DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11258Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and InternetNavigation416 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09640-9 | DOI 10.17226/11258Committee on Internet Navigation and the Domain Name System: TechnicalAlternatives and Policy Implications; Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Internet Navigation and the Domain Name System:
Technical Alternatives and Policy Implications
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS

Washington, D.C.
wwwwwwwwwwwwwww.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.edu.nap.eduSignposts in CyberspaceThe Domain Name System andInternet NavigationSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-
neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for ap-
propriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the U.S. Department of Commerce andthe National Science Foundation under Grant No. ANI-9909852 and by the Na-
tional Research Council.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda-

tions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the Commerce Depart-
ment.International Standard Book Number  0-309-09640-5 (Book)
International Standard Book Number  0-309-54979-5 (PDF)
Cover designed by Jennifer M. Bishop.
Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055, (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-
3313 in the Washington metropolitan area.  Internet, http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors

engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Insti-

tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in provid-ing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering com-munities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute

of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON INTERNET NAVIGATION ANDTHE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNICALALTERNATIVES AND POLICY IMPLICATIONSROGER LEVIEN, Strategy & Innovation Consulting, ChairS. ROBERT AUSTEIN, Internet Systems Consortium
STANLEY M. BESEN, Charles River Associates
CHRISTINE L. BORGMAN, University of California, Los Angeles
TIMOTHY CASEY, University of Nevada, Reno
HUGH DUBBERLY, Dubberly Design Office
PATRIK F•LTSTR–M, Cisco Systems
PER-KRISTIAN HALVORSEN, Hewlett-Packard Labs
MARYLEE JENKINS, Arent Fox, PLLC
JOHN C. KLENSIN, Independent Consultant
MILTON L. MUELLER, Syracuse University
SHARON L. NELSON, Washington State Attorney GeneralÕs Office
CRAIG PARTRIDGE, BBN Technologies
WILLIAM J. RADUCHEL, Ruckus Network
HAL R. VARIAN, University of California, BerkeleyStaffALAN S. INOUYE, Study Director (through December 2004)CHARLES N. BROWNSTEIN, Director (from January 2004)
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant
KRISTEN BATCH, Research AssociatevSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDJEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ChairEmeritusWILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center
DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
HECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
WENDY A. KELLOGG, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, Member EmeritusTERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and Entertainment
ERIC SCHMIDT, Google, Inc.
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLCCHARLES N. BROWNSTEIN, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate
JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate
JANET BRISCOE, Manager, Program Operations
JON EISENBERG, Senior Program Officer
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant
GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program Assistant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, writeto CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001,
call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.viSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
viiThe Domain Name System (DNS), which was developed in the early1980s, provides a way of associating alphanumeric names, which
are easier for humans to use, with the numerical addresses thatdesignate every location on the Internet. The system of DNS servers dis-
tributed across the Internet invisibly converts the namesÑserving as sign-
posts in cyberspaceÑinto the numerical addresses required by network
routers to reach the signposted locations.The mnemonic quality of domain names became a practical necessitywhen the rapid increase in the use of e-mail and the World Wide Web
caused the number of Internet users and uses to increase tremendously.
Web sites often became known to their visitors by their distinctive do-
main namesÑfor example, pepsi.com or whitehouse.gov. Carefully cho-sen domain names often enabled a searcher to navigate to a site simply by
guessing (e.g., www.un.org). Consequently, those signposts gained eco-nomic, social, cultural, and political value and they became the objects of
pride, competition, and dispute. It was fitting, therefore, that the DNS
also provided the nameÑthe Dot-Com EraÑfor the period of the 1990s
when Ògold rush feverÓ drove frenzied efforts to stake out and exploit
virtually every potentially valuable site on the Web. Inevitably, such ef-
forts led to intense conflicts, especially disputes involving trademarks,
which provided the impetus for the 1998 congressional mandate to ini-
tiate this study (see Box P.1). However, the passage of time, the rapid
evolution of the Internet and the DNS, the additional and differing inter-
ests of the funding agencies, and the logic of the committeeÕs charter have
resulted in a report whose scope differs in some respects from the originalSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEcongressional request, but is as a result more responsive to the currentinterests of the reportÕs sponsors and audience.CURRENT CONTEXT AND STUDY TASKAlthough the initial feverish period of Internet exploitation appearsto have passed, in its third decade the DNS faces new challenges arising
from continued growth in the size and scope of the Internet and from itsBOX P.1Excerpt from Public Law 105-305
SEC. 6. STUDY OF EFFECTS ON TRADEMARK RIGHTS OFADDING GENERIC TOP-LEVEL DOMAINS(b) Matters To Be Assessed in Study.ÑThe study shall assess and, as appro-priate, make recommendations for policy, practice, or legislative changes
relating toÑ(1) the short-term and long-term effects on the protection of trademark rights
and consumer interests of increasing or decreasing the number of generic
top-level domains;(2) trademark rights clearance processes for domain names, includingÑ(A) whether domain name databases should be readily searchable through
a common interface to facilitate the clearing of trademark rights and pro-posed domain names across a range of generic top-level domains;(B) the identification of what information from domain name databases
should be accessible for the clearing of trademark rights; and(C) whether generic top-level domain registrants should be required to pro-vide certain information;
(3) domain name trademark rights dispute resolution mechanisms, includ-ing how toÑ(A) reduce trademark rights conflicts associated with the addition of any
new generic top-level domains; and(B) reduce trademark rights conflicts through new technical approaches toInternet addressing;
(4) choice of law or jurisdiction for resolution of trademark rights disputesrelating to domain names, including which jurisdictions should be avail-able for trademark rights owners to file suit to protect such trademark rights;
(5) trademark rights infringement liability for registrars, registries, or techni-cal management bodies;(6) short-term and long-term technical and policy options for Internet ad-
dressing schemes and the impact of such options on current trademarkrights issues; and(7) public comments on the interim report and on any reports that are
issued by intergovernmental bodies.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixincreasing integration into almost every aspect of human activity almosteverywhere on the globe. The Internet needs more signposts, in more lan-
guages, to satisfy more uses and users. And the DNS has to be carefully
developed and managed to ensure that it can meet those needs while con-
tinuing to provide reliable, efficient, and secure service.Furthermore, even if the DNS successfully adapts and grows, users ofthe Internet will confront new challenges in reaching the resources that
they are seeking on the Internet, whether they are educational, social, po-
litical, cultural, commercial, or recreational. The challenges will arise not
from the absence of resources or of signposts for them, but from their
presence in such volume and variety that navigating through the maze to
find the right ones may become too arduous or too complex for most us-
ers. Reciprocally, those who put resources on the Internet will want them
to be easily found by their prospective users in the cluttered bazaar of
competing or confusing resources and signposts on the Internet. Thus, the
larger issue of the third decade of the DNS is that of navigation through
the InternetÑthe need for its users to find their way quickly and confi-
dently to the resources they desire and for its resources to be easily and
reliably found by the users they seek.This study builds on CSTBÕs prior work related to the Internet, most no-tably on The InternetÕs Coming of Age and The Digital Dilemma.1 One of theimportant lessons from this prior work is that contentious issues in informa-
tion technology policy (e.g., the domain name trademark issues as described
in Public Law 105-305) are often much more complex and require analysis
in a much larger context than a popular characterization of Òus versus
themÓ would suggest. In the interval between the enactment of Public
Law 105-305 and the initiation of this study, CSTB was able to conduct
preliminary background work to develop a statement of task (see Box P.2)
that addresses the congressional mandate but also ensures that the neces-
sary larger context is included explicitly. Moreover, the larger context was
necessary to respond appropriately to the interests of the National Sci-
ence Foundation, which joined with the U.S. Department of Commerce as
co-sponsors of this study.COMMITTEE COMPOSITION AND PROCESSThe CSTB convened a cross-disciplinary study committee comprisingcomputer scientists and engineers, information science/retrieval and1See Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Coun-cil (NRC), The InternetÕs Coming of Age, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001;and CSTB, NRC, The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEBOX P.2Statement of Task
This project will examine the future of Internet navigation and the Do-main Name System (DNS) in light of the evolution and interaction of Internetusage, information technology, the economy, and society. The original pur-
pose of the DNS was to provide identifiers for network objects that are moreeasily remembered and enduring than the numerical addresses and port num-bers used by the network infrastructure. However, domain names are now
often used for purposes for which they were not originally intended, such assearching, corporate identification, and marketing. And certain domainnames, especially those in the .com top-level domain, have acquired sub-stantial economic value, leading to conflict and competition over their own-ership and a perceived scarcity of desirable names.The continuing increase in the number of Internet users and sites, thedeepening integration of the Internet into the economy and social pro-cesses, the growth in embedded computing devices, and the possible intro-duction of permanent personal and object identifiersÑamong other fac-
torsÑpose challenges to the continued viability and usefulness of the DNS,as currently constituted. This project will describe and evaluate emergingtechnologies and identify how they might affect the ability of users to find
what they are seeking on the Internet and the role of the DNS. Some of thetopics to be considered include extension of the DNS through the additionof generic top-level domains and multilingual domain names; introduction
of new name assignment and indexing schemes (including alternate rootservers); adoption of new directory structures or services for locating infor-mation resources, services, or sites of interest; and deployment of improved
user interfaces.navigation experts, lawyers, public policy analysts, a graphic designer anddesign planner, economists, and business strategists. Many but not all of
the members were directly engaged with the DNS or with Internet navi-
gation (see Appendix A for the biographies of committee members). The
committee members brought different and complementary perspectives
to the examination of the DNS and Internet navigation. In some cases,
they also held views that strongly conflicted with those of other commit-
tee members. The conclusions reached and the recommendations devel-
oped by the committee are thus the products of a multidimensional ex-
amination of the issues and a careful negotiation of agreements among
members holding contrasting opinions. The sharp discussions and e-mail
threads fueled by the committeeÕs diversity of experience and opinion
helped it to avoid overly simple conclusions or recommendations reflect-
ing just one perspective. Information gathering, discussion, argument,Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExixinegotiation, and compromise were the stages the committee passedthrough in addressing most of the topics.The committee did its work through its own deliberations and by so-liciting input from a number of other experts (see Appendix B for a list of
those who briefed the committee) and from the international public
through an open invitation published on the Web.2 It first met in April2001 and six times subsequently in plenary session. Additional informa-
tion was derived from reviewing the published literature, monitoring se-
lected listservs and Web sites, and obtaining informal input at various
conferences and other meetings. Committee members and National Re-The technologies that support finding information on the Internet aredeployed within a complex and contentious national and international
policy context. The ÒrightÓ to use a particular domain name, like any name,can often be disputed. These disputes include conflicts among commercial
claimants as well as conflicts between non-commercial and commercialclaimants. Effective solutions must consider the potentially competing in-terests of domain name registrants and trademark holders; the different in-
terests of stakeholders including businesses, from small firms to multina-tional corporations; educational, arts, and research institutions;not-for-profit charitable and service organizations; government entities at
all levels from town to nation; nation-states and international organiza-tions; and individuals (i.e., the general public); as well as public interestssuch as freedom of speech and personal privacy.The projectÕs report will examine the degree to which the options of-fered by new technology or new uses of existing technology can mitigateconcerns regarding commercial and public interests (which will include a
discussion of trademark-related issues), facilitate or impede further evolu-tion of the Internet, and affect steps being taken to enhance competitionamong domain name registrars, the portability of Internet names, and the
stability of the Internet. For each of the prospective technologies, the finalreport is expected to characterize the institutions, governance structures,policies, and procedures that should be put in place to complement it and
will specify the research (if any) required to design, develop, and imple-ment the technology successfully. Also identified will be the options fore-gone or created by particular technologies and the difficulties associated
with each technological alternative.2See ÒThe Future of Internet Navigation and the Domain Name System: An Invitation toIndividuals Worldwide to Provide Input to a Study Conducted by the U.S. National Acad-emy of Sciences,Ó available at <http://www7.nationalacademies.org/cstb/project_dns_input.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiPREFACEsearch Council (NRC) staff made several site visits, which included par-ticipation in meetings of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN), the Internet Engineering Task Force, and the

World Summit on the Information Society. Significant input was also de-
rived from committee members during the course of their professional
activities outside of the committeeÕs work. During the editorial phase of
the study, facts were checked for accuracy with either published sources
or subject experts.At the outset of the study, some conflict and controversy were ex-pected, given the intense debate about the DNS and its associated institu-
tions such as the ICANN and the rapidly growing interest in the use of
commercially sponsored navigation services. We were not disappointed.
However, the committee was able to achieve consensus in a number of
areas as described in the main text. Moreover, the committee believes that
this report represents a contribution to future discussions related to the
DNS by serving as a reference document containing much of the basic,
relevant technical and institutional background material and many of the
policy alternatives in as clear and objective a manner as possible.A number of committee members withdrew from the committee forvarious reasons. In a few instances, new employment or professional op-
portunities raised conflict-of-interest concerns. Several committee mem-
bers were simply unable to participate in the committeeÕs work because of
increased professional or personal obligations.Although the report refers to several companies, products, and ser-vices by name, such reference does not constitute an endorsement by the
committee or the National Academies.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe committee appreciates the support and guidance of its sponsors.The committeeÕs initial contacts at the U.S. Department of Commerce were
J. Beckwith Burr, Amy Page, and Karen Rose, and in the later portion of
the study, Cathy Handley and Robin Layton. Aubrey Bush and George
Strawn were the committeeÕs initial contacts at the National Science Foun-
dation, with Darleen Fisher assuming this role during the final months of
the project. The committee also appreciates the financial support of CSTBÕs
core sponsors: the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Cisco Systems,
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Energy,
Intel Corporation, Microsoft Research, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, National Institute of Standards and Technology, National
Library of Medicine, National Science Foundation, Office of Naval Re-
search, and the Vadesz Family Fund. Additional financial support was
provided by the National Research Council.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExiiiIn addition, we would like to thank those individuals who provided valu-able inputs into the committeeÕs deliberations. Those who briefed the com-
mittee at one of our plenary meetings are listed in Appendix B. Others who
provided us with important inputs include Ronald Andruff (RNA Partners,
Inc.), Carl Bildt (AG Global Solutions and ICANN At-Large Study Commit-
tee), Mason Cole (SnapNames), Shari Garmise (Cleveland State University),
Carolyn T. Hoover (dotCoop), Cary Karp (MuseDoma), Kalpana Shankar
(University of California, Los Angeles), Paul Twomey (Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers), Anastasia Zhadina (Robin, Blecker &
Daley), and Matthew Zook (University of Kentucky). We would also like to
acknowledge those organizations that hosted committee meetings: AOL Time
Warner, Inc.; University of California, Berkeley; University of California, Los
Angeles; Harvard University; and VeriSign, Inc. 
Thanks go, too, to JonathanO. Chan, consultant, for his help with a translation.The committee appreciates the thoughtful comments received from thereviewers of this report and the efforts of the NRCÕs report review coordi-
nator and monitor. The review draft stimulated a large volume of com-
ments, each of which was taken into account during revision of the draft.
Many of the comments provided additional reference material and obser-

vations to bolster or counter the committeeÕs earlier thinking, 
thus helpingthe committee to sharpen and improve the report. However, the reviewers
are not responsible for the reportÕs conclusions or recommendations, with
which some of them may disagree, or for its structure and specific content.
Those are solely the committeeÕs responsibility.Finally, the committee would like to acknowledge the staff of the NRCfor their work. Special appreciation is accorded to Alan S. Inouye, who as
the study director had overall staff responsibility for the conduct of the
study and for the development and completion of this report. Margaret
Marsh Huynh handled the administrative aspects of the project, such as
organizing meeting logistics. Marjory S. Blumenthal, as director of CSTB
through June 2003, and her successor, Charles N. Brownstein, provided
the committee with valuable administrative and technical guidance.
Cynthia Patterson and Kristen Batch supplied research and writing sup-
port at various stages of the report drafting and revising process. The
committee would also like to thank Jennifer M. Bishop, Janet Briscoe, and
Renee Hawkins of the CSTB staff; Susan Maurizi of the NRCÕs editorial
staff; Liz Panos of the staff of the Division on Engineering and Physical
Sciences; and Janice Mehler of the Report Review Committee for their
support of the committeeÕs work.Roger Levien, ChairCommittee on Internet Navigation and the
Domain Name SystemSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Report Review

Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confi-
dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to

thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Aristotle Balogh, VeriSign, Inc.Timothy Bray, Textuality
J. Beckwith Burr, Wilmer, Cutler and Pickering
kc claffy, Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis
David D. Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Steve Crocker, Shinkuro, Inc.
Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Leslie Daigle, VeriSign, Inc.
Graeme Dinwoodie, Chicago-Kent College of Law
Joseph Farrell, University of California, Berkeley
Michael Froomkin, University of Miami
Hector Garcia-Molina, Stanford University
Marti Hearst, University of California, BerkeleyxivSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSxvRandy H. Katz, University of California, BerkeleyButler W. Lampson, Microsoft Corporation
F. Thomson Leighton, Akamai Technologies and the MassachusettsInstitute of TechnologyMichael Lesk, Rutgers University
Lars-Johan Liman, Autonomica
Clifford Lynch, Coalition for Networked Information
M. Stuart Lynn, Independent Consultant*Tom M. Mitchell, Carnegie Mellon University
Ivan Png, National University of Singapore
Fred B. Schneider, Cornell University
Paul Vixie, PAIX.net, Inc.
Tan Tin Wee, National University of SingaporeAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many construc-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con-
clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Alexander H.
Flax, independent consultant, and Joseph Bannister, University of South-
ern California. Appointed by the National Research Council, they were
responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for
the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee
and the institution.*Formerly, Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT19
1.1The Internet, 20

1.2The Domain Name System, 24

1.3Internet Navigation, 28

1.4The Dynamics of Change, 29
1.4.1Increasing Scale, 30

1.4.2Technological Progress, 30

1.4.3Increasing Economic Value, 31

1.4.4Increasing Social Value, 31

1.4.5Internationalization, 32
1.5Internet Naming and Navigation, 33

1.6Objectives of This Report, 35

1.7Roadmap for This Report, 37
2THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCEAND EVOLUTION39

2.1Origin of the Domain Name System, 39

2.2Designing the Domain Name System, 42
2.2.1Simple, Mnemonic, and Deeply Hierarchical Names, 45

2.2.2Experimental Features, 46
2.3Deploying the Domain Name System, 47
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTS2.3.1Caching, 47
2.3.2Lookup Timeouts, 48

2.3.3Convergence in Electronic Mail Systems, 49

2.3.4The Whois Database, 52

2.3.5The DNS as a Production System, 53
2.4Continuing Growth and Evolution of the Internet as
a Technical Infrastructure, 542.5Economic and Social Value of Domain Names, 57
2.5.1Demand for Domain Names and Emergence
of a Market, 572.5.2The Rise of Conflicts Over Domain Names, 61
Trademark Conflicts, 63
Beyond Trademark Conflicts, 67
Beyond Second-Level Domain Names, 702.5.3Whois, 72
2.6Globalization, 73

2.7Administration of Domain Names, 74
3THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE79
3.1Operation of the Domain Name System, 80
3.1.1A New, Remote Query, 82

3.1.2Local Query, 84

3.1.3Repeat Query, 85
3.2Architecture of the Domain Name System, 87
3.2.1Name Space, 87

3.2.2Hierarchical Structure, 87

3.2.3Programs: BIND and Others, 88

3.2.4Standards, 91
DNS Zone Data File, 92
DNS Message Format, 923.2.5Functions and Institutions, 93
Maintenance of the DNS StandardsÑThe Internet Engineering Task Force, 93Providing Root Name Server SoftwareÑInternet Software Consortium, Inc., and
Other Software Providers, 953.2.6Assessment, 95
3.3ImplementationÑThe Domain Name System Root Zone, 96
3.3.1Characteristics of the Root Zone, 97
Defining Characteristics, 97
Critical Characteristics, 97
Unique Characteristics, 98Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxix3.3.2Technical System of the Root Zone, 100
The Root Zone File, 100
The Root Name Servers, 1003.3.3Institutional Framework of the Root Zone, 105
Approving the Root Zone FileÑU.S. Department of Commerce and ICANN, 105Maintaining the Root Zone FileÑVeriSign, 108
Selecting the Root Name Server OperatorsÑSelf-Selection, 108Operating the Root Name ServersÑThe Root Name Server Operators, 1093.3.4Assessment, 110
3.4ImplementationÑThe Top-Level Domains, 113
3.4.1Characteristics of the TLDs, 113
ccTLDs, 113
gTLDs, 114
Recharacterizing TLDs, 1163.4.2Technical System of the TLDs, 120

3.4.3Institutional Framework of the TLDs, 121
Selecting New TLDs, 122
Selecting the Organizations Responsible for the TLDs, 125
Selecting the TLD Registry Operators, 129
Operating the TLD Registries, 1333.4.4Assessment, 133
3.5ImplementationÑThe Second- and Third-Level Domains, 134
3.5.1Technical System of the Second- and
Third-Level Domains, 1343.5.2Institutional Framework of the Second- and
Third-Level Domains, 135Selecting the Organizations to Register Domains, 135
Registering Domain Names, 137
Resolving Domain Name Conflicts, 1403.5.3Assessment, 150
3.6Summary, 150
4THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS152
4.1Improving the Security of the Domain Name System, 153
4.1.1Mechanics of DNSSEC, 154

4.1.2Deployment of DNSSEC, 156
4.2Linking the Telephone and Internet Naming System, 158
4.2.1Mechanics and Operations of ENUM, 160

4.2.2Technical and Public Policy Issues, 162
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxCONTENTS4.2.3Alternate Models, 163
4.3Internationalizing Domain Names, 164
4.3.1Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications, 165
Client-Side Support, 1674.3.2Registries and Registrars, 169

4.3.3Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Scripts, 170

4.3.4Conclusions, 173
4.4Responding to Domain Name Errors, 173
4.4.1Traffic Aggregation, 174

4.4.2Site Finder by VeriSign, 175
Technical Issues, 176
Institutional Issues, 1824.4.3Conclusions, 184
5THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES187
5.1Governance of the Domain Name System, 189
5.1.1Relationship to Governance of the Internet, 190

5.1.2Where Should Stewardship of the DNS Reside?, 190

5.1.3Alternatives, 192
Alternative A:  Existing Intergovernmental
OrganizationÑInternational Telecommunication Union, 192Alternative B:  International Treaty Organization, 195

Alternative C:  Private Organization with
International Participation, 1955.2Management of the Domain Name System, 198
5.2.1Scope of ICANNÕs Authority, 199

5.2.2Composition of the ICANN Board, 200

5.2.3Nature of ICANNÕs Management Processes, 202

5.2.4Alternatives, 204
Alternative A:  Markle Foundation Proposal (2002), 204

Alternative B:  Non-governmental Organization and
Academic ICANN Study Proposal (2001), 206Alternative C:  ICANN as Registry for the Root (2004), 208

Alternative D:  New.net ProposalÑ
ICANN as a Private Trade Association (2002), 211Alternative E:  Center for Democracy and Technology
ProposalÑNarrowed Scope with Broad
Participation (2004), 212Alternative F:  Reformed ICANNÑ
Narrowed Scope with Broad Participation (2003), 214Summary of the Alternatives, 2175.2.5Conclusions and Recommendation, 217
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxi5.3Oversight and Operation of Root Name Servers, 219
5.3.1Current Situation: Diverse Autonomy, 219
Description, 219
Evaluation, 2215.3.2Alternatives, 222
Alternative A:  Funding and Regulation, 222

Alternative B:   Competitive Market, 224

Alternative C:  Distributed Root Zone File, 226

Alternative D:  DOC Relaxes MoU Requirement, 228

Summary of the Alternatives, 2285.3.3Conclusions and Recommendations, 229
5.4Regulation of Generic Top-Level Domains, 230
5.4.1Should New gTLDs Be Added? If So, How Many
New gTLDs, and How Fast?, 231Technical and Operational Performance Issues, 232
User Needs and Economic Issues, 234
Recommendations, 2385.4.2If New gTLDs Are to Be Added, What Types
Should They Be, and How Should They and
Their Operators Be Selected?, 239Which Types of gTLDs Should Be Added?, 240
How Should the Operators of gTLDS Be Selected?, 242
What Selection Process Should Be Used?, 2445.4.3Recommendations, 252
5.5Oversight of Country-Code Top-Level Domains, 254
5.5.1Current Situation, 255

5.5.2Alternatives, 257
Alternative A:  ÒThickÓ ICANN, 259

Alternative B:  ÒThinÓ ICANN, 260

Alternative C:  International Oversight, 261

Alternative D:  Self-governing Root Management
Organization, 262Comparison of the Four Alternatives, 2625.5.3Conclusions, 263
5.6Resolution of Conflicts Over Domain Names, 263
5.6.1Assessment of the UDRP, 264

5.6.2Proposed Improvements to the UDRP, 268

5.6.3Disputes Concerning Internationalized Domain Names, 271
5.7Provision and Protection of Whois Data, 273
5.7.1Assessment of Whois Data Issues, 273
Data Accuracy, 274
Data Privacy, 275Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxiiCONTENTS5.7.2Whois and Internationalized Domain Names, 278
5.7.3Conclusion and Recommendation, 279
6INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION281
6.1The Nature of Internet Navigation, 282
6.1.1Vast and Varied Resources for Multiple Purposes, 282

6.1.2Two-sided Process, 283

6.1.3Complexity and Diversity of Uses, Users, and Providers, 285
6.1.4Lack of Human Intermediaries, 287

6.1.5Democratization of Information Access and Provision, 288

6.1.6Lack of Context or Lack of Skill, 290

6.1.7Lack of Persistence, 291

6.1.8Scale, 294

6.1.9The Sum of the Differences, 294
6.2Internet Navigation Aids and ServicesÑHistory, 295
6.2.1Aiding Navigation via the Internet, 296

6.2.2Aiding Navigation Through the World Wide Web, 298
6.3AddendumÑSearching the Web Versus Searching Libraries, 308
7INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE313
7.1Navigation Aids and Services, 314
7.1.1Direct Access via a Uniform Resource
Locator or Domain Name, 3147.1.2Direct Access via Hyperlinks, 315

7.1.3Direct Access via Bookmarks, 316

7.1.4Direct Access via KEYWORDS, 317

7.1.5Direct Access via Metadata, 319

7.1.6Navigation via Directory Systems, 324

7.1.7Navigation via Search Engines, 326
Algorithmic Search, 327
Monetized Search, 330
Search Engine Marketing and Optimization, 331
The Deep, Dark, or Invisible Web, 332
Metasearch Engines, 3357.1.8Use of Navigation Aids, 335
7.2Internet NavigationÑInstitutional Framework, 338
7.2.1The Commercial Providers of Navigation Services, 338

7.2.2The Business of Internet Navigation, 340

7.2.3The Navigation Services Market, 345
Consolidation, 345
Innovation, 347Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxxiii8INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTSAND ISSUES349

8.1Technological Prospects, 349
8.1.1Navigation Service Algorithms and Operations, 350

8.1.2Navigation Interfaces, 351

8.1.3Navigation to Audio and Visual Materials, 353

8.1.4Making Greater Use of Contextual Information, 355

8.1.5Improving Persistence, 358

8.1.6Understanding User Behavior, 360
8.2Institutional Issues, 361
8.2.1Regulation, 361

8.2.2Privacy, 364

8.2.3Trademarks and Copyright, 365
Trademark, 366
Copyright, 3689THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM AND INTERNETNAVIGATION371
APPENDIXESABiographies of Committee Members and Staff377
BSpeakers at Meetings and Participants at Site Visits389
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryMost people who use the Internet rely on the Domain Name Sys-tem (DNS) and navigation aids and services to find the re-
sources they seek or to attract users to the resources they pro-vide. Yet, although they perform well, both the DNS and Internet naviga-
tion services face challenges arising from technological change and from
institutions with a wide variety of commercial, cultural, social, and politi-
cal agendas. Individually, or together, those pressures could force opera-
tional changes that would significantly reduce access to Internet-linked
resources by segments of the user community, reducing the InternetÕs
value as a global resource.This document reports the conclusions of an assessment of the currentstate and the future prospects of the DNS and its interactions with Internet
navigation, including its uses as a means of navigation itself and as an in-
frastructure for navigation by other means. The assessment is the result of
the deliberations of a committee that encompasses a wide range of disci-
plines, experience, and viewpoints. The report is addressed to the technolo-
gists, policy makers, and others whose decisions will affect the future of the
DNS and Internet navigation aids and services. The specific conclusions
and recommendations of the Committee on Internet Navigation and the
Domain Name System appear throughout this summary in boldface type.DOMAIN NAME SYSTEMDomain names are commonly used to designate services and deviceson the Internet, as a more memorable and more permanent alternative toSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe numerical addresses employed by its routing computers. They are thevalued, often valuable, and often user-friendly names on the signposts
that designate many things connected to the Internet. Consequently,
which names are available, who controls their allocation, what is charged
for their use, how their uses are managed, and the answers to many re-
lated questions are important to virtually everyone who uses the Internet,
whether as information seeker or provider.Overall, the DNSÕs technical system and institutional frameworkhave performed reliably and effectively during the two decades of the
DNSÕs existence. The DNS has coped with the extremely rapid expansionof Internet usage driven by the wide deployment of the World Wide Web
in the 1990s and the widespread adoption of e-mail. The hierarchical, dis-
tributed structure of the DNS technical system, operated collaboratively
by a group of mostly autonomous organizations, has proven to be scal-
able, reliable, secure, and efficient.The DNS technical system can continue to meet the needs of anexpanding Internet. Early in the committeeÕs assessment it became ap-parent that it would not be fruitful to consider alternate naming sys-
tems. As noted, the DNS operates quite well for its intended purpose
and has demonstrated its ability to scale with the growth of the Internet
and to operate robustly in an open environment. Moreover, signifi-
cantly increased functionality can be achieved though applicationsÑ
such as navigation systemsÑbuilt on the DNS, or offered indepen-
dently, rather than through changing the DNS directly. Hence, the need
did not seem to be to replace the DNS, but rather to maintain and in-
crementally improve it. Furthermore, given the rapidly increasing in-
stalled base and the corresponding heavy investments in the technical
system and the institutional framework, the financial cost and opera-
tional disruption of replacing the DNS would be extremely high, if
even possible at all.However, the continued successful operation of the DNS is not as-sured; many forces, driven by a variety of factors, are challenging the
DNSÕs future. Required and desirable technologies to increase securityand enable the use of non-Roman scripts for domain names are not being
incorporated into the technical system as quickly as many would like.
There are persistent and substantial controversies concerning the struc-
ture and policies of the DNSÕs institutional framework. Moreover, there
have been many efforts to use the DNS, because it exists and is so widely
deployed, for many purposes for which it may not be appropriate. In ad-
dition, national legislation and court decisions are addressing Internet and
domain name issues with potentially conflicting consequences for the op-
eration of the DNS.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3Security ChallengesLike all public networked systems, the system of public domainname servers is threatened by a variety of purposeful attacks, both ma-
licious and mischievous, by individuals or groups that aim to disable or
divert their operations. The operators of the DNS are responding to thesethreats, but not all the desirable steps to ensure security have yet been
implemented.Denial-of-Service AttacksDenial-of-service attacks attempt to overwhelm key name servers andtheir links to the Internet with so much traffic that they are incapable of
responding to legitimate queries. The root name servers have the capacity
and capability to respond to many times the normal number of queries
they receive, and have alternate connections to the network if some are
blocked. Their ability to respond to attacks has been improved by some
operatorsÕ recent addition of multiple distributed copies (called ÒanycastÓ
servers) of the base name servers, increasing both capacity and connectiv-
ity. In anticipation of future denial-of-service attacks and normalgrowth in demand, and to improve service globally, anycast server de-
ployment should be expanded.Physical VulnerabilityNotwithstanding the deployment of anycast servers and installationof backup servers at remote locations, the concentration of root name
server facilities and personnel in the Washington, D.C., area and, to a
lesser extent, in the Los Angeles area is a potential vulnerability. The needfor further diversification of the location of root name servers and per-sonnel should be carefully analyzed in the light of possible dangers,
both natural and human in origin.Message AlterationIn response to the threat of alteration of messages being transmittedamong name servers, the technical community has developed DNS Secu-
rity Extensions (DNSSEC), which uses digital signatures to verify that the
content of a message to or from a name server arrives unaltered and that
its origin is as stated. DNSSEC only gives assurance that what was sent
was not changed during transmission; it cannot and is not intended to
assert that the message is factually correct. For example, DNSSEC has noSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcapability to guarantee that it is communicating the correct address for agiven domain name. The security of the DNS would be significantlyimproved if DNSSEC were widely deployed among name servers for
the root zone and top-level domains in particular, and throughout the
DNS in general.Performance MonitoringAlthough some steps have been taken, more could be done to con-tinuously monitor the performance and traffic flows of the DNS so as to
enable rapid detection of and response to attacks or outages.Governance ChallengesThe DNS works through the voluntary cooperation of its autono-mous component entities. That cooperation, in turn, depends on their
tacit agreement on two principles that together enable the Internet and
the DNS to evolve and remain effective:¥Universal open standards. The first principle is that the protocols andstandards defining operation of the Internet and the DNS will be open
and established by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), an interna-
tional voluntary organization of technical specialists. This technical frame-
work enables every device on the Internet to connect to and communicate
with every other, and it has been critical to the success of the Internet and
the DNS. Because changes in Internet and DNS protocols, standards, and
practices are matters of consequence beyond specific Internet services, al-
terations to the functions of or modifications to established standards and
practices have traditionally been vetted by the IETF before being imple-
mented.¥Innovation at the edges. The second principle is that applicationsshould be offered by devices on the edges of the Internet, rather than at
the InternetÕs internal nodes or on its links. In general, applications lo-
cated at the edges have little effect on the stability of the Internet, so there
is no need to regulate them. The DNS is not, strictly speaking, internal to
the Internet (the translation service is performed by computers at the
edges), but functions as though it were. It can thus be thought of as a core
service, which although not absolutely necessary, is extremely useful in
giving a relatively user-friendly face to Internet resources, and for en-
abling access to those resources even when their Internet addresses
change. Moreover, it is a deeply embedded and ubiquitous service that
enables other services and functions, including most aids to Internet navi-
gation.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5This tacit agreement governs the basic behavior of the many autono-mous operators of the DNS, but there is also a need for an authority to
make decisions about the allocation of limited resources central to DNS
operations. The most critical of these decisions are the determination of
which top-level domains (TLDs) shall appear in the root zone file of the
DNS, which organizations shall be designated as responsible for their
operation, and the terms under which those organizations shall operate.The principal organizations that constitute this authority are, currently,the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) and the Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), although national bodies have
considerable influence over the operations of the associated country-code
top-level domains (ccTLDs). Both the DOC and ICANN face significant
challenges to their authority and legitimacy in management of the DNS.Stewardship of the DNSAs the Internet has become an increasingly important component ofthe international infrastructure, there has been growing pressure to intro-
duce some form of international political control over the DNS. This pres-
sure comes both from existing international organizations seeking author-
ity over the Internet or the DNS, and from individual countries that would
like to end the stewardship role of the United States.Governance of the DNS is part, but not all, of governing theInternet. Efforts to leverage it to influence broader Internet policy are,
therefore, likely to be ineffective and could also be detrimental to the
DNS. Many of the governance issues that concern governmentsÑcontrolof spam and uses of the Internet for illegal purposes; resolving the dis-
parities between developed and developing countries in Internet usage;
protection of privacy, freedom of expression, and intellectual property
other than domain names; and the facilitation and regulation of e-com-
merceÑhave little or nothing to do with the DNS per se. The DNS would
not be an effective vehicle for addressing such issues. Attempts to change
the DNS or extend its management and administrative processes to do so
could interfere with reaching agreements on the already contentious is-
sues concerning the DNS itself.Governance of the DNS is not an appropriate venue for the playingout of national political interests. One valued and essential quality of theDNS institutional framework has been its relative freedom from direct
pressures arising from conflicts among competing national interests and
policy agendas (apart from sovereignty-associated issues such as ccTLD
delegations and redelegations). International disputes arising in other con-
texts have largely been kept away from the DNSÑas they should be.For that reason: The committee does not support efforts to put theSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEDNS directly under the control of governments or intergovernmentalagencies. In practical terms, the U.S. government, which must agree, hasnot supported turning DNS stewardship over to other governments or an
international organization, although that could change. Although the 2005
U.N.-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) may
produce proposals for a non-governmental agentÑan internationally ne-
gotiated convention or multi-stakeholder organizationÑwith oversight
or other influence over the DNS, no proposal that can be evaluated for
either practicality or feasibility has yet (in June 2005) been made.One way to respond to concerns about the U.S. governmentÕs role assteward of the DNS is for it to transfer its stewardship role to a non-
governmental bodyÑspecifically, ICANN. In the September 2003 revi-sion of its agreement with ICANN, the DOC stated its intent to transfer its
stewardship to ICANN if within 3 years ICANN is able to fulfill a mutu-
ally agreed set of tasks.If ICANN does not fulfill the agreed tasks, and a proposal for creationof a non-governmental organization having Internet governance respon-
sibilities results from the WSIS process before the transfer date, the DOC
could consider transferring the stewardship role to the proposed organi-
zation. That would entail comparing a not-yet-existing organization to
one with 8 years of experience and evolution.Life without the stewardship of the U.S. government will openICANN to political and commercial pressures. A free-standing ICANNwould lack the oversight and, importantly, the protection provided by
the U.S. governmentÕs stewardship. If ICANN becomes steward of the
DNS, legitimacy based on the Òconsent of the governedÓ would be the
principal basis for its continued authority and its ability to resist inappro-
priate pressure from governments and other powerful interests. Final re-
sponsibility for satisfying the needs of its constituencies in an equitable,
open, and efficient manner would lie with its board.Before completing the transfer of its stewardship to ICANN (or anyother organization), the Department of Commerce should seek ways to
protect that organization from undue commercial or governmental pres-
sures and to provide some form of oversight of performance.Legitimacy of ICANNICANN is a work in progress; its long-term success is not assured. Af-ter a troubled start, it has introduced several innovations to the institutional
framework of the DNS, including competition among registrars and an ar-
bitral process for resolving disputes over domain names, the Uniform Do-
main Name Dispute Resolution Policy. In 2003 it had to undertake a major
reform of its own organization, stimulated by dissatisfaction with its opera-
tion under its initial structure. It is working on the revision of key decisionSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7processes in response to complaints about their lack of transparency andfairness. Furthermore, ICANN has been unable to conclude formal agree-
ments with many of the organizations critical to its responsibilities, notably
the root name server operators and the vast majority of the ccTLD regis-
tries. Nevertheless, through its responsibility for recommending changes in
the root zone file, which defines which TLDs are in the DNS and where
their operators are located on the Internet, ICANN has been able to exercise
authority over the coherence and stability of the DNS.Since its beginning, ICANN has been the subject of controversy andcontention flowing from the many diverse constituencies that have been
attracted to it and their correspondingly diverse views. The criticsÕ con-
cerns have been with ICANNÕs scope, its organizational structure, and its
management processes. The concern about scope has been principally the
extent to which ICANN has exceeded its technical-administrative responsi-
bilities, for example, to regulate TLD registry operations; but others have
been disappointed by its unwillingness to take on broader issues. The struc-
tural concerns have included perceptions of imbalance in the historical com-
position of ICANNÕs board, of failings in the board selection processes, and
of inadequate representation of certain constituency groups. The process
concerns have been the perceived lack of transparency, effectiveness, ac-
countability, and recourse in ICANNÕs electoral and decision processes.ICANN is more likely to achieve perceived legitimacy by narrow-ing its scope and by improving its processes rather than by seeking an
ideally representative composition of its board. No composition of its
board is likely by itself to confer the perception of legitimacy on ICANN
among all its possible constituency groups. A narrowing of scope andimprovement of processes are elements of the path that ICANN claims to
be following in carrying out its 2003 reform. However successful its re-
form, ICANN faces the challenge of reaching an effective modus oper-
andi with three critical sets of participants in the DNSÕs institutional
framework: the root name server operators, the generic TLD registries,
and the ccTLD registries.Root Name Server OperatorsNo greater oversight of the root name server operators will be neces-sary so long as they continue to operate effectively and reliably and to
improve the DNSÕs security, stability, and capability. The effective dailyoperation of the root, and therefore the DNS, lies in the hands of the operators
of the 13 critical root name servers. They have provided reliable and efficient
service as the Internet has undergone rapid growth in the numbers of its
users and providers. Although the DOC has assigned ICANN responsibility
for the stability and security of the root name server system, ICANNÕs au-
thority has not been sufficient for it to manage or regulate the root nameSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEserver operators directly, nor is it clear that doing so is desirable or necessary.The real challenge to ICANN is to identify how it can best ensure the stability
and security of the root name server system, given the long-standing au-
tonomy of the operators and the effectiveness of their operations.More formal coordination of the root name server operators is de-sirable in the longer term. ICANN is currently the most appropriate
organization to assume the coordination role. Although direct manage-ment or oversight may be neither necessary nor feasible, with continued
growth in the Internet and demands on the DNS, a more formal process of
coordination of the root name server operators with ICANNÕs facilitation
will become desirable so as to ensure rapid response to persistent security
needs and to other challenges.The present independent funding arrangements for the root nameservers are advantageous and should continue, because the multiplicity
of sources contributes to the resilience, autonomy, and diversity of the
root name server system. The root name server operators do not receivedirect compensation for the services they perform. While running a root
server may only add an incremental cost in the range of tens of thousands
of dollars for an organization already operating a secure Internet site, fully
loaded costs have been estimated at up to $1 million or more depending
on numerous factors including the number of locations, bandwidth re-
quirements, and staffing levels. The costs are covered by each organiza-
tion as part of other operations. Although a central source of funds to
compensate all the root name server operators for their services might
appear desirable, it is likely to be accompanied by an unacceptable regu-
latory or control role for the funding organization and would reduce the
robustness of the current arrangement.ICANN should work with the root name server operators to estab-lish a formal process for replacing operators that directly engages the
remaining root name server operators. Under the process, ICANN
would be responsible for the final decision on the basis of recommen-
dations from the root name server operators. One or more of the currentroot name server operators may withdraw for organizational or perfor-
mance reasons, and it would be reasonable to have in place an agreed
process to deal with such eventualities.Generic Top-Level Domain RegistriesA major challenge to ICANN since its founding has been decidingwhether, when, and how to add generic top-level domains (gTLDs) and,
if any are added, how many. It has faced strong pressures both to add
gTLDs and to stop, or at least moderate, the pace of such additions. The
committee addressed the issue of gTLD addition broadly in terms of bothSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9effects and constituencies affected, but for simplicity the multidimensionalarguments for and against new gTLDs were clustered into two groups:
technical and operational performance, and user needs and economic ben-

efits.Considering technical and operational performance alone, the ad-dition of tens of gTLDs per year for several years poses minimal risk to
the stability of the root. However, an abrupt increase (significantly be-yond this rate) in the number of gTLDs could have technical, operational,
economic, and service consequences that could affect domain name regis-
trants, registries, registrars, and Internet users.From the standpoint of user needs and economic benefits, neitherthe arguments in favor of nor those against additional gTLDs are con-
clusive. Thus, the decision to add gTLDs is one requiring judgment andcannot be determined by formal analysis alone.If new gTLDs are added, they should be added on a regular sched-ule that establishes the maximum number of gTLDs (on the order of
tens per year) that could be added each time and the interval between
additions. Addition of gTLDs should be carried out cautiously and pre-dictably, so that on the one hand, the stability and reliability of the system
can be protected, and on the other hand, those considering acquiring a
gTLD can do so with a realistic view of future prospects.A mechanism to suspend the addition of gTLDs in the event thatsevere technical or operational problems arise should accompany a
schedule of additions. It should explicitly specify who has the author-
ity to suspend additions and under what conditions.A neutral, disinterested party should conduct an evaluation of newgTLDs approximately 1 or 2 years after each set of new gTLDs is opera-
tional to make recommendations for improving the process for select-
ing and adding gTLDs.If new gTLDs are to be created, the currently employed compara-tive hearing or expert evaluation processes should not be assumed to be
the only processes for selecting their operators. In its addition of gTLDsin 2000, ICANN used a comparative hearing process to select 7 from the
44 applicants. In its 2004 addition of sponsored gTLDs, ICANN used a
non-competitive process that replaces subjective judgments by its staff
and board with judgments by expert groups that are insulated from lob-
bying, but whose decision-making processes are not transparent. By do-
ing so, it has reduced a few of the potential sources of dissatisfaction with
the resultant selections compared with the process used in 2000. How-
ever, the question remains as to whether it is necessary for ICANN to
qualify new gTLDs, as this process does, on such matters as sponsorship
by a community, business and financial plans, and addition of new value
to the name space.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEFor creation of new gTLDs, ICANN should consider alternate pro-cesses that are less reliant on expert, staff, or board judgments. One suchapproach would be pre-qualification of applicants only on technical capa-
bility, basic financial viability, and adherence to registrant protection stan-
dards and ICANN policies. (ICANN should establish requirements to
minimize the dangers of domain name registrants losing their serviceÑ
and the value invested in their domainsÑif a registry fails and should
carefully consider possible side effects.) If the number of qualified appli-
cants turns out to be less than the number of available slots, all would be
chosen; if not, a market-based selection processÑan auctionÑcould be
used to select among them. Because of the wide range of intents and cor-
responding designs of such processes, they must be carefully planned,
drawing on the breadth of previous experience in the design of auctions.Country-Code Top-Level Domain RegistriesResolution of ICANNÕs role vis-⁄-vis the ccTLDs is one of the criti-cal challenges to establishing an ICANN that is viewed as a legitimate
and appropriate steward for the DNS. Although the ccTLDs represent243 of the 258 TLDs, ICANN had formal agreements with only a dozen of
the ccTLD operators as of June 2005.The ccTLDs as a group now operate only partially under the over-sight of any higher authority, ICANN or government. A number of
ccTLDs are overseen by their national governments; some have estab-
lished non-governmental bodies to represent the local Internet commu-
nity and exercise varying degrees of oversight; some are completely au-
tonomous non-profit bodies that operate voluntarily to meet local Internet
community interests; and some are commercial bodies with some con-
tractual linkage to the national government.The only body that currently has an opportunity to exercise oversightover all the ccTLDs is ICANN. The principal way in which it exercises
that authority is through recommendations to the DOC about which or-
ganization should be delegated responsibility for a specific ccTLD. Yet
this issue arises only when the present delegatee resigns or is challenged
or a new ccTLD is established.The relationship between ccTLDs and ICANN has been difficult fromthe beginning of ICANN. First, a large number of the ccTLDs felt no need
to contribute to ICANNÕs budget, since they did not think that they re-
ceived any corresponding benefits. Second, many ccTLDs resented
ICANNÕs major role in deciding on delegations and redelegationsÑes-
sentially a policy role that they felt would be better performed locally.
They also believed that their position as one constituency within ICANNÕs
initial Domain Names Supporting Organization, whose other constituen-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11cies primarily addressed gTLD issues, did not adequately reflect theirimportance.Under its 2003 reorganization, ICANN attempted to respond to theirconcerns by replacing the Domain Names Supporting Organization with
two organizations, the Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO)
and the Country-Code Names Supporting Organization (ccNSO). ICANN
intends thereby to draw the ccTLDs more actively into its operations and
build a stronger basis for their support. Furthermore, in April 2005
ICANNÕs Governmental Advisory Committee issued a revision of its
ÒPrinciples for the Delegation and Administration of Country Code Top
Level DomainsÓ to address many of the concerns expressed about them.If the creation of the ccNSO does not result in increased participa-tion by the ccTLDs in ICANN policy making, then ICANN may find
itself subject to increasing pressures to constrain its role to that of gTLD

management and root zone file record keeping and to turn ccTLD over-
sight over to some other organization. The success of the ccNSO willdepend on its ability to attract an increasing number of members, both
from the large ccTLDs that are needed for financial and other support of
ICANN and the smaller ccTLDs that can benefit from the support that
ICANN could offer them. Even more critical is the refinement of the prin-
ciples and processes for delegation and redelegation of ccTLD registries
and their acceptance by most of the ccTLDs.Commercial ChallengesPerhaps the most subtle, but still significant, challenge that the DNSfaces is that arising from the imperative faced by commercial operators of
parts of the DNSÑthey must strive to increase their revenues and profits
in the face of competition. On the Internet, increasing revenues generally
means increasing traffic to oneÕs service, sometimes by diverting it from
another operatorÕs service. This imperative raises the temptation to seek
traffic and revenue by breaking or bending the fabric of tacit agreements
that underlies the success of the Internet and the DNS.ICANN should strengthen its contracts with TLD operators (espe-cially the largest ones) to ensure that it has the authority to review pro-
posed changes in their services that could have a detrimental effect on
the DNS or on other services that depend on the DNS. It should establish
an open, transparent, and speedy process of review for such changes that
solicits contributions from the technical community, other DNS opera-
tors, other affected Internet operations, and end users. A recent case inpoint is the unanticipated and unannounced introduction by VeriSign, a
commercial registry, of a service, called Site Finder, that altered the conven-
tional response to erroneous queries to the .com and .net TLDs by return-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEing pointers to its own search page, rather than sending back an error mes-sage. After being called on by ICANN to suspend the service, VeriSign did
so under protest and is currently seeking relief in the courts.TLDs and other DNS operators that do not have agreements withICANN should voluntarily agree to adhere to published technical stan-
dards and to consult the technical community and conduct public re-
view processes before introducing new services that could have a detri-
mental effect on the DNS or on other services that depend on the DNS.Dispute Resolution ChallengesArbitral domain name dispute resolution processes, rather than na-tional courts, should continue to be encouraged as the initial and pri-
mary vehicle for resolving most disputes associated with the rights to
domain names. The Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policywas implemented by ICANN in December 1999 and has been adopted by
all registrars in nine of the generic top-level domains, as well as voluntar-
ily by managers of several ccTLDs. In addition, managers of other ccTLDs
have adopted their own policies based on modified versions of the UDRP.The UDRP has generally satisfied the need for an effective and cost-efficient means of resolving disputes concerning domain names; however,
it has weaknesses that should be addressed. The UDRP has both positiveand negative aspects, which differ, however, depending on whether they are
being considered from the perspective of the complainants or of the respon-
dents. Although many observers believe that the UDRP has enabled speedy
and fair resolution of domain disputes, others believe that the current system
is biased toward the interests of trademark holders. Notwithstanding its per-
ceived disadvantages, by 
early 2005 more than 9000 decisions concerningover 15,000 domain names had been rendered under the UDRP.The feasibility and desirability of five specific UDRP improve-ments should be further considered by ICANN:¥Improving consistent use of arbitral precedents to enable similarissues to be addressed in a more consistent manner that also supports
case-by-case knowledge building;¥Establishing an internal appeals process that would review thesmall number of decisions that are clearly faulty or that cover a situation
or issue for which competing bodies of precedent exist;¥Using three-member panels. Some analyses of UDRP proceedingsindicated a significant difference in outcomes depending on whether they
were heard by one-member or three-member panels: three-member pan-
els found for the complainant in a smaller percentage of the cases;Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13¥Improving panelist knowledge about the technology underlyingthe DNS, the uses of domain names (beyond Web sites), and the applica-
tion of the policies and rules applicable to domain name disputes; and¥Improving the nature and structure of incentives in the process.Under the current funding structure, the revenue for panelists depends
on the volume of cases, creating incentives either for haste or for market-
ing strategies and tactics to attract cases by defining lucrative niches.Internationalization ChallengesContinuing and increased attention to internationalized domainnames (IDNs) is necessary. Efforts to coordinate work across differ-
ent countries, regions, and language groups should be undertaken to
prevent the balkanization of the Internet. Of particular interest inmany countries is access to the Internet and the DNS using home-coun-
try languages and scripts. Unfortunately, the design of the DNS, as
well as the general nature of multiscript environments, presents formi-
dable technical and linguistic challenges for the accommodation of lan-
guages that use non-Roman characters, which require compromises for
their solution.Some experts have argued for a major overhaul of the InternetÕs infra-structure to incorporate IDNs. However, pressure to act quickly reduced
support for solutions that would require extensive changes in architec-
tures or standards; the result was an effort led by the IETF that culmi-
nated in the Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)
mechanism.1 The central goal of the IDNA scheme is to enable end-userviewing of IDNs without altering the DNS protocols themselves, using a
client-side set of procedures, implemented at the edge of the DNS.However, the IDNA mechanism solved only part of the international-ization problem. Remaining to be addressed are the questions of potential
consumer confusion; conflict avoidance or resolution for similar-appear-
ing names; differences in interpretations for different languages; restric-
tions on registrations on a per-domain basis; implications for the UDRP
and the Whois database (of information about domain name registrants);
security issues raised by IDNs; and the implications of (and alternatives
to) multilingual top-level domains.1IDNA is described in Patrik F−ltstrım, Paul Hoffman, and Adam M. Costello, ÒInterna-tionalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),Ó RFC 3490, March 2003, available at<http://www.rfc-editor.org/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEINTERNET NAVIGATIONIn contrast to the unique role played by the DNS, navigation throughthe Internet is not supported by a unique integrated technical system.
Among the many ways to navigate the Internet, only two involve dedi-
cated technical systemsÑsearch engines and directories. Moreover, the
institutional framework of those technical systems is an open market, with
many, generally commercial, competitors offering navigation services,
and specialized non-commercial services focused on non-profit resource
providers and seekers.Finding and accessing a desired resource via the Internet poses chal-lenges that are substantially different from the challenges in navigat-
ing to resources in non-digital, non-networked environments.A wide range of navigation aids and services now permit large seg-ments of the Internet, particularly the World Wide Web, to be traversed
rapidly and efficiently in ways previously unimaginable. They offer
users across the globe convenient access to much human knowledge
and experience and open an international audience to purveyors of con-
tent and services, no matter where they may be located.Use of Navigation Aids and ServicesSurveys indicate a high level of satisfaction with navigation aidsand services at present.An analysis of navigation behavior, based on survey data from March2003,2 indicates that Internet users tend to use preferred sites and servicesconsistently, visiting them repeatedly, using their bookmarks or remem-
bered Uniform Resource Locators (URLs). Search engines produced only
13 percent of site referrals, navigation through entry of a known or
guessed URL or use of a bookmark produced 66 percent of referrals, and
flow along hyperlinks produced 21 percent.According to a recent survey,3 residents of the United States con-2The data were collected on March 6, 2003, by WebSideStoryÕs StatMarket from about 12million visitors to 125,000 sites using its proprietary analytical platform and were comparedwith figures from the previous year. Reported in Brian Morrissey ÒSearch Guiding MoreWeb Activity,Ó CyberAtlas, March 13, 2003, available at <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/traffic_patterns/article/0,1323,5931_2109221,00.html>.3See Deborah Fallows, Lee Rainie, and Graham Mudd. ÒThe Popularity and Importance ofSearch Engines,Ó data memo, Pew Internet & American Life Project, August 2004, available
at <http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Data_Memo_Searchengines.pdf>. The resultscame both from a telephone survey of 1399 Internet users and from tracking of Internet useby comScore Media Metrix.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15ducted 3.9 billion searches in June 2004, an average of 33 searches peruser. Search engines have been used by 84 percent of U.S. residents who
use the InternetÑmore than 107 million people; on an average day, about
38 million of the 64 million U.S. residents who are online use a search
engine. Using search engines is second only to using e-mail as the most
popular Internet activity, except when major news stories are breaking. A
vast majority of searchers say that they find the information they want
most of the time, and more than two-thirds consider search engines a fair
and unbiased source of information. But only a third of searchers say they
could not live without search engines; about half say that, although they
like using search engines, they could go back to other ways of finding
information.As the material accessible through the Internet continues its rapidincrease in volume and variety and as its societal importance grows,
Internet navigation aids and services are likely to be challenged to de-
liver more precise responses, in more convenient forms, to more diverse
questions, from more users with widely varying skills. Efforts to im-prove the basic algorithms and operations of Internet navigation services
will continue because of competitive pressures, evolving user require-
ments, and technological advances. Among the specific areas where im-
provements are needed are query interfaces and results displays for desk-
top, portable, and collaborative devices; navigation of audio and visual
materials; management of the navigation process; use of contextual infor-
mation (while protecting privacy); and understanding the wide range of
navigation behaviors of the highly diverse users who now seek resources
on the Internet.As the Internet has become the sole or most accessible location ofmany valuable resources, the importance has grown of ensuring that they
will persist indefinitely at the same URL (or in an archive on the same
site) or, alternatively, that they will be preserved at another site where
they can be readily found. Ensuring persistence is primarily the responsi-
bility of resource providers, while third partiesÑnational libraries or pri-
vate organizations such as the Internet ArchiveÑare undertaking some
preservation efforts.Although commercial services can be expected to support substantialresearch and development on these topics, academic research and devel-
opment activities have provided the innovative basic technologies for
many successful navigation aids and services. Public support of such aca-demic research and development efforts should be continued.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACECommercial Navigation ServicesThe Internet navigation services industry has financed the develop-ment and evolution of services that meet many of the needs of a wide
range of searchers at little or no cost to them, especially when they are
seeking commercial material. At the same time, it has provided adver-
tisers with an efficient, cost-effective means to gain access to potential
customers at the time that they are most interested in the advertiserÕs
product or service. The primary source of income for commercial Internetnavigation services is selling advertising linked to search queries. Conse-
quently, as for many broadcast media, it is the content and service provid-
ers that are subsidizing usersÕ access to navigation services so that they
can present advertisements to them at the time of their expressed interest
in a topic.The major search services currently identify the results whose presen-tation in response to specified search terms is paid for by advertisers (so-
called sponsored links or sponsored search listings) and set them off from
the direct results of more neutral search algorithms. As long as the dis-
tinction is clear and users are aware of it, sponsored search listings should
present few problems while providing the great benefit of free search ser-
vices to the user.The potential for abuse exists, however. It would be possible, forexample, for a search service to accept payment for assured placement
in the Òtop 10Ó of what would appear to be a neutral listing. Shouldabuses grow, search services could find themselves under increased
public pressure for government scrutiny or facing more disputes and
criticism concerning such activities from other commercial entities.
None of the navigation services have been accused of accepting payment
for highly ranked inclusion of particular responses to queries, but some
have accepted payment to ensure inclusion, but not ranking, in the other-
wise neutral listing. Furthermore, the distinct placement and typography
of the sponsored listing could be weakened to the point that a casual user
would not be aware of its difference from the neutral algorithmic search
results. Thus far, competition among services, third-party evaluations, and
the perceived value to the user of search transparency have served as im-
portant forces constraining misbehavior of these kinds. Although competition and the desire to be seen as useful by search-ers are incentives for fair and open behavior, appropriate regulatory
agencies of the U.S. federal government and of other governments
should pay careful and continuing attention to the result ranking and
display practices of Internet navigation services and their advertisers to
ensure that information can flow freely and that those critical practices
are fully disclosed. The behavior of commercial navigation services canSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17have a substantial influence on the kind, quality, and appropriateness ofthe information that Internet users receive. Although there is no evidence
that abuse has yet occurred, the potential for abuse is inherent in the navi-
gation servicesÕ ability to affect usersÕ access to information for commer-
cial or other reasons.In the future, competition among general navigation services ismore likely to take the form of rivalry among a small number of estab-
lished large players rather than competition with a large number of
small newcomers. Over the past 4 years, there has been considerable con-solidation in the general search services market, which reflects the increas-
ing importance of economies of scaleÑthe considerable hardware and
software costs of developing and operating a search engine are indepen-
dent of the number of users, whereas revenues from advertising are di-
rectly dependent on them. The result is that the barriers to entry are high,
and only a company with substantial financial resources and technical
skills, such as Microsoft or IBM, is in a position to introduce its own com-
petitive general navigation service, as Microsoft began to do in 2004.Innovation, Competition, and RegulationThe importance of the Internet as the infrastructure linking a grow-ing worldwide audience with an expanding array of resources means
that improving Internet navigation will remain a profitable goal for
commercial developers and a challenging and socially valuable objec-
tive for academic researchers. Consolidation of navigation services makesit difficult for innovative services to start small and build volume over
time unless they have a very large amount of patient investment capital.
But, so long as no single service becomes dominant, each of the major
competitors will face continuing pressure to improve its offerings either
through internal innovation or through the acquisition of innovative small
companies, paths they are currently actively pursuing.Since competition in the market for Internet navigation servicespromotes innovation, supports consumer choice, and prevents undue
control over the location of and access to the diverse resources available
via the Internet, public policies should support the competitive market-
place that has emerged and avoid actions that damage it.Potential rulings in some jurisdictions could substantially reducethe abilty of search engines to sell keywords using the current auto-
mated methods. As with the Domain Name System, the most contentiousintellectual property issues affecting navigation services concern trade-
marks, specifically the sale of trademarked terms to advertisers as key-
words whose use will bring up their advertisements. Since there is no
arbitral process, such as the UDRP, by which such disputes could be re-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsolved outside the courts and with worldwide effect, it seems likely thatconflicting court decisions in different jurisdictions, worldwide, will es-
tablish the potentially conflicting rules by which navigation services will
have to abide.THE DNS AND INTERNET NAVIGATIONThe preservation of a stable, reliable, and effective Domain NameSystem will remain crucial both to effective Internet navigation and to
the operation of the Internet and most of the applications that it sup-
ports.Despite the differences in the way in which they developed, the rela-tionship between the DNS technical system and Internet navigation aids
and services is strong and fundamentalÑthe DNS has served as the stable
core on which the incremental evolution of the different navigation aids
and services has depended. The development of navigation services is
likely to continue to relieve some of the commercial pressures on the DNS
as users become increasingly comfortable with using them as their pri-
mary means to navigate the Internet, but both the Domain Name System
and Internet navigation aids and services will be significant elements of
the Internet for the foreseeable future.The demonstrated success of the DNS and navigation aids and ser-vices in meeting the basic needs of all Internet users should not be jeop-
ardized by efforts to constrain or direct their evolution outside the open
architecture of the Internet, or to use them to enable control of the free
flow of information across the Internet.The governance and administration of the DNS should not becomea vehicle for addressing political, legal, or economic issues beyond those

of the DNS itself.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.191Navigating the Internet:Concepts and ContextThe Internet is rapidly becoming everybodyÕs neighborhood. Just afew keystrokes take us to an online bookstore; several mouse clicks
deliver us to an online newsstand; only a bit more effort connectsus with distant friends or family. For many of us, seeking out a Web site
or an e-mail address is almost as important as finding the way to the li-
brary, a theater, the nearest mall, the bookstore, or the neighborhood play-
ground. And for those who use the Internet to deliver products or ser-
vices, their clienteleÕs ability to find them is essential to their success.
Navigating the virtual neighborhood has become a life skill for those need-

ing something on the Internet and a life-or-death matter for businesses
with something to offer on the Internet.To navigateÑto follow a course to a goalÑacross any space, a methodis needed for designating locations in that space. On a topographic map,
each location is designated by a combination of a latitude and a longitude.
In the telephone system, a telephone number designates each location. On
a street map, locations are designated by street addresses. Just like a physi-
cal neighborhood, the virtual neighborhood has addressesÑ32 or 128 bit
numbers, called Internet Protocol (IP) addressesÑthat define the specific
location of every device on the Internet. And also like the physical world,
the virtual world has namesÑcalled domain names, which are generally
more easily remembered and informative than the addresses that are at-
tached to most devicesÑthat serve as unchanging identifiers of those de-
vices even when their specific addresses are changed. The use of domain
names on the Internet relies on a system of serversÑcalled name serv-
ersÑthat translate the user-friendly domain names into the correspond-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEing IP addresses. This system of addresses and names linked by nameservers establishes the signposts in cyberspace and serves as the basic in-
frastructure supporting navigation across the Internet. It is called the Do-
main Name System (DNS).This report is concerned with the Domain Name System and its inter-actions with Internet navigation, including its uses as a means of naviga-
tion itself and as an infrastructure for navigation by other means. Since
the World Wide Web is the application running on the Internet that con-
tains the greatest number of locations to which most users want to navi-
gate, this report often draws examples from the Web. However, there are
other applications that use the Internet, not least e-mail, and others that
are being developed for it. The DNS supports most of them. Unless other-
wise specified, the information in this report, its conclusions, and its rec-
ommendations apply to the DNS in its role as a basic infrastructure ele-
ment of the entire Internet, not just of the World Wide Web.The reportÕs specific objectives and how it is organized to addressthem are spelled out in this chapter, which begins with an introduction to
the Internet, the Domain Name System, and Internet navigation, and with
an examination of the forces affecting them. Four basic concepts that are
used throughout this reportÑnames, navigation, technical system, and
institutional frameworkÑare defined and briefly described in Box 1.1.1.1THE INTERNET
The Internet, according to the National Research Council, is Òa di-verse set of independent networks, interlinked to provide its users with
the appearance of a single, uniform network . . . . The networks that com-
pose the Internet share a common architecture (how the components of
the networks interrelate) and software protocols (standards governing the
interchange of data) that enable communication within and among the
constituent networks.Ó 1Internally, the Internet comprises two types of elements: commu-nication links, channels over which data travel from point to point;
and routers, computers at the networkÕs nodes that direct data arriv-
ing along incoming links to outgoing links that will take them toward
their destinations. Altogether, the Internet is a complex network of
routers and links, the latter varying in transmission medium (tele-
phone lines, cable lines, optical fiber cable, satellite, wireless); servers
and other hosts; and access equipment. Links in the network may be
characterized by their transmission capacity (low-capacity local lines1Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, TheInternetÕs Coming of Age, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001, p. 29.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT21to very high capacity ÒbackboneÓ cables) and by their latency (short-latency local fiber links to long-travel-time satellite links). Data travel
along the Internet in packets adhering to the standard Transmission
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) that defines the packetsÕ
format and header information.Each router uses the origin and destination IP addresses in each arriv-ing packet to determine which link to direct it along. A message from a
sender to a receiver may be broken into multiple packets, each of which
may follow a different path through the Internet. Information in the pack-
etsÕ headers enables the message to be restored to its proper order at its
destination.The origins and destinations of data transiting the Internet are com-puters (or other digital devices) located at its Òedges.Ó They are, typically,
connected to the Internet through an Internet service provider (ISP) that
handles the necessary technical and administrative arrangements. A dis-
tinctive feature of the Internet is that all the user services (such as e-mail
or the World Wide Web) accessible through it are provided by applica-
tions running on computers located at its edges. The ÒcenterÓ of the
InternetÑits links and routersÑprovides the critical connectivity among
them. As a consequence of this architecture, most of the service innova-
tion takes place at the edges, completely independently of the network
itself. It is an embodiment of the end-to-end argument in systems design2that says that Òthe network should provide a very basic level of serviceÑ
data transportÑand that the intelligenceÑthe information processing
needed to provide applicationsÑshould be located close in or close to the
devices attached to the edge of the network.Ó3A consequence of this architecture is that innovation at the edges iseased and facilitated, requiring no coordination with network architects
or operators, as long as the basic protocols are adhered to. Conversely,
innovation at the center of the network is difficult and often slow, since it
requires the cooperation of many providers and users. Because of the
higher potential for inadvertent disruption as a side effect of a change at
the center of the system, difficult and time-consuming effort must be de-
voted to testing and validating each proposed change. All such changes
have been subject to cooperative collaboration and agreement by the
Internet engineering community since the earliest days of research and
implementation. (See ÒMaintenance of DNS StandardsÓ in Section 3.2.5.)
That principle has been a major factor in the successful design, develop-
ment, and implementation of the technology.2See Jerome H. Saltzer, David P. Reed, and David D. Clark, ÒEnd-to-End Arguments inSystem Design,Ó ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 2(4):277-288, 1984.3CSTB, NRC, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, 2001, p. 36.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 1.1Four Basic Concepts
Names and Naming SystemsNames and naming systems are everywhere in society. A license plateon a car, a serial number on a product, and a stock market symbol for a
company are a few examples of names that are used within formal namingsystems. Each of these examples is a unique identifier, created according tothe specifications of a naming system, which is associated through strict
naming rules with a single automobile, product, or company. Equally im-portant are a host of informal or less strict naming systems, such as thenaming of people by families, the naming of streets or locations, or the
naming of files and directories on a personal computer. In these processes,there is no guarantee of unique names for objects.More generally, naming is used to distinguish individual objects withina broad class, the object space. The set of allowable names for objects inthat class is called the name space. A name is then a member of that setused to differentiate one member of the object class from another. A nam-
ing system is the combination of an object space, the name space that isapplied to it, the rules governing the assignment of names to objects, thefiles recording the assignments, and the administrative processes (if any)
applying the rules and maintaining the files.Navigation, Navigation Aids, and Navigation ServicesNavigation is the process of following a course from one place to an-other. In the narrow sense, the term is used to refer to a person or entity(e.g., a vehicle) being directed along a course from an origin to a specified
destination. In the broader sense, navigation refers to following a courseon, across, or through (e.g., navigate a stream) or making oneÕs way some-where (e.g., Lewis and Clark navigating to the Òwestern passageÓ or Dr.
Livingstone navigating to the source of the Nile). Navigation involves a setof skills (e.g., reading a compass, using a search engine). The place towhich one wishes to navigate may be known explicitly (e.g., latitude and
longitude, a street address, a Web site address) or only in general terms(e.g., source of the Nile, sites with information about veteransÕ benefits). Inthe former case, navigation requires only the two steps of laying out a route
to the known location and following it. In the latter case, however, there isa prior step of identifying the desired location (or locations) through asearch process of some form.A navigation aid is anything that assists navigation, such as a map or acompass. In the physical world, navigation aids include a sextant and preci-sion clock, and a compass and topographical map. In document-oriented
environments, navigation aids include printed directories for the telephonesystem and card catalogs for library collections. Human intermediaries alsocan serve as navigation aids in these environments, such as directory assis-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT23tance operators in the telephone system and reference librarians for libraryservices. In the Internet, navigation aids include bookmarks and lists of favor-
ites, hyperlinks, and restricted keyword systems, such as AOL keywords.A navigation service is a navigation aid that is based on a complex techni-cal system (see below). In the physical world, the Global Positioning System is
a navigation service, as is an inertial navigation system. Automated directoryassistance and online white pages are navigation services for the telephonenetwork, and online card catalogs are navigation services for libraries. In the
Internet, directories and search engines are navigation services.Internet navigation, navigation aids, and navigation services are dis-cussed in greater detail in Chapters 6, 7, and 8.Technical SystemsA technical system is an integrated set of engineered elements (compo-nents and practices) that delivers a specific service to users. Some familiarexamples of technical systems are the telephone system, the air transportsystem, the electric power system, and the Domain Name System. In the
case of the telephone system, the engineered elements are organized in acomplex network that includes the switching facilities (both hardware andsoftware) that set up the circuits linking telephones for a call, the transmis-
sion lines that carry the calls, and the telephone instruments that originateand receive calls; the service it delivers is telephone connectivity; and theusers are people who want to communicate with others by voice, data, or
facsimile.The single technical system that is the Domain Name System is de-scribed and discussed in detail in Chapters 2, 3, and 4; the technical sys-
tems that support Internet navigation services are characterized morebroadly in Chapters 6, 7, and 8.Institutional FrameworkAn institutional framework is a collection of organizations and policieswhose decisions and actions enable a technical system to be constructed,
operated, controlled, regulated, and improved. An institutional frameworkand its technical system are complementary to each other. Each of theexamples of technical systems described above has a complementary insti-
tutional framework. The telephone system, for example, depends for itseffective and efficient development and operation upon a complementaryframework comprising equipment suppliers, operating companies, local,
state, national, and international regulatory bodies, international standardsorganizations, and the technical community.The institutional framework of the DNS is discussed in Chapters 2, 3,and 5; that of Internet navigation services, in Chapters 6, 7, and 8.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe InternetÕs architecture has enabled it to respond very successfully tothe challenges of growth in the number of its users and in the capacity of its
links and the complexity of their connectivity, as well as to provide a robust
base for the growth of services such as e-mail and the World Wide Web.1.2 THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEMThe DNS was put into place by technologists in the early 1980s whenthe Internet provided basic non-commercial services to a small community
of specialists.4 The World Wide Web had not yet been invented. The DNSÕsdesigners intended it to be a simple and stable way for users and applica-
tions to identify computers on the Internet. They gave it a hierarchical struc-
ture so that the responsibility for maintaining the necessary information
tying domain names to IP addresses (and other data) could be distributed
to the organizations actually managing the relevant networks and groups
of hosts across the edges of the network.5 They designed it as an invertedtree with the expectation that most domain names would lie several
branches down, requiring relatively few names in the upper part of the
tree. Figure 1.1 illustrates the Domain Name SystemÕs role in support of
navigation across the Internet.6 Complete domain names7 incorporate thenames of the nodes in the tree above them. So in Figure 1.1, the domain
name www.cstb.nas.edu designates the www leaf lying on the .cstbbranch, which lies on the .nas branch, which lies on the .edu branch.A number of factors, including the introduction of the World WideWeb in the early 1990s, have transformed the Internet community from a
small town into a great and rapidly expanding metropolis with an ex-
tremely large, highly diverse body of users, relatively few of whom are
computer specialists. These users employ the Internet as the communica-
tions backbone for a vast range of commercial and non-commercial pur-
poses. As a result, the Internet has expanded both in scale and in the scope
of its applications. Because of the elegance of its technical design, the DNS
has, thus far, been able to adjust to the expanded scale of the Internet,
evolving to meet the increased operational demand adequately. However,
as a consequence of the growth in the scope of the Internet, the DNS is
now used in ways that were not anticipated when it was designed. These4Chapter 2 describes the development of the Domain Name System.5Chapter 3 describes the design and operation of the Domain Name System.6This depiction of the DNS is highly simplified. More detailed descriptions of the DNS areprovided in Chapters 2 and 3.7Formally, these are called Òfully qualified domain namesÓ to distinguish them from par-tial domain names that describe the path only from some node below the root.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT25unanticipated uses have led, in turn, to a substantial increase in the num-ber and complexity of the institutions responsible for its operation and
management and to less use than was originally expected of deep naming
hierarchies and distributed, but localized, management of names. This
growth in institutional complexity has been driven primarily by the fact
that domain names acquired increased value, which required mechanisms
to deal with their allocation and control. Their acquisition of increased
value followed from four developments:¥Preference for short and memorable names.The first development wasa preference among users for short and memorable domain names, which
led to an unexpectedly unbalanced distribution of domain names. More
devices were named at the second or third level of the inverted tree,
thereby widening it, rather than deepening it to the fourth and lower lev-
els as had been anticipated. And although the implementation of the DNS
offered a range of generic top-level domainsÑsuch as .com, .net, .org,INTERNETDOMAIN NAMESYSTEMUSER1.What is the IP address of the 
domain name www.cstb.nas.edu?2.The IP address of 
www.cstb.nas.eduis 128.128.128.1283.Retrieve the home page at 
128.128.128.128.128.128.128.1284.Here is the home page at 
www.cstb.nas.edu.INTERNETDOMAIN NAMESYSTEMUSER1.What is the IP address of the 
domain name www.cstb.nas.edu?2.The IP address of 
www.cstb.nas.eduis 128.128.128.128.3.Retrieve the home page at 
128.128.128.128.128.128.128.1284.Here is the home page at 
www.cstb.nas.edu.FIGURE 1.1The Domain Name System and Internet navigation for the WebÑ
navigating to www.cstb.nas.edu. The Web site and IP address used are fictional.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE.gov, and .eduÑfor a variety of reasons, .com became the preferred choice,further unbalancing the tree. Even with the addition of new generic top-
level domains after the year 2000, memorable domain names within the
.com domain remain the preferred choice for most businesses, many non-profit organizations, and numerous individuals.8¥Navigation role of .com.What led most directly to the growth inimportance of the .com domain was the second developmentÑits self-fulfilling role in navigation. For example, as commercial uses grew, users
seeking IBMÕs site on the World Wide Web could guess www.ibm.comwith an expectation of success. That common behavior naturally led orga-
nizations and individuals to seek registration of domain names that users
might be able to guess to find their site, which in turn improved the usersÕ
chances of navigating by guessing. That users were inclined to use do-
main names to search for content of interest increased the desirability of
domain names corresponding to generic words, such as Òbusiness,Ó
Òjobs,Ó or Òsex.Ó And the importance of having those names in the .comdomain was increased even more by the design of Web browsers. Recog-
nizing user inclinations, designers made the default behavior of many
Web browsers when confronted by an incomplete domain name the auto-
matic addition of .com to the end of it and www as the default prefix.9Thus, domain names became not only the way of designating locations onthe Internet, but also a principal means of navigating to them.10¥Valuable second-level domain names.The third development was therecognition that certain domain names within the top-level domainsÑ
second-level domain namesÑare more valuable than most others. The
result was an aftermarket for domain names, generally in the .com top-level domain, in which some have been resold for prices far greater than
the nominal registration fee paid by the original registrant. Furthermore,
in an effort to protect their rights and prevent others from abusing them,
trademark holders have sought to acquire many of the domain names
incorporating their trademarks and, given the likelihood of entry errors,
words that are typographically close to them in all of the relevant top-
level domains. This effort has, in turn, led to competition among trade-
mark holders with the same mark (though in different industries or re-
gions) for the small number of memorable domain names incorporating
their marks. (Individuals or groups with other legitimate claims to a8In mid-2004 there were almost 27 million .com registrations compared with 4.4 millionfor .net and 2.8 million for .org. See also Table 3.3.9Browsers in 2005 no longer make this assumption. Instead, they commonly assume thatthe entry is a search term.10The unique role of .com is elaborated on in Chapter 2.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT27nameÑsuch as those with the surname McDonald11Ñhave also assertedtheir rights to domain names incorporating trademarks.) It has also at-
tracted speculators who rush to acquire potentially desirable domain
names (both trademarks and generic words) in order to resell them to
those for whom the value would be substantially greater than the regis-
tration fee.12¥Marketing function.The value of domain names has been furtherenhanced by their widespread use in marketing materials as a secondary,
or even primary (e.g., amazon.com), identifier of an organization. In that
role they appear on stationery, in newspaper ads, on billboards, and on
the sides of buses. This marketing function of domain names is the fourth
unanticipated development.Because of these developments, the Domain Name SystemÑoriginallya modest technical system introduced to provide easy-to-remember and
portable names for locations on the InternetÑhas become a critical tool
facilitating global communication by designating sources of information,
products, and services as well as the e-mail boxes of people and organiza-
tions throughout cyberspace. As a consequence, its simple original insti-
tutional framework, managed essentially by one person,13 has been re-placed with a complex network of institutions comprising numerous
public and private, commercial and non-commercial organizations that
register domain names and operate name servers; and one non-govern-
mental organization with international scope that, with the authority and
oversight of the U.S. government, provides technical coordination and
establishes some elements of global policyÑthe Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).11The new top-level domain, .name, for registration by individuals was intended to meetthat need, although by mid-2004 the companies involved with registrations in that domainhad not found business models capable of supporting those operations.12A case in point is the name business.com, which changed hands for $150,000 in 1997and was resold for $7.5 million in 1999. See Jennifer Mack, ÒBusiness.com: The $7.5 MillionDomain,Ó ZDNet News, December 1, 1999, available at <http://zdnet.com.com/2100-11-516999.html?legacy=zdnn>. However, in the aftermath of the dot-com bust, the prices real-
ized in the aftermarket for domain names have also subsided substantially, although at theend of 2003 the name men.com was sold for $1.3 million by a person who paid $15,000 for itin 1997. See Anick Jesdanun, ÒDomain Names Once Again Fetch Top Dollar,Ó Associated
Press, December 25, 2003.13Jon Postel held this responsibility for many years. For further information, see <http://www.isoc.org/postel>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE1.3INTERNET NAVIGATION
With the growth of the size, complexity, and variety of applicationsusing the Internet, and especially the rapid growth of the World Wide
Web, a range of aids to the navigation process (especially on the Web)
have appeared.14 The DNS is a single technical system providing a singleservice, which is operated and controlled in a complex institutional frame-
work. In contrast, among aids to navigation on the Web there are numer-
ous specialized navigation services, each operated by different providers
that compete openly without any comprehensive institutional framework
for their operation and control. Principal among these navigation services
are search engines, which at the possible cost of a few more keystrokes
open up a far wider range of possibilities on the Web than simple domain
name guessing; and directories, which provide a yellow pages or white
pages guide to locations, principally on the Web. As search engines have
improved in user-perceived quality and ease of use, they have become a
principal means of navigation to new destinations for many users.15 Inplace of guessing, intrepid Web travelers enter a descriptive word or

phrase in the search engine and use the resultant list to direct their jour-
neys. In June 2004, nearly 4 billion searches were conducted each month
by almost 110 million people in the United States, an average of 33
searches per person per month.
16 It appears that a consequence of thegrowing use of search engines for navigation across the Web may be a
reduction, though by no means elimination, of the direct use of the DNS
to support navigation by guessing domain names.Because locations that offer search or directory capabilities are ac-cessed so often, a number have evolved into portals, which are Web sites
offering directed links to popular categories of services, such as My Ya-
hoo!. Portals such as MSN and AOL have also evolved from provision of14If the location of a desired Web site is known, then navigation can be directÑthe DNSdetermines the IP address of the site. If the location is not known, then some navigation aidmust first be used to determine the location. See Section 7.1 for a detailed discussion of directand indirect navigation.15According to data from WebSideStory, both direct navigation using a known domainname and the use of Web search engines increased substantially from 2002 to 2003. In March2003, 13.6 percent of Web site accesses were generated by search engine listings, while 66
percent were the result of the use of bookmarks or direct entry of a known address. See<http://www.websidestory.com>, press release, March 12, 2003.16Deborah Fallows, Lee Rainie, and Graham Mudd, ÒThe Popularity and Importance ofSearch Engines,Ó data memo, Pew Internet & American Life Project, August 2004, availableat <http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Data_Memo_Searchengines.pdf>. The resultscame both from a telephone survey of 1399 Internet users and from tracking of Internet use
by comScore Media Metrix.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT29Internet service. Some users find the portals more desirable than searchengines alone and begin their navigation from them. In doing so, they are
relying on the editorial judgment and commercial or other arrangements
of the portal to get started. However, once a World Wide Web site is
reachedÑno matter howÑsubsequent navigation often flows along the
network of links from one site to others. And it is likely that most experi-
enced users deploy a combination of navigation services and other aids:
employing search engines, portals, and direct entry of destinations into
browsers at various times.17 Other navigation aids are also in use. In someWeb portals run by ISPs (such as AOL) or through extensions to brows-
ers, a specified vocabulary of key words can be used to reach specific
destinations.The cumulative effect of these services and other aids to navigationhas, thus far, been positive. They enable users to find sources of products,
services, information, and contacts that they would not have been able to
identify previously. Complementarily, they enable providers to reach au-
diences that might not otherwise have known of their existence. Unlike
the development of the top levels of the DNS, which has been under the
technical control of the Internet engineering community and the gover-
nance of ICANN, national governments, and the operational organiza-
tions, these navigation services have for the most part been provided by
private organizations. Despite their benefits, however, navigation services
and other aids are also beginning to raise policy concerns. Most search
engines and directories now accept payment from advertisers for place-
ment of an ad on the pages of responses to queries with specific search
terms. If not clearly identified such ads might give searchers a false sense
of an advertiserÕs importance or relevance and reduce the chances that a
non-advertiser will be located. Concerns about the practices of the pro-
viders of navigation services are likely to grow as Internet users rely in-
creasingly on these services as a principal means of navigation.1.4THE DYNAMICS OF CHANGE
Since the early 1980s, when the DNS was developed, five forces haveinexorably driven the transformation of the Internet from its origins as a
small, primarily North American research network, which was run by a
tight-knit group of specialists for use within their research and industrial
communities, into its current state as a diffusely managed and increas-
ingly critical part of the global information and communication infrastruc-17These destinations might be derived from guesses about domain names as discussedabove or references provided by others (e.g., in an e-mail) that are copied and pasted intobrowsers, as well as by the use of bookmarks for destinations that are accessed frequently.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEture. These driving forces are increasing scale, technological progress, in-creasing economic value, increasing social value, and internationalization.
In addition to having a profound impact on the Internet (and the World
Wide Web) as a whole, these forces have simultaneously transformed the
DNS and Internet navigation to subjects of substantial commercial, legal,
political, and social importance. The likelihood of the continued influence
of these forces raises important questions about the future viability, oper-
ability, and governability of the DNS and Internet navigationÑthe sub-
jects of this study.1.4.1Increasing Scale
When the DNS was developed, the Internet comprised on the order of1000 sites and perhaps 10,000 users. In two decades it has grown to more
than 30 million sites and over 600 million users.18 Though its designersdid not fully anticipate the rapid growth in users and uses stimulated by
the World Wide Web, the DNS has technically scaled quite well to the
current size. In addition, new navigation tools have been deployed to as-
sist users in searching the vastly larger Internet. The Internet continues to
grow in number of users, number of addresses, and number and diversity
of attached devices. By 2010, at current growth rates, the Internet could
have more than 60 million sites and well over a billion users worldwide.191.4.2Technological Progress
When the DNS was developed, most of the hosts were workstations,minicomputers, or mainframe computers. Personal computers had just
begun their penetration of the business and home markets in North
America, Europe, and Japan. Internetworking communication took place
over backbones that had 56 kbps (kilobits per second) speedsÑabout
1/180,000th the speeds of backbones in 2005, which run at 10 Gbps (giga-
bits per second). As the capacities of computers and communications net-
works have soared, the DNS and navigation systems have taken advan-
tage of the increased computational capability and bandwidth to meet the18These numbers reflect estimates made in May 2003 by CyberAtlas; see <http://cyberatlas.internet.com>.19To serve them, the basic IP addressÑcurrently 32 bitsÑis being enlarged to 128 bits,enabling addressing of a wide range of devices from computers and cell phones to home
digital media centers and home appliances. The current IP address space is called the IPv4address space; the new version is called the IPv6 address space. IPv6 is slowly being adopted,working in parallel with IPv4.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT31challenges of scaling. Continuing technological advances in computingand communications offer the possibility of strengthening the DNS and
increasing the capacities of navigation services, while at the same time
further empowering those who would attack the services or attempt to
misdirect them for their own benefit.1.4.3Increasing Economic Value
When the DNS was developed, there was probably little or no eco-nomic value associated with possession of a particular domain name,
which could be obtained at no cost, although having a hierarchical nam-
ing system was judged to be valuable. A distinctive Internet culture had
developed well before this time, led by the relatively small and homoge-
neous community of engineers and scientists who were its primary users.
It placed high value on voluntary service, free access within the commu-
nity, and consensus decision making. However, the growth of applica-
tions on the Internet for commerce, information, art, and entertainment
attracted commercial, legal, governmental, and other communities whose
values and processes differ from those of the early Internet culture. Their
arrival led to the development of a vigorous market for domain names
and of a variety of mechanisms to deal with fair allocation of the now
economically valuable domain names. Not surprisingly, throughout these
developments there has been a continuing tension between the technical
community and the public interest community about the proper goals and
mechanisms for the allocation of domain names and the management of
the DNS.As domain names have gained economic value, so, too, has the desiregrown for opportunities to publicize those names (as part of Web site and
e-mail addresses) to potential users of the corresponding Internet loca-
tions. Consequently, many search engines and other navigational services,
which originally provided a single listing of search results in the order of
estimated relevance to the userÕs query, now also give prominent place-
ment to those willing to pay for it. As noted above, the search engine
industry faces a continuing challenge in finding the proper balance be-
tween the interests of the users of search engines and the advertisers on
them, against the backdrop of the ever present possibility of government
intervention.1.4.4Increasing Social Value
When the DNS was developed, there was a modest level of social,political, or cultural value associated with specific domain names. As the
Internet grew in size and evolved in use, it became a primary medium forSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcommunication, commerce, information, art, and entertainment; accord-ingly, domain names assumed greater social, political, and cultural sig-
nificance as the memorable designators of the Internet locations of politi-
cal groups, cultural resources, and social activities. But as a result, the
DNS became entangled in issues of privacy versus accountability, free-
dom of expression versus national legal restrictions, and the rights of pro-
ducers of intellectual property versus those of its users. In the future, the Internet can be expected to be even more widelyused for interpersonal communication, for the public expression of ideas,
for access to information, for the development of virtual communities
around common interests, and for the production and distribution of art
and entertainment. It will be a major portion of the global social fabric,
facilitating and controlling the flow of information, expression, art, and
entertainment. Until or unless the DNS is replaced, the signs designating
the location of information, art, entertainment, viewpoints, and services
will continue to depend on domain names. For that reason, it will be es-
sential to sustain the DNS as the reliable signposting infrastructure of the
Internet, facilitating the InternetÕs use as a medium of free expression
openly communicated to all corners of the globe, while balancing that
freedom of expression against privacy rights, property rights, cultural
mores, and national laws.As a result of the InternetÕs increased social value, the desire to navi-gate freely across it can also be expected to encounter legal, commercial,
cultural, and political challenges.1.4.5Internationalization
When the DNS was developed, the InternetÕs geographic scope waslimited primarily to North America, parts of Western Europe, and a few
countries on the Pacific Rim. And it was operated by a loose confedera-
tion of bodies and individuals, primarily in the United States, most of
whom had received substantial support from the U.S. government. As
use of the Internet has spread beyond its initial sites to encompass every
continent and region and almost all nations, the network has responded
successfully. But internationalization has posed two specific challenges
for the DNS.First, until recently domain names have been limited to strings of Ro-man letters, Arabic numbers, and the hyphen, a subset of the ASCII2020The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) was originally devel-oped for use with teletype. It was extended by IBM to represent 256 characters and hasbecome a de facto standard.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT33character set.  However, the native languages of an increasing number of
Internet users employ different character sets. Recently, following years
of work, a means of enabling presentation of internationalized domain
names (domain names encoding other character sets into ASCII charac-
ters) has been adopted. It should become an important facilitator of
Internet access and use for those communities.21And, second, although ICANN has international participation, its au-thority rests on a contract from the U.S. Department of Commerce, which
is perceived by some as undercutting its legitimacy as a representative of
the international community. That concern may increase as the economic
and social value of the DNS as the critical signposting infrastructure of
the Internet continues to grow.22Although the DNS is only now moving toward presentation of non-ASCII scripts in domain names, Internet content in most important appli-
cations, including e-mail and the Web, has been internationalized for well
over a decade. Most Internet navigation services have incorporated the
capability to search in multiple languages. For example, in November 2004

the Google search engine supported searches in over 100 languages and
dialects and provided a customized version of the search interface for 103
different nations.23 At the same time, the Yahoo! directory and searchservice offered portals customized for 32 national or language groups.24Since the navigation services are provided by a variety of organizations in
an open forum, they are less subject to concerns about the international-
ization of their governance. However, as their importance as the principal
means of access to the Internet grows, they may well come under pressure
from those who believe that in one aspect of their service or another, they
do not adequately take into account the concerns or interests of certain
nations, ethnic groups, or linguistic communities.1.5INTERNET NAMING AND NAVIGATION
Owing to the five forces outlined above, Internet naming and naviga-tion have become matters of broad concern throughout the world. Those21Internationalized domain names (IDNs) have recently been approved by ICANN for useby registries with which it has agreements. See ÒStandards for ICANN Authorization ofInternationalized Domain Name Registrations in Registries with Agreements,Ó posted March13, 2003, on the ICANN Web site, <http://www.icann.org>. See Section 4.3 for a more com-
plete discussion of this subject and more extensive references.22Changes in ICANNÕs organizational structure and decision processes responded to thisconcern, although debate continued into 2004 about the effectiveness of those changes. See
Sections 5.1 and 5.2 for an extended discussion of this issue.23For a listing see <http://www.google.com/language_tools?hl=en>.24For a listing see <http://world.yahoo.com/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEconcerns are given voice by the large number of competing interest groupsthat now take a vigorous interest in the DNS and, to a somewhat lesser
degree, Internet navigation.Product and service providers compete for named locations on theInternet and have a strong interest in the means for setting up new re-
gions and allocating named locations in them. Internet users have a
complementary interest in being able to find the information or service
they want wherever it may be located, even as the Internet continues to
grow in size and in diversity. All cultures have an interest in being able to
name locations and access and navigate the Internet in their native lan-
guages. Trademark holders have an interest in protecting their rights in
names from being infringed. Nations and their citizens want assurance
that their interests will be treated fairly and their needs supported by the
institutional frameworks that affect the InternetÕs naming and navigation
infrastructures. The Internet technical community wants to ensure that
everything is done to improve and nothing is done to compromise the
reliability, security, and stability of the Internet itself. Individuals also
want to be certain that neither their access nor their rights will be unduly
affected by the actions of the other groups. The interaction among these
various interests in naming and navigating the InternetÑa global infra-
structure that is undergoing rapid growth in scale while absorbing con-
tinual technological changeÑraises important issues that lie at the inter-
section of technology, economics, public policy, law, and user behavior.25This report addresses those issues from a specific perspective, that ofthe Domain Name System. Navigation across the vast and multifaceted
complex of human activity connected through the Internet is a subject
that warrants a major report in its own right. It is too large, in its full
richness, to fit within a report that was initiated to address significant
questions about the future of the DNS. Yet, at the same time, navigation is
so intertwined with the present and future of the DNS that it cannot be
completely absent. Consequently, this report concentrates on navigation
over the Internet primarily in its relationships with the DNS. Even under
that constraint, however, it is necessary to introduce fundamental issues
of Internet navigation to provide a background for the more circumscribed
examination of its interrelationships with the DNS.The DNS interrelates with navigation across the Internet in five ways.¥First, the DNS plays a direct navigational role by providing the IPaddress of a World Wide Web site, an e-mail server, or another network
host or resource whose domain name is known, or can be guessed.25See CSTB, NRC, The InternetÕs Coming of Age, 2001.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT35¥Second, the DNS serves as an enhancer of navigation because manynavigation services return locators incorporating the domain names of
relevant Web sites. These names usually provide more (although not nec-
essarily reliable) information to the user about the provider whose loca-
tion has been returned than just the IP address or a blank link would.¥Third, navigation services complement the DNS by, for example,enabling navigation to Web sites whose domain names are not known by
the user or by enabling searches within sites that have been reached by
use of their domain names.¥Fourth, navigation services relieve some of the pressure on theDomain Name System by reducing the need for a site to have a short
memorable name in order to be found. It appears that efforts and funds
spent in previous years to obtain desirable domain names are now being
diverted to some degree to efforts and expenditures to ensure a presence
and high ranking in the results of search engines or directories.¥Fifth, navigation services could, in the extreme, substitute entirelyfor the Domain Name System on the Web because they could directly
return IP addresses. However, as noted above, this approach would de-
prive the user of any information about the provider contained in the do-
main name. It would also deprive the provider of the marketing value of
the domain name. And it would eliminate the use of domain names as
stable identifiers of Internet resources whose IP addresses change, which
was one of the original motivations for the creation of the DNS.Of these five roles, it is the third and fourthÑnavigation as a comple-ment to and a relief for the DNSÑthat are the focus of this reportÕs exami-
nation of Internet navigation.1.6 OBJECTIVES OF THIS REPORTThis report is addressed to those who are or will be concerned withpolicies and practices that affect the operation and evolution of the DNS
and Internet navigation. That is a large audience. It includes the technolo-
gists who research, design, implement, and operate the DNS and naviga-
tion systems; the governmental policy makers and their staffs who estab-
lish, oversee, and operate the framework of institutions and laws that
govern or regulate those systems; the commercial and non-commercial
organizations that operate, manage, and use those systems; and the users
and providers who depend on those systems for access to and the accessi-
bility of Internet locations.During the time that this report has been in preparation, the DNSand Internet navigation have seen many technical and institutionalSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEchanges, some substantial, others modest; some controversial, othersagreeable; some likely to last, others temporary expedients that will
eventually be replaced. Some of the changes made have addressed the
issues that gave rise to the initial request for this report. Clearly, this
study was not the proper vehicle to address those specific issues. How-
ever, it is equally clear that many issues of similar character are or soon
will arrive on the agendas of the policy, technical, provider, and user
communities. Yet those called upon to deal with policy and practices
affecting the DNS and Internet navigation often have little or no knowl-
edge of the full complexity of those arenas. Those who are engaged with
the technology of these worlds do not always appreciate the nuances of
the policy, economic, and legal issues, while those experienced with the
legal, economic, and policy aspects often are largely unaware of the in-
tricacies of the technology. This asymmetry of knowledge exacerbates
cultural differences between the technology and the policy communi-
ties, inhibiting both effective policy making and desirable technological
change. Both groups would benefit from having a reliable source of in-
formation about the technologies and the institutions that control them,
upon which they can base reasonable and effective policies. And, where
appropriate, they might also benefit from the conclusions and recom-
mendations of a broadly knowledgeable committee that has spent sev-
eral years reviewing the two worlds.Therefore, this report, which is the result of extensive and collabora-tive work by a committee whose members are drawn from both the tech-
nology and the policy communities, is intended to serve five objectives:1.To provide a thorough and objective description and assessment of
the Domain Name SystemÑboth its technology and the institu-
tional framework within which that technology operates;2.To describe and analyze alternative approaches to the principal
technology prospects and institutional issues that are likely to af-
fect the future of the DNS;3.To provide a thorough and objective description and assessment of
Internet navigation, with sufficient background information to pro-
vide context;4.To describe and analyze alternative approaches to some of the tech-
nology prospects and institutional issues that are likely to affect
the future of Internet navigation; and5.To present conclusions and make recommendations where it was
possible for the committee to reach agreementÑin any case, to
characterize the range of alternative views.This report has been structured to respond to those objectives.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NAVIGATING THE INTERNET: CONCEPTS AND CONTEXT371.7 ROADMAP FOR THIS REPORTThis report is divided into three parts. The DNS is the subject of thefirst, consisting of Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5. Internet navigation in its rela-
tionship to the DNS is the subject of the second, consisting of Chapters 6,
7, and 8. Chapter 9 summarizes the interaction between the DNS and

Internet navigation.Because the options for moving forward are partially constrained bythe decisions taken along the path to the present, the first part begins with
a careful review of the development of the Domain Name System. Chap-
ter 2 examines the evolution of the technical design of the DNS and its
associated operational, administrative, and governance mechanisms. It
describes the sequence of important technical decisions and innovations,
as well as the new governance and administrative mechanisms that have
been introduced in response to the InternetÕs rapid growth. Several of the
early technical decisions, taken at the time of restricted use of
internetworks by specialized groups, still constrain the DNS. Chapter 3 describes the current state of the DNS, considering boththe technical system, which performs the linkage of domain names with
IP addresses and associated data, and the higher-level institutional frame-
work, which carries out operational, administrative, and policy-setting
functions essential for the DNS to function. It explains and evaluates the
operation of the DNS technical system and identifies and assesses each of
the functions carried out by the highest levels of the institutional frame-
work.Chapter 4 describes the prospective technologies that can respond tothe challenges the DNS faces from malicious attacks, the growing inter-
section of the telephone system and the Internet, the need to internation-
alize the DNS, and the need to regulate the introduction of potentially
disruptive new services. Chapter 5 deals with the key institutional issues
facing the DNS: governance of the DNS itself, oversight of root opera-
tions, governance of the top-level domains, improvement of the dispute
resolution process, and improvement of the DNSÕs information service
(called the Whois service).The distinctive characteristics and historical development of Internetnavigation, as it relates to the DNS, are described in Chapter 6. The cur-
rent state of navigation aids and services and the framework of commer-
cial institutions within which they operate are presented in Chapter 7.
Chapter 8 addresses some prospective technologies whose introduction,
and a number of the institutional issues whose resolution, can have a
major influence on the future development of Internet navigation and its
relationship to the DNS.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEFinally, Chapter 9 sums up the interaction between the DNS and
Internet navigation.Throughout the chapters on the DNS and Internet navigation, thecommitteeÕs conclusions and recommendations are incorporated into the
text where appropriate.The goal of this report is to clarify the sometimes controversial, oftenarcane, and frequently uncertain issues concerning the signposting and
navigational infrastructure of the Internet. The committee hopes that by
providing such clarification, this report will itself serve as a navigational
aid to the policy and technology communities as they find their way to
decisions that will enable the Internet to remain an efficient and reliable
channel of global communication and commerce.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.392The Domain Name System:Emergence and Evolution
The Domain Name System (DNS) was designed and deployed in the1980s to overcome technical and operational constraints of its pre-
decessor, the HOSTS.TXT system. Some of the initial design deci-sions have proven to be extraordinarily flexible in accommodating major
changes in the scale and scope of the DNS. Other initial design decisions
constrain technical and policy choices to the present day. Thus, an under-
standing of the system architecture and the rationale for the design char-
acteristics of the DNS provides the base for understanding how the DNS
has evolved to the present and for evaluating possibilities for its future.
This chapter outlines the origin and development of the DNS and de-
scribes its key design characteristics, which include both technological and
organizational aspects.12.1ORIGIN OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
For the first decade or so of the ARPANET,2 the host3 table file(HOSTS.TXT) served as its directory. HOSTS.TXT provided the network1A general presentation of the history of the Internet is beyond the scope of this report.One source of documentation on the InternetÕs history is available at <http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/>.2The Internet grew out of the ARPANET project (funded by the Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (DARPA), which was known as ARPA for a period of its
history); for many years the ARPANET served as the core of the Internet.3A host is the primary or controlling computer in a network.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEaddress for each host on the ARPANET,4 which could be looked up byusing the hostÕs one-word English language name, acronym, or abbrevia-
tion. The Network Information Center (NIC) at the Stanford Research In-
stitute5 managed the registration of hosts and the distribution of the in-formation needed to keep the HOSTS.TXT file current. The list of host
names and their mapping to and from network addresses was maintained
in the frequently updated HOSTS.TXT file, which was copied to and
stored in each computer connected to the ARPANET. Thus, HOSTS.TXT6was introduced to:¥Simplify the identification of computers on the ARPANET.Simple andfamiliar names are much easier for humans to remember than lengthy
(12-digit) numeric strings; and¥Provide stability when addresses changed.Since addresses in theARPANET were a function of network topology and routing,7 they oftenhad to be changed when topology or routing changed. Names in the host
table could remain unchanged even as addresses changed.The HOSTS.TXT file had a very simple format. Each line inHOSTS.TXT included information about a single host, such as the net-
work address, and when provided, system manufacturer and model num-
ber, operating system, and a listing of the protocols that were supported.Because a copy of the host table was stored in every computer on theARPANET, each time a new computer was added to the network, or an-4These network addresses could be represented using the Internet Protocol (IP) for-mat or in the equivalent (now unused) ARPANET Network Control Protocol (NCP)
format. The most widely used version (v4) of IP represents addresses using 32 bits,usually expressed as four integers in the range from 0 to 255, separated by dots. Anexample of an IP address is 144.171.1.26.5Stanford Research Institute became known as SRI International in 1977.6For further discussion, see L. Peter Deutsch, ÒHost Names On-line,Ó Request forComments (RFC) 606, December 1973; Ken Harrenstien, Vic White, and Elizabeth Feinler,
ÒHostnames Server,Ó RFC 811, March 1982; and Ken Harrenstien, M. Stahl, and Eliza-beth Feinler, ÒDOD Internet Host Table Specification,Ó RFC 952, October 1985, allavailable at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>. RFCs are created to document technical and
organizational aspects of the Internet. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)manages the process for discussing, evaluating, and approving RFCs. See Box 3.3. Fora discussion of the role of the DNS more generally, see John C. Klensin, ÒRole of the
Domain Name System,Ó RFC 3467, February 2003.7Routing refers to the way data flowed on the ARPANET. Data transmitted frompoint A to point B might have traversed many different paths, or routes, on the ARPANET.
Note that the ARPANET, as the original network to employ the Internet Protocol (IP),was often referred to as Òthe Internet,Ó although the term later formally encompassedthe aggregate of interconnected IP-based networks.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION41other update was made, the entire table had to be sent to every computeron the network for the change to be recognized.8 As increasing numbersof computers joined the ARPANET, the updating task became more and
more burdensome and subject to error and failure, and, as a consequence,
several major problems developed from the use of the HOSTS.TXT file:¥Failure to scale.As the ARPANET started to grow rapidly, it be-came clear that the centralized HOSTS.TXT file failed to scale in two ways.

First, the volume of updates threatened to overwhelm the NIC staff main-
taining HOSTS.TXT. Second, because every system needed to have an up-
to-date copy of HOSTS.TXT, announcement of a new copy of HOSTS.TXT
meant that the NIC server where the current version of HOSTS.TXT was
stored was inundated with attempts to download the file. Moreover, the
download problem was aggravated because HOSTS.TXT kept getting big-

ger. In short, more hosts on the network meant more updates, more hosts
trying to download, and more data to download.¥Inadequate timeliness.It often took several days to get a new hostlisted in HOSTS.TXT while the NIC staff processed the request to add the
host entry. Until it was listed and communicated, the host was effectively
invisible to the rest of the ARPANET. In a community already becoming
accustomed to getting data instantly over the network, this delay was a
source of frustration. Similarly, correcting an error often took a few days,
because fixes to any errors were not generally available until the next
HOSTS.TXT file was releasedÑwhich caused further frustration. The
maintainers of some hosts also did not update their copies of the table at
very frequent intervals, resulting in those hosts having obsolete or incom-
plete information even when the master copy of the table was up-to-date.¥Susceptibility to failure.The system had multiple ways to fail. Prob-ably the most famous outage occurred when the NIC released a version of
HOSTS.TXT that omitted the entry for the system where the HOSTS.TXT
file was stored. When the subsequent HOSTS.TXT file was released, most
systems could not download it, because they could not look up the rel-
evant host name! There were also cases where partial tables were inad-
vertently released. Furthermore, seemingly innocuous additions to
HOSTS.TXT could cause the programs that converted HOSTS.TXT into
local formats to fail.¥Name conflicts.The HOSTS.TXT name space was flat, which meantthat host names had to be unique. Popular host names such as Frodo were
selected first, and so some people had to invent alternate names for their
systems.8It was the obligation of individual network and host operators to download thelatest HOSTS.TXT file to their machines.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe emergence of these problems caused technologists to develop anew, distributed, method for managing the mapping of names and ad-
dresses.2.2DESIGNING THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
In the early 1980s, research on naming systemsÑsystems for associat-ing names with addressesÑwas underway and a few prototype naming
systems had just been developed, most notably the Grapevine and Clear-
inghouse systems at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC).9 Alsoin progress at this time was preliminary work on other computer network
addressing standards such as X.400.10 Because of the uncertainty as towhether these research and development efforts would yield in the near
term an operational system with the required functionality and needed
scale, Internet researchers elected to develop their own protocols.In August 1982, Zaw-Sing Su and Jon Postel authored ÒThe DomainNaming Convention for Internet User Applications,Ó Request for Com-
ments (RFC) 819, which described how Internet naming should be
changed to facilitate a distributed name system. As envisioned in this

document, Internet names would be organized into logical hierarchies,
represented by text components separated by a period (Ò.Ó) (thus the ex-
isting host ÒISIFÓÑhost computer ÒFÓ at the Information Sciences Insti-
tute (ISI)Ñwould become F.ISI), and the various parts of the name as as-
signed (i.e., the parts delimited with periods) would be managed by
different network servers. RFC 819 specified only how names would be
representedÑthe details of how the management of various parts of as-
signed names would take place operationally by the different network
servers remained to be determined.In November 1983, Paul Mockapetris authored ÒDomain NamesÑConcepts and FacilitiesÓ (RFC 882) and ÒDomain NamesÑImplementa-
tion and SpecificationÓ (RFC 883), which specified a set of protocols, called
the Domain Name System, that implemented the hierarchical name space
proposed by Su and Postel. Reflecting the discussions of the previous sev-
eral months on the electronic mail list Namedroppers, the proposed DNS9See Andrew D. Birrell, Roy Levin, Roger M. Needham, and Michael D. Schroeder,ÒGrapevine: An Exercise in Distributed Computing,Ó Communications of the ACM 25(4):260-274, 1982.10The International Organization for Standardization and the International Telecom-munication Union endorsed X.400 as a standard that describes a messaging service (e.g.,
electronic mail). The first version of X.400 was published in 1984 by the Comit” Consultatif
International T”l”phonique et T”l”graphique (CCITT), which is now the International
Telecommunication UnionÐTelecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION43supported more sophisticated services and features than simply convert-ing host names to addresses (e.g., the proposed system would provide a
way to map a name to different addresses, depending on the purpose for
which an inquiry was being made). With some modest changes, the pro-
posed protocols are exactly those in use two decades later.Conceptually, the DNS is implemented through a distributed and hi-erarchical series of tables, linked like the branches of an inverted tree
springing from a single, common root. When an address is sought, the
search proceeds successively from the table at the root (or top) of the tree
to successive branches and leaves, or lower tables, until the table that
holds the desired address is found. For a particular query, only the last
table in the search serves as a white pages directory. All of the other tables
serve as directories of directories, each one pointing to lower-level direc-
tories on a path to the one holding the desired address. Thus, the entries
in a table at any given level of the tree can include pointers to lower-level
tables as well as final network addresses. See Figure 2.1.When a change is made in the network, only the table directly af-fected by that change must be updated and only the local organization
(e.g., the system administration function in a university or corporation)
responsible for that table needs to make the update. As a result, the work
of registering changes is distributed among many organizations, thus re-
ducing the burden each must carry.The DNS naming syntax corresponds to the levels in the hierarchicaltree. Each node in the tree has a name that identifies it relative to the nodeÒ.Óroot.edumit.educstb.orgibm.comcsail.mit.eduÒÓ.com.org.icann.orgfrodo.csail.mit.eduFIGURE 2.1The hierarchical Domain Name System inverted tree structure.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEabove it. The highest level, the Òroot node,Ó has the null name. In text it iswritten as a single dot (Ò.Ó) or simply implied (and thus not shown at all).
Each node below the root is the root of another subtree, a domain, that can
in turn be further divided into additional subtrees, called subdomains.
Each subdomain is written in text to include its name and the subdomains
above it in the applicable hierarchy. In Figure 2.1, .com, .org, and .edu aretop-level domains (TLDs) and cstb.org, mit.edu, and ibm.com aresubdomains of the TLDs, often called second-level domains. The third-
level domain, csail.mit.edu, is a subdomain within the mit.edu second-level domain.The DNS name of a computer is the name of its node or end point inthe Domain Name System. Thus, frodo.csail.mit.edu would be the com-puter (or device) named ÒfrodoÓ that is located within the csail.mit.edusubdomain of the mit.edu second-level domain within the .edu TLD. Onthe other hand, myownpersonalcomputer.com (without any furthersubdomains) could point directly to a particular computer.Applications, such as Web browsers and e-mail software, use domainnames as part of the Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs; see Box 6.2) or
other references that incorporate information about the protocols required
for communication with the desired information source. Examples of URIs

are http://www.national-academies.org and mailto:someperson@example.com. In 
the first example, ÒhttpÓ refers to the Hypertext Transfer Protocol(HTTP) used for communication with sites on the World Wide Web. Inthe second example, a particular user at the host identified by
Òexample.comÓ is identified as the addressee for electronic mail.In terms of information technology, the Domain Name System is imple-mented through a series of name servers that are located at each of thenodes in the hierarchy. Each name server contains a table that indicates the
locations of the name servers immediately below it in the hierarchy and the
portion of the hierarchy for which it contains the final (authoritative) net-
work addresses. Thus, the root name servers (at the top of the hierarchy)
contain the locations of each of the name servers for the top-level domains.11At any given node, such as .com or ibm.com, there are expected to be mul-tiple (physical) name servers at different Internet Protocol (IP) addresses,
each with identical information; the purpose of this redundancy is to share
the workload to ensure adequate system performance.When a user wants to reach www.national-academies.org, his or hercomputer usually sends a message to a nearby name server (usually local
or operated by the userÕs Internet service provider), where software (called11Each of these root name servers contains identical information; the purpose of hav-ing multiple root name servers is to distribute the query workload and ensure reliable
operation. Specifics concerning the root name servers are discussed in Chapter 3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION45a resolver), in conjunction with other name servers and resolvers, per-forms a series of queries to find the name server that is authoritative for
www.national-academies.org. That server is then queried for the corre-sponding IP address(es) and returns the resulting address(es) to the userÕs

computer.122.2.1Simple, Mnemonic, and Deeply Hierarchical Names
As indicated above, domain names were intended to enable a moreconvenient and efficient way of referring to IP addresses and other infor-
mation, using a simple taxonomy. The early DNS included eight generic
top-level domains (gTLDs): .edu (institutions of higher educationÑmostof which were based in the United States), .gov (U.S. government), .mil(U.S. military), .com (commerce), .net (network resources), .org (other or-ganizations and persons13), .int (international treaty organizations), and.arpa (network infrastructure).14 In addition, country-code top-level do-mains (ccTLDs) were created based on the two-letter code set (e.g., .gh forGhana or .au for Australia) in the ISO 3166-1 standard.15Despite the ability of the protocols and data structures themselves toaccommodate any binary representation, DNS names were historically
restricted to a subset of the ASCII character set.16 Selection of that subsetwas driven in part by human factors considerations, including a desire to
eliminate possible ambiguities in an international context. Hence, charac-
ter codes that had international variations in interpretation were excluded;
the underscore character (too much like a hyphen) and case distinctions
(upper versus lower) were eliminated as being confusing when written or
read by people; and so on. These considerations appear to be very similar
to those that resulted in similarly restricted character sets being used as
protocol elements in many International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) protocols.12The summary provided in this paragraph is quite simplified; there are many dis-crete technical processes that are not articulated here. See Chapter 3 for a more de-
tailed explanation.13Initially, the .org TLD was intended as the category for organizations and indi-viduals that did not fall into any of the other categories. Through time, many indi-
viduals increasingly viewed .org as representing the domain name space for non-profit organizations.14These definitions of the gTLDs were generally followed, although a number ofexceptions existed.15Thus, the determination of what constitutes a country did not need to be addressedby those who administer the DNS. See <http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prodsservices/
iso3166ma/index.html>.16This subset, which derives primarily from the original HOSTS.TXT naming rules,includes the 10 Arabic digits, the 26 letters of the English alphabet, and the hyphen.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEAnother initial assumption behind the design of the DNS was thatthere would be relatively many physical hosts for each second-level do-
main name and, more generally, that the system would be deeply hierar-
chical, with most systems (and names) at the third level or below. Some
domainsÑthose of most universities and some large corporations and the
country code for the United States (.us)Ñfollow this model, at least in itsoriginal design, but most do not17 (see Chapter 3 for discussion). How-ever, experience through mid-year 2005 has shown that the DNS is robust
enoughÑgiven contemporary machines as servers and current bandwidth
normsÑto operate reasonably well even though the design assumption of
a deep hierarchy is not satisfied. Nonetheless, it is still useful to remember
that the system could have been designed to work with a flat structure
(e.g., the huge, flat structure under .com comprising tens of millions of
names) rather than a deeply hierarchical one. For example, based on an
assumption of a flat structure at the TLD level, one would probably not
wish to assign specific operational responsibility by TLD (as is the case
currently). Instead, it might have made more sense to design the system
as one database that is replicated on a limited number of servers (to share
the workload and coordinate updates in a manageable way).2.2.2Experimental Features
The DNS specification included a number of experimental features,intended to enhance the services that the DNS could provide beyond
simple name-to-address lookup. Several of these features were intended
to facilitate improved support of electronic mail. Several resource
records18 were intended to improve e-mail routing, helping to ensure thate-mail sent to a particular host took a reliable route to that host. The DNS
also included features intended to support e-mail lists and aliases. The
idea was to make it easier to maintain mailing lists and to forward mail
when someoneÕs e-mail address changed. In addition, the DNS contained
a feature to track Òwell-known services.Ó The purpose of this feature was
to provide a list of services (e-mail, File Transfer Protocol, Web) that are17The .us country code TLD was designed originally to use geographical and politi-cal jurisdictions as subdomains. As one moves to the left, each subdomain represents a
subset of the area represented by the immediately preceding name. For example, in
the name Òwww.cnri.reston.va.us,Ó ÒvaÓ represents the state of Virginia within theUnited States, ÒrestonÓ represents a city within Virginia, and ÒcnriÓ represents an
organization in the city of Reston.18Each table within the domain name tree hierarchy contains resource records, whichare composed of fields such as the type (i.e., does this record correspond to a host
address, an authoritative name server, or something else) and time to live (i.e., for
what period of time may this record be cached before the source of the information
should be consulted again?). See Box 3.2 for a detailed discussion of resource records.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION47available from a host. Most of the experimental features have not beenadopted for general use. Indeed, the original set of e-mail-related record
types were deprecated in favor of a newer model (see Section 2.3.3) and
the Òwell-known servicesÓ record was determined to be unworkable.2.3DEPLOYING THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
Whereas the design of the DNS looked reasonable on paper, severallimitations of the new system, as with any new system, did not become
apparent until initial deployment began. Addressing these limitations
caused a delay in the full implementation of the DNS. The plan called for
a switchover to the DNS in September 1984, but full conversion did not
take place until 1987. Some of the delay was attributable to reconciling
naming conflicts.19 A large part of the delay derived from a far longerthan expected period to implement and debug the DNS, of which a sig-
nificant portion derived from simple procrastinationÑjust not getting
around to installing and implementing the DNS. Another delay included
the difficulty of retrofitting the DNS into old operating systems that were
no longer actively maintained.2.3.1Caching
The design of the DNS allows for the existence of caches. These arelocal data storage or memory that can significantly reduce the amount of
network traffic associated with repeated successful queries for the same
data by providing access to the data in servers closer to the end user than
the authoritative name server.20 The data in these caches need to be re-freshed at regular intervals21 to ensure that the cached data are valid. Inthe initial version of the DNS specification, several timing parameters had
time-to-live limits of approximately 18 hours. It quickly became apparent,
however, that in many cases data changed slowly, and so updating caches
every 18 hours or so was unnecessary. As a consequence, the protocol
specification was changed to increase the allowed range of these timing
parameters; several other protocol parameters were also given expanded
ranges, based on the theory that one incompatible protocol change early
on would be better than a series of such changes. This happened early19Most or all of these conflicts were internal onesÑfor example, subunits of a univer-sity trying to obtain the same domain name as the university.20An additional potential benefit from the use of caches is an improvement in userresponse time.21As defined in the time-to-live field in the resource records. See Chapter 3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEenough that there was no serious difficulty in deploying upgraded soft-ware.In its original design, the DNS did not have a corresponding mecha-nism for reducing the network traffic associated with repeated unsuccess-
ful queries (i.e., queries for which no entry in the relevant authoritative
table is found). Within a few years of the initial implementation of the
DNS, it became apparent that such a mechanism would be beneficial,
given the number of identical queries that are unsuccessful. A proposed
mechanism for negative response caching was developed, and the data
necessary to support it were added to the protocol in a way that did not
affect software based on earlier versions of the protocol, but the full de-
ployment of the new mechanism was slow. The name server side of the
new mechanism was very simple and was deployed fairly quickly, but
initial support for the client (user) side of the negative caching mechanism
was limited to a few implementations and was not adopted more gener-
ally until much later. The lack of widespread and correct client-side sup-
port for negative caching is a problem that still persists.222.3.2Lookup Timeouts
The biggest single difficulty in the transition from HOSTS.TXT to theDNS, however, was not due to any specific shortcoming of the DNS.
Rather, it was attributable to the fundamental change in the nature of the
lookup mechanism. In the HOSTS.TXT world, any particular host lookup
operation would either succeed or fail immediatelyÑthe HOSTS.TXT file
is located on the userÕs system; it is not dependent on Internet connectiv-
ity at the moment of lookup. The DNS added a third possible outcome to
any lookup operation: a timeout attributable to any of a number of pos-
sible temporary failure conditions (e.g., the required name server is down,
so one does not know whether the particular name is indeed in the table
or not). The occurrence of a timeout indicates neither success nor failure;
it is the equivalent of asking a yes or no question and being told Òask
again later.Ó Many of the network programs that predated the DNS sim-
ply could not handle this third possibility and had to be rewritten. While22Users derive benefits from the implementation of negative caching, namely fasterresponse times. The larger system also derives benefits through the reduced load of
invalid queries. However, there are costs associated with the implementation and main-
tenance of negative caching. For a given user, if the estimated benefit deriving from
faster response times is deemed to be worth less than the costs associated with nega-
tive caching, then the user is not likely to implement negative caching, even though
the total benefits (which include the reduced load of invalid queries on the larger
system) may exceed these costs. This phenomenon is explained under the rubric of
what economists refer to as externalities.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION49this was something of a problem for programs intended to be run directlyby a user (e.g., one then-popular e-mail client checked the host name of
every recipient during composition), it was a far more serious problem
for programs that ran unattended, such as mail transfer agents. These pro-
grams had to be rewritten to handle DNS timeout errors in the same way
as they would handle any other form of connection failure. Conceptually,
this was simple enough, but it took several years to actually track down
and fix all the places in all the programs that made implicit assumptions
about the host lookup mechanism. Toward the end of this period, the
Internet had entered an era of periodic Òcongestion collapsesÓ that even-
tually led to a fundamental improvement in certain algorithms used in
the Internet infrastructure. During each of these congestion collapses, DNS
lookups (along with all other forms of Internet traffic) frequently timed
out, which made it much more obvious which applications still needed to
be converted to handle timeouts properly. To this day, however, correct
handling of the possibility of timeouts during a DNS lookup represents
an issue in application design.2.3.3Convergence in Electronic Mail Systems
In the mid-1980s, the Internet was one of the major data networks.23Although data could not move from one network to the next, e-mail wasable to flowÑthrough carefully designed e-mail gatewaysÑbetween the
networks. Some of the busiest computers on each network were the ma-
chines whose job it was to relay e-mail from one network to the next.24Unfortunately, the system of gateways required users to route their e-
mail by explicitly using the e-mail address. For instance, to send e-mail
over the Internet to a colleague at Hewlett Packard Laboratories on the
Computer Science Network (CSNET), one had to address the e-mail to
colleague%hplabs.csnet@relay.cs.net. This complex syntax says that the
Internet should deliver the e-mail to relay.cs.net and then send the mes-
sage on to the appropriate address on cs.net.25 Thus, some people had23These major data networks included BITNET, Internet, CSNET, UUCP, and Fidonet.See John S. Quarterman, The Matrix: Computer Networks and Conferencing Systems Worldwide,Digital Press, Bedford, Mass., 1990; and Donnalyn Frey, Buck Adams, and Rick Adams,
!%@: A Directory of Electronic Mail Addressing and Networks, OÕReilly and Associates,Sebastopol, Calif., 1991.24For instance, relay.cs.net and seismo.css.gov, the e-mail gateways between the Internetand the Computer Science Network, and an important one of those between the Internet
and the Unix-to-Unix network, respectively, were typically the top two hosts (in terms
of traffic sent or received) on the ARPANET in the mid-1980s.25In some instances, the messages were even messier; someone on the Unix-to-Unixnetwork (UUCP) might have to write an address such as <ihnp4!seismo!colleague%
hplabs.csnet@relay.cs.net> to send an e-mail.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEone e-mail box yet had business cards listing three or four different waysto send e-mail to them. There were ample opportunities for confusion and
mis-routed e-mail.26The original DNS specification tried to address this problem by mak-ing it possible to send e-mail to names that were not connected to the
Internet. For instance, if the Example Company was on the UUCP net-
work, but wanted to exchange e-mail over the Internet, it could register
Example.com and place an entry in the DNS directing that all e-mail tonames ending Example.com should be forwarded to the UUCP e-mailgateway, which would know to forward the e-mail to the Example
CompanyÕs e-mail hub.Unfortunately, the original DNS scheme for e-mail routing was notup to the task. It did not handle certain types of e-mail routing well, and,
worse, it could cause e-mail errors that resulted in lost e-mail.The result was a new scheme using Mail eXchangers (MXs) so that,for any domain name, the DNS would store a preferentially ordered list of
hosts that would handle e-mail for that name. The rule is to start with the
most preferred host in the list and work down the list until a host is found
that will accept the e-mail.27 This simple rule could be combined with theDNS facility for wildcarding (following rules that state that all names end-
ing in a particular domain, or that a particular subset of names ending in
a name, should all get the same response)28 to create e-mail routing foralmost any desirable situation. In particular, it was possible to address e-26For instance, at Princeton University there was a weekly tape swap between theoperators of princeton.bitnet and princeton.csnetÑtwo machines on different networks
that routinely got e-mail accidentally intended for the other.27See Craig Partridge, ÒMail Routing and the Domain Name System,Ó RFC 974, Janu-ary 1986, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.28For example, in the early days of e-mail connectivity to much of Africa, e-mailhubs were set up inside the countries, serving all users there. These hubs did not have
direct Internet connectivity to the rest of the world but were typically served through
occasional dial-up connections that, in turn, usually used non-TCP/IP connections. To
facilitate this arrangement, the DNS was set up so that all traffic for, say, South Africa
(the .za ccTLD), regardless of the full domain name, would be routed to a mail-receiv-ing system in the United States. That system would then open an international dial-up
connection at regular intervals and transfer the accumulated e-mail over it. The e-mail
hub in South Africa would then distribute the e-mail to other hubs within the country,
often using the originally specified domain as an indication of the appropriate domes-
tic server. This model had the added advantage that, when permanent connectivity
became available, user and institutional e-mail addresses and domain names did not
have to changeÑusers just saw a dramatic improvement in service and turnaround
time. More information on the history of this strategy may be found at <http://
www.nsrc.org/> and in John C. Klensin and Randy Bush, ÒExpanding International E-
mail Connectivity: Another Look,Ó ConnexionsÑThe Interoperability Report 7(8):25-29,1993, available at <http://www.nsrc.org/articles/930600.connexions>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION51mail to domains that were off the Internet, or domains that were partly onand partly off the Internet.The development of a dependable and highly flexible mechanism forrouting Internet e-mail had two almost immediate consequences. First, all
the other major e-mail networks converted to using domain names or
names that looked like domain names.29 These other networks all hadnon-hierarchical (i.e., flat) name spaces, with many of the same scaling
problems that were experienced with HOSTS.TXT, and were looking for a
workable hierarchical name space. Once it was shown that the DNS would
work for e-mail, it was simpler for companies to adopt domain names
and, in some cases, adapt the DNS to run on their networks rather than to
devise their own naming scheme. Thus, within a matter of 18 months to
2 years, the Babel of e-mail addresses was simplified almost everywhere
in the world to user@domain-name. A second effect was that companies
could now change networks without changing their host names and e-
mail addresses, providing incentives for some companies to make the
switch to the Internet. Indeed, by 1990, almost all the networks that had
offered services comparable to the Internet were either gone or going out
of business.30 Around the same time, companies began to encourage theiremployees to put e-mail addresses on business cards (it had often been
discouraged because, as previously noted, e-mail addresses were so com-
plicated). Domain names thereafter became a (small) part of everyday
business.There were also some longer-term effects. First, it was very clear thatthe DNS could provide names for things that were not hosts. For instance,
almost every organization soon made it possible to send e-mail to
someperson@example.com, even though there was no actual machine
named example.com, but rather a collection of servers (e.g.,
mailserver1.example.com, mailserver2.example.com, and so on) that
handled e-mail for the example.com domain. The DNS began to beviewed as a general naming system. Second, because almost all naming29For convenience and as a transition strategy, many sites chose to treat, for example,ÒBITNETÓ and ÒUUCPÓ as if they were top-level domain names, mapping those names
through the DNS or other facilities into gateway paths. So a generation of users be-
lieved that, for example, smith@mitvmb.bitnet was an Internet domain name when, in
fact, it was mapped to smith%mitvmb.bitnet@mitvma.mit.edu, where the latter was a
gateway between the Internet and BITNET. The full use of MX records, so that the
same user could be addressed as smith@mitvmb.mit.edu, came along only somewhat
later.30In economics, network effects (or, alternatively, positive network externalities) ex-plain the rationale for the convergence to Internet-based e-mail: The value of a net-
work to a user increases as more users join the same network, or other networks that
are compatible with it. See, for example, Jean Tirole, The Theory of Industrial Organiza-tion, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1988, pp. 404-409.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsystems had been designed primarily to support e-mail, and domainnames had won the battle for how e-mail was done, the other naming
systems diminished in importance and use, leaving the DNS as the only
widely available naming system. The result was that the DNS was viewed
as a general service, albeit an imperfect one: but even if imperfect, it was
the only naming system that was widely available, and thus it became the
one of choice.2.3.4The Whois Database
The Whois database was developed in the 1970s to track authorizedARPANET users and, in particular, those users that could request ad-
dresses on the network. For each host or domain name, the information in
the Whois database was supposed to include the contact information (such
as the contact personÕs name, organization, street address, electronic mail
address, and phone number) of those with responsibility for the host or
domain name; additional information could also be stored and accessed.
From a technical design and operational viewpoint, the Whois database is
independent of either the HOSTS.TXT file or the DNS.31 For a while, theWhois database, maintained by the Network Information Center (NIC),
served as a de facto white pages directory of ARPANET users. Beyond
the online database, the NIC printed a phone book of everyone listed in
the Whois database about once a year until 1982.Around the time of the last NIC phone book, the Whois database wasrapidly losing its value as a white pages directory because many new
Internet users were not being included in the database. However, at the
same time, the Whois database was becoming increasingly important for
network operations because the NIC (which at the time also managed the
allocation of IP addresses) would not give out an IP address, a host name,
or a domain name to anyone who did not have a Whois entry. Further-
more, the NIC put all address and name registrations into the Whois data-
base. So, given a host name or address, any user on the network could
query the database to learn who had control of that host name or address.
Thus, if a network operator noticed (or had a user complain) that a do-
main name suddenly could not be looked up, or that a particular network
appeared to be unreachable, the operator could query the Whois database
and find out whom to call about the issue.31ÒWhoisÓ represents the name of the implemented system/database as well as thename of the underlying protocol. This caused, and continues to cause, some confusion,
since several universities and enterprises maintained local Òwhite pagesÓ and similar
services, which had nothing to do with the central databases, that were accessed using
the Whois protocol.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION53By the late 1980s, problems began to develop with the Whois data-base. The first problem, which proved easy to solve, was that in many
cases the formal institutional contact for the name or address was a corpo-
rate or university officer or administrator and was not the network opera-
tions person who actually managed the network or domain name server.
The NIC resolved this problem by updating the database to keep track of
both the administrative and operational contact for each address and do-
main. The second problem, which was not so easy to solve, was trying to
keep the Whois data currentÑa problem that existed even before the ex-
plosive growth of the Internet and demands on the DNS in the 1990s.322.3.5The DNS as a Production System
By 1990, the DNS was a production system and deeply ingrained inthe Internet and its culture.33 The use of HOSTS.TXT was declining rap-idly. But the move to a production system was not easy: Deploying the
DNS in the 1980s required several years of debugging and resolving vari-
ous issues. Timeouts and negative caching remain, to some extent, open
issues in 2005.Several lessons are apparent from the process of developing and de-ploying the DNS. A good new design that solves important problems can
catch on, but it will take time for solid implementations to be developed.
And even if a new design offers significant advantages, adoption will take
time. Even when the Internet was comparatively small, switches from
HOSTS.TXT to DNS or from e-mail Babel to uniform naming took a sig-
nificant amount of time. Given the decentralized nature of the Internet,
network service providers, hardware and software vendors, end users, or
others can inhibit worthwhile technical advances from being implemented
through mere procrastination or a deliberate decision that the implemen-
tation of a particular software upgrade is simply not sufficiently benefi-
cial to them. Given the much larger scale and scope of the DNS and the
embedded base of software two decades later, successful implementation
of any proposed new system or major changes to the existing DNS may
prove difficult.3432The history of the Whois database through the 1990s can be found in Section 2.5.3.33By the late 1980s, the Internet was in fact an operational network and not only asubject of research and, as such, increasingly fell outside DARPAÕs research mission.
At this time, DARPA was working with other federal agencies, notably the National
Science Foundation, to hand off the infrastructure it had created.34See Tirole, The Theory of Industrial Organization, 1988, pp. 406-409, for a brief discus-sion of the kinds of coordination and strategic issues that can arise in a network like
the DNS.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE2.4CONTINUING GROWTH AND EVOLUTION OF THE
INTERNET AS A TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTUREThe increasing popularity of personal computers changed the basicmodel of computing in most organizations from a model based on central
computing using mainframes or minicomputers with terminals to one
based on personal computers connected in local area networks, which in
turn were connected to central resources (i.e., the client/server model of
computing). The adoption of the personal computer by consumers (which
is correlated with the improving price/performance of computers and, in
particular, increasing modem speeds at affordable prices) provided the
household infrastructure for supporting widespread dial-in access to the
Internet by the mid-1990s in the United States.35To function on the Internet, a computer needs to have some basic in-formation, such as its IP address, the IP address of at least one router,36and the IP addresses of a few critical services.37 In the world of a rela-tively small number of large mainframes or minicomputers, such infor-
mation was entered manually on each new computer when installed and,
once configured, rarely changed. In such a world, IP addresses functioned
as de facto stable identifiers, with the DNS (or its HOSTS.TXT predeces-
sor) representing a convenience, not a necessity.38However, as the number of computers increased sharply, such a cus-tom approach became increasingly impractical. Thus, a mechanism to35According to the Current Population Survey (conducted by the U.S. Census Bu-reau), personal computer adoption in the United States continued to increase through-
out the 1990s and demonstrated a 5-fold increase from 1984, the first year data was
collected on computer ownership to the year 2000. By the year 2000, 51 percent, or 54
million households, had access to at least one computer at home, up from 36.6 percent
in 1997. The percentage of households with Internet access more than doubled be-
tween these years, from 18 percent in 1997 to 41.5 percent, or 42 million households,
by the year 2000. Computer access and Internet access were becoming synonymous:
more than four in five households with computer access also had Internet access. For
the full report, see Eric C. Newburger, ÒHome Computers and Internet Use in the
United States: August 2000,Ó Current Population Reports, U.S. Department of Commerce,U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C., September 2001, available at <http://
www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/p23-207.pdf>.36A router is a device that determines the next Internet Protocol (IP) network point towhich a data packet should be forwarded toward its destination. The router is con-
nected to at least two networks and determines which way to send each packet based
on its current understanding of the state of the networks to which it is connected.
Routers create or maintain a table of the available routes and use this information to
determine the best route for a given data packet.37Examples include the address of an e-mail server (because most computers do notoperate their own mail server) and the address of a DNS resolver (explained in Chap-
ter 3).38Indeed, the IP addresses of certain important servers were well known to systemadministrators.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION55automate this startup process was developed. One approach is containedwithin the Bootstrap Protocol (BOOTP), a very simple protocol that en-
abled a computer to ask a local central server for and receive a number of
critical parameters. BOOTP and other protocols of a similar type shared
one important characteristic: Each protocol had a mechanism to allocate
IP addresses to computers, but did not have any mechanism to reclaim IP
addresses when they were no longer needed. In the 1980s, this was not a
problem because IP addresses were plentiful. However, by the early 1990s
IP addresses, which had once seemed to be a nearly inexhaustible re-
source, were starting to look like a scarce resource that required conserva-
tion, a consequence of the tremendous growth of the Internet. Protocols to
support the ÒleasingÓ or temporary assignment of IP addresses were de-
veloped,39 such as the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)Ñadirect successor of BOOTPÑor the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP).40 Animportant reason for the development of these protocols was to support
system and local area network (LAN) management and auto-configura-
tion, but the timing was fortuitous inasmuch as these protocols could also
help with the conservation of IP addresses.The spread of network address translators (NATs)Ñin part, a re-
sponse to the increased difficulty of obtaining large blocks of IP addresses
in the latter half of the 1990sÑfurther degraded the usability of IP ad-
dresses as stable identifiers. The basic function of a NAT is to rewrite IP
addresses in the data that it forwards. NATs map the set of IP addresses
for external traffic (i.e., the IP addresses that are visible to the world) to a
set of IP addresses for internal traffic (e.g., an organizationÕs LAN); thus,
an organization can have many more internal IP addresses than external
ones. The use of NATs distorts the one-to-one mapping between Internet
hosts and IP addresses that many applications assumed in their designÑ
thus, any application that depends on IP addresses is at risk when its
traffic goes through a NAT.41As a result of these changes, IP addresses have become much lessuseful as stable identifiers than they once were. In the case of most appli-39After the lease expires, ownership of the address reverts back to the server thatissued the address. The protocol includes mechanisms for lease renewal, and lease
times can be quite long at the discretion of the DHCP server administrator. These
ÒleasesÓ did not include a financial componentÑÒtemporary assignmentÓ is perhaps a
more accurate characterization.40PPP supports address assignment for dial-up networking by assigning IP addressesto ports on access servers. Users connect to the access server and are allocated to a
port, which has an IP address assigned to it. Thus, users ÒleaseÓ the assigned IP
address for the duration of their session.41In particular, peer-to-peer applications and security protocols that require differentpublic addresses for each host become much more difficult to deploy.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcation protocols, the ÒobviousÓ answer has been to replace the use of IPaddresses with DNS names wherever possible. Thus, over the last decade,
applications have come to rely on DNS names very heavily as stable iden-
tifiers in place of IP addresses.Another departure from transparent architecture42 came with the in-troduction of packet-filtering routers, one of the simplest kinds of
firewalls.43 A number of organizations introduced such firewalls begin-ning in the late 1980s with the intent to defend their sites against various
real and perceived threats. The much-publicized Morris worm44 furtherraised the profile of network security and provided network administra-
tors with an additional motivation to install firewalls (thereby further in-
hibiting transparency in the network architecture).45As network security attracted increasing attention, some focus wasdirected to the DNS itself. DNS security emerged as an issue in the form
of a proposed addition of a cryptographic signature mechanism to the
DNS data.46 Such a mechanism would help ensure the integrity of the
DNS data communicated to the end user. The original DNS design did
not include a mechanism to ensure that a name lookup was an accurate
representation of the information provided by the entity responsible for
the information. DNS information was assumed to be accurate as the re-
sult of general notions of network cooperation and interoperation (i.e.,
based on the presumption that nobody would deliberately attempt to42In this context, a transparent network is one that does not interfere with arbitrarycommunication between end points.43Packet-filtering routers attempt to block certain types of data from entering orleaving a network.44In 1988, a student at Cornell University, Robert T. Morris, wrote a program thatwould connect to another computer, find and use one of several vulnerabilities to copy
itself to that second computer, and begin to run the copy of itself at the new location.
Both the original code and the copy would then repeat these actions in a theoretically
infinite loop to other computers on the ARPANET. The worm used so many system
resources that the attacked computers could no longer function, and, as a result, 10
percent of the U.S. computers connected to the ARPANET effectively stopped at about
the same time. From ÒSecurity of the Internet,Ó available at <http://www.cert.org/
encyc_article/tocencyc.html>. Also published in The Froehlich/Kent Encyclopedia of Tele-communications, Vol. 15, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1997, pp. 231-255.45The relative value of firewalls in advancing network security can be debated, andsuch discussions can be found elsewhere; see, for example, Fred B. Schneider, editor,
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Trustin Cyberspace, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.46Digital signatures do not provide foolproof security, but they can demonstrate thatthe holder of the corresponding private cryptographic key (i.e., a secret password)
produced the data of interest. This is more or less like trusting a document that bears a
particular sealÑone must independently make a determination that an authorized
person had possession of the seal when it was used and that the seal is legitimate but,
if both of those conditions are met, it provides some assurance of the authenticity of
the document.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION57tamper with DNS information). Work on DNS Security Extensions(DNSSEC) started in the early 1990s and continues more than a decade
later.47 See Chapter 4 for further discussion of DNSSEC and DNS securityin general.2.5ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL VALUE OF DOMAIN NAMES
The nature of the growth in the Internet during the 1990s was qualita-tively different from the growth in the 1980s. Most of the new Internet
users in the 1990s were non-technical people who were not associated
with academic institutions or the computer and communications indus-
try. Instead, these new users represented a cross section of society that
typically accessed the Internet from their places of employment, through
dial-up connections from their homes, and by gaining access through li-
braries, schools, and community organizations.These new users and the organizations that supported them (such asInternet service providers, electronic commerce companies, non-profit in-
formation services, and so on.) were primarily interested in how the
Internet in general, and Internet navigation and the Domain Name Sys-
tem in particular (especially using the World Wide Web and e-mail), could

advance and support personal and business goalsÑthat is, they were not
very interested in the technology per se. Consequently, increasing effort
was directed to support these non-technical goals, and thus, it is not sur-
prising that economic value, social value, and globalization emerged as
major forces influencing the DNS and Internet navigation in the 1990s.2.5.1Demand for Domain Names and Emergence of a Market
48The rapid growth of the World Wide Web stimulated interest in andthe demand for domain names because Web addresses (Uniform Resource
Locators; URLs [see Box 6.2])49 incorporate domain names at the top oftheir naming hierarchy. One of the early major uses of the Web that ap-
pealed to a wide range of the new usersÑand helped to continue attract-
ing additional new users to the WebÑwas electronic commerce. The .comgeneric top-level domain (gTLD) became a kind of directory service for
companies and their products and services. If a consumer wanted to find47For further information on the historical progression of DNSSEC, see Miek Gieben,ÒA Short History of DNSSEC,Ó April 19, 2004, available at <http://www.nlnetlabs.nl/
dnssec/history.html>.48A significant portion of this subsection was derived from Milton L. Mueller, Rulingthe Root: Internet Governance and the Taming of Cyberspace, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.,and London, 2002.49Examples of URLs include <http://www.whitehouse.gov> or <http://www.un.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe Web site for a company, the consumer would often be able to guessthe URL by entering part or all of the companyÕs name followed by .comin the browser command line; often, the desired site would be located.
This practice was further encouraged by the use of second-level domain
names in advertisements and by the naming of companies by their sec-
ond-level domain name (e.g., priceline.com). Even if the userÕs initial
guess(es) did not work, users would often then try the companyÕs name
followed by .net or .org, or variations of the companyÕs name in combina-tion with one of these gTLDs, such as ibmcomputers.net.50It did not take users long to discover that shorter, shallower, URLswere easier to guess, use, remember, and advertise than longer ones. The
shortest URL of all was based solely on a domain name. Thus, if one
wanted to post a distinct set of resources on the Web, or create an identity
for an organization, product, or idea, it often made sense to register a
separate domain name for it rather than create a new directory under a
single domain name. Hypothesizing that customers would look for prod-
ucts and services by guessing at a similar domain name, companies like
the Procter & Gamble Company, for example, registered pampers.comand used that as a URL (namely, <http://www.pampers.com>), which also
had the advantage of being much easier to communicate to users, and for users
to remember, than, say, <http://www.pampers.procterandgamble.com>.
These different domain names would be used even if all the information
resided on a single computer. In short, domain names began to refer to
products or services rather than just network resources (e.g., host names).51Before the rise of the Web, the largest concentration of domain nameregistrations was under the .edu TLD (as of March 1993). The InternetÕsrapid growth after 1993, however, radically altered the distribution of do-
main names across TLDs; until at least 1997, 
.com attracted the large major-ity of new domain name registrations.52 Most of the users rushing to take50Sometime in 1996 or 1997, browser manufacturers made .com the default value forany names typed directly into the browser command line. That is, whenever a user
typed <name> without a top-level domain into the command line, the browser auto-
matically directed the user to www.<name>.com. Making .com the default value forall browser entries reinforced the value of .com registrations relative to other TLDs. Ineffect, a .com domain name functioned as a global keyword, and the possession of acommon, simple word in the .com space was sure to generate significant traffic fromWeb browsers. This explains, to some degree, why some domain names sold for hun-
dreds of thousands or even millions of dollars. As noted in Section 1.2, footnote 9,
browsers no longer operate in this way.51Generic words were also registered (e.g., cough.com was registered by Vicks).52See <http://web.archive.org/web/20020816085435/www.wia.org/pub/timeline.txt>.
Initiatives to use the Internet for commercial purposes (including R&D within companies)before the rise of the Webled to anincrease in 
.com registrations.And with wide use of the
Webcame registrations of multiple domain names to single companies, a practice that had

been discouraged in the past.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION59advantage of the Web were businesses, and .com was the only explicitlycommercial top-level domain. Furthermore, the U.S.-based InterNIC oper-
ated the only unrestricted, large-scale registry (supporting .com and othergTLDs). Most country-code registries at this time were slow, or expensive,
or followed restrictive policies and considered a domain name a privilege
rather than a commercial service.53 Indeed, in some of the countries withrestrictive country-code registries, such as Japan and France, more busi-
nesses registered in .com than under their own ccTLD. The available statis-tics provide the basis for estimating that roughly 75 percent of the worldÕs
domain name registrations resided in .com at the end of 1996.54 Thus, the.com TLD became the dominant place for domain name registration world-wide in the mid-1990s, which by the late 1990s became reflected in popular
culture through phrases such as a Òdot-com companyÓ (or simply a Òdot-

comÓ) or Òdot-com economy.ÓInterest in domain names extended beyond the for-profit sector. Thevisibility of governmental entities and non-profit organizations also be-
came increasingly tied to domain names as the Web became a key mecha-
nism for providing information and services to the public and their con-
stituencies. Moreover, individuals also wanted their own domain name
as the identifier for their personal information posted on the Web or for a
myriad of other purposes (e.g., establishing fan sites55). Opportunisticcompanies capitalized on (and perhaps helped to create) this demand by
developing services so that users could register a domain name and ob-
tain support for establishing and maintaining a Web page as an integrated
service for a monthly or annual fee.Domain names also became involved in electoral politics and socialcommentary. Political campaigns established Web sites with descriptive
domain names in the URLs such as <http://www.algore2000.com> or
<http://www.georgewbush.com>56 to provide access to information53In February 1996, when the InterNIC had about a quarter of a million second-levelregistrations, Germany (.de) had only 9000 total registrations, and Great Britain (.uk)had only 4000. Japan, Canada, Australia, and other major leading participants in the
Internet had numbers comparable to the United KingdomÕs. However, some countries
(e.g., the United Kingdom) have restrictive policies with respect to registering in the
second-level domain so that most entities actually have to register in the third-level
domain (e.g., sothebys.co.uk) that would instead be a second-level domain registra-tion in other TLDs (e.g., sothebys.com).54InterNIC gTLD registrations accounted for an estimated 85 percent of all domainname registrations worldwide, and .com accounted for 88.6 percent of all InterNIC
gTLD registrations. (About 62 percent of all registered domains worldwide resided in
.com in 2002.)55See, for example, <http://www.juliaroberts.de>, a fan site and tribute to the ac-tress Julia Roberts that is based in Germany; accessed on April 16, 2005.56Note that campaign information was not available at the Al Gore site as of April 16,2005.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEabout their respective candidates, to organize volunteers, and to solicitcontributions. Web sites were also created to critique or parody virtually
anything, from the practices of certain companies or their products or ser-
vices to various social and political causes. A common practice was to
register a domain name that included the name of interest followed by
Òsucks,Ó or something similar, and to associate that domain name with a
Web site that criticized the entity in question. In addition to motivating
legal actions to try to prevent the use of domain names in this fashion, this
practice caused many companies to pre-emptively register these types of
domain names for themselves.57Therefore, for various reasons, the demand for domain names in-creased tremendously during the 1990s.58 Further fueling the demand wasaggressive marketing by companies that register domain names and pro-
vide related services, efforts by IT companies more generally that played
up domain names (especially .com names) in their larger marketing cam-paigns, and the popular and technical press, which devoted a lot of atten-
tion to anything related to domain names.The increasing demand for domain names was attributed to interest infacilitating Internet navigation as well as to the value of domain names irre-
spective of their functional utility on the Internet (e.g., placing a domain name
on posters in a subway station as a part of a marketing campaign). Thus, the
real value of certain domain names in the rapidly growing and commercial-
izing Web and Internet was far greater than the price of setting up a domain
name (which was on the order of $50 at the retail level).59 The predictableconsequence was the development of an aftermarket for certain domain
names. In 1996, tv.com sold for $15,000 and in 1997, business.com changedhands for $150,000.60 Not surprisingly, speculation in the registration of do-
main names took place: An individual or firm would register domain names
(often very many) with the intent of reselling them to others for a premium.
Such speculators would not only register generic or descriptive names (e.g.,
Òbusiness,Ó Òfever,Ó and so on) with the hope of appealing to multiple pro-57However, this was a difficult proposition, considering the nearly limitless variations ofless-flattering names that can be devised. See further discussion in the next section.58The growth in the registration of domain names was phenomenal. For example, in Sep-tember 1995, there were approximately 120,000 registered domain names. By May 1998, 2million domain names were registered. See ÒFact Sheet: NSF and Domain Names,Ó NationalScience Foundation, Arlington, Va.59Domain names are registered through and maintained by registrars; see Chapter 3 for anextended discussion.60Business.com was resold for $7.5 million in 1999. With some irony, the committeeobserves that www.business.com links to ÒThe Business Search EngineÓ (as of March27, 2004), a Òcomprehensive business directory.ÓSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION61spective purchasers, but would also register domain names incorporating thetrademarks of third parties with the hope that the corresponding trademark
owner would purchase the domain name from the speculator as well. See
Box 2.1 for further discussion on the value of domain names.An industry emerged to provide services related to the transfer andassignment of domain names and related services.61 The pressure for newTLDs led to the conversion of some country codes to quasi-generic TLDs.
For example, the marketing of .cc (a country-code TLD created to representthe Cocos Islands but later marketed as a de facto gTLD) further increased
the variety and value of certain domain names. However, true additional
gTLDs did not materialize in the 1990s (despite the intense arguments and
efforts made by some individuals and organizations), which helped to so-
lidify the dominance of the then-extant TLDs, especially of .com.622.5.2The Rise of Conflicts Over Domain Names
As the number of domain name registrations exploded, conflicts de-veloped over the right to register particular names at the second level of
many of the TLDs.63 The basis for most of these conflicts derived from theunique naming associated with the DNS. The DNS does not have the capabil-
ity to incorporate context into domain names, so each domain name must be
unique worldwide and then in turn, a Web site at that domain name can then
be accessed throughout the world.64 The consequence is that it is significantlyharder to pick a domain name that is both unused and memorable.Claims to rights to domain names can be based on a number of differ-ent legal, political, economic, ethical, or cultural criteria. A common prob-61Registrars, and the industry surrounding registrars and allied services, are discussed indetail in Chapters 3 and 4.62Discussion of the gTLDs added in the early 2000s (e.g., .info) and general discussion ofthe issues involved with adding new gTLDs can be found in Chapters 3 and 4.63ÒRights to namesÓ refers to claims to exclusive or privileged use of an identifier based onthe meaning or economic value of the name.64The mythical (or perhaps real) JoeÕs Pizza illustrates the point. The DNS can sup-port only one www.joespizza.com worldwide, but in the physical world, people canusually distinguish among the (presumably) multiple JoeÕs Pizza restaurants around
the world. If a person is located in the center of a city and asks a taxi driver to take her
to JoeÕs Pizza, it is presumed that she wishes to travel to a restaurant within a few
miles, not a JoeÕs Pizza located in a city 2000 miles away. Although the requestor does
not state this context explicitly, it is assumed in the conversation. As of February 4,
2005, joespizza.com was registered by BuyDomains.com and offered for resale at aminimum price of $1488.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 2.1The Value of Domain Names
Semantic ValueEconomic value often arises when names have some semantic distinc-tionÑa meaningÑand are visible in a public arena. The value of meaning-ful names will differ from nil to very high depending on the meaning andthe potential application. Examples include sex.com and gardentips.com.Mnemonic ValueIn many contexts, it can be important for a name or identifier to beeasily remembered. If users cannot remember the name, or it is too long or
complicated to reproduce, the object will not be found. Memorability, andin some cases guessability, facilitates more incoming traffic and more busi-ness and, therefore, gives rise to economic value. One example is gm.com(i.e., a second-level domain name for the General Motors Corporation).Personal ValueEven when there is no apparent commercial consequence, the humandesire to make a statement and assert an identity can give economic valueto identifiers in a public name. Someone with a high regard for himself
might want the domain name i-am-the-best.com.1Stability ValueUsers can accumulate equity in a particular identifier, which becomesclosely associated with them and expensive to change. Changing a tele-phone number or e-mail address that has been used for many years can be
burdensome because of the large number of personal contacts and recordsthat contain the number. Thus, equity in an identifier raises switching costsfor consumers, making them more likely to stay with the provider of that
identifier.Pure Scarcity ValueMeaningless identifiers, such as bank account numbers, function eco-nomically as an undifferentiated resource pool. They may possess economicvalue by virtue of their scarcity, but no one cares which particular identifierhe or she gets. In the DNS, there are plenty of possible names (accepting that
random strings of letters and digits can produce domain names (e.g.,akwoeics8320dsdfa0867sdfad02c.org); there is scarcity of some desirednames, with desirability defined by one of the reasons above (e.g., only a
small subset of all possible domain names have semantic value).1As of March 27, 2004, this domain name was not registered.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION63lem raised by all such claims is that any reasonable attempt at resolutionmust balance the value of avoiding confusion or preventing illegal or oth-
erwise undesired appropriation of identity against the value of free ex-
pression, open communication, and fair use. Whenever semantics and eco-
nomics enter the picture, however, society and all of its conflicts come
along with them. The resultant conflicts over who has rights to use par-
ticular domain names has enmeshed and continues to enmesh apparently
technical naming processes in economic, public policy, and legal issues.65Trademark Conflicts In the commercial world, trademark law provides one of the oldest,most widely recognized and well-developed regimes for recognizing and
protecting exclusivities in the use of source identifiers of goods or services
within specific fields and territories. Trademark laws developed, in part,
to protect consumers against various forms of fraud, deception, or confu-
sion that might result from the ways in which products and services are
identified. By giving producers an exclusive right in an identifier, trade-
marks reduce consumer search costs and channel the benefits of develop-
ing a good reputation to the producer responsible for the reputation.
Trademark protection is not, however, intended to give firms ownership
of common words alone, to prevent non-commercial or fair use, or to in-
hibit public discussion of companies, products, and services involving
direct references to the mark.The great emphasis placed on second-level domain names created aproblem for some trademark holders, especially for those that held trade-
marks that were well known in the United States or worldwide. Trade-
mark rights (which are traditionally accorded on a country by country
basis) generally arise through use of a trademarkable name, logo, color,
sound, or other feature, in association with the marketing and sale of par-
ticular types or classes of goods and services in commerce. Some coun-65In his paper ÒExternal Issues in DNS Scalability,Ó Paul Vixie argues for eliminating thedisputes associated with domain names by eliminating all meaningful top-level domainsand replacing them with meaningless alphanumeric identifiers. See conference paper, No-
vember 11, 1995, available at <http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/iip/GIIconf/vixie.html>.Whereas the number of conflicts would surely decline, so, too, would the benefits to thosewho prefer specific domain names that have meaning or some other characteristic. As with
phone numbers, however, competition for certain numbers will ensue unless they are as-signed randomly and a secondary market (in either names or entities that control names) isprohibited.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE66This also means that the failure to use a registered mark can result in the loss of rights.67See J. Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, 4th ed.,¤ 24:88 (2003), Clark Boardman Callaghan/West, Deerfield, Ill., 1992.68See McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, ¤ 24:88 (2003). Anexample would be if Mack Trucks, Inc., began using the mark ÒBIG MACÓ in associa-
tion with a new model of truck. It is unlikely that the McDonaldÕs Corporation would
argue that there was a likelihood of consumer confusion between MackÕs truck and
McDonaldÕs large sandwich of the same name. However, it is possible that the McDonaldÕs
Corporation would argue that the truck model was diluting the value of its famous
mark, BIG MAC.69These factors include Òthe degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness of themark,Ó Òthe duration and extent of use of the mark in connection with the goods or
services with which the mark is used,Ó and Òthe duration and extent of advertising
and publicity of the mark.Ó See 15 U.S.C. ¤ 1125(c)(1).tries will allow someone to reserve or even register a trademark without
using it, but most countries (including the United States) require use to
claim protection under trademark law.66 Similar to trademarks, domainnames can act as source-identifiers suggesting the identity, quality, or
source of a good or service. Accordingly, domain names may conflict with
trademarks because of their similarity in function.If a trademark holder allows someone else to use the trademark ormark either in the same class of goods/services or in some other way that
could create confusion in the marketplace, the other party may begin to
acquire rights as a result of that use, and those rights reduce the value of
the mark to its original owner. Within the United States, the problem is
further complicated by the existence of federal and state antidilution laws
that permit owners of famous marks to enjoin others from commercial
uses of such marks, even where such commercial uses are in classes of
goods or services different from that of the famous mark.67 Designed toprevent the whittling away of the identification value of the plaintiffÕs
mark, antidilution laws differ from more traditional trademark laws,
which are designed to prevent consumer confusion within the same class
of goods or services.68 In order to determine whether a mark is subject tofederal antidilution protection (i.e., whether it is considered to be a fa-
mous mark), the law provides several non-exclusive factors that may be
considered.69 Some states within the United States have more generousdefinitions of Òfamous marks,Ó while other countries have similar or dif-
ferent definitions or do not recognize the concept at all. Another one of
the factors to be used in this determination under U.S. law is Òthe nature
and extent of use of the same or similar marks by third parties.Ó This
factor demonstrates that a potentially famous mark ownerÕs antidilution
rights, like rights against infringement, can be lessened or lost by its fail-
ure to police its mark.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION65Thus, trademark holders became quite concerned about the activitiesof parties that had registered domain names that either were confusingly
similar to their trademarks or diluted their famous marks. Generally, to
cause a likelihood of confusion under trademark law,70 a domain namemust be used in connection with an offering of goods and services or it
must be used commercially for antidilution laws to apply, but
cybersquatters raised a slightly different problem. Cybersquatters are gen-
erally defined as domain name speculators who register a domain name
that incorporates a trademark owned by another party, not in order to use
the domain name, but with the intent of reselling the registered domain
name to that party for an amount that far exceeded the cybersquatterÕs
registration cost. The most contentious examples of cybersquatting were
those in which domain names incorporating trademarks (or phonetic or
typographical variants of them) were associated with Web sites that in-
cluded pornographic content or other information that would confuse or
offend users who reached that Web site by mistake or assumed that the
trademark holder had registered the domain name and that the Web site
associated with it belonged to the trademark holder. The cybersquatter
would then offer to sell the domain name to the trademark owner for a
substantial sum, which some companies agreed to pay, if for no other
reason than to stop the offending use. Such actions, of course, only fueled
more cybersquatting activities. Cybersquatters also figured out that users
were trying alternative domain names (e.g., ibm-computers.com insteadof ibm.com) and began to register many different combinations, such asibmcomputers.com and ibmcomputer.com. Partially in response to theseactions, many companies began to register various combinations them-
selvesÑso-called pre-emptive registrations71Ñand to seek remediesthrough the courts, various dispute resolution processes, and legislative
action.72At least one court has held that a cybersquatterÕs registration of a do-main name that incorporated a plaintiffÕs famous mark, without the sale
of any goods or services via the Web site associated with that domain
name, was a violation of the federal antidilution statute because the de-
fendant made Òcommercial useÓ of the trademark when he attempted to70See McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, ¤ 25:76.71Such pre-emptive registrations were encouraged by the marketing strategy of many reg-istrars.72In fact, the congressional mandate (P.L. 105-305) for this study came largely as a result ofactions by representatives of the trademark community. This community was very activeand visible in the domain names arena in the late 1990s.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsell the domain name back to the owner of the famous mark.73 Anothercourt has found the attempted sale or licensing of domain names contain-
ing trademarks to be trademark infringement, similarly concluding that
the sale of these domain names was a commercial use of the marks.74Additionally, the Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act (ACPA),
enacted in 1999,75 provides additional rights to trademark owners againstthose who register, traffic in, or use, with the bad-faith intent to profit, a
domain name that is identical or confusingly similar to a registered or
unregistered mark that was distinctive or dilutive of a famous mark when
the domain name was registered. Despite the creation of ACPA and other
domain name dispute resolution mechanisms,76 the costs involved withpre-emptive registrations and the enforcement of trademarks ultimately
led many representatives of trademark holder interests to resist efforts to
create new TLDs, fearing that these costs would continue to increase sub-
stantially if new additional TLDs were created.In contrast, the protective efforts by trademark holders in some in-stances have also raised conflicts with other legally equivalent rights held
by the individuals using the domain names. For example, suppose a group
critical of a corporation wants to create a public space for discussion and
register a domain name associated with that corporation (e.g.,
companyname.org). Does such a registration constitute an infringementof the corporationÕs trademark because it creates consumer confusion or
is it dilutive because it tarnishes the reputation of the corporation, or
rather is it an exercise of a protected right, such as freedom of speech
under the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution? Discussions related
to domain names, trademark concerns, and public policy issues will con-
tinue into the 21st century.77Other conflicts involving trademarks arose for reasons that had noth-ing to do with the above-described conflicts between trademark holders
and their cybersquatting antagonists. For example, Chris Van Allen, then
12 years old, registered the second-level domain name pokey.org becausePokey was his nickname, and was subsequently ensnarled in a trademark
dispute with Prema Toy Company, owner of the trademarks on the
claymation character Gumby and his horse Pokey, which wanted control73See Intermatic, Inc. v. Toeppen, 947 F. Supp. 1227 (N.D. Ill. 1996).74See Toys ÒRÓ Us, Inc. v. Abir, 45 U.S.P.Q.2d 1944 (S.D.N.Y. 1997).75See 15 U.S.C. ¤ 1125(d).76See Section 3.5 for an extended treatment.77The state of understanding continues to evolve. See, for example, The TaubmanCompany v. Webfeats, et al., Nos. 01-2648/2725 (6th Circuit, February 7, 2003).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION67over the domain name.78 Ultimately, Prema Toy Company withdrew itscomplaint.79 In other cases, disputes arose between different entities withequally valid rights to the same second-level domain name, such as
Òbob.com,Ó which might have been coveted by many men named Robert,and Òavon.com,Ó which might have been coveted by a variety of differentcompanies around the world that have legitimate rights to the trademark
Avon for different products or services in different countries.This latter example presents a particularly difficult point that cannotbe easily resolved by simply granting the second-level domain name to
the entity with the legal right to use it as a trademark, since multiple enti-
ties can have such legitimate rights. Under most countriesÕ trademark
laws, multiple entities can use the same trademark in the same country,
provided each entity uses the trademark for different categories (called
classes) of goods or services, as long as there is no possibility of confusing
consumers as a result, and each trademark has to be registered within
each country in which it is used in order to be fully protected. Hence it is
entirely possible to have one company legitimately use the trademark
ÒavonÓ for automotive tires in the United States, and a second company
to use the same trademark for cosmetics. Unfortunately, however, there
can be only one avon.com, and so the first entity to register that domainname has often been able to use it to the exclusion of all other legitimate
users worldwide.80Beyond Trademark ConflictsTrademark issues dominated domain name conflicts in the late 1990sand into the beginning of the 21st century, but other conflicts also de-
manded attention. For example, some governments asserted rights to con-
trol the assignment of country-code TLDs and country names and the
registration of those names, even beyond the second level.81 Some gov-ernments assert that this is an extension of national sovereignty. Similar
claims may be asserted by ethnic groups and indigenous tribes that have78See Courtney Macavinta, ÒShort Take: Pokey Causes Net Trademark Uproar,Ó News.com,March 23, 1998, available at <http://news.com.com/2110-1023-209417.html?legacy=cnet>.
The dispute also involved PokeyÕs Network Consulting, which registered pokey.com.79See Heather McCabe, ÒPokey Wins His Domain Name,Ó Wired News, April 22,1998, available at <http://www.wired.com/news/business/0,1367,11846,00.html>.80See Chapters 3 and 5 for a discussion of how trademark conflicts over domainnames can be (and should be) managed.81See the principles for delegation and administration of ccTLDs presented by theICANN Government Advisory Committee, February 23, 2000, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/gac/gac-cctldprinciples-23feb00.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEnot achieved the political status of sovereigns, but that nevertheless wishto protect or control the use of their collective name. In some jurisdictions,
the subunits of national governments, such as city administrations or port
authorities, have claimed exclusive rights to the use of their name in the
DNS.82 In a similar vein, some international organizations have asserteda right to prevent others from registering domain names identical to their
acronyms or names.83 These claims have more to do with the imputedlegitimacy of the association than with commercial confusion. Here, too,
issues arise regarding the balance struck between the use of the name as
an identifier and its legitimate use as a reference to the identified entity.
These claims also raise questions about who in the affected society has the
right to control the name. Also, some legal regimes, which are analogous
to trademark law because they are related to reputation in commerce, at-
tempt to vest regions or localities, rather than specific firms or products,
with exclusive rights to a name for a certain use. These regimes of Òcon-
trolled appellations of originÓ might be applied, for example, to wines or
other agricultural products.84In addition to nations, regions, and international organizations, manypeople feel that they have some ownership right over their personal name
and other aspects of their persona. National systems of law often recog-
nize Òrights of personalityÓ when defined as the ability of a person Òto
control the commercial use of his or her identity.Ó85 In the United States,there currently is no federal right of publicity or privacy; rather, the pro-
mulgation of such laws has been left to the states. About half of the states
have recognized the right of publicity, either through common law or stat-
ute.86 Other states provide similar protections as a part of the right of82See, for example, Excelentisimo Ayuntamiento de Barcelona v. Barcelona.com Inc., WIPOCase No. D2000-0505, available at <http://arbiter.wipo.int/domains/decisions/html/2000/d2000-0505.html>; and Salinas, California, National Arbitration Forum, City of Sali-nas v. Brian Baughn, WIPO Case No. FA0104000097076, available at <http://www.arbitration-forum.com/domains/decisions/97076.htm>.83For example, international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund(IMF) or the World Health Organization (WHO). See The Recognition of Rights and theUse of Names in the Internet Domain Name System, Report of the Second WIPO InternetDomain Name Process, September 3, 2001, available at <http://wipo2.wipo.int/process2/report/pdf/report.pdf>.84For further discussion see, ÒGeographic Identifiers,Ó in The Recognition of Rights andthe Use of Names in the Internet Domain Name System, 2001.85See McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition, 4th ed., 1992.86See, for example, Carson v. NatÕl Bank of Commerce, 501 F.2d 1082, 1084 (8th Cir.1974) (recognizing a common-law right of publicity in Nebraska); and F
LA. STAT. ANN.¤540.08 (West 2002) (providing for a statutory right of publicity in Florida).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION69privacy.87 Under the Restatement (Second) of Torts ¤¤ 652A - 652C (1979),invading an individualÕs right of publicity is similar to invading her pri-
vacy through unauthorized appropriation of her name or likeness.88One of the primary motives behind passage of the AnticybersquattingConsumer Protection Act in the United States, for example, was the wide-
spread registration of the names of U.S. politicians as domain names and
their linkage to Web sites that were satirical or critical.89Communications technology can create new arenas for disputes overrights to names. In particular, the process of entering an identifier into a
network creates numerous opportunities for conflicts over the boundary
of a name right. Of course, many of the underlying issuesÑconfusion,
fraud, competition, fair use, freedom of expressionÑare familiar from
other contexts.A good part of the advertising economy of the Internet is based onpaying for ÒhitsÓ (i.e., the exposure of the content of a Web site to a dis-
tinct user).90 Thus, the practice of ÒtyposquattingÓ developed, whereinentrepreneurs registered domain names that were only a keystroke or two
87See, for example, Allison v. Vintage Sports Plaques, 136 F.3d 1443 (11th Cir. 1998)(describing the appropriation of plaintiffÕs personality for a commercial use as an
invasion of privacy tort in Alabama).88In 1953 in the case of Haelan Labs. v. Topps Chewing Gum, the right of publicity wasfirst explicitly recognized as a right independent of the right of privacy and as an
individualÕs right to the publicity value of his photograph. The court distinguished the
right of publicity from the right of privacy because Òmany prominent persons . . . far
from having their feelings bruised through public exposure of their likeness, would
feel sorely deprived if they no longer received money for authorizing advertisements
[or] popularizing their countenances.Ó See Haelan Labs. v. Topps Chewing Gum, 202 F.2d866, 868 (2d Cir. 1953). Thus, the right of publicity has developed into a body of law
distinct from, but related to, copyright law, privacy rights, and the law of unfair
competition. While certain states encode publicity rights within their right of privacy
statutes, prominent case law and jurisprudence acknowledge the development of the
right of publicity as an independent body of law. See, for example, Carson v. HereÕsJohnny Portable Toilets, 698 F.2d 831, 834 (6th Cir. 1983) (stating, Ò[T]he right of privacyand the right of publicity protect fundamentally different interests and must be ana-
lyzed separately.Ó). When commercial exploitation of names is involved, personality
rights often overlap with, or are informed by a logic that parallels, trademark rights.
Indeed, a personÕs name is often registered as a trademark or used to brand products
or services (e.g., Michael Jordan). But rights of personality are often asserted even
when commerce is not directly involved.89U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, ÒReport to Congress: the AnticybersquattingConsumer Protection Act of 1999,Ó January 2000. A law passed by the state of Califor-
nia makes it illegal to register someone elseÕs name as a domain name Òwithout regard
to the goods and services of the parties.Ó See Section 17525 of the California Businessand Professions Code, at <http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=
bpc&group=17001-18000&file=17525-17528.5>.90See Section 7.2.2 for an extended discussion.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEapart from popular domains. These ÒtypoÓ domains would then be linkedto advertisements in order to collect pay-per-hit revenue from people who
mistyped the locator into the browser. The cybersquatter John Zuccarini
refined the practice of ÒtyposquattingÓ to an art, registering hundreds of
close misspellings of popular domain names and trapping users into a
parade of cascading Web pages, some of them pornographic.91There are even fuzzier boundaries to consider. There are businessesthat register large collections of expired domain names in order to collect
advertising hits from people who are looking for the old Web site.92 Isthis an abusive practice or one as innocent as putting up a billboard on a
choice spot on a busy highway?Beyond Second-Level Domain NamesThus far, the discussion has focused on second-level domain names.Although less common, there are disputes involving third-, fourth- and
higher-level domain names, as well as involving directory and file de-
scriptors. For example, in Bally Total Fitness Holding Corp. v. Faber, 29 F.Supp. 2d 1161 (C.D. Cal. 1998), an infringement suit was brought against
a defendant who used the URL <http://www.compupix.com/
ballysucks> to post critical comments regarding the plaintiff. The court
held that Òno reasonable consumerÓ was likely to confuse the defendantÕs
domain name with the plaintiffÕs marks BALLY, BALLY TOTAL FITNESS,
and BALLYÕS TOTAL FITNESS, because, among other things, the defen-91See, for example, Joanna Glasner, ÒTypo-Loving Squatter Squashed,Ó Wired, Octo-ber 31, 2000, available at <http://www.wired.com/news/business/0,1367,39888,00.html>.In 2004, Zuccarini was sentenced to 30 months in prison for using misleading domain
names to trick children into visiting pornographic Web sites in violation of the federalTruth in Domain Names Act. See ÒU.S. Man Jailed for Luring Children to Porn Sites,ÓReuters, February 26, 2004.92Other cases include attempts to protect the ÒnonproprietaryÓ status of a name byexcluding it from a name space. The World Health Organization and the World Intel-lectual Property Organization (WIPO) proposed to do this with respect to Interna-
tional Nonproprietary Names (INNs), a list of over 3000 names of pharmaceuticalsubstances. See ÒInternational Nonproprietary Names (INNs) for Pharmaceutical Sub-stances,Ó in The Recognition of Rights and the Use of Names in the Internet Domain NameSystem, Report of the Second WIPO Internet Domain Name Process, September 3, 2001,available at <http://wipo2.wipo.int/process2/report/pdf/report.pdf>. This proposalis particularly problematic because the list of INNs not only is long, but also expands
over time.Religion is another potential source of rights claims. Certain religions recognizewords as sacred and attempt to protect or restrict their use.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION71dant did not use the plaintiffÕs mark in his domain name.93 Based on thefacts of the case, the court stated that the result would have been the same
even if the defendantÕs domain name was ballysucks.com.94 The courtalso contrasted the defendantÕs domain name and the hypothetical sec-
ond-level ballysucks.com domain name with other cases where likeli-hood of confusion was found when the plaintiffÕs mark was the only mark
(e.g., panaflex.com) used in the defendantÕs second-level domain.95In another example, the Usenet newsgroup name space contains nu-merous descriptors that use a variety of names to describe the space, in-
cluding, for instance, the name Disney (e.g., alt.disney.disneyland or
rec.arts.disney.parks). These newsgroups (which are visible to most
Internet users) are not run by the Disney Corporation, and the content
and administration of the group may or may not have the corporationÕs
approval. In the even more freewheeling world of AOL screen names, any
user can appropriate the name of his or her favorite Disney character (even
in less than flattering variations) and use it as his or her screen name and
e-mail address. While it is clear that no exemption exists for Usenet groups
and AOL screen-name aliases, it does appear that trademark holders have
chosen not to pursue many of these uses in these naming spaces.96Yet current law and policy regarding domain names erect major dis-tinctions between the various parts of the domain name used in a URL.
Within the generic and most country-code top-level domains, all (or at
least most) of the political and legal conflict over rights to names takes
place over the second-level domain name. The third-level domain and all
identifiers to the right of the domain name are generally outside the scope
of challenge through dispute resolution processes.97 Current law andpolicy therefore regard the top-level domain as a fixed set of generic cat-93See The Recognition of Rights and the Use of Names in the Internet Domain Name Sys-tem, 2001, pp. 1163-1165.94See The Recognition of Rights and the Use of Names in the Internet Domain Name Sys-tem, 2001, p. 1165.95See The Recognition of Rights and the Use of Names in the Internet Domain Name Sys-tem, 2001, p. 1165.96Many trademark holders have not done anything regarding many newsgroup names,in part because it is difficult to police such activities as well as prove that trademarkinfringement or dilution has occurred. Indeed, as soon as a name was removed or
changed in this space, another of the millions of users could create a new one.97There are some important exceptions, such as the case of .uk, for which most enti-ties register at the third level (e.g., Disney.co.uk) rather than at the second level. Forthese exceptions, it is the fourth level and beyond that are outside the purview ofdispute resolution processes. Dispute resolution processes are further described inChapters 3 and 5.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEegories or country codes, the second-level domain as the identifier of anorganization, product, or Web site, and the third-level domain as part of a
ÒprivateÓ naming system, wherein assignments can generally be left to
the discretion of whoever holds the second-level name.To further illustrate this point, Yahoo! Inc. has been an active defenderof its brand name in cyberspace. It has challenged the registration of hun-
dreds of second-level domains, including some rather remote misspell-
ings, such as ÒjahuÓ or Òyhuu,Ó whenever they appear in the second level
of a domain name. But under current legal precedent, it would likely take
no action against a name such as yahoo.blatant.cybersquatter.com. Inall likelihood, however, YahooÕs decision not to pursue claims for trade-
mark infringement or dilution for alternative uses of its brand name and
mark is less influenced by current precedent than it is by YahooÕs likeli-
hood of success on the merits, especially in view of decisions such as that
in the above noted Bally Total Fitness Holding Corp. v. Faber case.By contrast, second-level domain names are ripe for generating con-flicts over rights to names. They are meaningful, they are perceived as
being economically valuable, and they are part of a global, public naming
system administered via collective action. And perhaps most importantly,
they are susceptible to centralized control because of the existence of a
single, central point of coordination, the relevant registry. See Box 2.2.2.5.3Whois
In concert with the rise in the interest in and demand for domainnames was a corresponding increase in the value of contact information
associated with domain names. Hence, interest in the Whois database con-

tinued to rise in the 1990s.Some of the targeted uses of the Whois data were for old-fashionedmarketing purposesÑfor example, to send sales brochures and to make
telephone solicitations to network operators and domain name registrants.
As domain names became economically valuable after 1995, accessing
Whois data also became a popular way to find out which domain names
were taken, who had registered them, and the creation and expiration
date of the registration. The Whois database also became an investigation
and monitoring tool for intellectual property rights holders. When a trade-
mark holder discovered a potentially infringing domain name, the trade-
mark holder could use the Whois database to identify, investigate, and
contact the registrant of the domain name. At that time, the Whois data-
base could also be used to determine if the same registrant had registered
any similar domain names that the trademark holder did not know about
or to search for further evidence of cybersquatting by the registrant. Trade-
mark holders also discovered that they could use the database proactivelySignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION73to perform searches for character strings that matched trademarks, andretrieve many of the domain name registrations in the generic top-level
domains that matched or contained a trademark. This automated search-
ing function proved to be so valuable that trademark interests began to
demand that the Whois functions be institutionalized, expanded, and sub-
sidized, including the right to purchase the complete list and contact data
for all of a registrarÕs customers. The first World Intellectual Property Or-
ganization (WIPO) domain name process, initiated in 1998 in response to
a U.S. government request, as detailed by a U.S. Commerce Department
white paper,
98 recommended that the contact details in a Whois record be
contractually required to be complete, accurate, and up to date, on pen-
alty of forfeiture of the domain name.992.6GLOBALIZATION
Worldwide interest in the DNS developed during the 1990s along withincreasing concern about U.S. dominance of a critical element of global
communication and a commercial resource on which other nations fore-98For the text of the white paper, see <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/6_5_98dns.htm>.99See paragraph 73 of The Management of Internet Names and Addresses: IntellectualProperty Issues. Final Report of the WIPO Internet Domain Process, April 30, 1999, avail-able at <http://wipo2.wipo.int/process1/report/finalreport.html#49>.BOX 2.2The Institutionalization of 
.comFor the most part, the initial dominance of .com among the TLDs was ahistorical accident, a product of the chance conjunction of the commer-cialization of the Internet, the rise of the Web, the openness of the InterNICregistry relative to the ccTLD registries, and the lack of any other commer-
cially oriented TLD in the original set of gTLDs. Once .com became estab-lished as the most desired TLD for many registrants, other forces contrib-uted to the solidification of .comÕs increasing dominance. As discussedelsewhere in this section, ÒBeyond Second-Level Domain Names,Ó the risein value of .com names (whether for navigation or marketing functions) ledto the registration of some domain names for speculative, abusive, or pre-
emptive purposes. Based on a desire to avoid further registration of domainnames for these same purposes in new TLDs, some resistance developed tothe creation of new TLDs, thereby reinforcing the focus on extant TLDs
(with disproportionate advantage to .com , given its dominant market posi-tion). Whether the historical dominance of .com from the mid-1990s willcontinue in the future of the DNS is discussed in Section 5.4.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsaw their economies and societies becoming ever more dependent. Withincreasing recognition of this value came a growing desire to participate
in the management and policy decision making with respect to domain
names.An issue of particular interest in many countries is access to theInternet and the DNS using home-country languages other than English.
As the number of users whose first language is not based on Roman char-
acters grew dramatically during the 1990s, interest developed in domain
names based on non-Roman scripts (e.g., Chinese, Hebrew, Arabic, and
so on). Several major efforts have been undertaken to accommodate inter-
nationalized domain names (IDNs) within the Internet infrastructure.100The design of the DNS, however, presents formidable technical chal-lenges for the accommodation of languages that use non-Roman charac-
ters. As a lookup system, the DNS must be able to determine unambigu-
ously whether or not there is a match with a query. Comparing strings is
much more difficult than most people realize, because the definition of
what is ÒequalÓ is often not deterministic. For the French language in
Canada and in France, for example, there are different rules as to whether
an accent stays over a character when it is converted from lower to upper
case. And some languages (e.g., Chinese) cannot be reduced to a relativelysmall number of standardized characters (e.g., the character set for En-
glish). See Section 4.3 for further discussion of the IDN issue and the in-
creasing interest and involvement by parties outside the United States in
matters related to the DNS.2.7ADMINISTRATION OF DOMAIN NAMES
In the 1980s, the Network Information Center managed the registra-tion of domain names, operating under the auspices of SRI International
and funded by the Department of Defense (DOD), by DARPA and the
Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA).101 Jon Postel and other re-searchers at the Information Sciences Institute at the University of South-
ern California had been given the authority to establish procedures for
assigning and keeping track of protocol and network numbers and con-
trolled the definition of TLDs.102 Overall, the administration and policyoversight for domain names was relatively straightforward.100See discussion in Section 4.3.101Formally, the NIC was the Defense Data Network-Network Information Center(DDN-NIC).102Jon Postel had a central role in the DNS from the beginning as co-author of ÒTheDomain Naming Convention for Internet User Applications,Ó RFC 819. Postel Òheld
leadership positions in several Internet infrastructure activities. He was founder andhead of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, RFC editor, and chief administratorSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION75In the mid-1980s, the National Science Foundation (NSF) createdNSFNet to provide data communication services to researchers and edu-
cators. It selected the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
(TCP/IP) as its transport protocol and worked closely with the Depart-
ment of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and
DARPA to share facilities to extend this infrastructure in the United States
and worldwide. NSF encouraged campus network investment by focus-
ing its efforts on high-speed and high-capacity long-haul ÒbackboneÓ103and regional networks to connect the campuses. Thus, the responsibility
for the civilian network gradually shifted from the DOD to NSF. (See

Box 2.3 for a timeline of the shifting administration of domain names.) In
the early 1990s, NSF made another important decisionÑto withdraw as
the primary financial benefactor for the backbone of the Internet and to
encourage a commercial market for support of transport facilities.Continuing on this path, in 1993 NSF replaced DOD as the fundingagency for domain name management. As the workload increased, NSF
contracted with Network Solutions, Inc. (NSI) to manage the registration
for most of the gTLDs (.com, .net, .org, .edu, and .gov), through InterNIC.At this time, NSF, preserving the practice that the registration of domain
names would be free to registrants, subsidized the costs associated with
domain name registration. See Box 2.3.Increasing scale was not the only impetus for administrative evolu-tion. The increasing economic and social value of domain names caused
new players to become interested in the realm of domain names. As dis-
cussed earlier, holders of highly visible and valuable trademarks devel-
oped an active interest in domain names. Many other entities, from na-
tional governments and public interest groups to the firms in the emerging
domain name industry, also developed a keen interest in all things related
to domain names. Thus, the 1990s saw the domain name community ex-
pand radically, both in scale and, especially important to understand, in
the scope of the interests and backgrounds of participants.104of the .us domain. He was expected to play a crucial role in the future of Internetadministration, which [was] in the process of being transferred to the private sector[the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)].Ó See ÒIn Me-
moriam, Dr. Jonathan B. Postel, August 3, 1943 Ð October 16, 1998,Ó The Domain NameHandbook, available at <http://www.domainhandbook.com/postel.html>, accessed March31, 2004.103A backbone is a network that interconnects other networks. Backbone networksoften operate over relatively longer distances than do typical networks.104This diversity in the range of participants creates challenges in achieving consen-sus in the decisions needed to make progress on various problems. Among other
things, conflicting goals and varying communication styles and vocabulary contribute
to these challenges. Even agreeing on something as basic as defining ÒDNSÓ can leadto disputes.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 2.3Administration of the Domain Name System
in the 1990s: The Road to ICANN1991Responsibility for much of the Network Information Center (NIC) wastransferred from SRI International (operating on the behalf of the Depart-
ment of Defense; DOD) to Government Systems, Inc., which then subcon-tracted the entire operation to Network Solutions, Inc. (NSI). NSI startedoperating the NIC in 1992.1993The National Science Foundation (NSF) replaced DOD as the fundingsource for the NIC. NSF completed a service contract with InterNIC, the
umbrella organization for the participating contractors AT&T (directory anddatabase services), NSI (registration services), and General Atomics/CERFnet (information services). Thus, NSF engaged NSI to take over do-
main name registration services for most of the generic top-level domains(gTLDs) through a 5-year cooperative agreement.1994ÒDomain Name System Structure and DelegationÓ (RFC 1591), writtenby Jon Postel, was published and gained general acceptance.11995NSF and NSI amended their cooperative agreement, imposing a $100fee for 2 years of domain name registration.1997The International Ad Hoc Committee (IAHC), a coalition of individualsrepresenting various constituencies established in 1996, released a pro-posal for the administration and management of gTLDs that included aframework for a governance structure, captured in a document known
as the Generic Top Level Domain Memorandum of Understanding(gTLD-MoU).2The U.S. government created an interagency group to address the domainname issue and assigned lead responsibility to the National Telecom-munications and Information Administration (NTIA), Department ofCommerce. This interagency group reviewed the IAHC proposal and
solicited public comment.As a part of the Clinton AdministrationÕs ÒFramework for Global ElectronicCommerce,Ó3 the Department of Commerce was directed to privatize theSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION77Domain Name System in a manner that would increase competition andfacilitate international participation in its management. The departmentissued a call for public input relating to the overall framework of the DNS.1998The NTIA released ÒA Proposal to Improve Technical Management ofInternet Names and Addresses,Ó also known as the Green Paper. This
proposal called for a private, non-profit corporation, headquartered inthe United States, to manage domain names and IP addresses, and forÒthe addition of up to five new registries.Ó4A final statement of policy, the ÒManagement of Internet Names and Ad-dresses,Ó also known as the White Paper, was issued by NTIA. The WhitePaper reaffirmed the goals of the Green Paper, while having the U.S.
government take a more hands-off approach, and urged the creation ofa new not-for-profit corporation to oversee the management and assign-ment of domain names and IP addresses. Goals for the new corporation
included ensuring stability, competition, private and bottom-up coordi-nation, and fair representation of the Internet community.5NSF transferred authority to the U.S. Department of Commerce to adminis-ter the cooperative agreement under which domain name registrationservices are provided.6Internet constituencies (e.g., those that attended the workshops held underthe auspices of the International Forum on the White Paper) discussedhow the new entity (the New Corporation, or ÒNewCoÓ) might be con-stituted and structured. A group led by Jon Postel (and under his name)
proposed a set of bylaws and articles for the incorporation of NewCo.The final version of NewCoÕs (then named as the Internet Corporationfor Assigned Names and Numbers; ICANN) bylaws and articles of in-
corporation were submitted to NTIA in October. On November 25,NTIA and ICANN signed an official memorandum of understanding(MoU), with an initial termination date of September 30, 2000.In October, NTIA and NSI extended their cooperative agreement throughSeptember 2000. NSI committed to a timetable for the development ofa shared registration system (SRS) that permitted multiple registrars to
provide registration services within the .com, .net, and .org gTLDs. Also,NSI agreed to separate its registrar and registry operations into separatedivisions, to recognize NewCo, and to make no changes to the root
without written approval from the U.S. government.1Available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.2For further information, see <http://www.gtld-mou.org/draft-iahc-recommend-00.html>.3See <http://www.ta.doc.gov/digeconomy/framewrk.htm>.4See <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/dnsdrft.htm>.5For the text of the white paper, see <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/6_5_98dns.htm>.6See <http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/news/media/ma9822.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBy 1996, the belief by some (e.g., Jon Postel) that additional TLDs wereneeded led to the establishment of the International Ad Hoc Committee
(IAHC) to develop a framework for the administration of domain names,
which became known as the Generic Top Level Domain Memorandum of
Understanding (gTLD-MoU). The IAHCÕs proposal for an institutional
framework prompted a strong reaction from a few key constituencies and
Òsent ripples through the international system,Ó as characterized by Milton
Mueller.105
 Although the gTLD-MoU was not implemented, its creationdid motivate the discussions leading to the development of the Green and
White Papers (see Box 2.3) and the eventual creation of the Internet Corpo-
ration for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) in late 1998.NSI exclusively operated the .com, .net, and .org TLDs through 1998.The registry operations (associated with the management of the TLD da-
tabases themselves) and registrar operations (associated with the retail
functions of dealing with customers) were integrated. NTIAÕs agreement
with NSI in late 1998 required NSI to separate its registry and registrar
functions so that other registrars could enter the market. To facilitate the
entry of other firms, NSI also agreed to establish a shared registration
system to enable all registrars (including NSIÕs registrar unit) to interact
with the registry database. The vibrant market for domain name registra-
tion services in the .com TLD that developed in the late 1990s also spurredinterest in the creation of new TLDs.Thus, the DNS has experienced an extraordinary evolution since itsbirth in the early 1980s. Initially intended to address specific technical and
operational problems of concern to a small, relatively homogeneous group
of computer scientists and engineers, the DNS came to involve individu-
als from many different sectors such as law, business, government, and
the public interest. The issues surrounding the DNS became increasingly
non-technical in nature and increasingly complex and controversial, and
so the founding of ICANN did not end the conflict among constituents,
but rather provided the forum for their often intense discussion. Chapters
3 and 5 further explore these conflicts and the alternatives for their pos-
sible resolution.105From Milton Mueller, ÒInternet Domain Names: Property Rights and Institutional In-novation,Ó in Gary Libecap, editor, Entrepreneurship and Growth in the American Economy12:93-131, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000, p. 111.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.793The Domain Name System:Current State
The Domain Name System (DNS) in 2005 serves a global Internet farlarger and more diverse, in users and in uses, than the relatively
small homogeneous network for which it was first deployed in theearly 1980s. To meet the needs of this expanded and enhanced Internet,
the DNS has developed into a complex socio-technical-economic system
comprising distributed name servers embedded in a multilayered institu-
tional framework. This chapter describes the DNS as it exists in 2005 to
establish a base for consideration of the future of the DNS and of naviga-
tion on the Internet.The chapter begins with an explanation of how the DNS responds toqueries, illustrating the process with a query about the Internet Protocol
(IP) address that corresponds to a particular domain name. It then de-
scribes the basic architecture of the DNS: its domain name space, its hier-
archical structure, its basic programs, and its key standards and proto-
cols. The core of the chapter is a description of the implementation of this
architecture at three levels of the DNS hierarchy: the root, the top-level
domains, and the second- and third-level domains. The distinctive char-
acteristics of each level are examined first, followed by descriptions of the
technical system and its institutional framework. The committeeÕs conclu-
sions about the current performance of the DNS architecture and the
implementation of each level are presented at the end of each section.
Open issues affecting the future of the DNS are collected and analyzed in
Chapters 4 and 5.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEMany of the contentious issues that arise in the context of the DNSconcern domain names themselvesÑin particular, the definition of per-
missible names and the rights to their use. Some of those issues are intro-
duced and discussed in Chapter 2.3.1OPERATION OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM1
Many things happen when a query to the DNS is initiated. If the DNSwere a centralized database, such as HOSTS.TXT,2 every query would godirectly to a central file where the answer would be found (or its absence
noted). However, because the DNS is a hierarchical, distributed database,
a search in response to a query generally requires several steps. If neces-
sary, it can begin at the root and traverse a course through the tree of files
to the one in which the sought-for answer resides. However, frequently
the search can begin further down the tree because previous answers are
stored and reused by the querying client. The design of the DNS ensuresthat the path down the tree will be followed without detours or false starts,
leading directly to the desired file because the structure of the domain
name spells out the route. This process may best be understood through
an example, shown in Figure 3.1, which illustrates the use of the DNS to
find the IP address corresponding to the hypothetical domain name
indns.cstb.nas.edu.3This is what would happen if, for example, the user wanted to accessa Web site at that name, in which case the requesting application would
be a browser. However, the same process would be followed for, say, an
e-mail application or any other application supported by a host4 on theInternet.Two versions of the process are described below: first, the versionshown in Figure 3.1, which would be followed if this were a new query
from a computer that was not on the same DNS subtree as the cstb.nas.edu
server; and then a version shortened by taking advantage of additional
information from shared servers or previous queries.1This section elaborates on the high-level explanation in Chapter 2. It draws exten-sively on material in Paul Albitz and Cricket Liu, DNS and BIND, OÕReilly & Associ-ates, Sebastopol, Calif., 2001.2HOSTS.TXT is the predecessor of the DNS and is described in Section 2.1.3The process shown in Figure 3.1 assumes that the querying client has stored norelevant previous answers.4A ÒhostÓ is a network computer on which applications run providing services, suchas computation or database access, to end users on the network.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE81netmit.educstb.nas.edurootName Server
.eduName Server
nas.edu
Name Server
cstb.nas.edu
Name Server
comindns.cstb.nas.edu?indns.cstb.nas.edu?IP Address of
indns.cstb.nas.edueduroot
IP address
nas.eduFIGURE 3.1Operation of the Domain Name System without a local name server.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE3.1.1A New, Remote Query
When a domain name is used in a Web browser, e-mail program, orotherwise, the applications program forms a requestÑa query. The ex-
ample query, ÒWhat is the IP address corresponding to the domain name
indns.cstb.nas.edu?,Ó goes first to a piece of software called a resolver.Resolver software is ordinarily incorporated as part of other software resi-
dent on the userÕs computer5 or in a host to which it is linked. There aretwo kinds of resolvers: stub resolvers and iterative resolvers. Both types
of resolver send queries to name servers (see below), but they differ in
how the resolver selects the name servers to which it sends the query and
how much of the work of answering the query is performed by the re-
solver. A name server is a computer running one of a small number of
name-serving programs, the most common of which is the Berkeley
Internet Name Domain (BIND) software.6 A stub resolver simply for-wards the query to a local name server and awaits a reply. It places on the
name server the burden of searching the DNS for the answer. An iterative
resolver, in contrast, retains control of the search by using the answer
from each successive name server to guide its search. This example as-
sumes that the query comes from a stub resolver.Name servers are located throughout the Internet: at the root and thetop-level domain registries, in organizationsÕ intranet infrastructures, and
at Internet service providers (ISPs). Name servers can perform two im-
portant functions:¥First, they are designed to reply directly to queries concerning theportion of the domain name space for which they have complete informa-
tion, which is called their zone and for which they are said to be authori-
tative (see Section 3.1.2).¥Second, they can, by incorporating an iterative resolver, reply toqueries concerning zones for which they are not authoritative, obtaining
information from other name servers in the DNS (described in this sec-
tion). The incorporated iterative resolver will in almost all cases also con-
tain a file or cache of answers obtained as a result of processing previous
queries (see Section 3.1.3). In this case, the combination of name server
and iterative resolver is said to be a caching or recursive name server.5For example, this is part of the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol(TCP/IP) stack in Microsoft Windows software, but some applications incorporatetheir own resolvers. Consequently, a computer may contain more than one resolver.6This name server program was originally written in 1983-1984 by a group of gradu-ate students at the University of California, Berkeley, with funding from the DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency. Name servers are discussed further in Section3.2.3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE83In practice, name servers with a heavy query demand or at the toplevels of the DNS hierarchy are often configured to be authoritative only
and not to offer caching/recursive services, except through a separate
server. The name servers at ISPs, however, will offer caching/recursive
services to their customersÕ stub resolvers, but may not be authoritative
for any domain.In Figure 3.1, the query is shown as going first to a name server offer-ing recursive services located at the userÕs ISP.7 Since in this example theiterative resolver incorporated into the ISPÕs name server has not recently
seen this query or any portion of it and the name server is not authorita-
tive for any portion of the query, it sends the query on to the DNS root. It
is able to find the root because the IP addresses of the name servers for the
root, called the root hints data, were manually entered into a file on the
computer, the hints file. Some systems automatically detect changes to
the list of root name servers and make use of them, but the software never
changes the file because to do so might eliminate the fallback in case of an
attack that maliciously delivered an incorrect list.There are 13 root name servers (and many satellite copies of them)8distributed around the world, and the querying name server will go to
one chosen by an algorithm that, although differing among name server
implementations, usually takes the shortest response time into account.
The multiple computer copies of some of the 13 name servers employ a
technology called ÒanycastÓ addressing (see Box 3.1). Although geo-
graphically distributed, each satellite is capable of responding to queries
to the same IP address.If, for some reason, one root name server (or its closest satellite) doesnot respond, the iterative resolver will continue to try other servers ac-
cording to its selection algorithm, and so on, until it receives a response.
Similar behavior is common to all iterative resolvers at whatever level in
the DNS hierarchy they are searching.The response of a root name server, which is configured to be authori-tative only, takes the form: ÒThe address of indns.cstb.nas.edu is not in
my zoneÕs name file, but here are the names or addresses of name servers
that are authoritative for .edu.Ó The ISPÕs iterative resolver then sends the
same query to one of the .edu name servers, which responds: ÒThe ad-
dress of indns.cstb.nas.edu is not in my zoneÕs name file, but here are the
names or addresses of the name servers that are authoritative for nas.edu.Ó7Where a query goes first is a consequence of an explicit configuration choice madeby the user, an ISP, an enterprise IT department, or by a dynamic configuration proto-col whose values are supplied by one of those sources.8See Table 3.1 for a listing of the 13 root name servers and their base and satellitelocations. See Box 3.1 for a description of satellite servers.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe ISPÕs resolver then queries one of the nas.edu name servers, whichrefers it to a cstb.nas.edu name server, which is authoritative for the re-
quested domain name and replies with the corresponding IP address.3.1.2Local Query
A name server can answer many queries quickly when these queriesrequest the address of a domain name for which the name server is au-
thoritative. This is often the case, for example, for name servers on organi-
zational intranets, where most of the requests are for IP addresses of other
computers on the intranet. In such a case, the name server can respond to
the query without going to the larger DNS, simply by looking up the an-BOX 3.1Anycast Addressing
Anycast addresses, a special type of Internet Protocol (IP) address, wereinvented in the early 1990s to simplify the process of finding replicatedservices (i.e., services that are provided by multiple and identical servers).1Some of the operators of root name servers have implemented anycast
addressing as a way to facilitate load sharing, to improve service, and toreduce vulnerability to attacks.The use of anycast addresses allows a root name server operator toinstall copies of the root zone file at different servers (in this report, thoseservers that replicate the root zone file are called satellites). Properly con-figured and located, each of the satellites will get a share of the traffic forthe root name server. Although the shares will, in most cases, not be equal,the load of queries will be distributed and thus relieve the load burden onthe root name server. Satellites that are located at the same physical site areusing local anycast addressing, also known as load balancing, which iswidely deployed among the root name server operators.From the userÕs perspective, the great advantage derived from the adop-tion of anycast addressing is improved service. The satellites are typicallyplaced at topologically diverse locations in the Internet. Queries can there-fore be answered more swiftly. An additional benefit is that the DNS que-ries use, in the aggregate, fewer network resources, because servers willtend to be ÒcloserÓ on the network to the sources of the queries.The use of anycast addressing can sharply reduce the impact of an at-tack on a root name server: In the short run, physically disabling a root
name server does not affect the operation of its satellites, and physicallydisabling a satellite disables only that satellite. In the long run, there is thequestion of how satellites would obtain updated root zone information. It isalso much harder to mount an effective electronic attackÑbecause queriesare routed to the closest satellite (or the root name server itself, if it is theclosest). An attacker would need to place (or acquire) machines close toSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE85swer in its local database. For example, if the local name server in theprevious example was authoritative for cstb.nas.edu, it could providethe response directly.3.1.3Repeat Query
A caching name server can answer many other queries quickly whenit has responded previously to queries that were identical or matched at a
higher level of the tree. (For example, in 2005 virtually every caching
name server is highly likely to have cached the IP address for
www.google.com.) It maintains those answers in a cache of informationcontaining the addresses of name servers (and other data) it has previ-each of the satellites and the root name server if the attacker wished todisable all access to the service.2 A single attacking machine might disablethe closest serverÑwhether a satellite or the root name server itself. Theother servers would be affected only in a minimal way, through a slightlyincreased load if one server were rendered inoperative.Therefore, the adoption of anycast addressing by the root name serveroperators is a positive development. However, more general use of anycastaddressing is problematic because current methods for deploying theseaddresses waste a number of IP addresses.3 Given the importance of arobust DNS, this wastage is acceptable for the operation of the root nameservers, but not necessarily for other domain name servers.Monitoring the performance of satellites presents root name server op-erators with a difficult problem. Such monitoring involves the placement ofmonitoring devices within the part of the Internet that each satellite servesand can represent a significant logistical challenge because the satellitesmay be widely dispersed.1The initial motivation for the creation of anycast addressing was to reduce the needmanually to configure information about basic services such as DNS resolvers. The basic
idea is that a Òhost transmits a datagram [a data packet carrying its own address informa-
tion so it can be independently routed from its source to the destination computer] to an
anycast address and the internetwork [Internet] is responsible for providing best effort
delivery of the datagram to at least one, and preferably only one, of the servers that
accept datagrams for the anycast address.Ó See Craig Partridge, Trevor Mendez, and
Walter Milliken, ÒHost Anycasting Service,Ó Request for Comments (RFC) 1546, Novem-
ber 1993, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>. See Box 3.3 for an explanation of
RFCs. All RFCs are available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.2And even then other root name servers and their satellites would be accessible.3As of April 2004, anycast addresses were not fully supported in the current version ofIP (version 4). In particular, the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP; the cross-provider routing
protocol) was not designed to accommodate anycast addresses and, therefore, a workaround
is used that wastes about 256 IP addresses for each root name server that employs anycast
addressing.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEously obtained. Before going to the root, it searches its cache to find theknown name servers closest (in the DNS hierarchy) to the domain being
sought.For example, if the ISPÕs caching name server in the previous examplewere to receive a query for the address of tdd.cstb.nas.edu, it would checkto see if it already knew the address of the name server authoritative for
cstb.nas.edu. If it did, its iterative resolver would send the query directlyto that server, shortening the path that must be taken to obtain an authori-
tative response. If it did not, it would then check to see if it had the ad-
dress of the name server authoritative for nas.edu, and finally .edu. Onlyif it had none of those addresses would it go to the root.This property of cachingÑthat it limits the number of queries that aresent to the root name serverÑhas been crucial to the manageability of the
growth in the query load on the root system. If all DNS queries were to
start at a root name server, the capacity of the root system (as a whole)
would have to be of an entirely different magnitude, posing more formi-
dable technical and economic challenges as a consequence.The Internet and the many services on it are subject to constant, some-times rapid change. As a result, cached information can become outdated.
To reduce that problem, the administrator of each zone assigns a time to
live (TTL) to each datum that it sends out in reply to a query. After the
corresponding amount of time has passed, the name server is expected to
eliminate the datum from its cache.Often a name server will receive information that a domain name be-ing sought does not exist. That can happen because the query is ill formed,
contains a typographical error, is based on a userÕs incorrect guess about a
desired domain name, refers to a name that does not exist or no longer
exists, or refers to a domain name on a private network that is not on the
public DNS.9 Since such inquiries do not correspond to a cached address,even the caching name server system will not normally relieve the load on
the root name servers related to such requests. To minimize the load on
the network and improve response time, however, it is desirable that name
servers store information about such non-existent domains. That practice
is referred to as negative caching (as introduced in Section 2.3.1). The need
to assign a TTL also applies to negative caching, since a previously non-
existent domain may come into existence and would be missed if the nega-
tive cache did not eliminate responses regularly.9A significant portion of queries to the root name servers are ill formed or in erroraccording to studies by researchers. See, for example, Duane Wessels and MarinaFomenkov, ÒWow, ThatÕs a Lot of Packets,Ó Proceedings of Passive and Active Measure-ment Workshop, 2003, available at <http://www.caida.org/outreach/papers/2003/dnspackets/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE873.2ARCHITECTURE OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
The architecture of the DNSÑits conceptual designÑcomprises itsname space, its hierarchical structure, and the software that specifies op-
erations within that name space and structure.10 The software comprisestwo components: programs, which implement the resolver and name
server functions on various computers; and technical standards, which
define the formats of the communication between the programs, as well
as the logical structure11 of the files in a name server.3.2.1Name Space
The name space for domain names is the set of all symbol strings thatadhere to the rules for forming domain names specified in the design of the
DNS. Those rules define a standard format that imposes a tree structure on
the name space. Each node on the tree has a label, which consists of 1 to 63
characters drawn from a restricted subset of ASCII12 comprising the 26 let-ters of the Roman alphabet, the 10 numerals from 0 to 9, and the hyphen.
Labels may not begin or end with a hyphen.13 The fully qualified domainname of a node is the list of the labels on the path from the node to the root
of the tree written with the deepest node on the left and with those to the
right getting successively closer to the root. In external presentation form,
the labels are separated by dots (.). By convention, the root label has null
length and is written as a dot (.), but its presence is optional. Thus,
Òwww.nas.edu.Ó (with a trailing dot) and Òwww.nas.eduÓ (without a trail-ing a dot) are equivalent domain names. The total length of a domain name
must be less than 256 characters. Each node on the tree (including the leaves)
corresponds to a collection of data, which may be empty at the internal
nodes, unless they constitute a delegation point. The data are represented
by resource records, which are described in Box 3.2 in Section 3.2.4.3.2.2Hierarchical Structure
The hierarchical, tree structure of the DNS facilitates both an efficientresponse to queries and the effective decentralization of responsibility for10The evolution of the DNS is described in Chapter 2.11They will be stored in whatever data structures the local database software re-quires.12American National Standards Institute, ÒUSA Code for Information Interchange,Ó X3.4,1968.13The limitation to the 37 ASCII characters is not a strict requirement of domainnames but results from the constraints placed on domain names by other protocols.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEits maintenance and operation. That is accomplished through the divisionof a domain into subdomains, which taken together need not directly in-
clude all of the hosts in the domain. The responsibilities for maintaining the
name files for some or all of the subdomains can then be delegated to differ-
ent organizations. They, in turn, can further divide and delegate, a process
that can be repeated as often as necessary. The parent domain need only
retain pointers to the subdomains so that it can refer queries appropriately.The hierarchical delegation of responsibility is one of the great strengthsof the DNS architecture. It is up to the organization responsible for a zone to
maintain the corresponding zone file (thus, the organization has consider-
able motivation to provide satisfactory maintenance)Ñthe data file in the
zoneÕs name servers that contains pointers to hosts in the zone and to the
name servers for delegated zones (see ÒDNS Zone Data FileÓ in Section
3.2.4). The work of keeping the DNS current is, thereby, distributed to orga-
nizations throughout the entire DNS tree, down to the lowest leaves. In-
stead of a central organization being responsible for keeping the DNS data
current and accurate, which would have been an impossible task, there are
millions of organizations and individuals across the globe doing the work.Figure 3.2 illustrates the delegation of responsibility from the root tothe .edu domain, whose name servers are said to be authoritative for the
.edu zone. The .edu domain in turn delegates responsibility, in this lim-ited illustration, for the subdomains to three universitiesÑthe University
of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), Southern Methodist University
(SMU), and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), whose name
servers are authoritative for their corresponding zonesÑucla.edu,smu.edu, and mit.edu. In Figure 3.2 the MIT subdomain is further del-egated to two departments for illustrative purposesÑSloan School and
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, whose name servers are
authoritative for their zonesÑsloancf.mit.edu and eecs.mit.edu. Notethat in the example, the mit.edu zone includes a pointer directly to ahostÑweb.mit.eduÑin addition to pointers to the delegated zones.This distribution of responsibility, combined with the distributed handlingof tasks by the technology, is why the DNS scales, or handles growth so well.3.2.3Programs: BIND and Others
The DNS requires only two types of programs to operate within thecontext of the existing Internet.First, there must be resolver software. The resolver, recall from Sec-tion 3.1, is a client that accepts a query, passes the query to a name server,
interprets the response, and returns the response to the source of the
query. Generally, resolvers are just a set of library routines within a name
server, a browser, or an operating system.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE89FIGURE 3.2The 
.edu domain divided into zones. SOURCE: Based on Figures 2-8and 2-9 of Paul Albitz and Cricket Liu, DNS and BIND, 4th edition, OÕReilly Me-dia, Sebastopol, Calif., 2001.domainsmu.eduzoneucla.eduzonemit.eduzoneeduzonesmu.eduzoneucla.eduzonemit.eduzoneeduzonezonezonezoneSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACESecond, there must be name server software that performs the func-tions described in Section 3.1. As noted above, the most common name
server software is BIND,14 which is used on the majority of name serverson the Internet.15 There have been many versions of BIND produced sinceit was originally written in the early 1980s. The most recent releases (as of
March 2005) are BIND 8.4.6, which extends and enhances prior versions,
and BIND 9.3.1 and 9.2.5, which are the latest releases of a major rewrite
of the underlying architecture undertaken in response to anticipated de-
mands resulting from the rapid growth of the Internet. Although origi-
nally written for Unix operating systems, BIND has been programmed for
other operating systems, including Windows NT and Windows 2000.16 Ithas also been used as the basis for many vendor name servers.17The rest of this section uses BIND as an example because it is widelydeployed. However, other name server software may behave differently
in some respects and still conform to the domain name server standards. A name server running BIND, or a comparable program, has completeinformation and authority over the zones for which it is authoritative. It
contains all domain names from the top of its zone down to its leaves, ex-
cept for those that are delegated to zones within it. See Figure 3.2.Each zone must have a primary master (or primary) server that re-ceives the contents of the zone data file from some manually prepared
local file. The primary server is the ultimate source of information about
the corresponding domain. Generally, there is at least 1 and possibly as
many as 12 secondary servers, which obtain copies of the zone data file
from the primary or another secondary.BIND has not traditionally made severe computational or storage de-mands on the computers that run it. It has often been implemented on old
machines that have been taken out of front-line service. However, BIND 9
incorporates security and other features that impose more severe compu-
tational loads. In general, the computational requirements on a name
server depend on the number of queries per second and the relative dis-
tribution of the types of queries (because some types of queries impose
greater computational demands than others), as well as the extent of
change of the zone files. The memory requirements are determined by the14BIND also contains a resolver library.15According to a survey by Internet Systems Consortium, Inc., in January 2004 it wasused by almost 75,000 servers; the second most popular name server software wasprovided by Microsoft for almost 15,000 servers. For more information about thesurvey and BIND, see ÒISC Internet Domain Survey,Ó March 10, 2004, available at
<http://www.isc.org>.16See ÒDNS Server SoftwareÓ at <http://www.dns.net/dnsrd/servers/> for a sur-vey of DNS servers available on various operating systems.17A current list is posted at <http://www.isc.org/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE91size of its cache and zone files. In the latest versions of BIND, the cachesize can be controlled. In general, the cache size for a new name server is
determined by observation of the name serverÕs operation over a few
weeks to determine how much memory is required to respond to the
query demand at its installation.3.2.4Standards
The queries and responses that flow between name servers must be in aprotocol that is readily interpretable by any name server, no matter which
software and hardware it uses. To that end, the data in the queries and
responses are, like the zone data, represented as resource records (Box 3.2).BOX 3.2Resource Records
Resource records are used in every DNS zone data file and every DNSmessage.1 Resource records begin with a domain name (NAME), which isfollowed by the type (TYPE) and class (CLASS) fields. Those fields are fol-lowed by the time to live (TTL) and a data field (RDATA), appropriate to the
type and class. Domain names and IP addresses make up a large portion ofthe data in a typical zone data file.NAME: The domain to which the record refers.TYPE: The type of data in the resource record. The list of possible typesis open-ended; each is associated with a type code. There were more than
50 in June 2005, of which no more than 20 are used to any extent.Examples: A = host IP address; NS = an authoritative name server; MX =mail exchange.2CLASS: Only one class, IN for Internet, is widely used. Four classes havebeen defined to date, one of which is obsolete.TTL: Specifies the time interval (in seconds) that the resource recordmay be cached before the source of the information should again be con-sulted.Example: 86400 (equivalent to one day).
RDATA: Describes the resource in question.Example: If the class = IN and the type = A, this field is an IP address.3If the class = IN and the type = NS, this field is a domain name.1See P.V. Mockapetris, ÒDomain NamesÑImplementation and Specification,Ó RFC1035, November 1987, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.2For an explanation of Òmail exchange,Ó see Section 2.3.3.3Since each Type-A resource record in Class IN can include only one IP address, adomain name that maps to multiple IP addresses will have multiple resource recordsÑ
one for each IP address.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEDNS Zone Data FileEach DNS zone has a zone data file (also called the master file) thatcontains both resource records describing the zone and actual data records
for the zone. The former group specifies:¥The domain name of the primary name server and the e-mail ad-dress of the responsible person, as well as times associated with
updating the secondary name servers;¥All the name servers that are authoritative for the zone; and¥The IP addresses of the name servers (name-to-address mappings)that are in the zone.There can also be data files that contain reverse mappings (i.e., tablesfor conversion from IP addresses back to computer names). The domain
names in these files look like IP addresses turned back to front, and they
all end in in-addr.arpa.18The zone data file may contain some additional types of resourcerecords. The specification of resource records allows additional types of
data to be added in the future, as required.DNS Message FormatThe DNS message format comprises five sections, some of which maybe empty:¥Header,¥Question: the question for the name server (includes domainname),¥Answer: resource records answering the question,¥Authority: resource records pointing toward an authority, and¥Additional: resource records holding additional information.The lengths of the four sections that follow it are specified in theheader section.The practical limitation on the number of root name servers to 13 is aconsequence of the DNS message format and the design decision to use
datagrams employing a minimal protocolÑthe User Datagram Protocol
(UDP)19Ñto send DNS queries and responses so as to achieve high per-18Addresses are converted to names in the .arpa domain for DNS lookup.The in-addr.arpa zone contains the hosts associated with all registered IPv4 addresses.19For more information on the User Datagram Protocol, see Jon Postel, ÒUser DatagramProtocol,Ó RFC 768, August 28, 1980, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE93formance. Because in current practice there must be room within the
datagram answer section for a list of all root serversÑin order to update
the list of root servers20 in every iterative resolverÑthe number of rootservers is constrained by the maximum length of that section.21 To maxi-mize the number of root servers, their names were shortened and stan-
dardized for more efficient compression, increasing to 13 the maximum
number that could fit in the space available.3.2.5Functions and Institutions
There are two critical functions that the DNS institutional frameworkperforms in support of the standards and the programs that define the
DNS. The first is maintenance of the DNS standards, and the second is
ensuring the availability of DNS name server software. DNS client soft-
ware, primarily stub resolvers, is widely available in standard softwareÑ
operating systems, Web browsersÑand the specifics of their provision
are not further considered here.Maintenance of the DNS StandardsÑThe InternetEngineering Task ForceThe definition and maintenance of the basic standards for the DNSare the responsibility of one informal organizationÑthe Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force (IETF) (see Box 3.3). The IETF has attracted experienced
and knowledgeable technical talent, who volunteer considerable time to
its activities. The requests for comments (RFCs) process has provided a
means for this diffuse technical community to build a freely available,
peer-reviewed store of knowledge and the successful standards and pro-
tocols that enable the Internet and the DNS to function reliably and to
adapt smoothly to the additional requirements imposed by increased
scale, new applications, and new classes of users. Although the IETFÕs
standards and protocols underpin the worldwide Internet and the DNS, it
does not have the authority, the political or economic power, or the inter-
est to force their adoption or validate their implementation. Rather, their
universal use has been the result of the practical benefit of having freely20As noted above, every iterative resolver needs to know where the name servers forthe root zone are in order to have a starting point for a non-local, non-repeat query.21In theory, the response could be a list of name servers that contain the names andlocations of root name servers. Also, the hints file, which is local, could contain infor-
mation about more than 13 name servers. However, the limitation to 13 has not yetbeen judged to be a large enough issue to change current practice in either respect.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 3.3The Internet Engineering Task Force and
Requests for CommentsThe Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)1 is a voluntary, non-com-mercial organization comprising individuals concerned with the evolutionof the architecture and operation of the Internet. It is open to anyone who
wishes to participate and draws from a large international community.However, almost all its participants are technologists from universities,network infrastructure operators, and firms in related industries. Although
the IETF holds three meetings each year at locations around the world,much of its work is conducted through the circulation of e-mail to elec-tronic mailing lists. The IETF divides its activities among working groups,
organized into areas that are managed by area directors (ADs). The ADs, inturn, are members of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). TheInternet Architecture Board (IAB) provides general oversight on Internet
architecture issues and adjudicates appeals that are unresolved by the IESG,but it is not actively involved in standards development or implementation.The Internet Society (ISOC) charters the IAB and IESG.2Requests for comments (RFCs) were established in 1969 to documenttechnical and organizational aspects of the Internet (originally the ARPANET).RFC memos discuss protocols, procedures, programs, concepts, and various
other aspects of the Internet. The IETF defines the official specification docu-ments of the Internet Protocol suite that are published as Òstandards-trackÓRFCs. RFCs must first be published as Internet-DraftsÑa mechanism to pro-
vide authors with the ability to distribute and solicit comments on docu-ments that may ultimately become RFCs. An Internet-Draft, which can bepublished by anyone, has a maximum life of 6 months, unless updated and
assigned a new version number. The Internet-Drafts that are intended forprogression onto the standards track, and some other documents at IESGdiscretion, are Òlast called,Ó which involves an announcement being sent out
to the Internet community that the IESG wants input on the document. TheLast Call is usually of a few weeksÕ duration. Using input from it, the IESGmakes a decision on further processing of the Internet-Draft. Such decisions
might include rejection of the draft, publishing it as a standards-track docu-ment, or handling it in some other way. Documents that are consideredvaluable and permanent, including all standards-track documents, are then
submitted to the RFC editor for publication as RFCs.31For a full description, see Susan Harris, ÒThe Tao of IETFÑA NoviceÕs Guide to theInternet Engineering Task Force,Ó RFC 2160, August 2001, available at <http://www.rfc-
editor.org>.2For more information on the evolving relationship between ISOC and IESG, see<http://www.isoc.org/isoc/related/ietf/>.3For details on this process, see Scott O. Bradner, ÒThe Internet Standards Process,Revision 3,Ó RFC 2026, October 1996, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>. For back-
ground on RFCs and a searchable repository of RFCs, see <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE95available high-quality standards that all can share, and that give no orga-nization proprietary advantage. As a volunteer collaborating body, the
IETF periodically restructures its processes. In 2003, the IETF identified a
number of problems, both routine and structural, in its operations and
initiated a process of problem resolution.22 As is typical, it did so publiclyvia the RFC process.Providing Root Name Server SoftwareÑInternet SoftwareConsortium, Inc., and Other Software ProvidersInternet Systems Consortium, Inc. (ISC), a not-for-profit organiza-tion formerly called the Internet Software Consortium, has assumed
responsibility for continuing maintenance and development of
BIND.23 Although ISCÕs scope is considerably more focused than theIETFÕs, it, too, has played a key role in the smooth development and
operation of the Internet and the DNS. By continuing to evolve BIND
and making it readily available worldwide, free of charge, ISC has pro-
vided a widely adopted implementation of the DNS standards pro-
mulgated by the IETF.Implementations of BIND and other DNS server software are alsoavailable from Microsoft and other software companies as well as from
various providers in the form of freeware and shareware.3.2.6Assessment
Conclusion: The architecture of the Domain Name System has dem-onstrated the ability to scale to support the InternetÕs rapid growth, never
holding up its development because of an inability to meet the challenges
of vast increases in the number of domain names, users, and queries. Fur-
thermore, it has demonstrated robustness, operating reliably despite ma-
licious attacks and a very high volume of erroneous requests. What fail-
ures there have been have occurred in subzones of the system and have
been insulated from the rest of the DNS by its hierarchical, distributed
structure.The hierarchical architecture and caching have been critical to the abil-ity of the DNS to scale smoothly. First, they ensure that many queries are22The problem statement and the history of the response are described in E. Davies,ed., ÒIETF Problem Statement,Ó RFC 3774, May 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-
editor.org>; and E. Davies and J. Hoffman, eds., ÒIETF Problem Resolution Process,ÓRFC 3844, August 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.23Information about ISC is available at <http://www.isc.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEresolved locally, never reaching the higher levels of the DNS. Second, evenqueries that do reach higher levels of the DNS do so only the first time
they are made by a specific name server in a given period (the TTL), with
all subsequent queries from the same name server during that period be-
ing answered locally.These benefits are amplified by the ability of large ISPs, such as MCIand Verio, to maintain very large caches and, thereby, to handle a sub-
stantial portion of the queries originating from their customers without
ever passing them along to the DNS.Conclusion: Through its RFC process, the IETF has created a store ofknowledge and a body of standards and protocols that have, thus far,
enabled the Internet and the DNS to function reliably and to adapt
smoothly to the additional requirements imposed by increased scale, new
applications, and new classes of users. Though ISCÕs scope is much more
focused than the IETFÕs and its participation and decision-making pro-
cesses are far less open and public, by continuing the evolution of BIND
and making it readily available ISC has brought most of the IETF DNS
standards24 into practical effect.However, the continued growth of the Internet is posing new challengesand placing new demands on the DNS architecture. The issues of future se-
curity and robustness, internationalized domain names, and the intersection
of the DNS with the telephone system are addressed in Chapter 4.3.3IMPLEMENTATIONÑTHE DOMAIN NAME
SYSTEM ROOT ZONEThe top of the DNS inverted tree is its root, or more properly, the rootzone (see Section 3.1.1). The root zone name file (or, simply, root zone file)
is stored in 13 root name servers, which use it to respond to queries to the
root. As shown in Section 3.1, while queries can enter lower on the tree if
their resolvers have current cached information, or if the query lies within
the zone of the local name server, the root serves as the assured point of
entry to the DNS for any other query.24This issue is complex since not all of IETFÕs standards are mandatory or evenrecommended, and some are experimental or turn out to be bad ideas. The situation
also differs between BIND 8, which is on end-of-life maintenance, and BIND 9, whichis an entirely new code base. BIND 9 is believed to adhere to all the mandatory speci-fications, while ISC has eliminated non-compliant code from BIND 8 whenever it has
been identified.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE973.3.1Characteristics of the Root Zone
Defining CharacteristicsThe root zone file defines the DNS. For all practical purposes, a top-level domain (and, therefore, all of its lower-level domains) is in the
DNS if and only if it is listed in the root zone file. Therefore, presence in
the root determines which DNS domains are available on the Internet.25As Internet use has grown, especially with the explosive growth of the
Web and its reliance on domain names as key parts of Web site ad-
dresses, entry of a top-level domain into the root zone file has become a
subject of substantial economic and social importance. Consequently,
who controls entry into the root, and by what means, have become con-
troversial subjects. The current process for resolving these issues is de-
scribed in Section 3.3.3.Critical CharacteristicsThe root zone and the root name servers are critical to the operationof the DNS. The effective and reliable operation of the DNS, and of the
Internet, is entirely dependent on the accuracy and integrity of the root
zone file (and its copies) and the security, reliability, and efficiency of the
root name servers. Fortunately, the root zone has proven highly resilient
and resistant to errors or disruptions.One possible source of error is an incorrect entryÑa mistyped do-main name or an erroneous IP addressÑin the root zone file. A conse-
quence could be misdirection of queries seeking a particular top-level
domain (TLD) name server, say .net. That could prevent users searchingfor the address of any domain name within that name serverÕs TLD, say
any address in .net, from reaching it through the specific root name servercontaining the incorrect entry. If the error were updated in all copies of
the root zone file, access would effectively be denied to all domain names
in that TLD, except from name servers that had previously cached the
correct address.26 However, relatively simple error detection and correc-tion procedures can quickly prevent such errors. (For example, most large
top-level domains are programmed to regularly query the root to ensure
that it is properly routing queries seeking that TLD.)25The IP addresses for the servers of well-known TLDs are widely available, and soto them presence in the root may be less important. For less well known and newTLDs, however, presence in the root is the critical question.26This exception would hold true only until the TTLs of the cached addresses ex-pired.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEA possibly disruptive event would involve one or more of the rootname servers being non-operational for hours or more. This might hap-
pen because of the unexpected failure of a computer or communication
link (accidental or purposeful) or because of regular maintenance. How-
ever, since the capacity of each name server is many times greater than its
average load, and iterative resolvers can use any of the root name servers,
other name servers can take up the load without degradation in the

systemÕs performance that is perceptible to users. Moreover, in recent
years such outages have been very rare.27Although, as noted, there have been instances in the past of errors inthe root zone file that have had significant effects on the reliable operation
of the DNS, there have been none in recent times. At least for the current
rates of queries and of changes in the root zone file, the systems of error
checking and correction and of capacity sharing appear to be working
successfully.Unique CharacteristicsThe design of the DNS is predicated on the existence of a single au-thoritative root that ensures that there is one and only one set of top-level
domains. However, some of those who object to the pace at which new
generic TLDs have been added to the root, or to the process by which they
have been selected, have sought a solution through the addition of one or
more roots. They have been joined by some who believe in the principle
that having competition in the delivery of root services would benefit
Internet users.On the other side are those who argue that additional roots wouldcompromise the reliable operation of the Internet by, among other things,
opening the possibility of multiple addresses, associated with different
entities, being assigned the same domain name.28 Most experienced tech-nologists view the idea of introducing multiple roots for the DNS as threat-

ening the stable operation of the DNS.27For example, in 2000, 4 of the 13 root servers failed for a brief period because of atechnical mistake. In 1997, a more serious problem involving the transfer of an incor-
rect directory list to seven root servers caused much of the traffic on the Internet tocome to a stop. As reported in ÒISC Sets Up Crisis Centre to Protect Domain NameSystem,Ó Sydney Morning Herald, October 21, 2003, available at <http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2003/10/21/1066631394527.html>.28See, for example, M. Stuart Lynn, ÒICP-3, a Unique, Authoritative Root for theDNS,Ó ICANN, July 2001, available at <http://www.icann.org/icp/icp-3.htm>; also,
Internet Architecture Board, ÒIAB Technical Comment on the Unique DNS Root,Ó RFC2826, May 2000, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE99Moreover, since which domains are accessible to a user would de-pend on which of the multiple roots were used, these technologists see a
multiple-root DNS as balkanizing the Internet. Although there may be
some benefits from having competing roots, the presence of network ex-
ternalities29 encourages ISPs and name servers to converge on a singleroot that provides global compatibility. Consequently, many technologists
and economists believe it is unlikely that an alternative root would achieve
widespread success.30 In their view, while competition may serve a valu-able purpose in the short term, the task of maintaining the root zone file
will equilibrate on a single, dominant root zone file, albeit an equilibrium
in which operational control is shared among a number of (non-compet-
ing) entities.31There have been several attempts to create alternate roots thathave data about the TLDs that are recognized by the current root
servers plus some additional TLDs that the operator of the alternate
root is trying to promote. However, these attempts have generally
been unsuccessful, in large measure because of the lack of global com-
patibility among the domain names recognized only by alternative
roots, which has made users unwilling to use them. However, one
companyÑNew.netÑclaims to have reached financial profitability,
to have registered over 100,000 domain names, and to be potentially
accessible to 175 million Internet users through allied ISPs and
browser plug-in software. It offers 12 additional TLDs in English as
well as in each of Spanish, French, Portuguese, Italian, and German.32Although the continued existence of New.net can be seen as a chal-
lenge to the DNS and ICANNÕs management of the root zone file, it
has not thus far appeared to have had any significant effect on either.
Furthermore, in September 2004, New.net was acquired by the
Vendare Group, an online media and marketing company, as the ba-
sis for a division offering search services, while continuing to offer
domain name registration.3329Network externalities are the increased benefits received by one user of a system as thenumber of users of the system increases.30Milton L. Mueller, ÒCompeting DNS Roots: Creative Destruction or Just Plain De-struction?Ó Journal of Network Industries 3(3):313-334, 2002.31If an alternate root attracts a sufficient number of registrations, it raises the possi-bility that TLDs in the alternate root and registrations within these TLDs could becreated for speculative purposes. If ICANN creates a TLD that already exists in analternate root, the organization that controls the corresponding TLD in the alternate
root could be willing to transfer the registered names to the ICANN TLDÑfor a price.32This information was obtained from <http://www.new.net/> in February 2004.33The Vendare Group, ÒThe Vendare Group, Online Media and Marketing Company,Acquires Search-Services Provider New.net,Ó press release, September 17, 2004, available at<http://www.new.net/id_9172004.tp>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE3.3.2Technical System of the Root Zone
The Root Zone FileThe root zone file contains resource records for all the TLDs as well asfor the root. In February 2005, there were 258 sets of entries. Of those, 243
were country code TLDs (ccTLDs) and 15 were generic TLDs (gTLDs).
(One of the gTLDs was the domain .arpa that is used for infrastructuralpurposes, which is sometimes considered a separate category.) Because
there are multiple records in the root zone file for each of the subdomains,
there were a total of 2143 records in the root zone, which translates to
about 78 kilobytes of storage. Moreover, although, as noted earlier, all the
root name servers together execute, in total, 8 billion searches a day on
this file,34 this is well within their computational capability because of thesubstantial overprovisioning of the system.The Root Name ServersLike other zone files, the root zone initially had a primary or masterserver accessible from the DNS and severalÑin this case, 12Ñsecondary
or slave servers. That primary zone file was the most current of the files,
and all updates and changes were made to it; it served as the reference
source for the root zone. The secondary files were updated from it on a
regular basis, at least twice daily. Starting in 1996 and achieving adoption
by all secondaries by the end of 2001, the role of the primary was trans-
ferred to a Òhidden primary,Ó which is a server that is used to update the
secondaries but is not itself accessible from the DNS. VeriSign operates
this hidden primary. All 13 of the public root name servers are now sec-
ondaries, including the former primary. Digital signatures, error check-
ing, and correction processes are in place to minimize the chance of intro-
ducing errors or being successfully attacked during updates.The December 2004 status of the group of 13 named root nameservers is shown in Table 3.1.35 They are designated by the letters Athrough M. The A-root server, a.root-server.net, was until recently theprimary but, as noted above, has been replaced by a hidden primary.
See Box 3.4.34The F-root server (which includes its satellites), one of 13 root servers, answered morethan 272 million queries per day according to the Internet Systems Consortium in January
2004. See <http://www.isc.org>.35For the current version of this table, see <http://www.root-servers.org>. That Web sitealso contains links to the root name server operators and to other relevant information..Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE101Although the home locations of some of the root servers are the resultof historical accident, they were originally determined by analysis of net-
work traffic flows and loads, seeking to have at least one server ÒcloseÓ in
terms of message communication time to every location on the network.
It is important to have root servers distributed so that they provide a uni-
form level of service across the network.36 Having a root server in a well-connected area is fairly unimportant to that area, since users there are
likely to be able to reach several servers. By contrast, if an area is fairly
isolated from most of the network, it is important that the ISPs that serve
it acquire sufficient connectivity to enable the areaÕs users to access one or
more root servers at all times.Considerations of this type are both complex and important but werenot sufficient to determine a unique set of locations for the home sites of
the 13 root servers. However, as the Internet has evolved, these original
locations became less satisfactory, which has been one of the reasons for
the proliferation by some operatorsÑnotably C, F, I, J, K, and M in Table
3.1Ñof satellite sites at different locations. These satellite sites use anycast
addressing (see Box 3.1), which enables servers with the same IP address
to be located at different points on the Internet. Copies of the F-root server,
for example, can be placed at multiple locations around the world. The
widespread distribution of anycast satellites of the 13 root servers has
improved the level of service provided to many previously less well
served locations.Some have believed that 13 root name servers are too few to meetrequirements for reliability and robustness, which requires sufficient ca-
pacity distributed widely enough to protect against system or network
failures and attacks. Others have believed that more root servers are
needed to satisfy institutional requirements. Their concern arose from the
belief that to be a full participant in the Internet, a nation or region must
have its own root name server. While technical reasons37 make it difficultto increase the number of root name server IP addresses beyond 13, the
rapidly increasing use of anycast addressing has enabled the root name
server system to respond to both the technical and institutional require-
ments through the addition of multiple geographically distributed anycast
root server satellites. Even so, since it addresses the distribution only of36See Tony Lee, Brad Huffaker, Marina Fomenkov, and kc klaffy, ÒOn the Problem of
Optimization of DNS Root Servers Placement,Ó Passive Measurement and Analysis Work-
shop, 2003, available at <http://www.caida.org/outreach/papers/2003/dnsplacement/>.37See ÒDNS Message FormatÓ in Section 3.2.4 for an explanation of the technical limita-tions.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACETABLE 3.1 The 13 Root Name Servers and Their Anycast Satellites as ofDecember 2004NameOperator
AVeriSign Naming and Directory ServicesBInformation Sciences Institute, University ofSouthern CaliforniaCCogent CommunicationsDUniversity of MarylandENASA, Ames Research CenterFInternet Systems Consortium, Inc.GU.S. DOD Network Information CenterHU.S. Army Research LaboratoryIAutonomica/NordUNetJVeriSign Naming and Directory ServicesKR”seaux IP Europ”ensÑNetwork Coordination CentreLICANNMWIDE ProjectSOURCE: This table derives directly from information provided at<http://www.root-servers.org> as accessed on February 13, 2005.servers and not of the operating institutions, the location issue is likely tocontinue to add some political acrimony to any selection process that
might follow from the withdrawal of one of the current operators. (See
Section 5.3.)There is no standard hardware and software implementation of theroot name servers. Each of the responsible organizations uses its preferred
equipment and operating and file systems, although most of them runSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE103some version of the BIND name server software.38 Although there mightbe some operational advantages to having standard implementations,LocationsCountry
Dulles, VAUSA
Marina del Rey, CAUSA
Herndon, VA; New York City; Chicago; Los AngelesUSA
College Park, MDUSA

Mountain View, CAUSA

Palo Alto, CA; San Jose, CA; New York City; San Francisco; Ottawa;USA
Madrid; Hong Kong; Los Angeles; Rome; Auckland; S‰o Paulo;Beijing; Seoul; Moscow; Taipei; Dubai; Paris; Singapore; Brisbane;Toronto; Monterrey; Lisbon; Johannesburg; Tel Aviv; Jakarta;
Munich; Osaka; PragueVienna, VAUSA

Aberdeen, MDUSA

Stockholm; Helsinki; Milan; London; Geneva; Amsterdam;Sweden
Oslo; Bangkok; Hong Kong; Brussels; Frankfurt; Ankara; Bucharest;Chicago; Washington, DC; Tokyo; Kuala LumpurDulles, VA (2 locations); Mountain View, CA; Sterling, VA (2 locations);USA
Seattle, WA; Amsterdam; Atlanta, GA; Los Angeles; Miami;
Stockholm; London; Tokyo; Seoul; SingaporeLondon, Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Athens, Doha, Milan,NL
Reykjavik, Helsinki, Geneva, Poznan, BudapestLos AngelesUSA
Tokyo, Seoul, ParisJapan
38Since BIND 8 and BIND 9 have different code bases, this is less of a problem than itwould be if they were identical. The K root and some instances of other servers run
NSD name server software from NLnet labs of Amsterdam. VeriSign runs its ownname server software.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEmost Internet technologists believe that variation in the underlying hard-ware and software of the root name server system is highly desirable,
since it ensures that an error in a particular piece of hardware or software
will not lead to the simultaneous failure of all of the root servers.As the number and rate of queries to the root name servers have in-creased, hardware and software upgrades have enabled the servers to keep
up.39 However, the pace of inquiries is likely to continue to grow and it isconceivable that it could, in principle, exceed the capacity of a system com-
prising even the most powerful single computers. Because of anycasting
and multiprocessing, through which a root server can comprise multiple
processors, the number of computers at each root-server address is effec-
tively unrestricted. Moreover, it is plausible to expect continued improve-
ments in computing and communications performance. Consequently, it isBOX 3.4VeriSign
VeriSign, Inc., founded in 1995, describes itself as providing Òintelligentinfrastructure services that support the digital economy.Ó Its acquisition in2000 of Network Solutions, Inc. made it the registry for three gTLDs: .com,.net, and .org and the operator of the A-root and the J-root name servers.It currently operates the A-root and J-root name servers, the hidden rootprimary, and the name servers for the .com, and .net TLDs. At the end of2004, its Naming and Directory Services unit managed a database of over38 million names in the .com and .net gTLDs; owned and maintained 13gTLD name server sites around the globe that handled the more than 14billion transactions per day for those two gTLDs; and provided access to
the .com and .net gTLD registries for more than 150 ICANN-accreditedregistrars that submit over 100 million domain name transactions daily toits Shared Registration System.As a registrarÑthrough a subsidiary renamed Network Solutions, Inc. in2003Ñit registered more than 500,000 new domain names during the sec-ond quarter of 2002, and an additional 700,000 names were renewed or
extended. More than 8.7 million active domain names in .com and .netwere under management by VeriSignÕs registrar. However, in October2003, it sold Network Solutions to a private equity firm for $100 million.11This information was obtained from <http://www.verisign.com> on February 13, 2005.39This is only a portion of the total potential query load to the root zone file because ofcaching of queries by many name servers, and especially those of large ISPs, as noted above.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE105unlikely that the query load will ever be able to outrun the computing ca-pacity of the 13 named root name servers and their satellites.3.3.3 Institutional Framework of the Root ZoneBecause the root is central and critical to the operation of the DNS,decisions about the root zone and the root name servers are of substantial
importance, and the institutions that bear responsibility for them take on
an important role as stewards of the DNS.Those institutions carry out four critical functions:1.Deciding what new or revised entries will be permitted in the root
zone file;2.Creating the root zone file, keeping it current, and distributing it to
all the root name servers;3.Selecting the locations and the operators of the root name servers;
and4.Establishing and continually and reliably operating the root name
servers.The diverse collection of institutions that performs these functionsincludes a not-for-profit corporationÑICANN; a U.S. government
agencyÑthe Department of Commerce; a corporationÑVeriSign; and an
informal group consisting of the commercial, non-commercial, and gov-
ernmental root name server operators.Approving the Root Zone FileÑU.S. Departmentof Commerce and ICANNThe fundamental importance of the root zone file to the operation ofthe DNS and, therefore, of the Internet means that special attention is paid
to the process by which new or revised entries to the file are authorized.
Some process must be in place to decide whether a change is legitimate;
otherwise, persons or organizations with malicious motives or inadequate
capabilities could make or revise entries. Currently the authority to make
changes lies with the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC).40 However,the day-to-day operational responsibility is at VeriSign. As part of the
DOCÕs delegation of responsibility to ICANN (see Box 3.5), the process of
authorization for new or modified entries in the root zone was changed.40See Section 2.7 for a history of that authority.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEAll such requests go first to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority(IANA) (now a function of ICANN) and then to the DOC for final ap-
proval. Once the addition or change is approved, the DOC notifies IANA
and VeriSign. VeriSign Naming and Directory Services then makes the
change in the hidden primary, which distributes the changed root zone
file to the other root name servers (see ÒOperating the Root Name Serv-
ersÓ in Section 3.3.3).There are three kinds of changes to the root zone file. The first kind ofchange is a modification of the data associated with an existing resource
record. This might entail a change in the IP address of one or more of theBOX 3.5The Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and NumbersAs described in Chapter 2, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Namesand Numbers (ICANN) is a not-for-profit corporation founded in October1998 in California by a group of individuals interested in the Internet. Itwas sponsored by the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) to serve as a
technical coordination body for the Internet. Consequently, ICANN hasassumed responsibility (under a memorandum of understandingÑand itssix amendmentsÑwith the DOC) for a set of technical functions previously
performed under U.S. government contract by the Internet Assigned Num-bers Authority (IANA) and other groups. However, in practice, many of itsmost important and controversial activities have been as a policy-setting,
rather than as a technical coordination, body.IANA continues as a function of ICANN with overall administrative re-sponsibility for the assignment of IP addresses, autonomous system num-
bers, top-level domains, and other unique parameters of the Internet. Inaddition, ICANN is charged with coordinating the stable operation of theInternetÕs root server system.ICANNÕs primary governing body is its board of directors, which nowcomprises 15 voting members and the president, ex officio. Dissatisfactionwith the composition of the board and with the nature of the selection
process inspired a reform effort that resulted in new bylaws that guided theselection of a new board in 2003. (See Section 5.2.4, Alternative F, for adescription of this reform.)ICANN has three supporting organizations: the Address Supporting Or-ganization (ASO), which deals with the system of IP addresses; the Coun-try-Code Names Supporting Organization (ccNSO), which focuses on is-
sues related to the country-code top-level domains; and the Generic NamesSupporting Organization (GNSO), which handles issues related to the ge-neric top-level domains. In addition, it has four advisory committees: the
At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC) for the Internet community at-large;the DNS Root Server System Advisory Committee (RSSAC) for root serverSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE107name servers resulting, for example, from a change in the network serviceprovider. The data entry process is straightforward, and so such changes
should be routine and rapid. However, they do require a stage of verifica-
tion to ensure that the request is legitimate and not, for example, an effort
by a third party to capture a top-level domain. Nevertheless, such requests
should be processed in a few hours or days.The second kind of change is a shift in the responsibility for a TLD,typically a ccTLD. In such redelegation cases, the questions that must be
resolved may be more difficult and time-consuming. (See ÒSelecting the
Organizations Responsibile for the TLDsÓ in Section 3.4.3 for a discussionoperators; the Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC) for governments;and the Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) for security.There is also the Technical Liaison Group (TLG) for standards-setting orga-nizations and an Internet Engineering Task Force liaison who provides tech-
nical advice to ICANN. The supporting organizations and advisory com-mittees together represent a broad cross section of the InternetÕscommercial, technical, academic, non-commercial, and user communities
and advise the board on matters lying within their areas of expertise andinterest.As part of the reform effort, ICANN adopted a new mission statement:The mission of ICANN is to coordinate the stable operation of theInternetÕs unique identifier systems. In particular, ICANN:1.Coordinates the allocation and assignment of three sets of unique
identifiers of the InternetÑdomain names, IP addresses and autono-mous system (AS) numbers, and protocol ports and parameter numbers.2.Coordinates the operation and evolution of the DNSÕs root name
server system.3.Coordinates policy-development as reasonably and appropriately
related to the performance of these functions.ICANN is open to the participation of any interested Internet user, busi-ness, or organization. It holds several meetings a year at locations aroundthe world.1 ICANN has been the subject of many controversies regardingits governance, its processes, and its decisions since its founding. The pri-
mary issues are discussed in Section 5.2. A good sense of the full range ofcontroversies that have surrounded ICANN can be obtained from <http://www.icannwatch.org>, CircleID (<http://circleid.com>), and ICANNFocus
(<http://www.icannfocus.org>), through the resources that can be linked tofrom these sites, and from innumerable articles written about ICANN.1Information about ICANN was derived from <http://www.icann.org> on February 13,
2005.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEof the issues.) In particular, they may entail judging which organization hasthe ÒrightÓ to operate the registry for a ccTLD, which can become embroiled
in national politics. These changes will generally take longer but should
proceed according to a formal and transparent process.The third kind of change is the addition of data about a new TLD to theroot zone file (see ÒSelecting the Organizations Responsible for the TLDsÓ
in Section 3.4.3). This is a single process for new gTLDs. An ICANN selec-
tion process recommends both the domain name that shall be added and
who shall operate it. It is a two-step process for new ccTLDs. Who will be
responsible for operations is a separate recommendation from the decision
to add a ccTLD name to the list of ccTLDs. Such changes should take place
within a few days after the appropriate decisions have been made.Maintaining the Root Zone FileÑVeriSignVeriSign, as the operator of the hidden primary root zone server, isresponsible for maintaining the root zone file and for distributing it to the
secondary servers. It performs this function under the terms of a memo-
randum of understanding (MoU) with the DOC.Since any errors in the root zone file can affect large numbers of sitesand users, accurate and error-free preparation and distribution of the file
are essential. In the first instance, this is a human function. Someone must
enter additions and updates into the database, create a new zone file, and
check it for errors. Individuals at the secondary sites must check to ensure
that the file has not been corrupted during its distribution. However, com-
puter techniques and aids can be used to support this process and reduce
the demands on humans. Furthermore, regular queries of the root by each
of the TLD operators can be used to test the entries corresponding to their
TLDs and provide further assurance that no undetected errors are present
in the file.Selecting the Root Name Server OperatorsÑSelf-SelectionThe current root name server operators were not selected through aformal evaluation and qualification process, although they play a funda-
mental role in ensuring the availability and reliability of the root. Rather,
the group is the cumulative result of a sequence of separate decisions
taken over the years since the establishment of the DNS. It is a loosely
organized collection of autonomous institutions whose names are given
in Table 3.1. Ten of them are based in the United States. Of those, three are
associated with the U.S. government (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), Department of Defense (DOD), and the U.S.
Army), two are universities (University of Maryland and University ofSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE109Southern California), two are corporations (VeriSign and Cogent Com-munications), and two are not-for-profits (ISC, Inc. and ICANN). Three
are based outside the United States: one in Sweden, one in the Nether-
lands, and one in Japan.One of the responsibilities that ICANN assumed under its agreementwith the DOC is coordinating the stable operation of the root server sys-
tem. To do so, it established the DNS Root Server System Advisory Com-
mittee, whose responsibilities were spelled out in ICANNÕs bylaws (Ar-
ticle VII, Section 3(b)).The responsibility of the Root Server System Advisory Committeeshall be to advise the Board (of ICANN) about the operation of the root
name servers of the domain name system. The Root Server System Advi-sory Committee should consider and provide advice on the operationalrequirements of root name servers, including host hardware capacities,
operating systems and name server software versions, network connec-tivity and physical environment . . . should examine and advise on thesecurity aspects of the root name server system . . . [and] should review
the number, location, and distribution of root name servers consideringthe total system performance, robustness, and reliability.The parties will collaborate on a study and process for making the man-agement of the Internet (DNS) root server system more robust and secure.ICANNÕs intent is to enter into an MoU41 with each server operatorthat will spell out the root name server performance requirements, such
as service levels, reliability, and security. However, as of February 2005,
no MoUs had yet been signed.In the absence of an agreed oversight role for ICANN, there is, atpresent, no formal process for selecting a new root name server operator
if one of the incumbents should withdraw, although it is clear that the set
of remaining operators could, and probably would, work together to make
the selection. (See Section 5.3 for a discussion of this issue.) Operating the Root Name ServersÑThe Root Name Server OperatorsThe role of the operators of the 13 root name servers is to maintainreliable, secure, and accurate operation of the servers containing the cur-
rent root zone on a 24-hour-a-day, 365 days-per-year-basis. Each server is
expected to have the capacity to respond to many times the rate of queries
it receives and must increase its capacity at least as fast as the query rate41The DNS Root Server System Advisory Committee has drafted a model memoran-dum of understanding, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/dns-root/model-root-server-mou-21jan02.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEincreases. An attempt to define the responsibilities of the root name serveroperators was made in RFC 2870, issued in June 2000,42 but the ideal thatit describes has not been achieved.Historically, the operators of the root servers have not charged feesfor resolving Internet address queries, instead obtaining support in other
ways for the substantial costs they incur in providing the service. These
operators choose to do so either because (1) they believe that operating a
root server is a public service (and sufficiently inexpensive that they can
afford the cost) or (2) they believe that operating a root server conveys a
business, or other, advantage to them. Nevertheless, it is a valuable ser-
vice, whose provision is a little-known and little-appreciated gift in kind
to all users of the Internet.3.3.4Assessment
Conclusion: The system of DNS root name servers currently respondsto more than 8 billion queries per day43 and does so reliably and accuratelyas shown by its virtually uninterrupted availability and the very low occur-
rence of root-caused misdirections. Because the majority of queries are
served from cached answers lower in the hierarchy, the entire DNS re-
sponds to many times that number each day with correspondingly good
results. However, the robust operation of the root name servers is poten-
tially vulnerable to an excessive query load, either inadvertent or malicious,
that might slow down their responses or cause them to fail to respond.Data collected about root name server operation has revealed that asubstantial fractionÑbetween 75 percent and 97 percentÑof the load on
those servers may be the result of erroneous queries.44 These errors fallinto three categories: stupidÑfor example, asking for the IP address of an
IP address; invalidÑfor example, asking for the IP address of a nonexist-
ent domain; and repetitiveÑfor example, continuing to send an incorrect
query even after receiving a negative response. Analysis has revealed that
the sources of many of these errors lie in faulty resolver or name server
software and faulty system management that misconfigures name servers42See Randy Bush, Daniel Karrenberg, Mark Kosters, and Raymond Plzak, ÒRootName Server Operational Requirements,Ó RFC 2870, June 2000, available at <http://
www.rfc-editor.org>.43The monthly average load on all root name servers in December 2004 was around90,000 queries per second according to the Internet SocietyÕs Member Briefing No. 20,
ÒDNS Root Name ServersÑFrequently Asked Questions,Ó January 2005, available at<http://www.isoc.org/briefings/020/>.44The 97 percent figure is from Wessels and Fomenkov, ÒWow, ThatÕs a Lot of Pack-ets,Ó 2003. However, according to an anonymous reviewer, VeriSignÕs experience onits two servers is closer to 75 percent.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE111or resolvers and does not monitor performance closely enough to catcherrors. The latter is not purely a technical issue but poses an institutional
issue.45 Software developers, system administrators, and users generallyhave few incentives to make an effort to prevent the occurrence of this
extra load.In addition, the system of root name servers may be vulnerable tomalicious attempts to overload it. In October 2002, the root name server
system was subjected to such a denial-of-service attack that sought to
swamp the system with queries.46 Eight of the 13 servers were inacces-sible from some places on the Internet for an hour or more, but the re-
maining 5 served the Internet without observable degradation. Although
the system successfully resisted this attack, which lasted only an hour and
a half, it should serve as a warning about the potential for longer and
more sophisticated attacks in the future.Conclusion: The root name servers receive far too many incorrect orrepetitive queries, increasing the load that they must serve. This unneces-
sary load arrives at the root name servers because many sites on the
Internet employ faulty software, misconfigure their resolvers or name
servers, or do not manage their systems adequately. The root name server
operators, however, lack the means to discipline the sites at fault.Conclusion: The root name servers are subject to malicious attack,but through overprovisioning and the addition of anycast satellites have
substantially reduced their vulnerability to denial-of-service attacks. Fur-
thermore, the widespread caching of the root zone file and its long time to
live mean that the DNS could continue to operate even during a relatively
long outage of most or all of the root name servers and their satellites.Recommendation: To be able to continue to meet the increasing queryload, both benign and malign, the root name server operators should con-
tinue to implement both local and global load balancing through the de-
ployment of anycast satellites.45These analyses have been sponsored by the Cooperative Association for InternetData Analysis (CAIDA) and have been reported in many publications. In addition tothe Wessels and Fomenkov study, see, for example, Nevil Brownlee, kc claffy, and EviNemeth, ÒDNS Measurements at a Root Server,Ó Proceedings of IEEE Globecom, CAIDA,San Antonio, Tex., November 2001, pp. 1672-1676. Also see <http://caida.org/outreach/papers/2001/DNSmeasroot/>.46See, for example, David McGuire and Brian Krebs, ÒAttack on Internet CalledLargest Ever,Ó Washington Post, October 22, 2002. Three root server operators coau-thored an authoritative report about the attack. It can be found at <http://d.root-servers.org/october21.txt>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEConclusion: Notwithstanding the deployment of anycast serversand installation of backup servers at remote locations, the concentra-
tion of root name server facilities and personnel in the Washington,
D.C., area and, to a lesser extent, in the Los Angeles area is a potential
vulnerability.Recommendation: The need for further diversification of the locationof root name server facilities and personnel should be carefully analyzed
in the light of possible dangers, both natural and human in origin.Conclusion: The system of root name servers lacks formal manage-ment oversight, although the operators do communicate and cooperate.
Not everyone would agree that formal oversight is desirable. Should one
or more of the current root name server operators withdraw from that
responsibility, or fail to exercise it reliably, effectively, or securely, there
would be no responsible organization or formal process for removing the
failed operator or for recruiting and selecting a replacement. In their ab-
sence, the informal, collegial processes that led to the current group of
operators would likely continue to be used.Conclusion: The root name server operators have provided effectiveand reliable service to the community of Internet users without any form
of direct compensation for that service from the users. With the growth in
the scale and economic importance of the Internet, and with the expense
of ensuring secure operation, the root name server operators face increas-
ing costs and potential liabilities that some, at least, may find too great to
meet without compensation.47 Indeed, the current system for maintain-ing root servers may well face additional economic pressures, as well as
technical ones, as the volume of Internet traffic increases, especially if the
number of TLDs were to be expanded.The root zone must be kept secure and robust in the face of pos-sible future threats. Moreover, the continued stable management and
financing of root zone operations must be ensured for the DNS to
function. These challenges and approaches to meeting them are dis-
cussed in Section 5.3.47As noted in PresidentÕs Report: ICANNÑThe Case for Reform, February 24, 2002, Ò. . .some organizations that sponsor a root name server operator have little motivation tosign formal agreements [with ICANN], even in the form of the MOU that is nowcontemplated. What do they gain in return, except perhaps unwanted visibility and
the attendant possibility of nuisance litigation? They receive no funding for their ef-forts, so why should they take on any contractual commitments, however loose?Ó Thesame logic raises questions about their incentives to continue to operate the root name
servers.  See <http://www.icann.org/general/lynn-reform-proposal-24feb02.htm>.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE1133.4IMPLEMENTATIONÑTHE TOP-LEVEL DOMAINS
The portion of the DNS hierarchy that has captured the most publicattention and attracted the greatest controversy is the level just below the
root, the top-level domains. As noted above, in February 2005 there were
258 such domains in the two major categories defined in the early days of
the DNS (see Section 2.2.1): 243 country code top-level domains (ccTLDs)
and 15 generic top-level domains (gTLDs). These TLDs are, in turn, the
top of a hierarchy of second-level domain names. Typically, the commer-
cial gTLDs have very flat structures with many second-level names, but
the others vary widely, some having very deep structures. The ccTLDs
also have a wide range of structures, some having several levels of hierar-
chy, which may be structured geographically or generically.3.4.1Characteristics of the TLDs
ccTLDsThe 243 ccTLDs are each associated with a nation or region or exter-nal territory and designated by the two-letter abbreviation for that entity
assigned by the International Organization for Standardization in ISO
3166-1.48 Examples of ccTLDs are .ke for Kenya, .jp for Japan, and .de forGermany.49 The expectation was that a ccTLD would signify a locationand would be supervised and administered by an organization in the cor-
responding location, and be limited to registrants with a presence there;
however, these criteria are not effectively enforced. Moreover, a number
of small nations and territories have licensed administration of their do-
mainsÑfor example, .tv for Tuvalu and .cc for the Cocos IslandsÑto com-mercial bodies that register anyone who wishes to use that ccTLDÕs two-
letter domain. Such ccTLDs are for all practical purposes equivalent to
commercial gTLDs. This equivalence is further explored in
ÒRecharacterizing TLDsÓ in Section 3.4.1.The largest ccTLDs are listed in Table 3.2, as are most of thoseccTLDs, shown in boldface, that have contracted for commercial use of
their domains. The .us domain, which had been limited to third- andfourth-level registrations in a locality-based hierarchy, is shown in ital-
ics. In April 2002, registration at the second level in .us was opened with48See <http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prods-services/iso3166ma/index.html> for a listof the abbreviations.49There are a few exceptions to the use of ISO 3166-1 two-letter abbreviations. Forexample, the United Kingdom is assigned .uk rather than .gb (for Great Britain). ICANNhas also assigned ccTLD two-letter codes to each of the Channel Islands and to Ascen-sion Island, which are not in ISO 3166-1, because it was anticipated that they would be
added to the list.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe intent that any U.S. citizen or resident and any business or organiza-tion with a bona fide presence in the United States could register a do-
main name in .us.50Table 3.2 shows the number of domains registered at the first avail-able level under each top-level domain in February 2003. The total at that
time was just over 19 million. By December 2003, almost 24 million do-
mains had been registered in ccTLDs, and by November 2004 it had
reached 25.6 million. As noted above, some country code TLDs have fur-
ther generic or geographic substructures. In those cases, the count of do-
mains is the sum of those registered under each second- or third-level
domain, depending on the highest level at which registration by the gen-
eral public is permitted.gTLDsThere are 15 gTLDs, 8 that date from the early years of the DNSÑ.net,.com, .org, .edu, .gov, .mil, .int, and .arpaÑand 7 that were authorized byICANN in November 2000. As their designations suggest, the expectation
was that registration in the original gTLDs would be by types of organiza-
tions. Commercial organizations were expected to register in .com, ac-credited educational organizations in .edu, network infrastructure orga-nizations in .net, U.S. government organizations in .gov and .mil, andinternational treaty organizations in .int. The .org TLD was created fororganizations that did not fit into one of the other gTLDs. The designation
.arpa was assigned for network infrastructural use.In announcing the authorization of the seven new gTLDsÑ.biz, .info,.name, .aero, .museum, .coop, and .pro, ICANN distinguished betweensponsored and unsponsored TLDs. Those that are sponsored have a not-
for-profit organization representing the community of potential registrants.
The charters of the sponsored TLDs specify that registrants are restricted to
those satisfying criteria appropriate to that community. Thus, .aero is re-stricted to people, entities, and government agencies that (1) provide for
and support the efficient, safe, and secure transport of people and cargo by
air and (2) facilitate or perform the necessary transactions to transport
people and cargo by air. Registrations in .museum are restricted to entitiesthat are recognized by the International Council of Museums as museums,
professional associations of museums, or individuals who are professional
museum workers. And registrations in .coop are restricted to members ofthe international cooperative movement, which is further defined by mem-50The locality-based use of .us seems to be declining, which raises questions aboutthe relative merits of registrations at the second level and their associated revenuemotivations versus the benefits of the locality-based structure of .us.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE115bership in one or more of eight specific classes. ICANN allows unsponsoredTLDs to be either restricted or unrestricted. Thus, .info is unrestrictedÑanyone can register a name in .info, whereas .name is restricted to indi-viduals and .biz is restricted to bona fide business or commercial uses. De-termination of who is eligible to register is up to the domain operator
operating under the terms of its agreement with ICANN.TABLE 3.2 Some Large Country-Code Top-Level DomainsccTLDCountry or TerritoryRegistered Domain Names
a.deGermany 6,117,000
.ukUnited Kingdom 4,168,000
.nlNetherlands    827,000
.itItaly    767,000
.arArgentina    627,000
.jpJapan    568,000
.usUnited States    
529,000.krRepublic of Korea    507,000
.ccCocos (Keeling) Islands    500,000
.chSwitzerland    500,000
.dkDenmark    428,000
.brBrazil    427,000
.auAustralia    343,000
.caCanada    310,000
.atAustria    272,000
.tvTuvalu    262,000
.beBelgium    238,000
.wsWestern Samoa    183,000
.cnChina    179,000
.plPoland    175,000
.frFrance    163,000
.ruRussian Federation    156,000
.zaSouth Africa    134,000
.twTaiwan    123,000
.nuNiue    112,000.toTonga      97,000
Total (including ccTLDs not listed above) 25,637,000NOTE: Individual domain data is for February 2003; the total is for November 2004.aSOURCE: ICANNÕs Budget for Fiscal Year 2003-2004.   See <http://www.icann.org/
financials/revised-proposed-budget-24jun03.htm>.  Domain name counts where not avail-
able are estimated from the average of all other ccTLDs for which data is available (from
Web sites or other direct information). These estimated counts represent about 16 percent ofall ccTLD domain names. The total (for November 2004) was provided by Matthew Zook,Department of Geography, University of Kentucky.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe 15 generic TLDs are shown in Table 3.3 together with, for each, itstype and purpose, the organization responsible for its operation, and the
number of second-level domains that are registered in it. Note, however,
that in many domains there are far more registrants at the third and lower
levels.Recharacterizing TLDsAlthough a distinction between generic TLDs and national or countrycode TLDs is widely accepted and used in policy discussions, the reality
of practice is that the distinctions have been significantly eroded.TABLE 3.3Generic Top-Level Domains in 2004
gTLDTypeCurrent Purpose
.comUnsponsoredUnrestricted
.netUnsponsoredUnrestricted
.orgUnsponsoredUnrestricted
.eduSponsoredU.S. accredited higher
educational institutions.milSponsoredU.S. military
.govSponsoredU.S. governments
.arpaSponsoredInternet infrastructure
.intUnsponsoredInternational treaty
organizations.infoUnsponsoredUnrestricted
.bizUnsponsoredBusinesses
.nameUnsponsoredIndividuals
.proUnsponsoredProfessionals
.museumSponsoredMuseums
.aeroSponsoredAir-transport industry
.coopSponsoredCooperatives
aSOURCE:  ICANNÕs Budget for Fiscal Year 2003-2004.   See <http://www.icann.org/
financials/revised-proposed-budget-24jun03.htm>.  Domain count data provided courtesy
of Matthew Zook, Department of Geography, University of Kentucky. Ongoing data series

are available at his Web site <http://www.zooknic.com/>.bNeulevel is a joint venture of Neustar, Inc., and Australia-based Melbourne IT, Ltd.c.pro started accepting registrations in the United States on June 1, 2004, from licensedMDs, lawyers, and CPAs; added Canadian and U.K. professionals in September 2004; andadded engineers in February 2005.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE117OrganizationDomains
aVeriSign GRS33,352,000
cVeriSign GRS 5,324,000
cPublic Interest Registry (PIR) 3,307,000
cas of January 1, 2003Educause      7,400
cU.S. DOD Network Information Center?
cU.S. General Services Administration (GSA)      1,100
cInternet Architecture Board/Internet Assigned?
c Numbers Authority (IANA)IANA   88
cAflilias, LLC 3,334,000
cNeulevelb 1,088,000cGlobal Name Registry     87,000
cRegistry.proÑ
cMuseDoma   658
dSITA      4,000+
eDotCooperation, LLC   7,992
fTotal46,412,000gdData provided by Cary Karp, president and CEO, MuseDoma, personal communication,February 20, 2004.eAs listed on the .aero Web site in February 2005. See <http://www.information.aero/users.php>.fAs of February 2004. Carolyn Cooper, dot Coop Operations Center, personal communi-cation, March 17, 2004.gTotal reported on the Zooknic Web site at <http://www.zooknic.com>, February 2005.Among the generic gTLDs, threeÑ.edu,51 .mil, and .govÑare currentlyrestricted to new registrations by U.S. organizations and, in principle, could
have been established as second-level domains under the .us ccTLD.As noted above, among the ccTLDs, a numberÑincluding .cc, .tv, .bz,.ws, .nu, and .toÑactively seek global registrants and function as thoughthey were gTLDs.51Some non-U.S. educational institutions, such as the University of Toronto and theUnited Nations University, retain their registrations from an earlier, less restrictivetime. Also, registrations from foreign but U.S.-accredited educational institutions are
currently being accepted.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEMoreover, the registrants in some gTLDs have not been limited tothose originally expected. In practice, .com, .net, or .org have all beenoperating as unrestricted TLDsÑany person or organization can register
in them.Since many policy issues concern the desirable number and type ofTLDs, it is useful to introduce a characterization of TLDs that better cap-
tures the reality of their current state.In Table 3.4, the TLDs are recharacterized into eight types, designatedby the numbers 1 to 8, which are given in the first column. The second
column, ÒTLD,Ó indicates whether the domain is currently considered a
gTLD or a ccTLD.The ÒScopeÓ column shows whether the TLD is open to registrantsfrom anywhere on the globeÑglobalÑor is primarily for those who are
located within the national boundaries of the countryÑnational. (Many
ccTLDs that are primarily national will accept some non-national regis-
trants, but usually they must have an association with the country.) In
addition, the .arpa TLD is open only to register elements of the infrastruc-ture of the Internet, so its scope is designated as infrastructural.The ÒRestrictionÓ column in Table 3.4 indicates whether the genericTLD or, within national boundaries, the ccTLD has second- or third-level
domains that are intended to be restricted to members of specific commu-
nities (however, the enforcement of these restrictions varies widely). Most
ccTLDs have no restrictions on registrations at the second level, but some,
such as .ar (Argentina) and .au (Australia), and the .us (United States)until recently, register only at the third level under a limited number of
restricted second-level domains, such as com.ar and com.au for commer-cial organizations. However, Great Britain, .uk, has some second-leveldomains that are restricted, such as ltd.uk and plc.uk, and others, such asco.uk, that are not. As with other aspects of the DNS, restriction withinccTLDs is not really ÒyesÓ or Òno,Ó but more accurately Òyes,Ó Òno,Ó or
Òsome.Ó That situation is reflected in Table 3.4 by treating second-level
domains of such ccTLDs as though they were ÒseparateÓ TLDsÑsee the
examples in 7 and 8.The ÒSponsorÓ column indicates whether an organization representa-tive of a community has responsibility for managing a gTLD and for en-
forcing registration restrictions, if any. The concept of sponsor for a ccTLD
is less clear. To some degree, for example, the governments of the United
States and of France, for example, can be viewed as the sponsors of their
ccTLDs. The corresponding entries are left blank.Thus, among the 15 current gTLDs, 4 are of Type 1Ñ.com, .net, .org,and .info. Type 2 includes three TLDs—.museum, .aero, and .coop. Thereare four in Type 3: .name, .biz, .pro, and .int. That leaves three in TypeSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE1194Ñ.edu, .mil, and .gov, which are discussed below as ccTLDsÑand onein Type 8, .arpa.It has not been possible to assign a type to each of the 243 ccTLDs, butexamples of each of the four types have been identified in Table 3.4.Type 5 comprises many ccTLDs that function as generic TLDs. Asnoted above, they are generally small countries that have recognized, or
been shown, that their two-letter designation can be marketed globally to
companies and individuals who would find it commercially or personally
valuable. Thus, the lease of the domain name of Tuvalu (population:
11,000) could provide that Pacific Island nation with $50 million in royal-
ties over the next dozen years. The .TV Corporation, a subsidiary of
VeriSign, in June 2005 listed on its site such Òpremium registrationsÓ as
business.tv, which is available for $1 million, and weather.tv, which would
cost the registrant $250,000. The administrator of this TLD is the Ministry
of Finance and Tourism of Tuvalu, although in fact, the ministry appears
to have delegated all of its decision-making authority to the .TV Corpora-
tion as a part of the lease. Other nations are managing their globally avail-
able domains themselves. Western Samoa (population: 178,000), another
Pacific island nation, markets .ws directly and handles the registrationlocally. Western Samoa had two ISPs and 3000 Internet users in 2002.52TABLE 3.4Types of Top-Level Domains
TypeTLDScopeIntended RestrictionSponsorExamples
1gTLDGlobalNoNo
.com, .net,.info, .org2gTLDGlobalYesYes
.aero, .museum,.coop3gTLDGlobalYesNo
.biz, .name,.pro, .int4gTLDNationalYesYes
.mil, .gov, .edu5ccTLDGlobalNoÐ
.cc, .tv, .bz6ccTLDNationalNoÐ
.jp, .fr, .us,.co.uk7ccTLDNationalYesÐ
com.au, id.au,.ltd.uk8gTLDInfrastructuralYesYes
.arpa52See CIA, The World Factbook
, 2004, available at <http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/factbook/fields/2028.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEWhile some ccTLDs function as gTLDs, Type 4 comprises the threegTLDs that function like ccTLDsÑ.edu, .gov, .mil. All three are limited toregistrants in the United States that are, in turn, restricted to specific com-
munitiesÑprimarily accredited higher educational institutions,53 civiliangovernment54 agencies, and federal military agencies.The remaining two types distinguish between restricted and non-re-stricted ccTLDs. Almost all ccTLDs are unrestricted at the second and
third levels and fall into Type 6, but some, such as Australia, Argentina,
and Austria, have introduced categories resembling the gTLD categories
as their second levels. They belong to Type 7. Thus, Australians cannot
register directly in the .au domain but must instead use the category ap-propriate to their status: com.au for commercial organizations, asn.au forassociations, id.au for individuals, and so on.Thus, the apparently simple distinction between gTLDs and ccTLDsis really more complex. The differences among TLDs lie in the differences
in the policies that they operate under, not in whether they were origi-
nally associated with a country code or a generic category.3.4.2Technical System of the TLDs
Every TLD has an associated zone file, which is stored in name serv-ers whose addresses are recorded in the root zone file. ICANN requires
that there be at least two name servers for each ccTLD and at least five for
each gTLD with which it has agreements. Some TLDs have as many as 13
name servers, depending on the query load, the need for security against
attack, and their desire to improve access by their users. Each name server
is implemented on one or more computers, most of which run a version of
BIND.55The zone files on all TLDs are larger, generally very much larger, thanthe root zone file. At the extreme, .com contains more than 33 millionsecond-level domains, but even Greenland has more than 1200 domains
registered. Moreover, because of the hierarchical nature of DNS search,53As noted previously, some non-U.S. academic institutions have been ÒgrandfatheredinÓ or will be registered if they are accredited in the United States. Also, there aresome other exceptions such as the Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and Tech-
nology, whose domain name is tjhsst.edu.54Originally it was limited to federal agencies. It is now open to registration by stateand local governments and Native Sovereign Nations.55However, the name server for .org (and for some other TLDs) is operated byUltraDNS, which uses its own proprietary name server software; and VeriSign, whichruns .com, .net, .bz, and .tv, also uses its own proprietary name server software,Atlas.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE121the ease of caching the labels and associated resource record sets in thesmall root zone file, and the long TTLs within that file, the TLD name
servers receive a greater number of queries than the root name servers.
For example, according to VeriSign .com and .net alone receive over 14billion queries per day, while the root receives about 8 billion queries per
day.TLD name servers face specific unique technical issues distinct fromthose that involve the roots. One issue is increased traffic resulting from
low TTLs on second-level zone records. A popular second-level zone can
increase traffic to its parent TLD name servers by lowering its TTL, effec-
tively defeating the DNSÕs caching mechanism. (The root name servers do
not suffer from this potential problem to the same extent, since TLD name
servers give out mostly referrals. As a result, name server caches through-
out the Internet retain the copy of the TLD records from the root zone
with their 48-hour TTLs.56)TLDs probably receive some bogus queries, but perhaps not as manyas the root, since at least a portion of the query must be correctÑthe
TLD name. Their name servers face the same vulnerabilities that are

faced by the root name servers. However, although the effect would be
significant if the operations of large TLDs such as .com or .uk were to beinterrupted, the consequence of a short interruption of most TLDs, indi-
vidually, would not be significant for the overall Internet. An attack that
could take out a substantial number of TLD servers would be significant
but difficult to sustain because of the number of distinct targets that
would be involved.3.4.3 Institutional Framework of the TLDsThe effective operation of the top-level domains requires that an insti-tutional framework perform four functions:1.Deciding which new TLDs will enter the root zone file,
2.Determining the organization to be responsible for a TLD,

3.Determining the organization to operate a TLDÕs name server, and

4.Operating the TLD registry.
Many different organizations, international and national, governmen-tal and private, for-profit and not-for-profit, including ICANN, VeriSign,
and the DOC, are engaged in these activities. Their processes and interac-
tions are complex and, often, controversial.56Information provided by an anonymous reviewer.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACESelecting New TLDsThe original DNS design assumed a single, unified, name space (inwhich the set of names that one user is able to look up is the same set of
names that any other user is able to look up).57 Unless uncoordinatedentry into the root zone file is permitted, which would require that the
operators of the root servers recognize any TLD that chooses to operate,
some entity must decide how many and which TLDs there will be and
who will operate them. ÒSelecting new TLDsÓ means deciding which
new TLDs will enter the root zone file. As described above, that decision
is made by the U.S. Department of Commerce upon the recommenda-
tion of ICANN. Therefore, it is in the first instance a decision for ICANN.
The decision process that is employed differs between ccTLDs and
gTLDs.ccTLDsThere is generally no need for a complex decision process for en-try of ccTLDs since, as noted earlier, they are available to countries
and external territories represented by country codes in ISO 3166-1.
This list has been used as the authoritative source for country codes
because, as was stated in RFC 1591, Òthe IANA is not in the business
of deciding what is and what is not a country.Ó58 When new entitiesare assigned a two-letter identifier by the ISO, that entity is automati-
cally entitled to have a ccTLD. However, two situations have arisen
that cannot be resolved solely by this rule. The first occurs when a
country is removed from the ISO list. The two-letter code for the So-
viet Union, SU, was removed from the list in September 1992 and
placed in Òtransitional reserved status,Ó which means that its use
should be stopped as soon as possible. But, although this issue is on
ICANNÕs agenda, it has not yet addressed the complicated issues that
arise when a country is removed from the ISO 3166-1 list. Indeed, it is
still possible to register in the .su domain, and this domain remainsin the root.The second situation occurs when an international entity requests accTLD that is not on the ISO 3166-1 list. In July 2000, the European Com-
mission wrote to ICANN requesting the inclusion of the .eu domain in57It is this assumption that alternative or multiple roots violate. This discussionassumes a single root.58Jon Postel, ÒDomain Name System Structure and Delegation,Ó RFC 1591, March1994, p. 6, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE123the DNS root.59 Its request noted that the ISO had agreed to use of thetwo-letter code EU as a TLD. (The code, although not in ISO 3166-1, had
Òexceptional reserved statusÓ enabling its use for specific ISO-approved
purposes.) At its September 25, 2000, meeting, the ICANN board passed
a resolution that approved for delegation as ccTLDs those codes from
the ISOÕs exceptional reserved list for which the reservation permits any
application requiring a coded representation of the entity.60 In March2005, ICANN authorized the creation of the .eu TLD, which is expectedto begin operation in early 2006.61 It will be open to any person living inthe EU, as well as businesses with their headquarters, central adminis-
tration, or main base in the EU.62 The exceptional reserved list is nolonger published, and a policy has been implemented to prohibit the
creation or reservation of an unrestricted name that is not on the ISO
3166-1 list. The process of deciding who will be delegated responsibility for op-erating a ccTLD upon its first entry into the root, or for redelegating re-
sponsibility subsequently, can become very complex. This process is dis-
cussed in the next section and in Section 5.5.gTLDsThe gTLDs are a different matter. They fall into two groups: the firsteight, which were selected at the time of initiation of the DNSÑthe legacy
gTLDs; and the seven that were selected by ICANN in 2000 for addition
to the rootÑthe new gTLDs. (An additional 4 to 10 are being added dur-
ing 2005 as the result of an ICANN selection process initiated in 2004. See
Alternative A under ÒWhat Selection Process Should Be UsedÓ in Section
5.4.2.)The legacy gTLDs were selected by the developers of the DNS and agroup of network and information center operators. Jon Postel, writing59Letter from Erkki Liikanen, member of the European Commission, to Mike Rob-erts, (then) CEO and president of ICANN, dated July 6, 2000, available at <http://
europa.eu.int/ISPO/eif/InternetPoliciesSite/DotEU/LetterLiikanenRoberts.html>.60ICANN, ÒPreliminary Report. Special Meeting of the Board,Ó September 25, 2000,available at <http://www.icann.org/minutes/prelim-report-25sep00.htm#00.74>.61See Ellen Dumout, ÒICANN Approves .eu Net Domain,Ó c/net news.com, March 24,2005, available at <http://news.com.com/2100-1038_3-5634121.html>.62See the October 2004 EU Fact Sheet, ÒOpen for Business in 2005: yourname.eu.,Óavailable at <http://europa.eu.int/information_society/doc/factsheets/017-doteu-november04.pdf>. There is a more complex story behind the .eu TLD, but it is beyondthe scope of this chapter.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEalmost 10 years later, still maintained a policy that he expressed as: ÒIt isextremely unlikely that any other TLDs will be created.Ó63 However, bythe following year, Postel had changed his mind and recommended the
creation of new TLDs to compete with NSI, which had a monopoly in
commercial gTLD registrations, and in 1996 he recommended the creation
of 150 or 300 new TLDs. At the same time, the rapid growth in size and
scope of the Internet, driven by the introduction of the World Wide Web,
created a heavy demand for second-level domain names in the gTLDs,
especially in .com. (See Section 2.5.1.) That, in turn, led to a public de-mand for additional gTLDs. In response to that demand (some would
argue it was a belated response), ICANN created a process, which it used
during the year 2000 to select the new gTLDs. ICANN treated the addi-
tion of gTLDs as an experiment in order to seek compromises that would
satisfy the contending interest groups, although that did not prevent the
additions from becoming controversial. Since that process also entailed
selecting the organizations responsible for the TLDs and the TLD name
server operators, its description is deferred to ÒSelecting the TLD Registry
OperatorsÓ below.To at least some degree, TLDs compete with one another for the pa-tronage of those entities that wish to register domain names, although the
maximum prices that ICANN has negotiated with the gTLDs limit the
extent of this competition. This competition might be more intenseÑboth
with respect to the prices charged and the services offeredÑthe larger the
number of competitors, although beyond some point the effect of addi-
tional entry is likely to be small and the costs of switching from one do-
main to another are likely to give incumbents a strong advantage. In any
event, even when firms wish to operate TLDs, either because they observe
incumbents earning large profits or because they believe they can offer
better or cheaper services, entry is constrained by their need to obtain
approval from ICANN for inclusion in the root file.64Over the past few years, the demand for registrations in the TLDs hasgone through several changes. While the ccTLD registrations have grown
continually throughout the period, those in the previously rapidly grow-
ing gTLDs declined in the aftermath of the dot-com bust and only began
to grow again in mid-2002. According to ICANN writing in mid-2003:
ÒThe domain name counts for ccTLDs have jumped 22% over the num-
bers used last year [in the budget]. The count for gTLDs, however, has63Postel, RFC 1591, 1994, p. 1.64Some limitations on entry may have a legitimate practical basis. Nor is it clearwhether a small number of large TLDs are to be preferred to a large number of smallerones. In any event, incumbents can be expected to wish to limit the competition thatthey face, whether or not there is a legitimate basis for such limits.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE125declined 5%, largely due to a drop-off in .com whose statistics dominatethe overall gTLD count because of its comparative size.Ó65 In fact, thename counts in all three of the largest gTLDsÑ.com, .net, and .orgÑde-clined from 2002 to 2003. Both .net and .org declined by 14 percent. How-ever, by August 2003, another source reported that the total number of
.com, .net, and .org domain names had returned to the high mark of 30.7million reached in October 2001.66 Sustained growth had returned in July2002, and over the next 13 months the total registrations in those three
domains grew an average of 250,000 per month. As further confirmation
of the renewed demand for those gTLDs, VeriSign reported67 that an av-erage of 1.2 million new registrations for domain names ending in .comand .net were added each month in the third quarter of 2004Ña 33 per-cent increase over the third quarter of 2003.Ó68Selecting the Organizations Responsible for the TLDsICANN has been delegated authority by the DOC (and subject to theDOCÕs approval) over entries in the root zone and, consequently, it can
determine which organization is delegated responsibility for each ccTLD
and gTLD. The delegated responsibility entails arranging for the estab-
lishment and operation of (1) name servers for the TLD satisfying Internet
technical requirements and (2) a domain name registration process that
meets the needs of the local or international Internet communities.In the case of ccTLDs, the organizations with delegated responsibilityare designated managers or sponsors, and they are designated the spon-
sors for sponsored gTLDs. Sponsors are primarily either government or
not-for-profit organizations that provide their own funding, although
profit-making organizations run the commercial gTLDs and some ccTLDs.
In both groups of TLDs, the responsible organization need not operate the
required name server and domain registration functions itself and gener-
ally contracts with a specialist organization, which may be a commercial
service, to carry out those functions. In the case of the seven unsponsored65See ICANNÕs Budget for Fiscal Year 2003-2004, available at <http:// www.icann.org/financials/revised-proposed-budget-24jun03.htm>.66Zooknic Internet Intelligence, ÒgTLD Domains Returning to 2001 Levels,Ó pressrelease. August 25, 2003, available at <http://www.zooknic.com/pr_2003_08_25.html>.67VeriSign, ÒVeriSign Issues Quarterly Domain Name Industry Brief; Overall Do-main Name Registration Tops Past Record of 66.3 Million,Ó December 1, 2004, avail-able at <http://www.verisign.com/verisign-inc/news-and-events/news-archive/us-news-
2004/page_019484.html>.68See also Linda Rosencrance, ÒDomain Name Registrations Hit All-Time High,ÓComputerworld, June 8, 2004, available at <www.computerworld.com/developmenttopics/websitemgmt/story/0,10801,93716,00.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEgTLDs (other than .int), the responsible organization and the operatingorganization are the same and had until recently all been commercial ser-
vices. However, ICANN designated Public Interest Registry (PIR), a not-
for-profit, to manage .org beginning in 2003. PIR has contracted with aDublin-based company, Aflilias, to provide the registration services and
Afilias has contracted, in turn, with a commercial provider of DNS ser-
vices, UltraDNS, to run the name servers.For the ccTLDs and the legacy gTLDs, ICANN must have a processfor recognizing the organizations that will be responsible for the TLD
when a new ccTLD is added or when a change of responsibility is desired
for whatever reason. The processes used for the ccTLDs and the legacy
gTLDs are different. They are described below. For the new gTLDs, the
processes of selecting a manager and selecting an operator were combined
since the prospective managerÕs choice of operator was one factor in the
manager selection decision. That combined process is described below in
ÒSelecting the TLD Registry Operators.ÓccTLDsIANA began delegating responsibility for ccTLDs shortly after the de-ployment of the DNS and most delegations predate the formation of
ICANN. ICANNÕs policy has been not to challenge these except in cases
where a government seeks redelegation.69 In the early days of the DNS,responsibility for ccTLD management was usually assigned to the Internet
pioneers who volunteered for the task. Generally, there was only one inter-
ested organization since, at the time, the commercial prospects were thought

to be minimal. Even so, there was considerable due diligence on many ap-
plications to determine that other possible applicants had been identified
and, if there were any, that they supported the active application. There
were, however, some cases of multiple applications and post-delegation
challenges by those who sought various other benefits such as prestige or
the ability to leverage the role into sale of Internet services. The managers
agreed to abide by a set of policies for the administration and delegation of
ccTLDs that covered technical requirements and the circumstances under
which IANA would make or change a delegation of responsibility.70 Oftenthe corresponding governments did not know or did not care about the
Internet or the applicable ccTLD.69This section draws extensively on material in ICANN, ÒUpdate on ccTLD Agree-ments.Ó September 20, 2001, available at <http://www.icann.org/montevideo/cctld-update-topic.htm>. See also Jon Postel, RFC 1591, 1994.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE127With the growth in the size and importance of the Internet and theformation of ICANN, that situation has changed. Governments increas-
ingly want to participate in the selection and oversight of the manager of
their ccTLDs.71 Furthermore, ICANN felt the need for more precisely de-scribed agreements spelling out the mutual obligations and responsibili-
ties among governments, ICANN, and the delegated managers of ccTLDs.
Consequently, the board of ICANN authorized the development of such
agreements with the ccTLDs.According to ICANN, it was soon realized that no single agreementor, even, structure of agreement would fit every ccTLD. However, after
consideration of the wide variety of specific circumstances in the 243
ccTLDs, ICANN found that most would fit into one of two general situa-
tions that differ principally in the involvement of the local government or
public authority. In the first, legacy situation, the government is not in-
volved. In the second, triangular situation, it is, thus yielding three par-
ticipants: a ccTLD, ICANN, and a local government. ICANN proposed
two types of agreements, corresponding to these two situations.According to the proposed agreement for the legacy situation, the
ccTLD manager would operate under the oversight of ICANN only, sub-
ject of course to the laws of the country. ICANN would have the sole
responsibility to ensure that the ccTLD manager operates as a trustee for
both the local and the international Internet communities.According to the proposed agreement for the triangular situation,ICANN would retain the responsibility to see that the ccTLD manager
meets its responsibilities to the international Internet community and to
any non-national registrants, while the local government would assume
responsibility for ensuring that the interests of the local Internet commu-
nity are served.According to ICANN, the decision as to which arrangement to pur-sue would be reached by the government and the ccTLD manager (or
candidate manager) in consultation with the local Internet community,
with ICANN adopting Òa neutral stance.ÓIn the legacy situation, ICANN would have the full authority to selectand, when necessary, change the ccTLD manager. (Although they are not
signatories to the agreements, governments are notified if one is in prepa-
ration in case they want to be involved.) In the triangular situation, the70The general responsibilities of the ccTLD managers are documented in RFC 1591and in the ICANN publications ICP-1, Internet Domain Name System Structure and Del-egation (ccTLD Administration and Delegation), May 1999, and ccTLD Constituency BestPractice Guidelines for ccTLD Managers, 4th Draft, March 10, 2001. However, neither ofthe ICANN documents appears to have achieved consensus among all the ccTLD man-agers.71See discussion in Section 5.5.2.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACErelevant government or public authority would communicate its designa-tion of a ccTLD manager to ICANN, which would then decide whether or
not to accept the designee and, assuming a positive decision, seek to ne-
gotiate an appropriate agreement with the manager.The proposed agreements with the ccTLDs are intended to cover thefollowing areas: (1) the delegation of responsibility to the ccTLD and de-
scription of the circumstances that would lead to its termination, (2) speci-
fication of the local and global policy responsibilities of the ccTLD, (3)
characterization of the relationship with ICANN and their respective re-
sponsibilities, and (4) funding for ICANN.Despite ICANNÕs efforts to get ccTLDs to enter into agreements withit, by June 2005 it had completed only 12 of them. A number of ccTLDs
object to accepting ICANNÕs formal authority over their operations. This
issue is discussed in detail in Section 5.5.gTLDsICANN has acted to change the organization responsible for severalof the eight legacy gTLDs. The most significant instance was its negotia-
tion with VeriSign Global Registry Services, the legacy manager of .com,.net, and .org. Because those three gTLDs contain the registrations of thevast majority of the InternetÕs gTLD second-level domains and, in par-
ticular, almost all of those on its unsponsored and unrestricted domains,
VeriSignÕs position as the profit-making sole supplier of those three was
felt by many in the Internet community to be detrimental to the long-term
health of the Internet. In May 2001, VeriSign, Inc., ICANN, and the DOC
signed a revised agreement in which VeriSign agreed to give up its opera-
tion of .org at the end of 2002 while extending the term of its operation of.net to the beginning of 2006 and of .com to November 2007. Both of thelatter agreements are renewable, although under different terms: under
existing agreements, .net had to be put out for bid by ICANN by the endof 2005, while VeriSign has presumptive renewal rights for .com, unless itmaterially breaches the agreement. ICANN initiated an open bidding pro-
cess for .net in March 2004 and in June 2005 selected VeriSign, Inc., tocontinue as the operator.72To select a new manager for .org, ICANN issued a request for propos-als (RFP) in May 2002. In response, it received 11 proposals from a variety
of organizations, both commercial and not-for-profit. According to
ICANN, those proposals were reviewed by three independent evaluation72See ICANN, Ò.NET Request for Proposals,Ó December 10, 2004, available at <http://www.icann.org/tlds/dotnet-reassignment/net-rfp-final-10dec04.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE129teams that were charged with looking at technical issues and at the abilityof the proposals to meet the specific needs of .org. Comments were alsoreceived from the public and the applicants, which, according to ICANN,
were used by the ICANN staff to prepare an evaluation report and recom-
mendation. The ICANN board accepted the staff recommendation and
ICANN contracted with the PIR, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Internet Society, to become the manager of .org, effective January 1, 2003.A similar process was followed for .net.Selecting the TLD Registry OperatorsAn organization that is responsible for reliably performing the func-tions of (1) operating the TLD name servers and (2) registering second-
level domains in the TLD is called a registry.73 It may or may not be thesame as the delegated manager for the TLD.For example, VeriSign is the manager and operates the registry for.com and .net. PIR is the manager of .org, but, as noted above, it hassubcontracted with Afilias to operate the TLD registry, which has con-
tracted the name server function to UltraDNS. Afilias also operates the
registry for .info, for which it also serves as the manager, and for .vc, theccTLD for residents of St.Vincent and the Grenadines, which is managed
by the Ministry of Communications and Works of St.Vincent and the
Grenadines.There is always one, and only one, registry for a given TLD, but, asnoted above, an organization can be the registry operator for more than
one TLD. While the majority of TLD managers are non-commercial orga-
nizations, some registry operators are commercial organizations that op-
erate for profit; they register the vast majority of domain names.ccTLDsThe manager of a ccTLD may also be the registry operator, or it maysubcontract the registry services in whole or in part to other organiza-
tions. The process for selecting the registry services operator is entirely up
to the ccTLD manager, subject only to whatever restrictions the national73Registries can exist at any level, except the root, in the DNS (although in somerespects ICANN could be viewed as the registry for the root). In this section, only TLDregistries are considered. The term ÒregistryÓ is unfortunately used ambiguously in
this context. The database maintained by a registry is also called a registry, as are theorganizations that some registries subcontract with for database maintenance and op-eration, which are here called registry operators.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEgovernment may impose. The situations differ widely among the 243ccTLDs.Since the growth of the World Wide Web has vastly extended thescope, scale, and importance of the Internet, two phenomena have worked
to shape the operational arrangements of ccTLDs in a country. First, there
has been a movement from the early informal arrangements, which often
involved voluntary efforts by the computer science department of a uni-
versity in the country, to more formal arrangements that provide legal
protection and engage a wider national community in policy-setting roles.
Second, there has been a tendency to contract the actual operations to
commercial organizations more willing and able to undertake the re-
sponsibilities than academic institutions.For example, in Austria, the current manager and registry is Nic.AT,which is a limited-liability company that since 2000 has been wholly

owned by a charitable foundation, the Internet Private Foundation Aus-
tria. Nic.AT was established in 1998 by the Austrian ISP Association to
take over responsibility for the ccTLD from the University of Vienna,
which had managed it from its inception but was faced with an increasing
number of registrations, legal questions, and name conflicts beyond its
competence. While Nic.AT handles the name registration, it contracts with
the University of Vienna computer center to run the .at name servers.In contrast, the new registry and registry operator for the .us TLD is acommercial company, Neustar, which also is the registry and registry op-
erator for the new gTLD .biz. In the .us case, the manager, the DOC, de-cided to change the operational model from a deeply hierarchical, mostly
geographic, extensively delegated structure to one that would be exploited
commercially at the second level. Unlike the Austrian case, there was no
pressure for the change in strategy from the previous manager or opera-
tor, and no significant pressure from users/registrants in the domainÑ
indeed, many of them argued against it. And the DOC RFP essentially
required a commercial operator with commercial intentions.Legacy gTLDsThe registries for the legacy gTLDs are the consequence of history. NSIhad been operating the registries for .com, .org, and .net by agreement withthe U.S. government when VeriSign purchased it and assumed the responsi-
bility. As noted above, PIR, upon becoming manager of .org, contracted withAfilias to run the registry. The organizations shown in Table 3.3 for each of
the other legacy gTLDs are the associated registries (and also sponsors).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE131New gTLDsIn July 2000, the ICANN board adopted a policy for the introduction ofnew gTLDs that called for the solicitation and submission of proposals to
sponsor or operate them. In August 2000, the RFP was published. It speci-
fied the contents of the detailed multipart proposal, which was to be ac-
companied by extensive supporting documentation and a non-refundable
$50,000 application fee. The deadline for applications was October 2000.As explained by ICANN, two types of gTLDs were specified: spon-sored and unsponsored. In the latter case, the application was to be sub-
mitted directly by the organization proposing to serve as the registry. In
the former case, the application was to be submitted by the sponsoring
organization but would include the proposal of an organization that had
agreed to perform the registry functions for the sponsoring organization.
Thus, the registries for the new TLDs were selected through the ICANN
process whether ICANN made the decision directly or accepted the spon-
soring organizationsÕ selections.ICANN announced that the selection criteria would be the following:¥The need to maintain the InternetÕs stability;¥The extent to which selection of the proposal would lead to an ef-fective proof of concept concerning the introduction of top-level
domains in the future;¥The enhancement of competition for registration services;¥The enhancement of the utility of the DNS;¥The extent to which the proposal would meet previously unmettypes of needs;¥The extent to which the proposal would enhance the diversity ofthe DNS and of registration services generally;¥The evaluation of delegation of policy-formulation functions forspecial-purpose TLDs to appropriate organizations;¥Appropriate protections of rights of others in connection with theoperation of the TLD; and¥The completeness of the proposals submitted and the extent towhich they demonstrate realistic business, financial, technical, and
operational plans and sound analysis of market needs.ICANN received 47 applications, of which 2 were returned for non-payment of the fee and 1 was withdrawn, leaving 44 to be evaluated. The
ICANN staff carried out evaluation with the assistance of outside techni-
cal, financial/business, and legal advisors. ICANNÕs goal was to select a
Òrelatively small group of applicationsÓ that (1) were functionally diverse
and (2) satisfied the selection criteria.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEAt its November 2000 meeting, the ICANN board acted on the staffevaluation and selected the seven new gTLDsÑ.biz, .info, .name, .pro,.museum, .aero, and .coop. Four were unsponsoredÑ.biz, .info, .pro, and.nameÑand, therefore, amounted to the direct selection of a registry aswell as the TLD. The other three were sponsored, and each included a
designated registry chosen by the sponsor to operate its TLD.The registries for .com, .net, .org and for the seven new gTLDs haveagreed to pay certain fees and adhere to certain requirements as spelled
out in ICANNÕs sponsored and unsponsored TLD agreements. (The reg-
istries for .edu, .gov, and .mil operate under separate agreements withagencies of the U.S. government. ICANN is the registry for .int, and theInternet Architecture Board (IAB) manages .arpa. Therefore, they do nothave agreements with ICANN.)ICANNÕs TLD agreement obligates the sponsor and the registry to(1) satisfy functional and performance specifications set by ICANN; (2)
enter into agreements with any ICANN-accredited registrar (see ÒSe-
lecting the Organizations to Register DomainsÓ in Section 3.5.2) desiring
such an agreement and accord the registrar fair treatment; (3) provide
query and bulk access to registrant dataÑWhois information (see Box
3.6); (4) periodically deposit its registrant data into escrow with an ap-BOX 3.6Whois Service
Whois services provide contact information about the registries, regis-trars, or registrants in the DNS. (See Sections 2.3.4 and 2.5.3 for informa-
tion on the development of the Whois service and background on the is-sues surrounding it.)ICANN-accredited registrars are contractually obligated to collect andprovide access to information about the name being registered, the namesand IP addresses of its name servers, the name of the registrar, the dates ofinitiation and expiration of the registration, the name and postal address of
the registrant, and the name and postal, telephone, and e-mail addresses ofthe technical and administrative contacts for the registered name. Thesemust be made available either directly by the registrar or, in some cases, by
the registry.There are many separate Whois services on the Internet run by regis-trars, registries, and other organizations (often, as with universities, of their
own second- or third-level domains). In addition, there are numerous Websites that provide links to many of the Whois sites, such as Allwhois.comand Better-Whois.com.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE133proved escrow operator; and (5) comply with consensus policies estab-lished by ICANN.The ICANN process for adding gTLDs that was implemented in 2000was quite controversial. Many participants and observers complained
about the design and implementation of the process. The issue of whether
and how to add new gTLDs is examined in detail in Section 5.4.Operating the TLD RegistriesEvery TLD registry operator must perform two basic functions: regis-ter domain names requested by registrants and operate the name servers
that will link those domain names with their IP addresses and other criti-
cal information. Even these basic responsibilities may be divided between
organizations, some commercial and some non-commercial, as noted
above in the cases of Austria and of .org. In contrast, a single commercialorganization, VeriSign, is the manager, runs the registry, and runs the
name servers for .com and .net.The registration operation produces the entries to the zone file forthat domain, the content of the Whois file, and records of billing and pay-
ment, where appropriate. When the TLD has restrictions on who may
register either in the domain (such as restricting registrations to nationals
or residents of a country or to professionals or museums) or in its generic
subdomains (such as Australian businesses in com.au or British limitedliability corporations in ltd.uk), each application for a domain name mustbe examined to ensure that those restrictions are satisfied.The ICANN agreements with 12 gTLDs include functional and opera-tional specifications that the registry operators are responsible for meet-
ing, while the few agreements with ccTLDs specify only general require-
ments for Internet connectivity, operational capability, and adherence to
key RFCs, as well as agreements to make financial contributions to
ICANN. Ideally, all operators of TLD name servers should satisfy certain
minimal technical conditions to ensure their compatibility with the
Internet and that they are configured so as not to pose a danger to the
stability of the Internet, although there is no mechanism for enforcing this
for the TLDs not covered by ICANN agreements.3.4.4Assessment
Conclusion: The level of technical capability and competence varieswidely across the 258 TLD registries. The gTLDs and the large ccTLDs
generally operate at a high level of availability and responsiveness. Al-
though there are no readily available measures of the performance of the
majority of ccTLDs, they appear to provide adequate service.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACERecommendation: Regular and systematic testing of the availabilityand operation of secondary servers should be adopted by top-level do-
main registry operators. Policies and procedures should be developed to
clarify what to do when problems are identified and what measures can
be taken when problems are not resolved within a reasonable period of
time.Conclusion: No single organization has the authority and the abilityto oversee the operation of all the TLDs. ICANNÕs formal authority ex-
tends only as far as the provisions of its agreements with 10 gTLDs and 12
or so ccTLDs and the authority it has to recommend changes in the root
zone to accommodate new or reassigned TLDs.Even where there is a contract, ICANNÕs authority has been tested.VeriSignÕs introduction in October 2003 of its Site Finder service raised
fundamental issues of both a technical and an institutional nature and has
been challenged in the courts.743.5IMPLEMENTATIONÑTHE SECOND- AND
THIRD-LEVEL DOMAINSThe domain names in the DNS hierarchy that Internet users interactwith most directly are those at the second level (or in those ccTLDs with
fixed second-level domains, such as ltd.uk, those at the third level). Theyare generally the key identifiers in e-mail addresses (such as
recipient@mailserver1.nas.edu) or a Web address (such as http://www.nas.edu). They are the names that businesses, individuals, govern-ment agencies, non-profit organizations, and various other groups acquire
to identify themselves on the InternetÑthe names on their signposts in
cyberspace. More than 70 million second-level (and, in some instances,
third-level) domain names were registered during early 2005, with about
two-thirds in the gTLDs (more than half in the two largest gTLDsÑ.comand .net) and about one-third in the ccTLDs.753.5.1Technical System of the Second- and Third-Level Domains
Second- and third-level domains may have their own name servers torespond to queries to their zone files, as most large organizations do, but
often the services are provided by ISPs or other Web site hosting organi-74See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the Site Finder case.75See Tables 3.2 and 3.3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE135zations that store the zone file on their name servers. This is the coursetaken by most small organizations and individuals, although there are
many exceptions.The zone file of a second- or third-level domain may be very small if itbelongs, for example, to an individual, or it may be quite large, if it is
owned by a commercial or governmental organization. In the latter case, a
great many of the entries may be associated with the e-mail addresses of
the thousands of employees of the institution, while several, tens, or hun-
dreds may be associated with the name servers of lower-level zones. Of-
ten, institutions will register multiple domain names (e.g., nas.edu andnationalacademies.org) that point to the IP address of the same server,enabling access to it under different domain names.3.5.2Institutional Framework of the Second- and
Third-Level DomainsThe effective operation of the second- and third-level domains re-quires that three functions be performed:1.Selecting the organizations to register second-level domains,
2.Registering second-level domains, and

3.Resolving second-level domain name conflicts.
The principal organizations participating in this institutional frame-work are ICANN, the TLD registries, the registrars, and the organizations
that provide dispute resolution services. Although many of the organiza-
tions at this level are commercial, numerous not-for-profit and govern-
mental organizations play an active role as well.Selecting the Organizations to Register DomainsIn many cases, especially in the ccTLDs and some of the gTLDs, onlythe registry carries out the registration of second- or third-level domains.
However, in a 1998 white paper76 the DOC, responding to a policy goal ofprivatizing and increasing competition in the market for domain name
registration, recommended opening the business of registering lower-level
names in gTLDs to competition. It subsequently amended its agreement
with NSI, then the operator of the .com, .org, and .net registries, to re-quire it to develop a system of multiple registrars and put it into opera-76Department of Commerce, ÒManagement of Internet Names and Addresses,Ó Fed-eral Register 63(111):31741, 1998.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEtion in 1999. The DOC designated ICANN as the organization that wouldoversee the establishment of the Shared Registration System (SRS) and
would be responsible for establishing and implementing a system for reg-
istrar accreditation. The SRS and registrar accreditation began operation
in 1999. Before the multiple registrar system, NSI charged $35 per year for
registrations in its domains. At the beginning of 2005, registrations in those
domains in the United States could be obtained for less than $10 per

year.77Under the terms of their agreements with ICANN, gTLD registriesare required to permit registrars to provide Internet domain name regis-
tration services within their top-level domains. In addition, these agree-
ments regulate the price that registries can charge registrarsÑthe Òwhole-
sale price,Ó with the current regulated price being a maximum of $6 per
year per registrant. One can think of the regulation of the wholesale price
as intended to constrain the exercise of market power by registries and
the requirement for competing registrars as intended to constrain the re-
tail Òmargin.ÓTo the extent that regulation of the wholesale price is intended to limitthe exercise of market power in the wholesale market, however, it is not
entirely obvious why the wholesale price that can be charged by new
gTLDs, especially new gTLDs that are intended to serve diverse users,
must be regulated.78 Indeed, increased future competition, especially asthe number of gTLDs is expanded, might reduce or eliminate the need to
regulate the wholesale price that VeriSign or other registries can charge.
But if regulation of the wholesale price is intended to prevent registries
from exploiting existing customers that may be locked in, there may be a
continuing need to regulate wholesale rates even if the registry market
were to become more competitive. The significance of lock-in will depend
on the importance of switching costs, the flow of new registrants relative
to the existing stock, and on whether registries can discriminate between
new and existing registrants. There were in February 2005 more than 460 registrars from more than20 countries accredited to register domain names in 1 or more of the 10
eligible gTLD domains.79 Many of them have decided to operate, at leastin part, as wholesalers and suppliers of registrar services; those opera-
tions have enabled many agents to sell domain names without any rela-77For example, in February 2005, godaddy.com was offering .com registrations for$8.95.78Some specialized TLDs might continue to have market power even if the totalnumber of TLDs were very large.79For the current list, see the ICANN site at <http://www.icann.org/registrars/accredited-list.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE137tionship with, or accreditation by, ICANN. Although most ccTLDs useauthorized agents, many ccTLDs have adopted the notion of multiple reg-
istrars, and many ICANN-accredited registrars also register ccTLD sec-
ond-level domain names.ICANN accredits registrars through an open application process. Anyorganization wishing to become an ICANN-accredited registrar must
complete a detailed application concerning its technical and business
qualifications and pay a $2500 application fee. If approved by ICANN,
the applicant must execute the standard Registrar Accreditation Agree-
ment80 and pay a yearly accreditation fee that is $4000 for the first TLDand $500 for each additional TLD for which the registrar is accredited. In
addition, the registrar must pay a quarterly accreditation fee to cover a
portion of ICANNÕs operating expenses. The fee is based, in part, on the
registrarÕs share of registrations in the TLDs for which it is accredited.
Registrars that are accredited by ICANN must also enter into accredita-
tion agreements with the registries in the TLDs in which they want to
register domains. Those agreements specify, among other things, the fees
to be paid to the registries for each registration. As noted above, a ceiling
is imposed on that fee structure by ICANN for the gTLDs that have signed

agreements with ICANN.The ICANN Registrar Accreditation Agreement imposes certain re-quirements on registrars. The registrar is obligated to (1) submit specified
information81 for each registrant to the registry; (2) enable public Internetaccess to a file of information about registrantsÑthe Whois fileÑboth in
query and bulk access form; (3) maintain a file of all registrant informa-
tion submitted to the registry; (4) regularly submit a copy of the file to
ICANN or to an escrow agent; (5) comply with consensus policies estab-
lished by ICANN; and (6) have for the resolution of name disputes a policy
and procedures that comply with ICANNÕs Uniform Dispute Resolution
Policy. (See ÒResolving Domain Name ConflictsÓ below.) However, some
of the newer gTLD agreements anticipate the possibility of ÒthickÓ regis-
tries, for example, ones in which Whois and similar data are maintained
by the registry, not the registrars. This changes requirement (2) and has
some impact on the others.Registering Domain NamesRegistration of second-level (or third-level) domain names occurs ac-cording to different processes in the different types of TLDs. For the 1080A copy of the agreement can be found at <http://www.icann.org/registrars/ra-agreement-17may01.htm>.81See Box 3.6.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEgTLDs that use accredited registrars and for a number of ccTLDsÑforexample, Great Britain, Australia, Canada, and DenmarkÑregistrars com-
pete to sell second-level domain names in the TLDs they represent. They
are free to set whatever fees they like, subject only to competitive market
forces and their obligations to pay registration fees to the registries. For
the .edu, .gov, .mil, .int, and .arpa gTLDs, as well as for most ccTLDs,registration by members of the restricted group occurs directly at the reg-
istries.The registrar stage of the DNS process appears to be quite competi-tive, with entry being relatively easy82 and competition taking placealong a number of dimensions. Registrars for the same registry compete
with one another for the patronage of registrants83Ñwhat is sometimescalled intra-brand competitionÑwith competition being based on both
the prices and the services offered. These services include the efficiency
with which registrations take place as well as value-added services that
may be bundled with registration.84 Switching registrars within a givenregistry is not particularly difficult, but there have been complaints that
registrars have not always responded promptly to requests for switch-
ing and that some registrars have aggressively and misleadingly solic-
ited other registrarsÕ customers. In addition, domain name theft has been

one of the problems associated with inadequate procedures and security
measures put in place by the registrars of domain names. In such cases,
a third party fraudulently claims to be the registrant in order to have the
domain name transferred to its ownership.85 There have also been in-stances of fraud charges against domain name registries and registrars
of domain names.The SnapNames State of the Domain report listed 148 registrars in theCNO domains (.com, .net, and .org) in the first quarter of 2003.86 How-82This competition is facilitated by the Shared Registration System protocol, whichallows registrars to enter names directly in registries.83This is not to say that registrars for different TLDs do not also compete with oneanother, a form of interbrand competition. In addition to registering new domain
names, registrars also participate in the secondary market for domain names, acting asbrokers, as well as in assisting registrants in applying for expired names.84SnapNames reported that GoDaddy, a registrar, gained 70,000 registrants in a monthwhen it launched its free online tax preparation software, presumably available onlyto its registrants. See the next section for a discussion of value-added services, some ofwhich are provided by firms that are not registrars.85In April 2004, the original operator of sex.com received a $15 million settlementfrom VeriSign because its registrar service had incorrectly transferred ownership ofthe name to a fraudulent claimant.86SnapNames.com, Inc., State of the Domain, First Quarter 2003, May 13, 2003, avail-able at <http://www.sotd.info/sotd/content/documents/SOTDQ103.pdf>. TheSnapNames report showed over 150 ICANN-accredited registrars operational at that
time (pp. 31-34).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE139ever, Òmarket sharesÓ in these domains were skewed, with the VeriSignregistrar (now Network Solutions)87 having more than 25 percent of allregistrations in .comÑwhich was, however, a significant decline from its40 percent share only 15 months earlier;88 Tucows having about 10 per-cent; Register.com having approximately 9 percent; and GoDaddy having
somewhat over 6 percent. Thus, the share of the ÒmarketÓ controlled by
the top four firms in .comÑthe four-firm concentration ratioÑwas about52 percent.89 Seven other registrars each had more than 1 percent of all.com registrations. (More recent data were not available at the time of thiswriting.)The situation was somewhat different in the then newly opened .bizdomain according to the SnapNames State of the Domain, first quarter 2003report. Although the VeriSign registrar (Network Solutions) was the mar-
ket leader, its share was only about 19 percent, 6 percent less than its
share in the .com domain. Other registrars with shares in excess of 6 per-cent were Register.com (10 percent), Tucows (9 percent), and Melbourne
IT (6 percent),90 so that the four-firm concentration ratio here was onlyabout 44 percent. SnapNames reports that there were 127 registrars of .biznames. As a result of the wide disparity in the sizes of the various do-
mains, Network SolutionÕs approximately 25 percent share of .com wasabout 5.8 million names, while its approximately 19 percent share of .bizwas only about 170,000 names.91Finally, although registrars charge the same prices to all registrants,some registrars offer a back-order service under which, for a fee, they will
track the expiration of a desired domain name and attempt to register it
immediately if the registration lapses. However, multiple registrars may
be trying electronically to register the same name at the instant it becomes87VeriSign sold its registrar, Network Solutions, to a private investment company for about$100 million in October 2003.88SnapNames.com, Inc., State of the Domain, January 2002, February 26, 2002.89The quotation marks around ÒmarketÓ and Òmarket sharesÓ are intended to indi-cate that no claim is being made that registrar services in the .com domain constitute arelevant antitrust market. SnapNames reported that the top 10 registrars had about
75 percent of the market in the first quarter of 2003, down from about 91 percent at theend of 2001.90Recall that Melbourne IT is part of a joint venture with NeuStar, the operator of the.biz registry.91For further discussion of market issues and presentation of market data, seeÒGeneric Top Level Domain Names: Market Development and Allocation Issues,Ó
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Directorate for Science,Technology and Industry, Committee for Information, Computer and Communica-tions Policy, Working Party on Telecommunication and Information Service Policies,
July 13, 2004, available at <http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/56/34/32996948.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEavailable. The one that tries at just the right instant wins the prize. Be-cause of this chance element, consumers often enter back orders with
multiple registrars. In March 2002, ICANN asked VeriSign to conduct a
12-month trial of a single wait-listing service, which would take just one
orderÑat a $24 fee directly from the consumerÑfor an expiring name on
a first-come, first-served basis. Thus, from the consumerÕs side, the need
to use multiple registrars would be eliminated, but from the registrarÕs
side, the opportunity to derive additional revenue would be lost. On July
15, 2003, a coalition of name registrars filed a lawsuit against ICANN seek-

ing to block the launch of VeriSignÕs global waiting list for domain
names.92 At its March 2004 meeting, ICANNÕs board voted to seek theDOCÕs agreement to its approval of VeriSignÕs 1-year trial of the wait-
listing service.Resolving Domain Name ConflictsOne of the most difficult institutional roles that the operation of theDNS requires is the resolution of conflicts among competing claimants
for domain names. These conflicts arise for a number of reasons that are
discussed in detail in Section 2.5. The one that has attracted the most
attention is the use of trademarked words in domain names, which is
covered in ÒTrademark ConflictsÓ in Section 2.5.2. Although domain

names can be used for a number of legitimate purposes other than as an
address for a World Wide Web site, such as identifying a host, an e-mail
server, an FTP site, and so on, the vast majority of the disputes involving
domain names are associated with their very visible use in association
with World Wide Web sites. Conflicts can also arise over names in which

individuals, organizations, or governments claim a proprietary interest
other than a trademark.Whatever the source, the practical use of the DNS, which assumesthat every domain name will be registered to one and only one entity,
cannot proceed without some means for resolving conflicting claims for
the same name. In the early days of the Internet, before strong financial
and political interests were involved, such conflicts were handled infor-
mally, usually on a first-come, first-served basis, and they still are in many
ccTLDs.93 However, as domain names appeared on the signposts on theWorld Wide Web and in e-mail addresses, and some gained visibility and
potentially great value, the need to use more formal processes became92See Susan Kuchinskas, Embittered Registrars Sue Embattled ICANN, July 15, 2003,available at <http://siliconvalley.internet.com/news/print.php/2235661>.93See, for example, the terms and conditions for the .uk registry available at <http://www.nic.uk>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE141evident. This was especially true for .com at first, and then for .net and.org as they were more widely marketed to general users. For the reasonsdescribed in Section 2.5.1, they were the most visible names on signposts
on the Web.Possible Remedies to Conflicts Over NamesThere are basically two approaches to resolving conflicts over rightsto names: one approach incorporates policies and regulations into the ac-
tual administration of the naming system and its assignment rules. The
other approach relies on dispute resolution mechanisms that are external
to naming system administration.Internal Remedies.In a completely internalized naming system administra-tion, a single manager owns the naming system and decides who is entitled
to which name. Hence there are no rights conflicts. Public or quasi-public
naming systems, such as the DNS, can also attempt to link the assignment of
names to strict policies and regulations. The available techniques include
imposing policies on the assignment of names at the point of registration,
name reservations94 or exclusion, and so-called sunrise proposals.
Policies Imposed at the Point of Registration.Such policies must relyon rules or procedures to determine eligibility for a name. It is difficult to
mechanize such rules. Thus, prior review of registration is likely to be
expensive and slow if it is administered manually and prone to be crude
and unfair if it is not.Name Exclusions.Name exclusions withdraw specific names or en-tire classes of names from the available database. For a time, Network
Solutions did not allow registration of six of the Federal Communication
CommissionÕs Òseven dirty wordsÓ in the domain name space.95 TheWorld Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) recommended elimi-
nating a list of ÒfamousÓ trademarks from the DNS database and reserv-
ing their use to the trademark holder.96 ICANN has provided all of its94The deployment of internationalized domain names involves new processes andchallenges with respect to the reservation of names to prevent some conflicts overdomain names. See Section 5.6.3 for discussion.95For example, see ÒSeven Dirty Words,Ó Wikipedia online encyclopedia, availableat <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_dirty_words>.96See ÒThe Problem of Notoriety: Famous and Well-Known Marks,Ó in The Mangementof Internet Names and Addresses: Intellectual Property Issues, First Report of WIPO InternetDomain Name Process, April 30, 1999, available at <http://wipo2.wipo.int/process1/rfc/3/interim2_ch4.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEnewly authorized registries with a list of reserved names that consisted ofnames and acronyms of organizations related to the IETF and ICANN.97Name exclusion is an effective method of protecting the reservednames from abuse, but it is also a crude instrument, and in a global, public
name space its crudeness raises significant public policy concerns. With-
drawing words from circulation is in effect a form of automated censor-
ship. Exclusions do not make any distinction between legitimate and ille-
gitimate users; they simply make it impossible to use the names. A rigid
exclusion deprives these organizations of the right to register domain
names corresponding to their acronyms or trademarks. Exclusions and
other regulations are less significant when they are part of the practice of
a private naming system, where the owner can be assumed to have prop-
erty rights over the naming system as a whole. Such exclusions also ig-
nore the fact that certain words have a particular meaning only in a par-
ticular language. A ÒdirtyÓ word in English may have no such meaning in
another language.Sunrise Proposals.Sunrise proposals, in general, establish a periodat the start-up of a new name space within the DNS during which certain
entities may register names in which they have established rights (e.g.,
famous trademarks) before the space is opened for public registration.External Remedies.External methods of resolving rights conflicts in-clude litigation through the courts or alternative dispute resolution pro-
cedures, such as the ICANN Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy (UDRP), which is discussed below. The advantage of these meth-
ods is that they are based on case-specific analysis. Thus, they are sensi-
tive to the specific facts of the conflict and can employ ÒsoftÓ interpretive
principles to adjudicate a dispute. Their disadvantage, of course, is that
they are more time-consuming and expensive, and litigation is subject to
jurisdictional limitations that may not match the scope of the affected
naming system. Litigation is particularly expensive and cumbersome, al-
though it offers a reliably neutral tribunal in many countries. Alternative
dispute resolution techniques such as the UDRP greatly reduce the cost
of external dispute resolution but sacrifice thoroughness in compiling
and verifying facts, and their rapid procedures can put respondents at a
disadvantage.97For the list of reserved names, see ICANN, ÒAppendix K, Schedule of Reserved Names,Óavailable at <http://www.icann.org/tlds/agreements/unsponsored/registry-agmt-appk-26apr01.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE143Remedies to Conflicts Over Names in the DNSSince the remedies to domain name conflicts differ somewhat betweenthe gTLDs and the ccTLDs, each is described separately below.gTLDs.Although there are other uses of trademarks with internationalspillover effects, second-level domains in gTLDs are unusual in the extent
to which they are visible in almost every jurisdiction in the world, with
the resulting difficulty in making either geographic or sectoral distinc-
tions. Ordinarily, the same trademarks can be used in a single geographic
region so long as they are in different economic sectors where confusion is
unlikely. On the Internet such distinctions cannot be made. As a result,
the question arises as to the means to be used to make decisions about
domain name conflicts and disputes that cross national and business sec-
tor boundaries and, since such decisions inevitably involve matters of

commercial or political or social importance, to ensure that those deci-
sions are regarded as legitimate and enforced. Normally, trademark and
related disputes are resolved by the courts of the nation in which they
arise, and those in many nations have shown themselves capable of han-
dling domain name disputes. In addition, the United States has passed
specific legislation at both the federal and the state levels addressing the
rights of trademark owners to domain names. (These are discussed fur-
ther below.) As noted above, however, legal proceedings can become ex-
pensive and time-consuming. Therefore, many in the Internet community
felt the need for a less expensive and quicker means of resolving domain
name disputes.Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy.An answer,implemented by ICANN in December 1999, based on a recommendation
from WIPO, was the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy.
The UDRP has been adopted, as ICANN requires, by all registrars in the
.aero, .biz, .com, .coop, .info, .museum, .name, .net, and .org top-leveldomains, as well as voluntarily by managers of several global ccTLDs,
such as .tv, .cc, and .ws. In addition, managers of other ccTLDs, such as.ca, have adopted their own policies based on modified versions of theUDRP.The policy takes effect through agreements between registrars (orother registration authorities) and their registrants. Each registrant agrees
to be bound by the provisions of the policy when it registers its domain
name.98 In agreeing to the registration agreement, the registrant also must98The policy conditions, examples of bad-faith actions, and other provisions listedbelow are paraphrased from the UDRP text available at <http://www.icann.org/dndr/udrp/policy.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACErepresent that to its knowledge its registration of the domain name doesnot infringe any third partyÕs rights, nor is it for an unlawful purpose, nor
will it be used in violation of any applicable laws or regulations.By registering the domain name, the registrant is then bound by thepolicy to submit to a mandatory administrative proceeding if a complain-
ant asserts that:1.RegistrantÕs domain name is identical or confusingly similar to a
trademark or service mark in which the complainant has rights;
and2.Registrant has no rights or legitimate interests in respect of the do-
main name; and3.RegistrantÕs domain name has been registered and is being used in
bad faith.The complainant must demonstrate all three of these conditions for thecomplainant to prevail.The policy asserts examples of actions that would demonstrate badfaith that include registering and using the domain name:1.For the purpose of transferring the registration to the complainant,
or to one of its competitors, for more than the documented out-of-
pocket costs of the domain name; or2.To prevent the owner of the trademark or service mark from using
the mark in a domain name (provided that registrant engaged in a
pattern of such conduct); or3.Primarily for the purpose of disrupting the business of a competi-
tor; or4.Intentionally to attract, for commercial gain, Internet users toregistrantÕs Web site or other online location, by creating a likeli-
hood of confusion with the complainantÕs mark on registrantÕs Web
site or location.It also describes circumstances that would enable the registrant todemonstrate its rights and legitimate interests in the domain name. These
are as follows:1.Before any notice to registrant of the dispute, its use of, or demon-
strable preparations to use, the domain name or a name corre-
sponding to the domain name in connection with a bona fide offer-
ing of goods or services; or2.Registrant has been commonly known by the domain name, even
if it has acquired no trademark or service mark rights; orSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE1453.Registrant is making a legitimate noncommercial or fair use of the
domain name, without intent for commercial gain, to misleadingly
divert consumers, or to tarnish the trademark or service mark.The mandatory proceedingÑwhich is electronically basedÑmust beheld before an accredited and administrative-dispute-resolution provider
that has been approved by ICANN.99 The complainant selects the pro-vider and is required to pay the fees, except in the case when the regis-
trant elects to expand the panel from one to three panelists, in which case
the fee is split. The registrar, the registry, and ICANN are not parties to a
UDRP proceeding. However, during a UDRP proceeding, the registrar
does confirm that the domain name has been registered by the respon-
dent named in the proceeding and is required to execute the outcome of a
decision. The only remedy available to the complainant through the pro-
ceeding is cancellation or transfer of the domain name.As of May 10, 2004, 9377 proceedings involving 15,710 domain nameshad been brought under the UDRP.100 Two-thirds (6262) of these pro-ceedings had resulted in a transfer of the disputed domain name to the
complainant or in a cancellation of the domain name. Approximately one-
fifth (1892) had resulted in a decision for the respondent, and approxi-
mately one-tenth (971) of the proceedings had been disposed without de-
cision or terminated. There were 931 proceedings pending. The 15,710
domain names that had been disputed in 4 years represent 0.03 percent of
the more than 46 million domain names registered in the gTLDs subject to
the UDRP.Approximately 60 percent of these proceedings have been filed withWIPO, approximately 33 percent have been filed with the National Arbi-
tration Forum (NAF), approximately 6 percent were filed with
eResolution,101 and approximately 0.7 percent have been filed with theCenter for Public Resources Institute for Dispute Resolution (CPR). The
Asian Domain Name Dispute Resolution Centre (ADNDRC) began op-
eration in February 2002.99The approved providers are listed at <http://www.icann.org/dndr/udrp/approved-providers.htm>. There were four approved providers in February 2005.100ICANN, ÒStatistical Summary of Proceedings Under Uniform Domain Name Dis-pute Resolution Policy,Ó January 30, 2004; latest version available at <http://www.icann.org/
udrp/proceedings-stat.htm>.101eResolution ceased operating as a dispute-resolution provider for ICANN in lateNovember 2001.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEOver time, there has been a decline in the number of UDRP proceed-ings filed. As shown in Figure 3.3, the number of UDRP proceedings filed
each month has been steadily decreasing since August 2000.WIPO explained this decline as suggesting that Òan expedited on-line dispute resolution service has been effective in dissuading Internet
pirates from hijacking names.Ó
102 It may also be partly the conse-050100150200250
300
350Number of FilingsDec-99Mar-00Jun-00Sep-00Dec-00Mar-01Jun-01Sep-01Dec-01Mar-02Jun-02Sep-02Dec-02Mar-03Jun-03Sep-03Dec-03Mar-04FIGURE 3.3  UDRP filings as of April 30, 2004. NOTE: With respect to gTLD UDRP
filings commencing during the period from December 1999 through October 2003,data were obtained from the ICANN Web site at <http://www.icann.org/udrp/
proceedings-list.htm>. With respect to such filings commencing during the pe-riod from November 2003 through April 2004, data were obtained directly fromthe Asian Domain Name Dispute Resolution Centre Web sites at <http://
www.adndrc.org/adndrc/bj_home.html> and <http://www.adndrc.org/adndrc/hk_home.html>, the Center for Public Resources Institute for DisputeResolution Web site at <http://www.cpradr.org/ICANN_Cases.htm>, the Na-
tional Arbitration Forum Web site at <http://www.arb-forum.com/domains/decisions.asp>, and the World Intellectual Property Organization Arbitration andMediation Center Web site at <http://arbiter.wipo.int/domains/statistics/
index.html>. Specialized domain name dispute resolution proceedings (e.g., Start-up Trademark Opposition Policy (STOP) and the usTLD Domain Name DisputeResolution Policy (USDRP)) have been excluded from these statistics.102WIPO, ÒWIPO Continues Efforts to Curb Cybersquatting,Ó Press Release PR/2002/303,February 26, 2002, available at <http://www.wipo.org/pressroom/en/releases/2002/p303.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE147quence of working through the backlog of cases that UDRP faced uponstart-up and entering a more normal steady-state condition. To some
extent, as well, it may reflect a change in the attitudes of trademark
owners, some of whom may have come to feel that their interests are
not jeopardized by every similar domain name, which are not worth
the cost and effort to maintain. The decline in cases might also be at-
tributed, in part, to learning by cybersquatters about avoiding a find-
ing of bad faith against them.As a first step in a policy development process, in 2003, ICANN pre-pared a report that lists many of the procedural and substantive issues
that have been raised about the UDRP.103Start-up Registrations.The UDRP was designed to handle an ongo-ing rate of domain name conflicts arising in already established gTLDs.
However, several of the seven new gTLDs have faced unique issues when
they entered the start-up phase. Specifically, under the terms of their con-
tracts with ICANN, they needed a process by which intellectual property
rights holders could challenge bad-faith claimants in advance of open reg-
istration in order to avoid a rush of cybersquatters followed by a heavy
demand on the UDRP process as intellectual property holders asserted
their rights. The four most significantÑ.biz, .info, .name, and .proÑeachadopted somewhat different policies, but all are adopting or have a UDRP-
like dispute resolution policy.ccTLDs.Most ccTLD registries, and their agents and registrars whenthey exist, publish policies about who is eligible to register in the second-
level domain, or in its third-level domains when they are open for direct
registration. These policies generally also cover the resolution of con-
flicts over domain names. Where the TLD limits itself to individuals and
organizations that have an association with the country, many potential
conflicts are readily addressed through national administrative, regula-
tory, and judicial institutions. For example, matters of trademark priority
are handled through the national regulatory and legal systems, and cor-
porations may have defensible rights only in the names that are legally
registered.103See ICANN, ÒStaff ManagerÕs Issues Report on UDRP Review,Ó August 1, 2003,available at <http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/udrp-review-report-01aug03.htm>.ICANN also set up a committee to consider WIPOÕs proposed amendments to theUDRP. ICANN has not made the committeeÕs report public.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEU.S. Legislation.The United States has passed legislation at both thefederal and the state levels addressing the rights of trademark owners to
domain names.FederalÑThe ACPA:On November 29, 1999, President Clintonsigned into law the Anti-cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act
(ACPA), which provided trademark owners with a further cause of action
that was specifically directed to domain names.104 Under the ACPA, atrademark owner can bring a civil action against a person if that person
has a bad-faith intent to profit from a mark and registers, traffics in, or
uses a domain name that, in the case of a mark that is distinctive, is iden-
tical or confusingly similar to that mark; or in the case of a famous mark,
is identical or confusingly similar to or dilutive of that mark; or is a trade-
mark, word, or name protected by law.105 Mere registration of such adomain in bad faith may be sufficient to violate the trademark ownerÕs
rights under the ACPA; there is no further requirement for any use of the
domain name in association with any goods or services.Under the ACPA, factors affecting the judgment of bad faith include,but are not limited to, whether (1) the registrant holds any intellectual
property rights in the name; (2) the domain name consists of the
registrantÕs name; (3) the domain name was used in connection with the
bona fide offering of any goods or services; (4) the domain name was used
in a way that could be viewed as a bona fide noncommercial or fair use;
(5) the domain name was intended to divert consumers from the mark
ownerÕs online location; (6) the registrant offered to sell the domain name
to the mark owner without having used it in a bona fide manner; (7) the
registrant provided false contact information in the registration form; (8)
the registrant acquired multiple domain names that are identical or simi-
lar to the trademarks of others; and (9) the domain name incorporates a
mark that is not distinctive and famous.The ACPA also created a cause of action for individuals with respectto domain names. Specifically, a domain name registrant can be held li-
able if the domain name consists of, or is substantially and confusingly
similar to, the name of another living person and the domain name has
been registered without that personÕs consent with the specific intent to
profit from the name by selling it for financial gain. This particular cause
of action, however, is not available for domain name registrations that
occurred prior to the ACPAÕs enactment date.With respect to remedies, the ACPA provided that a court may awardinjunctive relief, including forfeiture, cancellation, or transfer of the do-10415 U.S.C. ¤ 1125(d).10518 U.S.C. ¤ 706 (ÒRed CrossÓ) or 36 U.S.C. ¤ 220506 (ÒOlympicÓ).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE149main name. In addition, if the registration, trafficking, or use of the do-main name occurred after the ACPAÕs enactment date, a plaintiff can elect
to recover, instead of actual damages and profits, an award of statutory
damages in the amount of $1,000 to $100,000 per domain name (as the
court considers just).Furthermore, if personal jurisdiction over the domain name registrantcannot be obtained, the trademark owner could file an in rem civil ac-tion106 against the domain name itself in the judicial district of the do-main name registrar, domain name registry, or other domain name au-
thority that registered or assigned the domain name. However, the ACPA
limits the remedies in an in rem action to forfeiture, cancellation, or trans-fer of the domain name.States:California, Hawaii, and Louisiana also passed laws that ad-dress the registration, sale, and use of domain names within that state and
provide for civil remedies in state courts for violations of these laws.Foreign Legislation. Relatively few countries have chosen to addressthe rights of trademark holders in domain names in the same legislative
manner as the United States. The European Union (EU) has relied largely
on new telecommunications laws coordinated at the EU level to provide for
the regulation of domain names at the national level. For example, in Spain,
the General Telecommunications Act (1998) was modified in July 2001 to
impose a number of conditions on the registration of domain names under
the ccTLD .es, including a requirement that a domain name to be registeredbe somehow related to the trademark or name of the company undertaking
the registration. In other countries, the judicial process, rather than the leg-
islative process, has been relied on to address conflicts between domain
names and trademarks. Since at least 1997, courts within the United King-
dom have been prohibiting the registration of domain names that conflict
with trademarks. In 1998, the Delhi High Court in India likewise extended
its form of common law trademark protection to domain names, as did the
Tribunal de Grande Instance of Draguignan in France. Many ccTLDs, 42 in
all, including a number from the EU, have opted to rely on a form of alter-
native dispute resolution policy.107 Likewise, the new .eu
 ccTLD will applythe following rules regarding registrations:¥Governments may reserve geographical and geopolitical names.¥In a 4-month sunrise phase, Òprior rightsÓ holders and public bod-ies can register .eu domain names before the general public can do so.
106 An in rem action is taken against property directly, in contrast to an action againstpeople (e.g., the owners of a given piece of property).107See <http://arbiter.wipo.int/domains/cctld/index.html> for an example.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE¥Two months before the sunrise phase starts, technical and admin-istrative measures will be published in detail.¥In the first 2 months of the sunrise phase, registered national andEuropean Community trademarks and geographical indications as well
as names and acronyms of public bodies can be registered as .eu domainnames by the holder/public body.¥Two months later, other Òprior rightsÓ holders can also register .eudomain names, but only as far as they are protected under national law in
the member state where they are held. This provision concerns unregis-
tered trademarks, trade names, business identifiers, company names, fam-
ily names, and distinctive titles of protected literary and artistic works.¥There will be an alternative dispute resolution procedure in place(similar to ICANNÕs ÒUniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution PolicyÓ
UDRP).¥After the sunrise phase, the domain names will be registered ac-cording to the first-come, first served-principle.3.5.3Assessment
Conclusion: The tens of millions of registered second- and third-leveldomains are operated by individuals with a broad spectrum of capabili-
ties. It is notable that the DNS has been able to function effectively and
reliably despite this range of operator capabilities.Conclusion: The UDRP is a unique cross-border, electronically basedprocess that has resolved thousands of disputes over domain names with-
out the expense and potential delay of court proceedings.The issues of dispute resolution and appropriate Whois balance areexamined in Chapter 5, where the alternative approaches are described
and the committeeÕs recommendations presented.3.6SUMMARY
Conclusion: The domain name technical system reliably and effec-tively handles the billions of queries it receives every day. The institutions
that manage it perform the required functions adequately, in many cases
without direct compensation.Conclusion: The DNS technical system can continue to meet the needs
of an expanding Internet. Early in the committeeÕs assessment it became
apparent that it would not be fruitful to consider alternate naming sys-
tems. As noted, the DNS operates quite well for its intended purpose andSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: CURRENT STATE151has demonstrated its ability to scale with the growth of the Internet and tooperate robustly in an open environment. Moreover, significantly in-
creased functionality can be achieved though applicationsÑsuch as navi-
gation systemsÑbuilt on the DNS, or offered independently, rather than
through changing the DNS directly. Hence, the need did not seem to be to
replace the DNS but rather to maintain and incrementally improve it. Fur-
thermore, given the rapidly increasing installed base and the correspond-
ing heavy investments in the technical system and the institutional frame-
work, the financial cost and operational disruption of changing to a
replacement for the DNS would be extremely high, if even possible at all.Yet, despite this better than passing grade, the committeeÕs assess-ments have identified a number of significant technical and institutional
issues whose effective resolution is critical to the DNSÕs successful adap-
tation to the demands on it. Chapters 4 and 5 address those issues.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1524The Domain Name System:Technology Prospects
The Domain Name System, as described in Chapter 3, has met mostof the infrastructural naming needs of the Internet and the applica-

tions that rely on it, even as their uses and usage have expanded rap-idly. However, the broadening and deepening penetration of the Internet
and its applications into global communications, commerce, and culture
poses new challenges to the basic technology of the DNS. In anticipation of
and in response to those challenges, the technology community has been de-
veloping modifications of and extensions to the current technology.This chapter is a review of the challenges and the prospective or actualtechnology responses to them. Each challenge and responsive technology is
described and evaluated and the implications for the Internet and its appli-
cations are explained. Where the committee is in agreement, its conclusions
and recommendations are presented. In all cases, the goal is to provide a
clear description of the challenges, the technologies, and their prospects in
order to inform forthcoming policy deliberations affecting or affected them.The following challenges and responsive technologies are addressedin this chapter:1.Improving the security of the DNS,
2.Linking the telephone and Internet naming systems,

3.Internationalizing domain names, and

4.Responding to domain name errors.
Some of these technologies are in or ready for the first stages of imple-mentation, whereas others may never enter into wide-scale usage. Never-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS153theless, a basic understanding of each of them will enable wiser decisionsabout them and other innovations in the future.4.1IMPROVING THE SECURITY OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
Because of its central role in the operation of the Internet, the DNS is anatural target for mischievous and malicious attacks. These can take a
wide variety of forms depending on the ingenuity of the attacker and on
which of the potential vulnerabilities is attacked.1 The most severe recentattack was the denial-of-service attack launched in October 2002. It
swamped 8 of the 13 root name servers for up to an hour and a half. How-
ever, the remaining 5 servers handled the regular requests to the root with-

out difficulty. Since that attack, the root name server operators have taken
a number of steps, including the widespread distribution of ÒanycastÓ
satellites and diversification of network connectivity (see Box 3.1), to re-
duce their vulnerability to such attacks and to mitigate their effects.Furthermore, although some steps have been taken,2 more could be doneto continuously monitor the performance and traffic flows of the DNS infra-
structure so as to enable rapid detection and response to attacks or outages.However, another serious vulnerability remains. As described in Sec-tion 2.4, Òthe original DNS design did not include a mechanism to ensure
that a name lookup was an accurate representation of the information
provided by the entity responsible for the information. DNS information
was assumed to be accurate as the result of general notions of network
cooperation and interoperation (i.e., based on the presumption that no-
body would deliberately attempt to tamper with DNS information).Ó In
more technical terms, the initial design of the DNS did not incorporate
data origin authentication and data integrity protection. However, be-
cause of increased fear of additional attacks on the DNS, these kinds of
security features have now become a major concern.Data origin authentication is needed to help ensure that the results ofDNS lookups come from authoritative sources. A widely publicized case
that involved the diversion of Internet users to an undesired Web site
drew attention to the lack of such authentication in the DNS.31See Derek Atkins and Rob Austein, ÒThreat Analysis of the Domain Name System,Ó RFC3833, August 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.2Notably the establishment of the Operations Analysis and Research Center by the InternetSystems Consortium (see https://oarc.isc.org/) and the online performance monitoring bythe k-root (see <http://k.root-servers.org/#stats>).3In 1997, Eugene Kashpureff diverted Internet users who were seeking the NetworkSolutions Web site to his own site, although this was intended as a publicity stunt ratherthan as a malicious attack. See Rik Farrow, ÒLocking Up DNS Troubles,Ó Network Magazine,August 5, 2000, available at <http://www.networkmagazine.com/showArticle.
jhtml?articleID=8702868>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEData integrity protection is needed because DNS data flows could becompromised at any point between the various name servers, resolvers,
or other intermediaries, and the corrupted data can remain in caches for
extended periods of time.To respond to these potential vulnerabilities, the technical commu-nity has over a number of years developed DNS Security Extensions
(DNSSEC).4 DNSSEC adds data origin authentication and data integrityprotection to the DNS. It aims to ensure that the recipient can validate that
the data was sent from an authoritative source and that it arrived at its
destination unchanged.4.1.1Mechanics of DNSSEC
DNSSEC provides end-to-end protection through the use of crypto-graphic digital signatures that are created by responding zone adminis-
trators and verified by a recipientÕs resolver software. In particular,
DNSSEC avoids the need to trust intermediate name servers and resolv-
ers that cache or route the DNS records originating from the responding
zone administrator before they reach the source of the query. DNSSEC
also preserves the capacity for localized variations and independence
within the DNS hierarchy.5In DNSSEC, resource record sets (RRSets) 6 within a zone are signedbased on the model of public-key cryptography.7 To support each sign-ing operation, two keys are generated: a private key (to sign data) and the
corresponding public key that is used to verify that the data were signed
by the private key. The process of signing takes data to be signed and a
private key as inputs to produce digitally signed data as the output.8However, DNSSEC involves signing the hash value of an RRSet, rather4Defined in Roy Arends, Rob Austein, Matt Larson, Dan Massey, and Scott Rose, ÒDNSSecurity Introduction and Requirement,Ó RFC 4033, March 2005, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.5For example, the control of the private and public keys remains within each respectivezone.6Resource records that have the same label, class, and type are categorized as belonging tothe same RRSet. See Box 3.2 for a detailed explanation of resource records.7For a review of public key cryptography and digital signatures, see Paul Albitz and
Cricket Liu, DNS and BIND, 4th edition, Chapter 11, OÕReilly Media, Sebastopol, Calif., 2001;and Fred B. Schneider, editor, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, NationalResearch Council, Trust in Cyberspace, Chapter 4, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
1999.8The crucial property of the digital signature is that it could have been produced only bysomeone with access to the private key.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS155than signing the full RRSet itself.9 (See Figure 4.1 for an illustration of theDNSSEC signing and verification process.)Two copies of the RRSet are sent over the Internet to the recipient.One copy is not signed; the other is hashed and then signed as described
above. To verify the origin and integrity of the unsigned RRSet, it is
hashed using the same algorithm used by the sender. It is then compared
with the verified, but still hashed, copy of the RRSet created by the zoneAuthentic RRSetHashSignSigned hash of RRSetVerify signature of RRSethash
ReceivedRRSet=?HashHashedRRSetPrivate KeyPublic KeyreceivedRRSetVerifiedreceived hash of RRSetRECIPIENTSENDERInternetInternetIf hashed RRSetsare =, the received RRSetis authentic; if not, it is not.
1.2.Authentic RRSetHashSignSigned hash of RRSetVerify signature of RRSethash
=?HashHashedRRSetPrivate KeyPublic KeyHashedRECIPIENTSENDERInternetInternetIf hashed RRSetsare equal, the received RRSetis authentic; if not, it is not.
1.2.FIGURE 4.1Use of DNSSEC to authenticate a resource record set (RRSet).
9A hash algorithm is a mathematical process that converts a message to a probabilistically-unique fixed-length string of digits that represents the original message. A hash algorithm is
essentially unidirectional: given a hash value, it is nearly impossible to reverse the process toderive the original message in order to construct a second message whose hash valuematches that of the original message. Since a hash value is typically much less data than
contained in an RRSet, it is generally more efficient to sign hash values rather than RRSets.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEadministrator. Matching hash values provide a high level of assurancethat the non-signed RRSet is authoritative and that it has not been altered
in transit.DNSSEC can, when everything works correctly, give the data con-sumer (validating resolver) some confidence that the received data is what
the data producer (signing zone administrator) has sent. It provides a ba-
sis for trusting that the data has been received without tampering. It does

not, however, assure that the data that the data producer sent is error-free
or appropriate for the data consumerÕs application.The DNSSEC extensions are based on four new resource record types:the public key (DNSKEY), the resource record digital signature (RRSIG),
the delegation signer (DS), and the authenticated denial of existence
(NSEC).10 The public key used to verify the digital signature of an RRSetis stored in the DNSKEY resource record.11 The digital signature is storedin the RRSIG resource record, and several RRSIG resource records may be
associated with an RRSet, if more than one cryptographic algorithm is
used for signing the RRSet.DNSSEC depends on establishing the authenticity of the DNS hierar-chy leading to the domain name in question, and thus its operation de-
pends on beginning the use of cryptographic digital signatures in the root
zone. The DS resource record facilitates key signing and authentication
between DNS zones to create an authentication chain, or trusted sequence
of signed data, from the root of the DNS tree down to a specific domain
name. To secure all DNS lookups, including those for non-existent do-
main names and record types, DNSSEC uses the NSEC resource record to
authenticate negative responses to queries. NSEC is used to identify the
range of DNS names or resource record types that do not exist among the
sequence of domain names in a zone.124.1.2Deployment of DNSSEC
DNSSEC implementation on a global level faces a number of techni-cal and non-technical challenges. The process of cryptographically sign-10For detailed information about these resource records, see Roy Arends, Rob Austein,Matt Larson, Dan Massey, and Scott Rose, ÒResource Records for the DNS Security Exten-sions,Ó RFC 4034, March 2005, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.11The private key must be closely protected from public access, of course, and so it is notstored in a resource record.12The implementation of DNSSEC also necessitates other changes that are too detailed todiscuss here. For the specifics on the two Ònew message header bitsÓ (CD and AD) inDNSSEC, see Roy Arends, Rob Austein, Matt Larson, Dan Massey, and Scott Rose, ÒProtocolRequirements for the DNS Security Extensions,Ó RFC 4035, March 2005, available at <http://
www.rfc-editor.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS157ing hash values derived from resource records, along with the increase inthe DNS packet size to accommodate large key sizes, adds significant op-
erational costs for organizations that manage DNS servers because of the
increase in DNS data and the associated increases in server computations
and communications traffic.13 The implementation of DNSSEC also in-creases the volume of Internet traffic and that, in turn, could increase the
vulnerability of the Internet to denial-of-service (DoS) attacksÑa threat
DNSSEC does not protect against, although DNSSEC may offer more con-
fidence in the responses of anycast satellites, which do provide a measure
of defense against DoS attacks. DNSSEC could also cause more timeouts
that would degrade the quality of service for end users.14 DNSSEC alsointroduces more complexity to the DNS and adds to the administrative
requirements for managing the security mechanism.15 For instance, theadministrator of a large zone would probably experience great difficulty
in re-signing his or her entire zone daily. This would require dividing the
task among many smaller parallel operations that could be managed with
softwareÑa solution that is feasible given the DNSSEC design (that makes
signatures within a zone remain largely independent), but would not be
without additional costs.Because public keys for the root zone will need to be replaced withnew ones on a regular basis, key management for the digital signatures
presents another problem for DNSSEC. In particular, the interaction of
key revocation with global caching and the distribution of copies of a new
public root key remain unresolved,16 and this adds even more impor-tance to the management of root zone keys. The consequence of a cor-
rupted root zone key is that it would break the chain of trust for source
authentication and data integrity that serves as the basis of DNSSEC. A
related and more fundamental and thorny problem that technical solu-
tions could only partially resolve is reaching agreement over which orga-
nization should have control of the root zone key. Obvious candidates for13Estimates for the increased computations and communications traffic associated withthe introduction of DNSSEC vary, but range from a 5- to 10-fold increase. See Albitz and Liu,
DNS and Bind, 2001; Beth Cohen, ÒDNSSEC: Security for Essential Network Services,Ó May12, 2003, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>; and Diane Davidowicz and Paul Vixie,ÒSecuring the Domain Name System,Ó Network Magazine, January 1, 2000.14See David Berlind, ÒDNS Inventor Says Cure to Net Identity Problems is Right UnderOur Nose,Ó August 7, 2003, available at <http://techupdate.zdnet.com/techupdate/stories/main/0,14179,2914447,00.html>.15See Cohen, ÒDNSSEC: Security for Essential Network Services,Ó 2003.16Distributing new public root keys is difficult as they must be preconfigured in DNS rootname servers, but they cannot be delivered via DNSSEC, since they cannot vouch for them-
selves, and thus they may require an offline distribution mechanism. One proposed solutioninvolves the publication of a public root key in national and international newspapers, whichillustrates the magnitude of the problem.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe controlling organization include VeriSign, ICANN, and the Depart-ment of Commerce; other entities could also be considered. However,
until a controlling organization is identified, the deployment of DNSSEC
is likely to be delayed.17While the introduction of DNSSEC imposes significant costs and doesnot eliminate all Internet security concerns nor address all Internet
threats,18 its implementation would represent considerable progress inimproving the security of the DNS. For example, it would raise the level
of protection against the falsification of DNS data to help in deterring
identity-related theft and SPAM problems.19 Furthermore, DNSEC pro-vides a basis to build trust on the Internet to support higher-level proto-
cols facilitating Internet Protocol (IP) telephony and other Web services.20Conclusion: The security of the DNS would be significantly improvedif DNSSEC were widely deployed among name servers for the root zone
and top-level domains (TLDs) in particular, and throughout the DNS in
general.Conclusion: Urgent attention is needed to identify the organizationthat would maintain control of the root zone key. The deployment of
DNSSEC is likely to be delayed until this organization is identified.Recommendation: DNSSEC should be deployed throughout the DNSas practical, with highest priority given to deployment in the root zone
and the TLDs.4.2LINKING THE TELEPHONE AND
INTERNET NAMING SYSTEMSThe Internet and the traditional telephone network operate differ-ently. When a traditional telephone call is made, switches create a circuit
between the caller and the person who is called. That circuit remains in
place for the duration of the call. The process is called circuit switching.17Several facilities in the Netherlands and Sweden are examining how DNSSEC couldoperate when it is generally deployed by examining procedures, such as key rollover, deter-mining parameters for DNSSEC mechanisms, such as key length and signature lifetimes,and other issues beyond the scope of this discussion. For more information about current
efforts of DNSSEC testing, see <http://www.dnssec.net>.18See Atkins and Austein, ÒThreat Analysis of the Domain Name System,Ó RFC 3833, 2004.19See Berlind, ÒDNS Inventor Says Cure to Net Identity Problems Is Right Under OurNose,Ó 2003.20See John Leyden, ÒDNS Inventor Calls for Security Overhaul,Ó The Register, April 11,2003, available at <http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/7/30224.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS159However, when a message is sent from one computer connected to theInternet to another computer, no such circuit is established. Rather, the
message is broken into packets and each is routed through the network
independently, possibly even following different paths, and reassembled
at their destination in the proper order. That process is called packet-
switching. For the most part, the circuit-switched world of telephony and
the packet-switched world of the Internet have remained distinct. How-
ever, in recent years, a convergence between the two has begun to occur,
with increasing use of the Internet to transmit telephone calls through a
process called Voice over Internet Protocol, or VoIP.21The recognition of the potential convergence of telephony and theInternet was one of the motivations for consideration by the technical com-
munity of ways to bring telephone numbers into the Domain Name Sys-
tem. Doing so, it was thought, would facilitate communications between
the Internet and the worldÕs telephone networks. The method that was
developed is called the Telephone Number Mapping protocol, more com-
monly known as the ENUM protocol.22 Under the ENUM scheme, tele-phone numbers, called E.164 numbers,23 are mapped (via the ENUM pro-tocol) to domain names. These are then mapped (in the DNS) to various
resources by DNS lookups that lead to Uniform Resource Identifiers
(URIs).24 The main premise underlying development of the ENUM proto-col is that standard telephone numbersÑfamiliar, globally unique identi-
fiers easily usable on numeric keyboardsÑare likely to persist. Conse-
quently, making it easy to link the Internet and telephone naming systems
may support the development of new and improved services that use a
telephony-like model.Applications that can build on the ENUM protocol include voice com-munications, fax, e-mail, and messaging. For example, a telephone call21See, for example, the explanation of VoIP on the Federal Communications CommissionWeb site, <http://www.fcc.gov/voip/>.22See Patrik F−ltstrım and Michael Mealling, ÒThe E.164 to Uniform Resource Identifiers(URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Application (ENUM),Ó RFC 3761,
April 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>. The mechanism used by ENUM formapping telephone numbers into the DNS was first specified in late 1992 as part of anInternet Òremote printingÓ model that could substitute for fax and other telephone-enabled
transmission mechanisms. That application and the mapping mechanism are described inCarl Malamud and Marshall Rose, ÒPrinciples of Operation for the TPC.INT Subdomain:Remote PrintingÐTechnical Procedures,Ó RFC 1528, October 1993, available at <http://
www.rfc-editor.org>.23E.164 is the designation for the International Telecommunication Union recommenda-tion that established the global numbering plan. RFC 3761 stipulates that the domain names
generated through the ENUM protocol must adhere to the existing E.164 country (or region)delegations.24See Box 6.2  for a definition of URIs.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEmight originate from a standard desktop telephone set and terminate at atelephone connected to the Internet (after passing through a gateway).
The implementation of the ENUM protocol may facilitate the completion
of such VoIP telephone calls, although such calls do not require the use of
ENUM as an addressing mechanism. The ENUM protocol enables the use
of a single E.164 number to access applications based on the telephone
network, the Internet network, or both networks. Thus, it may enable in-
creased functionality and/or lower costs for communications in such in-
terconnected networks.254.2.1Mechanics and Operations of ENUM
The ENUM protocol specifies how telephone numbers are convertedinto domain names. The conversion is best explained through an example.
Begin with a telephone number such as +46-8-1234567. Then remove all
characters except the digits, put dots between the digits, and reverse the
order, which yields, in the example above, 7.6.5.4.3.2.1.8.6.4. Then a sec-
ond-level domain name is appended, which for the implementation of the
ENUM protocol is e164.arpa.26 The resulting ENUM domain name is then7.6.5.4.3.2.1.8.6.4.e164.arpa.The deployment of ENUM is typically envisioned in tiers. The high-est level within the ENUM hierarchyÑtier 0Ñcorresponds with the se-
lected second-level domain e164.arpa.27 The name server resourcerecords in this second-level domain would point to ÒnationalÓ tier 1 regis-
tries, such as 2.6.e164.arpa (for IndonesiaÑtelephone country code 62) or2.3.e164.arpa (for BelgiumÑtelephone country code 32).28 The delega-25The resources used to develop this subsection include presentations and discussions atthe public forum of the meetings of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Num-bers, Rio De Janeiro, Brazil, March 25, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/
riodejaneiro/captioning-board-meeting-27mar03.htm>; materials from the InternationalTelecommunication Workshop on ENUM, Geneva, Switzerland, February 8, 2002, availableat <http://www.itu.int>; the ENUM Web site of the International Telecommunication
Union, at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/enum/>; ÒFrequently Asked Questions,Ó avail-able at <http://www.enum.org>; John C. Klensin, editor, ÒThe History and Context of Tele-phone Number Mapping (ENUM) Operational Decisions: Informational Documents Con-
tributed to ITU-T Study Group 2 (SG2),Ó RFC 3245, March 2002, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>; and ÒOnline Registries: The DNS and BeyondÉ,Ó Release 1.0, Sep-tember 16, 2003, EDventure Holdings, Inc., New York.26e164.arpa is the second-level domain name specified by the Internet Architecture Boardfor ENUM use in RFC 3761. The .arpa TLD is intended to support Internet infrastructureinitiatives such as the implementation of the ENUM protocol.27The R”seaux IP Europ”ens (RIPE) Network Coordination Centre (NCC) is the adminis-trator of the e164.arpa domain as determined by the Internet Architecture Board.28Twenty-six codes have been delegated (28 have been approved) as of March 4, 2005, asreported by RIPE NCC at <http://www.ripe.net/enum/request-archives>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS161tion beyond tier 1 registries (and the definition of a ÒtierÓ itself) may differamong countries. Various trials are underway in a number of countries to
identify the most effective models for those countries.29A tier 1 registry could delegate directly to name servers that containENUM information. However, in some models for the implementation of
the ENUM protocol, a tier 1 registry would delegate to multiple tier 2
operators (e.g., divided in a way that is based on how telephone numbers
are partitioned within a country). Tier 2 operators would then operate
name servers that contain ENUM information that takes the form of Nam-
ing Authority Pointer (NAPTR) resource records.30 These records includeNAPTR records for service-specific addresses (e.g., an e-mail address, cell
phone number, fax number, and so on31), which would all be returned inthe response to any DNS query about a particular ENUM domain name.
An important feature of NAPTR records is that they can convey priority
ordering (e.g., try this address firstÑif there is no response, then try this
one). The situation described above is referred to by some as the calling-
party control model because the DNS query for the NAPTR records re-
trieves all possible contact modesÑthat is, access to this information is
determined by the requestor.Tier 3 services could also be offered. Services at this level could sup-port operations after the completion of a lookup of ENUM information
(i.e., some of these operations might not depend on the DNS in any way).
For example, a lookup from a tier 2 name server could point to a proxy
server that contains tailored user information, rather than to service-spe-
cific addresses directly. This tailored user information could, in turn, pro-
vide office addresses to all queries and, in addition, home addresses only
to those requests with particular characteristics. Alternatively, all queries
to the NAPTR records could be directed to this tailored user information,
thereby providing the called party with control over what contact infor-
mation is made available (i.e., the called-party control model).3229For example, see <http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/inr/enum/trials.html>.30NAPTR records are described in Michael Mealling, ÒDynamic Delegation DiscoverySystem (DDDS) Part Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database,Ó RFC 3403, October2002, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.31These addresses may be specified using a variety of protocols that include the SessionInitiation Protocol (SIP), which supports the negotiation of the parameters between end-points for a real-time session. See Mark Handley, Henning Schulzrinne, Eve Schooler, andJonathan Rosenberg, ÒSIP: Session Initiation Protocol,Ó RFC 2543, March 1999, available at
<http://www.rfc-editor.org>.32This discussion was derived, in part, from ÒEnum: Mapping Telephone Numbers on to theInternet: Potential Benefits with Public Policy Risks,Ó April 2003, Center for Democracy and
Technology, Washington, D.C., available at <http://www.cdt.org/standards/enum/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE4.2.2Technical and Public Policy Issues
The deployment of the ENUM protocol raises anew most of the chal-lenges associated with the DNS as well as a few new ones. Thus, the tech-
nical and policy context for ENUM implementation includes a wide vari-
ety of issues that should be resolved prior to the widespread deployment
of the ENUM protocol and serves as an illustrative case study for other
applications that might be developed on top of the DNS. (It also illustrates
another one of the core Internet navigation issues: While ENUM provides
mechanisms for mapping from telephone numbers to the DNS and from a
domain name to relevant resources, it does not address the problem of
determining a telephone number given some (possibly inexact) form of
the name of a person or organization (and perhaps some additional quali-
fying attributes). On a global basis, that navigation problem is far more
difficult than the challenges associated with ENUM.)¥Registrars and consumers.An important implementation issue iswho has control over the information in the name servers. Conflicts over
the inclusion or content of NAPTR records need to be resolved in some
way. The design of the mechanisms for managing these conflicts can draw
from past experience with the DNS and telephone networks, which has
included dealing with slamming (the unauthorized change in service pro-
viders), number portability, and recourse in the event of fraud.¥Privacy.Since the records in the DNS are publicly accessible, there issome concern about the privacy of the personal information stored there.
Of specific concern are URIs in the NAPTR records that refer to personal
information that an individual would not wish to have linked to a tele-
phone number in a freely accessible way.33 Alternatives such as the calledparty control model described above accord individuals the ability to
specify what kind of information will be publicly available, and an opt-in
strategy provides individuals with the ability to decide whether his or her
telephone number will be included in the DNS as an ENUM domain name.¥Authentication and security.Under a system in which an individualmust make a deliberate opt-in decision, authentication of his or her iden-
tity is critical in substantiating that the person who wants a number is
really that person and that he or she has the rights to use that number
(and to make subsequent modifications to ENUM information). In addi-
tion, ensuring that the results from lookups to ENUM information are
authentic suggests that the implementation of DNSSEC is as critical for
ENUM deployment as it is for other DNS applications, as discussed in
Section 4.2.33However, note that the storage of E.164 numbers themselves in name servers is not aprivacy issue. The issue arises when E.164 numbers are linked to personal information.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS163¥Institutions.Because ENUM is also dependent on telephone num-bers and the various policies that pertain to telephone numbers, the insti-
tutional framework includes the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU). Also, as ENUM is based on telephone number country codes, na-
tional policies must be considered. A clash of institutional approaches may
result, given the strong regulatory tradition associated with telephone
numbering that contrasts with the traditionally less regulated manage-
ment of Internet naming and addressing.An important design characteristic of the DNS is the existence of aroot zone that provides the operational basis for global uniqueness and
coherence. By contrast, telephone service providers determine the coun-
try codes that they use for routing telephone calls. Each provider might
not use the same set of codes. For example, the country code +866 is used
from many, but not all, locations in the world to complete telephone calls
to Taiwan. The +866 country code is not officially allocated to Taiwan, but
it is being reserved by the ITU, which manages the country codes in the
world. Because the ENUM model as currently implemented requires ITU
and national approval for each ENUM delegation, the use of standard
ENUM for communication in and with Taiwan has been prevented by the
PeopleÕs Republic of China.¥Other.The deployment of the ENUM protocol raises other issuesthat are too detailed to be discussed here, such as the disposition of an
ENUM domain name when an individual terminates the service for the
corresponding telephone number. The references provided in this section
provide pointers to documents that explore these issues.4.2.3Alternate Models
In principle, ENUM-like domain names could be based on a uniqueidentifier other than a telephone number. For example, consider the use
of any random identifier that is globally unique, such as a product bar
code. Or one might tie ENUM more closely to the existing country-code
TLD model, using ISO 3166 numeric codes rather than E.164 country codes
to identify the country-specific part of the number. Another alternative
could call for the use (at least in part) of a domain other than e164.arpa.Also, the hierarchy of names need not be based on countries at all. How-
ever, it is unclear whether the adoption of an alternate model instead of
the ENUM protocol would provide the basis for a superior deployment.The deployment of the ENUM protocol could support important newapplications. However, it is also the case that its deployment would rein-
force the utility of telephone numbers. Assuming that it is increasingly
desirable to identify an individual or activity rather than a telephone num-
ber, the deployment of the ENUM protocol might not be optimal in theSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACElong run because its use could forestall efforts to develop systems withgreater capabilities.Conclusion: Overall, the plan to deploy the ENUM protocol couldlead to applications that use the DNS without necessitating any changes
to DNS protocols or software. However, a number of important technical
and public policy issues would need to be resolved in each country that
has an interest in deploying ENUM. These issues include establishing the
rights and requirements of registrars and consumers, developing prac-
tices for the protection of personal privacy, implementing procedures for
authentication and security, and developing an effective and efficient in-
stitutional framework for operation of ENUM.4.3INTERNATIONALIZING DOMAIN NAMES
One of the issues of particular interest in many countries is access tothe Internet and the DNS using home-country languages and scripts. As
the number of users in countries with first languages that are not based on
the Roman characters used in the DNS increased dramatically through
the 1990s, interest developed in domain names based on non-Roman
scripts (e.g., Chinese, Hebrew, Arabic, and so on). Several major efforts
were undertaken in the effort to accommodate internationalized domain
names (IDNs) within the Internet infrastructure.Unfortunately, the design of the DNS presents formidable technicalchallenges for the accommodation of languages that use non-Roman char-
acters. As a lookup system, the DNS must be able to determine unam-
biguously whether there is a match with a query or not. Comparing strings

is much more difficult than most people realize, because the definition of
what is ÒequalÓ is often not deterministic. For example, consider the case
of the French language in Canada and France, for which there are differ-
ent rules as to whether an accent stays over the character when it is con-
verted from lower to upper case.34 And some languages (e.g., Chinese)cannot even be reduced to a relatively small number of standardized char-
acters (e.g., the character set for English). As these challenges were articu-
lated and analyzed by the interested communities, it became clear that the
widespread deployment of IDNs would necessitate a number of compro-34Another example is the ÒaÓ with diaeresis Ò¬Ó (Ò−Ó) which in German should be sortedand looked at exactly as an ÒaÓ with diacritical character, but in Swedish has nothing to dowith the character ÒaÓ except the look. In the same way, † as the abbreviation for the physi-
cal unit of length ÒangstromÓ is one character, but the initial character of the word †ngstrımis another (which in turn is different from an ÒAÓ). The other problem with the German ÒaÓwith diaresis (umlaut) is that it may be considered to match the string ÒaeÓ, while not all
names containing ÒaeÓ match Ò−Ó.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS165mises. Some of these compromises stemmed from intense arguments overthe preservation of cultural identities, the use of names that are semanti-
cally correct, and other linguistic issues.Other compromises have their roots in technical issues. Some of thosewho were very concerned about the integrity of the DNS argued that in-
ternationalized domain names should be implemented in applications
(e.g., by reworking URL and similar formats to accommodate IDNs di-
rectly). Some other technical experts argued that the deployment of IDNs
should be executed through a major overhaul of the InternetÕs infrastruc-
ture, rather than as an add-on. However, considerable pressure devel-
oped within the interested communities to implement IDNs in the near
term and, therefore, solutions that would require extensive changes in
architectures or standards did not attract very much support. This pres-
sure provided the impetus for an effort led by the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) that culminated in a standard solution, the Internation-
alizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA) mechanism.354.3.1Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications
The central goal of the IDNA scheme is to enable end-user viewing ofIDNs (e.g.,               .cn) without altering the DNS protocols themselves.

Hence, even though an end user may see an IDN, the DNS itself sees only
the usual LDH-style domain names.36 IDNA is entirely a client-side set ofprocedures.There are a number of encoding systems for representing various lan-guage scripts. In the discussions leading to the adoption of IDNA as a
standard, it became clear that a constraint would be needed on the num-
ber of encoding systems so that the introduction of IDNs would be trac-
table. Unicode was agreed to be the client-side encoding system for lan-
guage scripts.37 Thus, any user application based on other encodingsystems would first have to translate its internationalized domain names35IDNA is described in Patrik F−ltstrım, Paul Hoffman, and Adam M. Costello, ÒInterna-tionalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),Ó RFC 3490, March 2003, available at<http://www.rfc-editor.org>.36These are domain names comprising letters, digits, and the hyphenÑa subset of ASCIIÑas described in Chapter 2.37ÒUnicode is a coded character set containing tens of thousands of characters. A singleUnicode code point is denoted by ÒU+Ó followed by four to six hexadecimal digits, while a
range of Unicode code points is denoted by two hexadecimal numbers separated by Ò..Ówith no prefixes,Ó as described in RFC 3490. Additional information about Unicode may befound at <http://www.unicode.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEto a Unicode representation prior to processing by IDNA-compliant pro-cedures.38The algorithms that make up IDNA work on the individual parts of adomain name separated by dots, which are called labels.39 Translationcan occur in two directions: from Unicode to LDH format (ASCII) or the
reverse.The input to the ÒToASCIIÓ algorithm is a single label comprisingUnicode code points. However, before labels are processed, they must be
normalized because different Unicode strings can represent the same do-
main name.40 Thus, a profile (ÒnameprepÓ) is appliedÑa string prepara-tion and normalization procedure for Unicode that is partially derived
from Unicode Technical Consortium (UTC)-specified normalization pro-
cedures.41 An encoding system (ÒpunycodeÓ) is then used for mappingÒnamepreppedÓ labels into conventional LDH-style labels.42 These labelsare then concatenated (with dots in between the labels) to generate the
resulting domain name. In the process of assembling the resulting do-
main name, ÒxnÑÓ is added as a prefix to denote that the domain name is
an IDN;43 an example of such a domain name is xn—fiq43lrrlfy5a.tw. Atthis point, the DNS is used as described in Chapter 3.The process for going from ASCII to Unicode involves the use of thedecoding algorithm in punycode. The details of this process are described
in ÒInternationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),Ó RFC 3490.38The mappings to and from Unicode may not be obvious (and may become controver-sial), as the local encodings sometimes make distinctions that Unicode does not, or viceversa.39For instance, in www.example.com, there are three labels: www, example, and com.40For example, upper case characters would be converted to lower case characters. How-ever, this case mapping may be problematic, as in the case for handling diacritical marks
where characters are mapped to upper case in modern French as compared to older forms(still used in Qu”b”c and elsewhere). Also, consider the Unicode stringwww.Exa$(not$)mple.com that would be normalized to www.example.com. Adapted fromEric A. Hall, ÒThe IDNA-to-ASCII Conversion Process,Ó Network Magazine, June 1, 2004, p.60.41See Paul Hoffman and Marc Blanchet, ÒNameprep: A Stringprep Profile for Interna-tionalized Domain Names,Ó RFC 3491, March 2003; and Paul Hoffman and Marc Blanchet,ÒPreparation of Internationalized Strings (Stingprep),Ó RFC 3454, December 2002, avail-able at <http://www.rfc-editor.org/>. For Unicode normalization, see Mark Davis and
at <http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/tr15-23.html>.42See Adam M. Costello, ÒPunycode: A Bootstring Encoding of Unicode for International-ized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),Ó RFC 3492, March 2003, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.43The description given here is a simplified one. The many details concerning the variousalgorithms may be found in the RFCs referenced above.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS167Client-Side SupportThere is a gap between Òdeploying IDNAÓ (i.e., adding IDNA-format(punycode) domain names in DNS zones) and the actual ability of users
to see, or provide as input, domain names expressed in characters that are
ÒnativeÓ to their preferred languages. The actual appearance of a domain
name in native characters on a screen or printout, or the ability to tran-
scribe such characters from a sign on the side of a bus into a URL to locate
a Web page, requires that the relevant applications be upgraded to recog-
nize the IDNA format and to translate to and from local scripts.Supporting Web AccessSome Web browsers have been upgraded to support IDNA namesdirectly, whereas others, including the most common browser, Internet
Explorer, support IDNA through browser plug-ins.44 These extensions tobrowser operations and syntax are not standardized and not consistent,
leading to different users getting different results depending on which
tools they choose to use (or, more commonly, have chosen for them).45 Inthe worst case, the consequence is a breakdown of the principle of refer-
ential integrityÑa putative domain name or URI, when passed from one
user to another, acquires a different meaning (or target) depending on the
environments of the two users. Even when support for Web browsers is
achieved on a consistent and widespread basis, it will take a considerable
period of time to replace the millions of copies of Web browsers. Forrester
Research predicts that it will take at least 2 to 3 years before IDNs can
really be used for Web browsing and up to 5 years until 90 percent of
applications are IDN compatible.46Supporting E-mail and Other AccessFor applications other than the Web, the situation is yet more prob-lematic. There is, in general, no ÒpatchÓ option equivalent to the browser
plug-ins. While there are only a few heavily used browsers, there are very44For an example of a plug-in, see <http://www.idnnow.com>. Internet Explorer doesnot provide direct support for IDNA as of July 2004.45Improper resolution and browser plug-ins that were not stable enough, complicated,and slow to download were among the reasons why Network Solutions, Inc., pulled out ofthe IDN business in early 2004. See ÒNSI Pulls Out of IDN Registration, Citing Technical
Problems,Ó Washington Internet Daily, January 15, 2004.46See Thomas Mendel, ÒInternationalized Domain Names: Good Idea; Shame About theExecution,Ó Forrester Research, March 10, 2004, available at <http://www.forrester.com/
Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,34018,00.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACElarge numbers of client / user interface programs for e-mail, the FileTransfer Protocol (FTP), and other protocols. Some of these programs are
embedded in firmware on portable devices, which generally cannot be
upgraded in a practical way.Electronic mail poses additional problems. For most users, the Web islargely passive: People find and view Web pages, but relatively few users
create their own Web content or need to establish addressing or location
information for it. E-mail, by contrast, is not passive. Most e-mail users
are actively engaged in the creation and receipt of e-mail. Addresses read
over the phone or copied from business cards or notes may well be more
common for e-mail than for the Web. Moreover, Internet e-mail operates
in a store-and-forward mode: Unlike, for example, the Web, there is nor-
mally no reliable mechanism for a sender to determine, or negotiate, the
capabilities of the receiver such as whether a receiver can handle interna-
tionalized addresses. And, finally, users typically expect the left side or
local part (before the Ò@Ó) of an e-mail address to reflect their names and
related conventions (or other personal identifiers such as nicknames) and
to do so accurately.47 People are often extremely sensitive about the spell-ing of their names (or other personal identifiers), and efforts to replace e-
mail addresses based on names with ones that involve semi-random
strings have rarely been met with enthusiasm. Even if the domain name
part of the address internationalization problem were solved with appro-
priate user agent software, it may well lead to more demand for properly
spelled and formatted local parts in local scripts. Non-English-speaking
users who have been using addresses containing Romanized translitera-
tions of their names are not likely to consider a transition to encoded ASCII
strings that have no mnemonic value and that generally cannot be
pronounced to be a step forward, especially with their expectations for
native-script presentation.Design and standardization efforts for e-mail local parts are in theirinfancy in 2005. There are two major proposals. One tries to minimize the
number of infrastructure changes that are required (just as IDNA avoided
requiring, or even permitting, any DNS protocol changes). The other pro-
posal assumes that true internationalization is going to require rethinking
e-mail in an internationalized context (and hence requiring those who
wish to take advantage of internationalized addresses to implement some
upgrades).47Although the Òlocal partÓ of an e-mail address is not within the scope of IDNA stan-dards, it is an important issue concerning the internationalization of the Internet more
broadly.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS1694.3.2Registries and Registrars
When it approved the initial versions of the IDNA standards, theInternet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) issued a statement that dis-
cussed the scope of those documents and areas in which other work was
needed by other organizations.48 Specifically, it pointed out that IDNAaddresses characters only and that any relevant language or script issues,
including near-equivalencies, must be dealt with on a per-registry basis.
It also identified the special problems faced by generic top-level domains
(gTLDs), the importance of conservatism in characters that are permitted,
and concerns about display issues with converted IDNA strings.After some discussion, and essentially as part of the process of gettingseveral new country-code TLDs to sign up to a formal ICANN relation-
ship, ICANN issued a set of guidelines for the deployment of IDNs in
TLDs.49 These guidelines build on the IESG statement and the work of theJoint Engineering Team (JET; discussed below) and provide that top-level
domain registries must use the IDNA standards and must adopt conser-
vative, language-specific approaches to IDN registration.To protect their populations from confusion and fraud, and, in at leastsome cases, to comply with ICANN guidelines, registries have begun to
establish language-based policies for registrations. The key to these in-
volves specifying which particular characters can be registered out of the
Unicode set or, when language rules are interpreted strictly, which char-
acters are permitted in combination. Of course, there is no standard list of
characters for any given language, and the Unicode Technical Consor-
tium has declined to make lists of characters that belong to named (by
language or otherwise) scripts, so a ÒlanguageÓ for DNS purposes is ulti-
mately a list of characters chosen by registries, with each registry free to
make a different choice. For the convenience of registries that are disin-
clined to reinvent the wheel, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA) set up a registry/catalog of these language/script/registry
tables.50 The criterion for registration is that a TLD registry thinks thetable is worthwhile; ICANN is not going into the Òwhat is really a lan-
guageÓ business.This leaves the more complex question of what scripts and languagesa particular registry should permit. The smaller the number of scripts per-
mitted, the lower the odds of fraud or other undesirable behavior. Prohi-
bition of mixing of scripts (or languages) within a given label is almost
implicit in a language-based system and will prevent at least some prob-48See <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/STATEMENTS/IDNstatement.txt>.49See <http://www.icann.org/general/idn-guidelines-20jun03.htm>.50See ÒIDN Language Table Registry,Ó at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/idn/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACElems,51 but it may restrict some registrations that might be consideredreasonable.All of these issues are much more complex for gTLDs, or other TLDs,that are seen as serving the entire world. Within a country, a decision as to
which languages or scripts are more important than others is at least trac-
table. While it may be very difficult, especially in countries that have more
than one official language, and where there are constitutional provisions
prohibiting treating some of those as more important than others, these
are the types of decisions that governments are typically constituted to
make. For generic top-level domains, on the other hand, there is an, at
least, implied requirement to treat all registration applicants equally,
which implies that policies such as Òthis script is preferred over that oneÓ
or Òthis language is assumed when the choice of language cannot be de-
terminedÓ are much more difficult, if not impossible, to implement.4.3.3Chinese, Japanese, and Korean Scripts
The scripts of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean (CJK) present specialchallenges. These languages are based on Han ideographs, which are de-
rived from pictographs and are constantly evolving. The ÒsimplificationÓ
of Chinese writing in the PeopleÕs Republic of China (PRC) in the early
1950s created a sharp divide in methods of writing Chinese, with the sim-
plified characters being used in the PRC, but not in Taiwan, Hong Kong,
Macao, and other Chinese-speaking communities elsewhere in the world.
However, the mapping between Simplified and Traditional Chinese forms

is not always one-to-one, but sometimes requires knowledge of meaning
or context.52 In addition, Chinese-based characters are used in writtenJapanese (as Kanji) and in Korean (as Hanji). An algorithm for handling
mappings between Traditional and Simplified Chinese characters that was
not sensitive to the particular language in use would map, for example,51At the time IDNA was adopted, the UTC representatives who were participating in theworking group were convinced that a Òone label, one scriptÓ rule would prevent many,perhaps most, potentially fraudulent cases resulting from confusing one character with an-other. More examples have been turned up since then, and few, if any, people actively en-
gaged in IDN issues now believe that such a restriction would eliminate even a large frac-tion of the potential problems.52Increasing communications and commerce among Chinese-speaking groups make itimportant that simplified and traditional characters be treated as equivalent. The committeethat did the writing simplification work, however, followed the historical pattern of lan-guage reforms over the centuries: they did more than simply replace one written character
or one spelling with another and, instead, made some changes to disambiguate homographsand consolidated other words.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS171Kanji into Simplified Chinese, resulting in the characters becoming notonly incorrect, but also unreadable to a significant fraction of the Japanese
population.To address the CJK script issues, a joint committee known as the JointEngineering Team (JET) was created among the network information cen-
ters and registries for Japan, China, and Korea. That committee created a
collection of guidelines for registration of the CJK languages and charac-
ters.53 Those guidelines, in turn, introduced two new concepts into DNSmanagement: Òvariant charactersÓ and Òreserved labelsÓ that could be reg-

istered into the DNS only by the registrant of some other, primary, label.In the JET model, the script associated with a particular language isdefined by the entries of a table, with the primary (valid) characters being
listed, one per row, in that table. If a label were proposed to be registered
that contained any characters that did not appear among these entries, the
registration attempt would be rejected as not conforming to the script.
Each one of these characters may be associated with zero or more pre-
ferred variantsÑcharacters that, if they appear, are considered to be fully
equivalent to the ÒvalidÓ character; and character variantsÑcharacters
that might be confused or substituted for the valid one (see Figure 4.2).
That is, many Han ideographs look exactly the same or have a similar
appearance but are assigned different code points in Unicode. The vari-
ants for the individual characters are then used to generate alternate (vari-
ant) versions of the labels. For example, if a label proposed for registra-
tion were ABC, and ÒBÓ had variants ÒXÓ and ÒY,Ó a label set (IDN
package) would be formed consisting of ÒABC,Ó ÒAXC,Ó and ÒAYC.Ó All
of these labels would be reserved; that is, it would not be possible for
anyone but the registrant of ÒABCÓ to actually register them in the DNS.54The labels generated from the preferred variants (as well as, of course, the
original ÒABCÓ) would be automatically registered; those from the char-
acter variants would be reserved and could be registered at the option of
the package registrant. Of course, if more than one of the characters in a
label had a non-zero number of variants, the number of variant labels
generated by the combinations, and hence the size of the IDN package,
could become quite largeÑexamples have been shown of some Chinese
labels that could generate hundreds of variants.5553See Kazunori Konishi, Kenny Huang, Hualin Qian, and Yanwoo Ko, ÒJoint EngineeringTeam (JET) Guidelines for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN) Registration and Admin-
istration for Chinese, Japanese, and Korean,Ó RFC 3743, April 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>. Also see James Seng, ÒJET Guidelines for Internationalized DomainNames,Ó CircleID, May 8, 2004.54The JET guideline document uses the term Òactivate.Ó55The JET guidelines view IDN packages as atomicÑthere should not be a mechanism formoving names in or out of a package once it is created.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEIntroduction of the ÒpackageÓ concept raises varying economic ques-tions that do not arise with LDH-style domain names. How should the
pricing of IDNs reflect the reality that each registration may cause other
(sometimes many other) domain names to be reserved? Also, given that
there is only one possible authorized registrant for a reserved domain
name, what options exist for pricing? Many new possibilities arise in the
realm of domain name pricing structures for IDNs.The challenges posed by CJK scripts also exist, though perhaps lessseverely, in alphabetic languages. Thus, work to generalize the JET guide-
lines to alphabetic languages is underway. Two attempts have been made
so far to make that generalization work, or at least to construct recom-
mendations for considerations as to how to do it for particular alphabetic
scripts and languages.56FIGURE 4.2Example of multiple forms of an Internationalized Domain Name.
aOf course, it is the case that a domain name of the form xn—k0tp21.com, forinstance, could have been registered directly, irrespective of any IDN issues (un-der IDNA processing, it would represent       .com). However, as discussed in
Chapter 2, there are strong reasons against the registration of domain names that
do not have some kind of semantic or mnemonic significance to someone, andthese specially coded labels do not have that property. Indeed, an extensive searchwas done, and none of these xnÐstrings actually appeared, at least in the acces-
sible top few levels of the DNS.SOURCE: Vincent W.S. Chen, ÒIDN Whois ChallengesÑTWNICÕs Case Study,Ópresentation at the ICANN meeting, October 29, 2003, Carthage, Tunisia,
available at <http://www.icann.org/presentations/chen-whois-carthage-29oct03.ppt>.56See John C. Klensin, ÒSuggested Practices for Registration of Internationalized DomainNames,Ó draft, May 17, 2005, available at <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-klensin-reg-guidelines-08.txt>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS1734.3.4Conclusions
It was recognized on its adoptionÑand it has become much moreobvious sinceÑthat IDNA solved only part of the internationalization
problem. Remaining to be addressed are the questions of consumer con-
fusionÑespecially those questions that did not involve intellectual prop-
erty issues; conflict avoidance or resolution for similar-appearing names;
differences in interpretations for different languages; restrictions on reg-
istrations on a per-domain basis; implications for the Uniform Domain
Name Dispute Resolution Process (UDRP) and the Whois database; secu-
rity issues raised by IDN;57 the implications of (and alternatives to) Òmul-tilingualÓ top level domains.58Recommendation: Continuing and increased attention to internation-alized domain names is necessary. Efforts to coordinate work across dif-
ferent countries, regions, and language groups should be undertaken to
prevent the balkanization of the Internet.Conclusion: The relative merit of an approach for implementing in-ternationalized domain names based on incremental fixes as compared
with one that involves an infrastructure overhaul remains uncertain.Conclusion: Although the ongoing work on internationalized domain
names is important, it addresses only a small fraction of the issues associ-
ated with internationalization of the Internet in general.4.4RESPONDING TO DOMAIN NAME ERRORS
A challenge that has faced the DNS since its inception is that userssometimes make errors when entering domain names as part of Web URIs,

e-mail addresses, or other applications on the Internet. The errors may
simply be misspellings or they may be the entry of non-existent or inac-
tive domains; often they are the result of a user guessing an address or
remembering one incorrectly. When an erroneous domain name arrives
at some level in the DNS, the standard response is for a Òno such domainÓ
message to be returned to the user. If the application is e-mail, then the57The Unicode Consortium has published a draft technical report that addresses Unicodesecurity issues, including IDN issues. See Mark Davis, ÒSecurity Considerations for theImplementation of Unicode and Related Technologies,Ó Proposed Draft Unicode TechnicalReport #36, Unicode Consortium, February 2005, available at <http://www.unicode.org/
reports/tr36/>.58The implications of IDN introduction for dispute resolution are discussed in Section5.6.3 and for Whois data and the Whois protocol in Sections 5.7.2 and 5.7.3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEresponse may be from a MAILER DAEMON reporting that the mail couldnot be delivered to the non-existent address. If the application is the Web,
then either the Internet service provider (e.g., AOL or Yahoo!) or the
browser (e.g., Internet Explorer) may send the erroneous address to a
search engine59 to initiate a search. In any event, the user receives infor-mation that the address entered is erroneous.However, in addition to the return of error information to the origina-tor as specified by the DNS technical standards and conventions, two con-
troversial kinds of response to user errors have appeared recently. Both
derive from the fundamental law of Internet commerce: traffic = > income.

That is, traffic to an Internet location (generally a Web site) can produce
income for the owner of the site (through advertising sales); the greater
the traffic, the greater the income potential. Consequently, the commer-
cial imperative is to acquire as much traffic as possible. Controversy arises
when that imperative leads to actions that confound user expectations or,
more fundamentally, challenge the underlying technology standards and
conventions on which smooth operation of the Internet has been based.4.4.1Traffic Aggregation
The first controversial response is called traffic aggregation. 60 Theaggregator sets up a Web site on which multiple advertisers place adver-
tising text that includes links to their marketing sites. The site may or may
not have a specific theme, such as travel or electronic products. The ad-
vertisers contract to pay for Òclick-throughsÓ to their sites, that is, for vis-
its that originate from the links on the aggregatorÕs site. To attract traffic,
the aggregator invests in domain names that would result from likely user
errors, for example, misspellings or wrong guesses of the domain names
of highly trafficked Web sites. It may also buy names that have not been
renewed by the original registrant and solicit people who invest in do-
main names for future re-sale (often called cybersquatters) to link their
warehoused domain names to the aggregatorÕs Web site in exchange for a
share of the resultant proceeds. The aggregator then awaits the traffic re-
sulting from users who misspell or incorrectly guess a domain name or
attempt to visit a domain name that is no longer operative or that has not
yet been made operative and collects fees from the advertisers, if any, to
which they Òclick through.Ó59For an extended discussion of search engines and various forms of paid advertising onsearch engines, see Chapter 7.60Two traffic aggregators, for example, are TrafficZ.com and Namerenters.com. TheirWeb sites are, respectively, <http://www.TrafficZ.com> and <http://www.Namerenters.com>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS175Although users finding themselves at entirely different sites fromthose intended may be annoyed, the operation of a traffic aggregation site
is in itself neither illegal nor in contravention of the explicit DNS technical
standards. However, by responding to an erroneous query with a Web
page that the user was not specifically seeking, it does arguably contra-
vene DNS conventions and reasonable user expectations of the DNS ser-
vice. Depending on the domain name used to attract the traffic, and the
content on the page, it might also result in trademark infringement, unfair
competition, or cybersquatting prosecution under the Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection Act or violate a host of consumer and child protec-
tion laws. Nevertheless, apparently a sufficient number of users find the
advertised sites of enough interest to follow their links and, thereby, pro-
vide income to the aggregators. Moreover, there does not seem to be a
practical technical or regulatory way to control this practice outside the
listed legal realms. Therefore, it not further considered here.4.4.2Site Finder by VeriSign
Far more controversial and subject to control was the offering of theSite Finder service by VeriSign, which was launched without notice in mid-
September 2003.61 That service, which was aimed at users of the WorldWide Web, re-routed any request concerning an unregistered domain name
within the .com and .net zones to a VeriSign-operated Web site featuringpaid advertising links and a search engine, rather than returning the usual
Òno such domainÓ error message. VeriSign described it as a value-added
service for users that could, at the same time, generate significant revenue
for VeriSign from the frequent errors in second-level domain names in the
.com and .net TLDs.62 However, the elimination of the Òno such domainÓerror across the .com and .net domains, which numerous applications de-pend on for their current operation, had a direct and an indirect impact on
the performance of applications other than the Web, on the DNS, and on
the Internet in general. Many in the Internet technical and operator commu-
nities believed that, even though Site Finder was implemented in strict con-
formance with DNS standards, it was in conflict with their spirit. As a result
of their strong complaints and ICANNÕs written demand that it desist,6361See VeriSignÕs Site Finder FAQ at <http://www.verisign.com/products-services/naming-and-directory-services/naming-services/site-finder-services/page_002698.html>.62VeriSign estimated the number of misspellings to be 20 million per day; see CircleID,ÒFacts and Figures,Ó available at <http://www.circleid.com/sitefinder>.63See ÒLetter from Paul Twomey to Russell Lewis 3 October 2003,Ó available at <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/Twomey-to-lewis-03oct03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEVeriSign suspended the service (under protest) in early October 2003 andpursued the matter in the courts, as is described below.The intense reactions from the Internet technical and operator com-munities64 that prompted ICANN to demand the suspension of the ser-vice65 until further review raised issues of two types: technical and insti-tutional. The technical issues were, themselves, of two types: first, whether
Site Finder would have negative effects on the stability and security of the
Domain Name System,66 and second, whether VeriSign had followed anappropriate process for introducing operational changes that have poten-
tial effects on other Internet processes and applications. The unilateral
introduction of the Site Finder service by VeriSign also raised fundamen-
tal institutional issues about the relationship between ICANN and
VeriSign and, by extension, the other gTLD registries.Technical IssuesThe Site Finder service introduced changes to the operation of the.com and .net top-level domains, through the use of the wildcard address(A) record. Wildcards, which can be set up by an authoritative name
server to stand in for name and class records (see Box 3.2), are used to
synthesize records if no exact match exists in the zone. In the Site Finder
case, the wild card entries in .com and .net synthesized a response thatsent requests for non-existent second-level domains to the VeriSign ser-
vice Web site. The use of wildcards is specified within Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force (IETF) standards for the DNS protocol,67 but their use gen-erally has been localized or confined to an organization.68 In contrast, the64Comments expressing concern about the Site Finder service are available at <http://www.icann.org/general/wildcard-history.htm>.65ICANN, ÒAdvisory Concerning Demand to Remove VeriSignÕs Wildcard,Ó October 3,2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/announcements/advisory-03oct03.htm>. For adescription of ICANNÕs ability to force VeriSign to suspend the Site Finder service, see
Jonathan Weinberg, ÒSite Finder and Internet Governance,Ó December 28, 2003, available at<http://www.law.wayne.edu/weinberg/sitefinder.new.PDF>.66For a discussion of the broader social, political, and privacy issues raised, see <http://www.circleid.com/article/312_0_1_0_C/>. See also <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/tlds/sitefinder/concerns.html>.67See Paul Mockapetris, ÒDomain NamesÑConcepts and Facilities,Ó RFC 1034, November1987, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org> and Paul Mockapetris, ÒDomain Names ÑImplementation and Specification,Ó RFC 1035, November 1987, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.68An example of a common use of wildcards is for mail resource records, or MX records, asthey allow e-mail server operators to synthesize all records locally that enable immediatenotification that a domain name is valid before a message is sent.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS177introduction of wildcards in the A records of the .com and .net TLDs hadan impact across a major portion of the DNS. They produced affirmative
responses, instead of the expected Òno such domainÓ response, to every
attempt by the numerous applications that use the DNS to find a non-
existent domain name within the two TLDs, as noted in the next section.Security and Stability IssuesTechnical Community Views.According to an assessment made by theInternet Architecture Board (IAB) shortly after the introduction of the Site
Finder service, VeriSignÕs unilateral change had direct effects on the many
applications that use the Internet.69 For example, SiteFinder altered thenormal operation of e-mail servers, which would be to return to the sender
any e-mail addressed to non-existent domains. The result of the consis-
tent affirmative responses for the VeriSign-operated top-level domains
was to send e-mail addressed to the non-existent domains to the registry-
operated server instead. This change affected users, as the immediate no-
tification of a non-existent domain could be delayed by several days or
more. It also affected network administrators that incurred costs to
reconfigure servers, if they chose to bypass VeriSignÕs server.70According to the IAB, these changes also affected the utility of spamfilters that rely on identification of invalid domain names to block mes-
sages, and limited the operation of sequential lookups that require notice
of unsuccessful DNS queries to seek information from other sources.Other direct effects of these changes, according to the IAB, included theinconvenience to users who were rerouted to an English-language Web site,

rather than receiving an error message in their native language; the poten-
tial loss of privacy as a result of e-mail and other Internet traffic being re-
routed to an unintended destination; and the danger to Internet security
and reliability caused by routing all the erroneous traffic to one location,
creating a single point of failure and a target for deliberate attacks.71An indirect effect of this change was the development of various tech-nical countermeasures to circumvent the VeriSign Site Finder service. The
Internet Systems Consortium (ISC) issued a patch for BIND,72 the soft-69See Internet Architecture Board (IAB), ÒCommentary: Architectural Concerns on the Useof DNS Wildcards,Ó September 19, 2003, available at <http://www.iab.org/documents/docs/2003-09-20-dns-wildcards.html>.70IAB, ÒCommentary,Ó September 19, 2003.71As noted in IAB, ÒCommentary,Ó September 19, 2003. For an additional list of technicalproblems, see <http://www.packet-pushers.net/tld-wildcards/>.72For more information on BIND, see Section 3.2.3.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEware used on many domain name servers, that disabled the re-direct tothe VeriSign Web site and responded with an error message instead.73While patches released by ISC and others74 provided an immediate solu-tion to the re-direct, the ad hoc decision by network administrators or
Internet service providers (ISPs) to use a patch or to create another
workaround introduced inconsistent changes throughout the Internet,75that had the second-order consequence of limiting options for other ser-
vices that operated within the boundaries of either the protocols or rea-
sonable user expectations.VeriSignÕs View. VeriSign responded to the IAB criticism with a point-by-point rebuttal,76 which asserted that (1) Site Finder did not violate theDNS standards; (2) VeriSign was working to provide other-language re-
sponses in the near future; (3) Site Finder, by adding a wildcard RRSet tothe .com and .net zones and updating its server, can relieve the majorityof e-mail problems; (4) applications that rely on error messages can
achieve the same effect by querying the DNS for the presence of a wildcardA record in the zone; (5) the detection of erroneous domains is not a widelyimplemented mechanism for spam identification and discovery and, in
any event, is easily circumvented; (6) VeriSign has published mitigation
strategies for dealing with other protocols; (7) VeriSignÕs experience in
securely and stably operating redundant .com and .net servers enables itto protect the Site Finder service; (8) VeriSign does not collect or retain
personal information through Site Finder; and (9) VeriSign is willing to
work with ICANN and the technical community to deal with Internation-
alized Domain Names and domains not in the .com or .net domains. Italso said that it shared the IABÕs concerns with workarounds to bypass
Site Finder and has written a guide for application developers to help
them write software consistent with the DNS standards for wildcards.73For a description of the patch, BIND 9.2.3rc2, see <http://www.isc.org/index.pl?/sw/bind/delegation-only.php>.74Such as Imperial Violet;  see ÒVeriSign CountermeasuresÓ at <http://www.imperialviolet.org/
dnsfix.html>.75IAB, ÒCommentary,Ó September 19, 2003. See also Benjamin Edelman, ÒThe Aftermath:How ISPs Responded to Site Finder Around the World,Ó CircleID, October 6, 2003, availableat <http://www.circleid.com/article/303_0_1_0_C/>.76See VeriSign, ÒVeriSignÕs Response to IAB on Site Finder Service,Ó October 3, 2003, avail-able at <http://www.verisign.com/products-services/naming-and-directory-services/naming-services/site-finder-services/page_002695.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS179Process IssuesTechnical Community Views. While the technical communities recognizethat the use of the wildcard record does not violate DNS protocol specifi-
cations,77 its implementation in the two largest TLDs did not follow prin-ciples that have guided the process for making Internet architecture deci-
sions from the initial development of the Internet to the present, which
have sought to minimize the impact of changes on the network.78 Thetraditional process of working out proposed changes with the technical
communities aims to maintain flexibility for all applications that use the
DNS and balance the impact of changes on network operators, users, and
the overall stability of the DNS and the Internet in general. Furthermore,
as a matter of principle, the technical communities insist that innovation
should take place not within the DNS, a core infrastructure of the Internet,

but rather on top of the DNS, at the edgesÑthe applications that use the
Internet and the DNS.Examples of innovation at the edges consist of services similar to SiteFinder, but which re-route misspelled or non-existent domain names at
the Web browser, such as Internet Explorer, or the ISP, such as America
Online. Because the service is limited to the Web browser or ISP, other
protocols, such as e-mail and FTP, are not affected by the redirect and will
still receive a Òno such domainÓ response.Changes at the core tend to make service offerings at the edges moredifficult, as the redirect offered at the DNS level overrides the changes
made at the Web browser or ISP level, requiring these services to work
around the high-level implementation. While services offered at the edges
cause the least harm to the network overall, they are also the most benefi-
cial to users, as they tend to offer more options to elect the service the user
wants to receive, to disable it, or to switch to another Web browser or ISP.Shortly after Site Finder was introduced, ICANN requested that itsSecurity and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) undertake a study of
Site FinderÕs implications for the security and stability of the Internet. Af-
ter public hearings and comments, the SSAC issued its report in July

2004.79 Its primary focus was not on Site Finder, per se, but rather on the77IAB, ÒCommentary,Ó September 19, 2003.78The two principles include the Robustness Principle, ÒBe conservative in what you do,be liberal in what you accept from othersÓ (Jon Postel, ÒTransmission Control Protocol,Ó
RFC 793, September 1, 1981), and the Principle of Least Astonishment, ÒA program shouldalways respond in the way that is least likely to astonish the userÓ (source unknown; IAB,ÒCommentary,Ó September 19, 2003).79Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC), ÒRedirection in the Com and NetDomains,Ó report submitted to the ICANN board, July 9, 2004, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/security/ssac-report-09jul04.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEfacts that Òcore registry operations were modified, thereby changing ex-isting services, and the change was introduced abruptly without broad
notice, testing, refinement or community agreement.Ó80 It found that SiteFinder (1) Òdisturbed a set of existing services that had been functioning
satisfactorilyÓ; (2) Òviolated fundamental Internet architectural principles
by blurring the well-defined boundary between architectural layersÓ and
moving more control toward the center and away from the periphery;
and (3) proposed mechanisms Òto ameliorate the undesirable effects of
their diversionÓ that Òput VeriSign in the implementation path of every
existing and future protocol that uses DNS.ÓIn addition, the SSAC found that Òthe abruptness of the change vio-lated accepted codes of conduct that called for public review, comment
and testing of changes to core systems.Ó That process is intended Òto en-
sure that changes are introduced with minimal disruption to existing ser-
vices and hence with minimal disruption to the security and stability of
the Internet.Ó Moreover, it Òprecluded the possibility that administrators,
IT departments, ISPs and other intermediaries on whom end users rely
might be adequately prepared to deal with the consequences.Ó The SSAC
also found that Òin response, workarounds and patches were introduced
quickly, cumulatively reducing the overall coherence of the system and
again violating the established practices of public evaluation, testing, dis-
cussion and review before core services are implemented and deployed.
These workarounds further blurred the functional layers intrinsic to the
InternetÕs robust architecture and in some instances created additionalÑ
and unintendedÑharmful effects.ÓThe SSAC made recommendations to eliminate Òsynthesized re-sponsesÓ from TLDs that serve the public and that satisfy several technical
conditions and to eliminate shortcomings from the specification of DNS
wildcards and their use. Most significantly, it recommended that Òchanges
in registry services should take place only after a substantial period of no-
tice, comment and consensus involving both the technical community and
the larger user community.Ó It asserted that the process must Ò(i) consider
issues of security and stability, (ii) afford ample time for testing and refine-
ment and (iii) allow for adequate notice and coordination with affected and
potentially affected systems managers and end users.ÓVeriSignÕs View.As its use of a wildcard A record in the TLDs did notdeviate from the IETF standards that describe the DNS protocol specifica-80All quoted material in this paragraph and the next two is from the Executive Summaryof the SSAC report ÒRedirection in the Com and Net Domains,Ó 2004.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS181tions,81 VeriSign maintains that this implementation is a legitimate use ofthe wildcard and a valid service innovation that adds value for user
searches that are not well served by the Òpage not foundÓ error message.82Additionally, VeriSign selected its own technical advisory group to test
the Site Finder service before it was deployed, arguing that a comparable
process within the broader technical community would have taken much
longer to complete and was incompatible with the pace and time horizon
of business decisions.83In August 2004, VeriSign published a response to the SSACÕs report.84In VeriSignÕs view, SSACÕs Òpurported ÔfindingsÕ and ÔrecommendationsÕ
are inappropriate, unsubstantiated, and themselves contrary to
longstanding written standards and specifications for the operation of the
DNS and the Internet.Ó85 According to VeriSign, since the SSAC did notfind that ÒSite Finder, or wildcards generally, pose a threat to the security
and stability of the InternetÕs naming and address allocation system,Ó its
ÒfindingsÓ and ÒrecommendationsÓ exceeded the scope of SSACÕs char-
ter. VeriSign argued that the SSAC started its analysis with a predeter-
mined conclusion and its report was written by persons who are oppo-
nents of Site Finder or competitors of VeriSign. Of greater general
significance was its assertion that the reportÕs findings and recommenda-
tions Òwould in effect restrain technical innovation and commercial prac-
tices on the Internet on the basis of vague and unwritten Ôcodes of con-
ductÕ and self-styled Ôestablished practicesÕ that, contrary to the Report,
do not represent consistent Internet practices and conduct.ÓVeriSign asserted that the Òwell-defined boundary between architec-tural layersÓ claimed by the SSAC is violated by Òmultiple technologies
widely used on the Internet, such as network translators and firewalls.Ó
Furthermore, VeriSign stated that Site Finder did not change the position-
ing of the DNS in the layering of network services, while the SSAC-en-81VeriSign, ÒArchitectural Concerns on the Use of DNS WildcardsÓ (response to IABÒCommentaryÓ of September 19, 2003), September 23, 2003, available at <http://www.verisign.com/nds/naming/sitefinder/iab_response.html>.82VeriSignÕs Site Finder Implementation; see <http://www.verisign.com/resources/gd/sitefinder/implementation.pdf>.83See Charles Cooper, ÒThe Cultural Divide and the InternetÕs Future,Ó CNET News.com,October 16, 2003, available at <http://news.com.com/2008-7347_3-5092590.html>.84VeriSign, ÒVeriSign, Inc.Õs Response to Report from the ICANN Security and StabilityCommittee re ÔRedirection in the Com and Net DomainsÕ,Ó August 5, 2004, available at<http://www.verisign.com/static/012393.pdf>.85All quoted material in this paragraph and the next two is from VeriSign, ÒVeriSign, Inc.ÕsResponse,Ó August 5, 2004.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEdorsed processing of IDNs at the DNS level would, by its own analysis,ÒblurÓ the boundaries between architectural layers.In sum, VeriSign charged SSAC with using Òa fa“ade of technical or-thodoxy to mask  rigid adherence to the status quo of the DNS, which is

antithetical to the very nature of the Internet and inconsistent with the
RFCs, which themselves recognize the importance of innovation to the
Internet.Ó VeriSign went on to argue that Òcontrary to ICANNÕs clear di-
rective, SSAC has failed to quantify or independently verify any of the
purported problems described in the Report, raising serious doubts that
they were real, serious, or widespread.ÓInstitutional IssuesWhile the Site Finder service raised contentious issues of adherence totechnical standards and processes, it also brought to the fore a critical and
equally contentious issue of authority over and responsibility for the ser-
vice offerings of TLD registries, especially gTLD registries that have
signed agreements with ICANN. (In Section 3.4.3 it is noted that, as of
June 2005, ICANN had such agreements with 10 of the 15 established
gTLDs.) The issue is of particular significance to the relationship between
ICANN and VeriSign, the registry for the two largest TLD domains, which
contain over 38 million second-level registrations between them.Specifically, the issue is this: To what extent and by what processescan ICANN control the offering of new services or the modification of
existing services by TLD registries with which it has contracts? (It has no
clear authority over most other TLD registries, although it couldÑin
theoryÑuse the threat of exclusion from the root to control the behavior
of other registries. In practice, that threat is unlikely to be used or to be
effective under current circumstances.)In his letter to VeriSign86 demanding the suspension of Site Finderservices on .com and .net, the president of ICANN asserted that Òourreview of the .com and .net registry agreements between ICANN andVeriSign leads us to the conclusion that VeriSignÕs unilateral and unan-
nounced changes to the .com and .net top level domains are not consis-tent with material provisions of both agreements.Ó He went on to list six
specific provisions of the agreements that VeriSign was, in ICANNÕs view,
violating.86See ÒLetter from Paul Twomey to Russell Lewis 3 October 2003,Ó available at <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/Twomey-to-lewis-03oct03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS183More generally, there is the question of whether the introduction ofSite Finder abused the public trust that accompanies the monopoly posi-
tion granted to VeriSign as the sole operator of the .com and .net TLDs. 87Did it take advantage of that monopoly position to extract profits fromunregistered domain names in unfair competition with ISPs, browsers,
and search engines? For example, the second-level domain names directed
to the traffic aggregation sites described in Section 4.4.1 must all be spe-
cifically registered and a fee must be paid to the registrar, which in turn
pays VeriSign for each name. In contrast, Site Finder effectively redirected
every unregistered second-level domain in .com and .net to VeriSignÕsservice, generating traffic-based advertising revenue for VeriSign. Because
of VeriSignÕs position as the sole registry for those two TLDs, it did not
have to specifically register those names in order to control the response
to a request for them.From VeriSignÕs perspective, ICANN overstepped its authority as atechnical-coordination organization and prevented it from continuing to
offer services that benefited Internet users.88 In pursuit of that argument,in February 2004 it filed a federal lawsuit in the U.S. District Court, Cen-
tral District of California, charging that ICANN Òoverstepped its contrac-
tual authority and improperly attempted to regulate VeriSignÕs business
in violation of its charter and its agreements with VeriSign.Ó89 VeriSignasserted that ICANN Òstifled the introduction of new services that benefit
Internet users and promote the growth of the Internet.Ó It asked the court
to assess damages against ICANN and for ICANN to treat VeriSign in a
Òfair, reasonable, and equitableÓ fashion in the future.90VeriSignÕs antitrust claims against ICANN were dismissed in May2004, but the court initially allowed VeriSign to file an amended com-87For more information, see ÒThe Cooperative Agreement Between the Departmentof Commerce and VeriSign,Ó available at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/nsi.htm>, which contains the text of the agreement and the amendments to itfrom 1998 to the present.88VeriSign reported receiving 5 million unique visitors per day while the service was op-erating; see John Leyden, ÒUsers Ôvote with their mousesÕ for Site Finder,Ó The Register, Oc-tober 9, 2003, available at <http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/6/32973.html>.89VeriSign, ÒVeriSign Files Lawsuit Against Site Finder,Ó press release, February 26, 2004,available at <http://www.verisign.com/verisign-inc/news-and-events/news-archive/us-news-2004/page_005186.html>.90Declan McCullagh, ÒVeriSign Sues ICANN to Restore Site Finder,Ó CNET. News.com,February 24, 2004, available at <http://news.com.com/VeriSign+sues+ICANN+to+restore+Site+Finder/2100-1038_3-5165982.html?tag=mainstry>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEplaint to try to strengthen its legal arguments. However, on August 27,2004, the court dismissed the claims with prejudice; specifically, the court
held that VeriSignÕs claims about competitors controlling ICANNÕs board
could not be supported.VeriSignÕs remaining causes of action based upon contractual mattersresulting from the registry agreements had to be refiled in California state
courts. In August 2004 it made such a filing in the California superior
court in Los Angeles County. VeriSign claims that: ÒWere VeriSign to de-
fer offering such services to the public during the effective period of the
2001 .com Registry Agreement, or to modify such services due toICANNÕs conduct and threats, VeriSign will suffer irreparable losses of
revenue from third parties, profits, market share, competitive position,
reputation and good will. Furthermore, millions of Internet users will be
deprived of the improved functionality and quality of VeriSignÕs ser-
vices.Ó91 As of October 2004, the suit remained open.4.4.3Conclusions
The Internet and the Domain Name System have operated success-fully over two decades, despite manyfold increases in connectivity and
connected devices and a great expansion of users and uses. As described
in Chapter 3, their successful adaptation to rapid change has been based
on a shared commitment among the operators of the Internet and DNS to
adhere voluntarily to a set of open standards strictly vetted by the techni-
cal community and to a collaborative process of cautious and controlled
change. This commitment has held even though the operators are vastly
different in nationality and in typeÑacademic, commercial, governmen-
tal, not-for-profitÑand are not subject to the authority of any overall con-
trolling body. The commitment is threatened, however, by two external
forces. One is the desire by some governments and international agencies
to introduce stronger international regulation of Internet operations. This
force is discussed in Chapter 5. The other is the commercial imperative
described earlier.The commercial organizations that operate key elements of the DNSare appropriately driven by the goal of increasing revenue and profit. As
observed earlier, in the Internet that goal is best served by attracting and
capturing the attention of user traffic, which can be translated into adver-
tising dollars. Consequently, there is a natural pressure on commercial
operators to find ways to do so in competition with other operators. This
is what happened in the Site Finder case. VeriSign saw an opportunity to91Paul Festa, ÒVeriSign Sues ICANN in State Court,Ó CNET News.com, August 31, 2004,available at <http://news.com.com/2102-1030_3-5331779.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: TECHNOLOGY PROSPECTS185capture substantial traffic from unregistered domain names and, drivenby its commercial imperative, took it. In doing so, it made an unantici-
pated use of a DNS standard for wildcards. Moreover, it launched its new
service as a surprise, without vetting it with the technical community or
informing other operators. VeriSign has defended its actions as being
within its rights to provide innovative new services that offer benefits to
users. However, the technical and operator communities have complained
vigorously about VeriSignÕs breaking of the shared commitment to stan-
dards and process.Although Site Finder may adhere strictly to published standards andits introduction might even, in some views, be strictly consonant with
VeriSignÕs rights to innovate, VeriSignÕs action poses two high-order chal-
lenges to the successful operation of the DNS and the Internet.First, VeriSign is not like any other TLD registry. It contains roughlyhalf of all second-level domain name registrations and almost all the com-
mercial and network infrastructure domains. It was granted the right to
operate the registry as a commercial monopoly by the Department of
Commerce and ICANN. Therefore, it is effectively an international public
utility whose actions have profound and widespread effects across the
entire Internet. When it is seen in that light, it becomes clear that it would
be reasonable for it to be required to, at the very least, obtain formal ap-
proval from its contractual regulator before introducing any new service
with wide-ranging consequences.Second, and more significant, VeriSignÕs action could set in motion acommercial rush among other operators of the DNS. Suppose VeriSignÕs
actions were copied by other commercial registries. The consequence for
the stability and predictability of operations of the DNS could be pro-
found. By ignoring the shared commitment among operators to accept
the authority of the technical community on standards and new services
and to adhere to a collaborative and cautious process of change, VeriSign
tore a hole in the invisible web of implicit understandings that has been
critical to the success of the DNS and the Internet. In remains to be seen
whether the outcome of its court cases will determine whether that web
can be mended.Recommendation: ICANN should strengthen its contracts with TLDoperators (especially the largest ones) to ensure that it has the authority to
review proposed changes in their services that could have a detrimental
effect on the DNS or on other services that depend on the DNS. It should
establish an open, transparent, and speedy process of review for such

changes that solicits contributions from the technical community, other
DNS operators, other affected Internet operations, and end users.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACERecommendation: TLDs and other DNS operators that do not haveagreements with ICANN should voluntarily agree to adhere to published
technical standards and to consult the technical community and conduct
public review processes before introducing new services that could have
a detrimental effect on the DNS or on other services that depend on the
DNS.The issues raised by VeriSignÕs introduction of Site Finder are bothtechnical and institutional. As such they serve as an appropriate bridge to
the next chapter, which addresses the issues facing the institutional frame-
work of the Domain Name System.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1875The Domain Name System:Institutional IssuesThe institutional framework of the Domain Name System (DNS), asdescribed in Chapter 3, comprises a diverse group of organizations
carrying out their various responsibilities with a high degree ofautonomy. No single institutionÑnot even the Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) or the U.S. Department of Com-
merceÑhas effective authority over all of the participating organizations.
Nevertheless, this group of organizations has successfully managed the
DNS through two decades of rapid growth of the Internet, and of the
most significant applications on the Internet such as the Web and e-mail,
which rely on it. However, as the Internet and its applications have grown
in importance, so have the attention and the controversy that the DNS
and its institutional framework have attracted. That critical scrutiny has
raised a number of issues concerning the structure, governance, manage-
ment, and operations of the organizations that manage the DNS.Most of those issues are being actively addressed, but the organiza-tions involved face the reality of multiple, often conflicting interestsÑ
both public and privateÑbecoming more actively engaged in their activi-
ties. That makes achieving consensus decisionsÑin the tradition of the
early Internet communityÑincreasingly difficult and leaves a residue of
dissatisfaction with any decision that is taken. Since attention to the insti-
tutional framework of the DNS can be expected to continue to increase
with the InternetÕs growing significance as a critical global communica-
tions infrastructure, so too can the critical institutional issues be expected
to receive increasing scrutiny and to give rise to increasing controversy.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThis chapter is a guide to the principal institutional issues that havealready or can soon be expected to come to the fore. For each institutional
issue, the principal alternatives that have been publicly identified are sum-
marized, and the alternatives are compared. Where the committee is in
agreement, its conclusions and recommendations are presented. In all
cases, the intent is to provide a clear description of the alternatives and
the arguments for and against them as background for current and future
policy deliberations.Some of the issues, such as ICANNÕs management structure, may ap-pear to be resolved for the time being. In the committeeÕs view, under-
standing the conflicting proposals that preceded the present resolution
illuminates the pressures that remain in the background and that may, in
the future, force the issue once again onto the policy agenda.The following issues are addressed in this chapter:1.Governance of the DNS.How should the DNS be governed? Whatshould be the role of the U.S. government, international organiza-
tions, and ICANN?2.Management of the DNS.What changes in ICANN, if any, are ap-propriate?3.Oversight and operation of root name servers.Is there a need forgreater oversight of the root name server operators? If so, how
might it best be conducted?4.Regulation of generic top-level domains (gTLDs): number andprocess.Can and should new gTLDs be added? If so, how manynew gTLDs should be added, and how fast? What types should
they be, and how should they and their operators be selected?5.Oversight of country code top-level domains (ccTLDs).Should any-thing be done to increase ICANNÕs oversight of and authority over
the ccTLDs? If so, what form should its increased authority take,
and how can it be implemented?6.Resolution of conflicts over domain names.Does the Uniform DomainName Dispute Resolution Process (UDRP) need to be improved? If
so, how should it be improved?7.Provision and protection of Whois data.What is the appropriate bal-ance among the various interests in Whois data?In contrast to most of the other chapters in this report, this one dealswith issues for which opinion and values play a significant role. Conse-
quently, many of the citations and references are to advocacy documents,
not to peer-reviewed scientific or technical papers. These references serve
as pointers to places where the proposals being summarized were pre-
sented. When there were multiple similar proposals, one or two have beenSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES189selected as references, either because they appeared to be the most repre-sentative or because they were the most readily accessible. The
committeeÕs use of these references should in no way be considered an
endorsement of the point of view expressed.5.1GOVERNANCE OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
Issues: How should the DNS be governed? What should be the role of theU.S. government, international organizations, and ICANN?As explained in Chapter 3, the U.S. government currently possessesthe final authority to make key decisions affecting the DNS. Specifically, it
must approve all changes in the root zone file and, thereby, controls the
designation of top-level domains (TLDs) and the assignment of responsi-
bility for their operation. In this way, it functions as the steward of theDNS, exercising its authority and making decisions for the larger Internet
community.Through a memorandum of understanding (MoU) signed in Novem-ber 1998, the U.S. government delegated day-to-day operational author-
ity to ICANN, which makes recommendations to the U.S. Department
of Commerce (DOC) for its decisions affecting the DNS. In this capacity,
ICANN recommends the addition of new TLDs and redelegations of
existing TLDs. (As noted in Chapter 3, ICANN has additional responsi-
bilities for Internet Protocol (IP) addresses and protocols.) ICANN might
be thought of as the registry for the root, sponsored by the U.S. govern-
ment. ICANN nominally has the same responsibilities as other regis-
tries: it registers entries into the zone file and sees to the distribution of
that zone file to the name server operators. However, as noted in Chap-
ter 3, unlike the TLD registries, ICANN does not directly contract for
operation of the root name servers, nor does it have contracts with all
the TLDs. In fact, in June 2005 it had agreements with only 10 of the 15gTLDs and 12 of the 243 ccTLDs. However, because it recommends any
new and revised entries into the root zone, because its agreements with
the largest gTLDs set the rules for their operations and those of their
accredited registrars, and because those rules strongly influence the op-
erations of the other TLDs, ICANN is generally perceived to be the man-ager of the DNS.Against this background, the issue of the proper form of DNS gover-nance can be divided into two separate but closely interrelated issues: (1)
Where should the stewardshipÑthe final authority for key decisionsÑof
the DNS reside? and (2) How should management authorityÑthe regis-
try function for the rootÑfor the DNS be exercised? Although these roles
are distinct at present, one possible answer is that they be combined.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE5.1.1Relationship to Governance of the Internet
Before addressing the questions of stewardship and management au-thority for the DNS, it is important to emphasize the distinction between
governance of the DNS and governance of the Internet. Clarifying this dis-
tinction is necessary because the DOCÕs and ICANNÕs visible responsibility
for a key part of the InternetÕs infrastructure and the fact that decisions affect-
ing the DNS have economic, social, and political consequences have tended
to focus discussions of Internet governance on the DOC/ICANN and the
DNS. However, there are many aspects of the Internet that are or might be
subject to governance but that lie outside the DNS and the areas of responsi-
bility of its managers.1 These include, for example, controlling spam; dealingwith use of the Internet for illegal purposes; resolving the Òdigital divideÓ
between developed and developing countries; protecting intellectual prop-
erty other than domain names; protecting privacy and freedom of expres-
sion; and facilitating and regulating e-commerce.2 Furthermore, there are in-
creasingly important aspects of the Internet that are currently subject to little
public governance, such as search engines and directories. Thus, DNS gover-
nance is a part of, but does not include many aspects of, Internet governance.
Since at the time of this writing in December 2004 there have been no practi-
cal proposals for broad governance of the Internet, this chapter focuses solely
on governance of the DNS. (The institutional issues associated with Internet
navigation are discussed separately in Chapter 8.)Conclusion: Governance of the DNS is part, but not all, of Internetgovernance. ICANN and the DNS are not the proper vehicles to address
most Internet policy issues.5.1.2Where Should Stewardship of the DNS Reside?
The U.S. government acquired responsibility for and authority overthe DNS root by virtue of its historical initiative and financial investment1The issue of Internet governance, in general, has become the subject of intense scrutiny inpreparation for the second phase of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in
November 2005. The ITU held a workshop on Internet governance in February 2004 at whichmany views on the subject were presented. For an extensive discussion of Internet gover-nance and the place of DNS governance within it, see, for example, Don McLean, ÒHerding
SchrıdingerÕs Cats:  Some Conceptual Tools for Thinking About Internet Governance,Ó ITU
Workshop on Internet Governance, February, 2004, available at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/forum/intgov04/contributions.html>. In preparation for the WSIS meeting in 2005, the
Working Group on Internet Governance (WGIG) was appointed in November 2004.2The ITU invited selected experts to present papers on Internet governance at a workshop.These papers, which present a variety of personal views on this broad range of issues, are
available at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/forum/intgov04/contributions.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES191in supporting creation of the Internet and the DNS, as described in Chap-ter 2. However, as the Internet has become international in extent, sup-
port, and operation, the formal legitimacy of the U.S. governmentÕs con-
tinued authority over the root has come under challenge, such as in the
context of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS).3Critics, including representatives of the governments of Brazil, SouthAfrica, Russia, and China,4 have argued that the DNS is so central to thereliable and effective operation of the now fully global Internet that its
control by a single nation is no longer justifiable. Some would prefer that
the ultimate stewardship reside in an intergovernmental body, such as a
U.N.-affiliated agencyÑfor example, the International Telecommunica-
tion UnionÑor a new organization specifically negotiated by treaty, such
as a ÒWorld Internet OrganizationÓ; others prefer an international body
that includes governments, the private sector, and civil society. Many of
the critics are national governments that have felt left out of the ICANN
process, in which their representation is through the Governmental Advi-
sory Committee (GAC),5 which until 2003 had advisory status only.6,7Indeed, Brazil has asserted that Òit is a myth that governments have a sayin ICANNÕs activities via the GAC . . . the influence of governments is
comparable to the influence of non-shareholders in a private company.Ó83For information about the World Summit on the Information Society, see <http://
www.itu.int/wsis/>.4See ÒGlobal Fight Looms for Net Management,Ó Reuters, September 16, 2003, available at<http://news.com.com/2102-1028_3-5077101.html>.5As of March 2005, the Governmental Advisory Committee comprised the representativesof 94 nations, as well as several international and regional organizations with observer sta-
tusÑthe African Telecommunications Union (ATU), Agence Inter-Gouvernmentale de laFrancophonie, Asia Pacific Telecommunity (APT), Commonwealth TelecommunicationsOrganization, Economic Commission for Africa, International Telecommunication Union
(ITU), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Pacific IslandsForum, and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).6For a history and analysis of the role of the GAC in ICANN, see Wolfgang Kleinwachter,ÒFrom Self-governance to Public-private Partnership: The Changing Role of Governmentsin the Management of the InternetÕs Core Resources,Ó 
Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review36(Spring): 1103-1126, 2003.7In September 2004, Norway argued, in a submission to a preparatory meeting for theWSIS, that the GAC needs stronger funding and Òcannot continue to have a mere counselingrole to the ICANN.Ó Norway called for a stronger and better-funded secretariat that would
enable the GAC to focus on more strategic and political issues. See World Summit on theInformation Society, Working Group on Internet Governance, written contribution from Norway,which is available at <http://www.itu.int/wsis/preparatory2/wgig/norway.pdf>.8As reported by ICANNWatch: ÒWGIG Will ReassessÑor Reassert?ÑGovernmentsÕ Rolein Internet,Ó which is available at <http://www.icannwatch.com/article.pl?sid=04/09/21/1812238&mode=thread>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEHowever reasonable the move toward international stewardshipmight appear in theory, in practice any change can be made only with the
acquiescence and active participation of the U.S. government. Not only
would the U.S. government have to be an important party to any transfer,
but it also holds an effective veto because all of the root name server op-
erators would have to agree to accept the root zone file from a new source,
yet 3 of the 12 operators are U.S. government agencies and 6 others are
U.S.-based organizations that may well be reluctant to take actions con-
trary to the wishes of the U.S. government.5.1.3Alternatives
In this light, an examination of three alternatives to U.S. governmentstewardship is instructive: an existing intergovernmental organization, a
new international organization formed by treaty, or an international (but
non-governmental) organization, such as ICANN or a successor. (Another
possibility would be to divide DNS governance responsibilities among
several organizations, each of which would have its own steward. Al-
though that may be an outcome of DNS governance decisions, this section
addresses the stewardship of the manager or managers of the DNS, what-
ever form it or they should take.)Alternative A: Existing Intergovernmental OrganizationÑInternational Telecommunication UnionDescriptionOf all the existing intergovernmental organizations, the one thatclaims the most relevant experience and that has expressed the greatest
interest in DNS governance is the Geneva-based International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU), a treaty organization affiliated with the United
Nations.9 Its membership comprises about 190 nations as well as morethan 650 firms and international organizations in the telecommunications
and information technology industries. Its Standardization Sector (ITU-T)
has long experience with the adoption and implementation of interna-
tional telecommunications standards, primarily for telephony but also for
some computer networking technologies that are now considered histori-9Other U.N. agencies have expressed interest in the broader question of Internet gover-nance, among them the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization,
which prepared a position statement for the U.N. I.C.T. Task Force Global Forum on InternetGovernance held in March 2004 in New York. See <http://www.itu.int/wsis/preparatory2/wgig/unesco.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES193cal in much of the world.10 A separate organization within the ITU, theRadiocommunication Sector (ITU-R), has responsibility for radio frequen-
cies and some regulatory authority under the applicable treaties. Its pro-
cesses and procedures are mature and, according to the ITU, Òthere are
sufficient checks and balances in place to ensure that vested interests can-
not misuse ITU processes for their particular interests.Ó11 All membergovernments and any interested private company (including registries,
registrars, Internet service providers (ISPs), and equipment suppliers) can
participate in ITU-TÕs work, but unless there is general agreement, only
governments can vote and only governments can be represented in ITUÕs
council, which has overall policy and strategy responsibility between ITU
plenipotentiary conferences.Because the ITU is an intergovernmental organization, it has sover-eign immunity, which obviates the need for liability insurance or worry
about liability affecting its decisions. Since concerns about the legal liabil-
ity it might be assuming appear to have affected ICANNÕs willingness to,
for example, enter into agreements with some ccTLDs that wanted to hold
it to predefined performance standards, and could affect its ability to take
on other roles, this advantage of an intergovernmental organization has
some weight. Conversely, however, it may make the ITU a less attractive
alternative to those ccTLDs and others that want to be able to hold a gov-
erning organization liable if it fails to perform its functions satisfactorily.The ITU members voted at its 2002 Plenipotentiary Conference inMorocco that it should play an active role in Òdiscussions and initiativesÓ
related to the DNS and IP address system with the goal of becoming the
forum in which public policy issues of Internet naming and numbering
are resolved. In its resolution from the meeting, the ITU identified Òstabil-
ity, security, freedom of use, protection of individual rights, sovereignty,
competition rules, and equal access for allÓ as important public policy
issues.12 Since that meeting, the ITU has campaigned for a more activerole in governance of the Internet generally and the DNS specifically. Its10ÒThe ITU-T performs world-wide administration, and acts as the forum for policy man-agement, of a number of naming and address allocation systems that are essential for the
good functioning of critical infrastructures, including the physical-layer infrastructure of theInternet itself . . . [and] such well-known examples as the E.164 numbering resource and theE.212 mobile numbering resource.Ó See Houlin Zhao, ITU-T and ICANN Reform, Telecom-munication Standards Bureau, ITU, April 17, 2002, pp. 3-4, available at <http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/tsb-director/itut-icann/ICANNreform.html>.11Zhao, ITU-T and ICANN Reform, 2002.12ITU Resolution 102,  Management of Internet Domain Names and Addresses, Marrakesh,Morocco, 2002, available at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/resolutions/2002/res102.html>.Also see Kevin Delaney, ÒGlobal Organization Seeks Voice in Internet Addressing System,Ó
Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2002, p. B4.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsponsorship of the Workshop on Internet Governance in February 2004and its consultation on forming the Working Group on Internet Gover-
nance in September 2004 are indicative of its continuing active interest.13EvaluationThe principal arguments in favor of moving stewardship of the DNSto the ITU are the broad international participation in the ITU, both by
governments and industry; its established processes for policy making; its
secure funding and sovereign immunity; and its long experience with
management of international telecommunications resources. Its interna-
tional treaty status would, perhaps, also give it greater influence over the
ccTLDs and the root name server operators. At the same time, ITU-T can-
not make decisions affecting competing parties or take actions without
agreement by its membership. If there is a disagreement between govern-
ments, aside from attempting to mediate, ITU-T can do nothing until a
plenipotentiary conference acts to resolve the matter, since only it has the
authority to make recommendations to governments (which, however,
can still ignore them). Furthermore, the ITUÕs charter does not allow in-
tervention in disputes within countries, such as might occur over the del-
egation or redelegation of a ccTLD registry.There are, moreover, objections to the ITUÕs assumption of the DNSstewardship role from the Internet technical and user communities and,
significantly, from the U.S. government.The technical and user communities have a distrust of the ITU for itslong record of opposing the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Pro-
tocol (TCP/IP) and for its unwillingness to make its standards publicly
available for use on the Internet. Additionally, they fear that the ITUÕs
bureaucracy and its structure and processes, which require that govern-
ments sign off on decisions, will lead to extremely slow decision making
unable to keep pace with the requirements of managing the DNS. Many
also fear that the large telecommunications companies, which have a long-
standing interest in and presence at the ITU, will dominate the processes.
It has generally been difficult for individuals and public interest groups to
participate in the ITUÕs processes, although the ITU has expressed a com-
mitment to change. Although it engaged individuals and groups in the
meeting on Internet governance that it sponsored in association with the
WSIS,14 it excluded non-governmental organizations from the decision-making sessions and it has not moved to change the ITUÕs charter or ITU-
TÕs internal rules to permit their active participation.13See materials at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/intgov/index.phtml/>.14See a list of participants at <http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/forum/intgov04/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES195The user communities are also concerned that the ITU would becomea vehicle for governments to exercise control over the registration of do-
main names and would use that control to enforce other policies such as
the local taxation of Internet commerce, intellectual property protection,
and the restriction of free speech and rights to privacy.From what is known of current U.S. government attitudes, both in theexecutive and legislative branches, transfer of DNS stewardship to an in-
tergovernmental organization is not likely to be supported now or in the
near future, although such attitudes can change.Conclusion: Despite the interest of the ITU and some of its nationalmembers in its assuming stewardship of the DNS root, that does not ap-
pear to be a realistic alternative for the near future.Alternative B: International Treaty OrganizationDescription and EvaluationThe negotiation of an international treaty to establish a special agencyof the United Nations for Internet governance is also not likely to be sup-
ported by the U.S. government. The example of other such negotiations
has shown that they take many years to complete, especially if gover-
nance or binding regulation are contemplated among its authority, rather
than just coordination or standardization, and are unlikely to succeed in
the absence of strong and sustained efforts by many nations, which de-
spite the currently expressed concerns does not seem likely. So this alter-
native does not appear to be realistic in the near term either.Conclusion: Although it is possible that the U.N.-sponsored 2005World Summit on the Information Society will lead to proposals for some
form of internationally negotiated, quasi-governmental or multi-stake-
holder organization with oversight or other influence over DNS gover-
nance, specific proposals are not yet (in December 2004) on the table and
cannot be evaluated for either their practicality or their feasibility.This leaves the third alternative, which follows.Alternative C: Private Organization with International ParticipationDescriptionThe only institution to which the U.S. government has expressed itswillingness to transfer its stewardship of the DNS is ICANN, or a similarSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEprivate, non-profit successor. Furthermore, this transfer of stewardshipcould occur only after ICANN (or a successor) had established its ability to
operate effectively, reliably, and with wide international and constituency
support for a number of years. Indeed, in its statement regarding the 1-year
extension of its MoU with ICANN in September 2002, the DOC said:The Department of Commerce (Department) continues to support thegoal of a private sector management of the Internet domain name system
(DNS). Innovation, expanded services, broader participation, and lowerprices will arise most easily in a market-driven arena, not in an environ-ment that operates under substantial regulation. To this end, the Depart-
ment has long maintained that a private sector organization is best ableto respond nimbly to DNS issues in the rapidly evolving Internet space.Further, in order to garner international respect and function stably and
soundly in the long-term, such an organization must be globally andfunctionally representative, operate on the basis of open and transparentprocesses, and possess robust, professional management.15In September 2003, the DOC granted ICANN a 3-year extension of itsMoU and indicated that if the agreementÕs milestones are met, it is pre-
pared to complete the transition of DNS management to the private sector
at the end of that period.16 More recently, in conjunction with ICANNÕsJuly 2004 meeting, the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communica-
tions and Information issued a statement expressing pleasure that
ÒICANN has timely met the MoU milestones to date. Clearly more work
remains to be done for ICANN to achieve functional, sustainable inde-
pendence. We look forward to continuing to work collaboratively with
ICANN . . . as we complete the transition to independent, private sector
management of the Internet Domain Name System.Ó17EvaluationAlthough these statements indicate the U.S. governmentÕs willingnessto give up the ultimate stewardship of the root, they also demonstrate its15Department of Commerce (DOC), ÒDepartment of Commerce Statement Regarding Ex-tension of Memorandum of Understanding with ICANN,Ó September 19, 2002, available at<http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/agreements/docstatement_09192002.htm>.16See amendment 6 to ICANN/DOC Memorandum of Understanding, September 16, 2003,available at <http://www.icann.org/general/amend6-jpamou-17sep03.htm>; and DOC,ÒDepartment of Commerce Statement Regarding Extension of Memorandum of Understand-
ing with ICANN,Ó September 16, 2003, available at <http://www.ntia.gov/ntiahome/domainname/agreements/sepstatement_09162003.htm>.17Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administra-tion, ÒStatement by Assistant Secretary Michael D. Gallagher on ICANNÕs July Meeting inKuala Lumpur,Ó press release, July 19, 2004, DOC, Washington, D.C.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES197unwillingness to do so until it is assured that ICANN can manage theDNS Òin a manner that promotes stability and security, competition, coor-
dination, and representation.Ó18The stewardship role of the DOC, while a matter of political concernto some nations, has not impeded ICANNÕs governance role, with the
important exception of sometimes substantial delays in approvals for rou-
tine changes in the root zone file, a situation that improved during 2004.19(See ÒApproving the Root Zone FileÓ in Section 3.3.3). For example, the
DOC has not overridden any ICANN recommendations for reasons of
U.S. national interest. The issues that have arisen about the governance of
the root have, rather, concerned the way in which ICANN operates in
preparing its recommendations to the DOC and not in the way that the
DOC operates once it receives those recommendations. In that respect,
the decision to establish an organization to take on the day-to-day admin-
istration of the root has successfully reduced those pressures on the U.S.
government while, at the same time, preserving its ultimate stewardship.The Internet in general and the DNS in particular have been devel-oped and governed with the goal of technically enabling equitable access
to all locations on the Internet to users anywhere on the globe. To best
serve the worldwide Internet and the DNS, the U.S. governmentÕs influ-
ence needs to continue to be exercised carefully and, in particular, this
influence should not be used as an instrument of U.S. domestic or foreign
policy in areas far removed from the Internet.Conclusion: Governance of the DNS is not an appropriate venue forthe playing out of national political interests.The technical legacy of the DNSÕs development and initial implemen-tation in the United States, such as the use of the ASCII character set for
domain names and the concentration of root servers in the United States,
has been a source of concern to some countries. Such concerns have been18DOC, ÒDepartment of Commerce Statement Regarding Extension of Memorandum ofUnderstanding with ICANN,Ó September 16, 2003, p. 2.19There has been dissatisfaction among the ccTLD managers over the length of time re-quired by ICANN and the DOC to approve routine changes to the root zone file. In re-
sponse, ICANN prepared a revised process designed to cut the time substantially and tokeep requesters informed of progress in the approval process.  See Internet Assigned Num-bers Authority (IANA), ÒProcedures for Handling Requests by ccTLD Managers to Change
Nameservers,Ó May 13, 2003, available at <http://www.iana.org/cctld/nameserver-change-procedures-13may03.htm>. These revised procedures and other changes have significantlyreduced the time taken to make changes in the root zone file as reported by the general
manager of ICANN/IANA at the Kuala Lumpur meeting of ICANN. His full report, includ-ing specific data, is available at <http://www.icann.org/presentations/barton-forum-kl-22jul04.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEor are in the process of being addressed and they should, consequently,be substantially reduced or eliminated.Although there may be continued objection by some nations to theright of the U.S. government to exercise its role,20 the United States hascommitted itself to a contractual 3-year transition to ICANN under the
conditions laid out in the amended MoU. The real question is whether
ICANN will be able to gain full legitimacy in the perception of other na-
tional governments and constituencies during this period.Conclusion: The continued evolution of ICANN to attain legitimacyamong its critical constituencies and, consequently, to receive steward-
ship responsibility from the U.S. government appears to be the most fea-
sible path to governance of the DNS that is broadly accepted as interna-
tional.The prospects of ICANNÕs assuming stewardship of the DNS are ad-dressed in the discussion of ICANNÕs role that follows.5.2MANAGEMENT OF THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM
Issue: What changes, if any, are required in ICANNÕs organization and man-agement for it to achieve greater legitimacy?When the DOC delegated responsibility for day-to-day management ofthe root to ICANN in 1998, it was with the expectation that ICANN would
soon be perceived as a legitimate steward of the root as well. Yet, although
ICANN is not a part of the U.S. government and its board has had an inter-
national membership, its legitimacy was not immediately accepted.21 ThecriticsÕ concerns have been with (1) ICANNÕs scope, (2) its organizational
structure, (3) or its management processes, or with all three. The concern
about scope has been the extent to which ICANN has exceeded its specific
technical-administrative responsibilities to, for example, regulate TLD reg-
istry operations. The concerns about structure have included a perceived
imbalance in the historical composition of ICANNÕs board, failings in the
processes by which the board was selected, and the inadequate representa-
tion of certain constituency groups. The concerns about management pro-
cesses have included the lack of transparency, effectiveness, accountability,
and recourse in ICANNÕs electoral and decision processes.20In the recent U.N.-sponsored forums on Internet governance, a few nations have ex-pressed a concern that their ccTLDs could be removed from the root by the U.S. governmentfor political reasons.21See, for example, Jonathan Weinberg, ÒICANN and the Problem of Legitimacy,Ó DukeLaw Journal 50:187-257, 2000.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES1995.2.1Scope of ICANNÕs Authority
The first controversy affecting ICANNÕs perceived legitimacy is itsappropriate scopeÑthe extent of its responsibilities and authority. On the
one hand, there are those who believe that ICANN should stick as closely
as possible to its technical-administrative charter, eschewing responsibil-
ity for seemingly related matters that require it to make value-laden judg-
ments that have political, commercial, or social effects.22 Such mattersinclude the administrative approval of new gTLDs, regulation of the busi-
ness practices of gTLD registries, and the delegation or redelegation of
ccTLD registries. On the other hand, ICANN currently engages in each of
those activities as a result of decisions taken by its staff and board during
its early years. ICANN may have assumed those decision responsibilities
because there was no other organization able to take them on, because
they believed that there was no non-judgmental way of resolving issues
that ICANN confronted in connection with its technical-administrative
responsibilities, or because of the views and aspirations of the board and
staff.There should be a connection among the breadth of ICANNÕs activi-ties, the pressure on it to broaden membership on its board and engage
more constituencies in its decisions, and the acceptance of its legitimacy
by various constituency groups. Were ICANN able, for example, to nar-
row its scope primarily to the IANA administrative functions, to use eco-
nomic processes such as auctions or lotteries to allocate TLDs, and to del-
egate to third parties the politically sensitive decisions such as
redelegation of ccTLDs, then the pressures might ease, and acceptance of
ICANNÕs legitimacy as an essentially administrative body might become
easier. However, in actual implementation, even economic processes re-
quire some potentially sensitive decisions to be taken (see Section 5.4.2);
delegation entails the question of delegation to whom; and apparently
routine administrative processes, such as contracting with a gTLD regis-
try, entail judgments about what provisionsÑif anyÑare necessary to
protect the technical integrity of the DNS, safeguard the interests of regis-
trants, and meet the needs of intellectual property owners while preserv-
ing freedom of expression.Conclusion: ICANN is more likely to achieve perceived legitimacywith a narrower scope rather than with a broader one.22See, for example, Center for Democracy and Technology, ICANN and Internet Governance:Getting Back to Basics, July 2004, available at <http://www.cdt.org/dns/icann/20040713_cdt.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEHowever, it may not be possible or desirable to narrow ICANNÕsscope to a purely technical-administrative one because of the difficulty of
performing such functions without making some politically, socially, or
economically sensitive judgments. Moreover, ICANN might very well at-
tract controversy simply because it would be the most visible organiza-
tion with some, however limited, authority over the DNS.5.2.2Composition of the ICANN Board
The second controversy concerns ICANNÕs organizational structure.If it is to be widely perceived as legitimate, what should the composition
of the ICANN board be and how should its members be selected? Those
questions have been the subject of dispute since ICANN was formed. To a
large extent, the dispute stems from different views of ICANNÕs proper
scope.Those who believe that ICANN is principally a technical-administra-tive body may favor selection of the board by members of the technical-
administrative community from among the members of that community
on the basis of expertise and experienceÑa traditional process in that com-
munity. In contrast, those who see ICANN as a major element of Internet
governance may favor a board comprising representatives of the broad
Internet user community chosen, so as to achieve legitimacy, through an
open electoral processÑInternet democracy. Those who see ICANNÕs
scope as lying between these two views might favor a board representa-
tive of various constituencies selected through some combination of con-
stituency elections and peer selections. Finally, some governments feel
that because the Internet (and the DNS) has become a central element of
the global communications infrastructure, it requires governmental over-
sight and regulation and, therefore, ICANNÕs board should consist only
or principally of governmental representatives.23Much of the debate about ICANNÕs board stems from the differencesamong these perspectives.In its first days, the 18-member ICANN board was selected withoutparticipation by many Internet constituencies, despite a DOC-imposed
requirement in its bylaws that half the board be elected by a membership.
The boardÕs composition quickly became a source of controversy as
ICANN addressed issues of broad significance and social-economic-
political consequence, such as the addition of new gTLDs and the23Since those countries have principally been calling for the ITU or another U.N. agency toassume DOC/ICANN functions, they have not at the time of this writing made this sugges-tion. However, should they determine that those options are not feasible, they might turn to
this view.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES201development of the UDRP. This put ICANN under pressure to imple-ment the requirement for democratically chosen representation of the
broad Internet community on the board. That pressure led it to experi-
ment with a process of open Internet voting for five (the DOC-required
one-half would have been nine) regionally representative members of the
board. That experiment, in turn, raised questions among some ICANN
participants about the legitimacy of an open Internet vote, which they
charged was vulnerable to capture by intensely interested, but not neces-
sarily representative, groups and open to possible fraud. Others felt that it
brought onto the board new members whose views were more represen-
tative of those of the broader Internet community than were the views of
the previously appointed members.24 Recently, ICANN has moved awayfrom that model of a partially elected board to one that more closely fol-
lows the in-between case described above. The 15-member board in 2004
comprises six representatives selected by the three major constituency
groups (the Generic Names Supporting OrganizationÑGNSO; the Coun-
try Code Names Supporting OrganizationÑccNSO; and the Address Sup-
porting OrganizationÑASO); eight others chosen by a board-selected
nominating committee, which includes representatives of ICANN stake-
holders, from nominations made by constituency groups and the public;
and the ICANN president, serving ex officio.The legitimacy of the ICANN board has also been undercut by theperception by some that the selection of its initial members was severely
flawed. Critics charge that it was done top-down by ICANNÕs managers
and did not represent a diversity of views. In their judgment, board mem-
bers lacked political experience and ties to constituencies and were, there-
fore, ill-prepared to supervise the managers who selected them. Most of
the members of that initial board remained in place longer than antici-
pated, during which time many of the key policies and processes of
ICANN were put in place. These critics see the selection, composition,
and actions of the initial board as having weakened ICANNÕs claims to
legitimacy.Since disagreements about ICANNÕs board composition and selec-tion appear to arise in some measure from different views of ICANNÕs
scope, they are likely to be difficult to resolve unless and until there is
broader agreement on that scope. In the more likely situation, where there
is not agreement among all parties on its scope, ICANN will probably24A recent academic study of ICANNÕs experiment in Òrunning a representative and opencorporate decision-making processÓ judged it to have Òlargely failed.Ó  See John G. Palfrey,

Jr.,  ÒThe End of the Experiment: How ICANNÕs Foray into Global Internet Democracy
Failed,Ó Research Publication No.2004-2, Beckman Center for Internet & Society, HarvardUniversity, 2004, available at <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/publications>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcontinue to be subject to some criticisms of its legitimacy. As in all politi-cal processes, ICANNÕs goal will be to ensure that the most important
constituencies are not among the critics. In particular, it will have to con-
vince the Department of Commerce that it has achieved legitimacy among

the most important constituencies in order to fulfill the terms of its most
recent MoU with the DOC.It should also be noted that even if there were agreement on ICANNÕsproper scope, ICANN would still face numerous practical problems of
representation. What would it take, for example, for it to be seen as truly
international? Does it suffice, for example, simply to have one board mem-
ber from each region? Or should the distribution of board membership
better reflect Internet usage in each country or region? Or should it, per-
haps, reflect the geographic distribution of registered domain names? This
appears to be an inherently difficult problem to which any proposed solu-
tion may incur objections from some of those nations that are not directly
represented. (Even direct representation may not suffice. Two of the coun-
tries that have been most critical of ICANN in international forums are
Brazil and China, both of which have nationals on the ICANN board.)In a similar way, the broadest view of ICANNÕs appropriate scopeimplies that the board reflects the many Internet constituencies having an
interest in its decisions. But there is no agreed list of those constituencies,
nor would the list be likely to remain unchanged. Even assuming that a
list could be agreed upon, should one board member be selected from
each constituency despite the fact that constituencies are of different size
and degrees of importance? And how should each constituency make its
selection? In the event that elections are used: Who is the electorate? How
are they to be reached? How can the validity of their votes be assured?These difficulties are not matters of ICANNÕs making. They arise fromthe unique situation in which it finds itself and would confront any other
non-governmental organization attempting to manage an economically,
socially, and politically significant component of the global infrastructure.Conclusion: No composition of the ICANN board, no matter howarrived at, is likely by itself to confer the perception of legitimacy on
ICANN among all its possible constituency groups.5.2.3Nature of ICANNÕs Management Processes
The third controversy concerns ICANNÕs management processes. Per-haps the goal of perceived legitimacy could be achieved through refining
the processes by which ICANN carries out its work and makes its deci-
sions. From its inception, ICANN has indicated that it would use bottom-
up, consensus-based, and transparent decision processes. The aspirationSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES203for such processes largely reflected the culture of the early Internet com-munity, especially the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). It fit well
with that small, relatively homogeneous group in which technical exper-
tise and experimental results drove most decisions. However, it has not
turned out to be as effective a tool for making the value-laden decisions
that have faced ICANN in an environment with a very large number of
users, many of whom are not technical experts, holding highly diverse
and often fundamentally different goals and values that are often not sus-
ceptible to resolution through consensus.Although ICANN put in place a formal structure of constituencygroups with apparent input into the boardÕs decision processes, prior to
the recent reform, at least, it had not succeeded in employing them in
such a way that they were perceived to identify consensus views, or even
to ensure that all constituency opinions were heard during the process. In
part, this was the result of failure of the constituency groups to partici-
pate, but there were also questions about the weight given to some con-
stituency groups and the absence of others.Thus, although ICANN has made efforts to fulfill its promises usingthe current processes, it appears doubtful thatÑas long as ICANN is more

than a purely technical-administrative bodyÑany set of processes that
was both efficient and effective could be restricted to bottom-up, consen-
sus decision making among imperfectly defined constituency groups.ICANNÕs existing processes have also been heavily criticized for theirlack of transparency, for the failure to document the logic of decisions, for
the absence of a process of appeal, and for the heavy reliance on non-
accountable staff and consultants. Many ICANN observers view account-
ability as an Òessential component of legitimacy for ICANN.Ó25Conclusion: Improvement of ICANNÕs processes appears to be a nec-essary step toward strengthening its perceived legitimacy.For the reasons noted above, it would be difficult to strengthenICANNÕs perceived legitimacy if the focus on bottom-up, consensus deci-
sion making were retained. It would be more practical to concentrate on25Center for Democracy and Technology, ÒComments of the Center for Democracy andTechnology to the Committee on ICANN Evolution and Reform,Ó May 3, 2002, available at<http://www.cdt.org/dns/icann/020503ceir.shtml>.  See also Tamar Frankel, ÒAccount-

ability and Oversight of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers(ICANN),Ó Report to the Markle Foundation, July 12, 2002, available at <http://www.markle.org/news/ICANN_fin1_9.pdf>; and Center for Global Studies, ÒEnhancing
Legitimacy in the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers: Accountable andTransparent Governance Structures,Ó final report to the Markle Foundation, September 18,2002, available at <http://www.markle.org/news/ICANN_Final_Sept18.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEmaking conventional majority-vote decisions through processes that areaccepted by its constituencies as being open to input from all those having
a legitimate interest, transparent and observable in all their stages, and
fair to all participants.5.2.4Alternatives
In response to the criticisms of its structure and management prac-tices, ICANN began implementing a significant reform in early 2003. Dur-
ing 2002, while it was examining what specific steps to take, a number of
external groups put forward specific proposals of their own. Those pro-
posals demonstrate the diversity of the interests that attempt to influence
ICANN and that remain active or potential critics of its efforts. Further-
more, should the current ICANN reform not prove successful, those pro-
posals are likely to reappear in their original or a modified form. Thus,
both to show the forces that ICANN faces and to characterize the alterna-
tives to its current reform, this section summarizes and evaluates some of
the major alternative paths that have been proposed for ICANN to achieve
legitimacy in the eyes of its critical constituencies.Two distinctly different groups of approaches to ICANNÕs structurewere proposed: broadening and narrowing. The broadening approaches
would keep or extend ICANNÕs scope and keep or broaden the number of
groups that participate in its processes on the board and through other
means. In contrast, the narrowing approaches would narrow both
ICANNÕs scope and the diversity of stakeholders directly involved. Each
approach would also have consequences for the nature of the processes
ICANN employed.The alternatives described and evaluated below include two broad-ening proposalsÑone by the Markle Foundation and the other by the
Non-governmental Organization and Academic ICANN Study groupÑ
and two narrowing proposals, one that ICANN serve solely as the regis-
try for the root and another that it be a private trade association. The
discussion concludes with two proposals that combine a narrowing of
scope with a broadening of participationÑa proposal by the Center for
Democracy and Technology, and the actual reform that ICANN adopted
in 2003.Alternative A: Markle Foundation Proposal (2002)DescriptionThe president of the Markle Foundation, Zo‚ Baird, presented recom-mendations for improving ICANNÕs credibility and legitimacy in a 2002Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES205Foreign Affairs article.26 These recommendations entailed changes tobroaden participation in the board and to improve its processes.With respect to the board, Baird said:ICANNÕs credibility as a global manager of critical parts of the InternetÕsinfrastructure depends on the boardÕs ability to ensure that all the variousprivate and public interests are represented [emphasis added]. Governmentinvolvement is one step toward providing public-interest representationbut is insufficient on its own. Only with truly broad representation on its
boardÑincluding non-profit organizationsÑcan ICANN adequately ad-dress the crisis of legitimacy that plagues it [emphasis added].27Baird also recommended changes in ICANNÕs processes:ICANN must take steps to bolster transparency and accountability. Thesesteps should include some kind of public oversight by politically account-
able officials; development of due-process principles and clear, publiclyavailable procedures for the resolution of complaints; public disclosureof its funding sources and budgets; staff and board members who are
held accountable to a clear set of professional norms and standards; openmeetings; and documentation of the rationale for ICANNÕs policy deci-sions and actions.28EvaluationAlthough pointing in attractive directions, the Markle proposalÕs rec-ommendations about ICANN board composition are, unfortunately, too
general to confront and resolve the practical difficulties of their imple-
mentation. For example: What are the groups that constitute ÒallÓ public
and private interests that should be represented on the board? How many
different governments need to be on the board to represent all public in-
terests? How many non-profits need to be represented to cover all other
public interests? In sum, how many board members would be required to
provide representation of all public and private interests? How can the
number be kept from becoming unwieldy?The Markle proposalÕs recommendation on process, although stillgeneral, appear to lead more directly to practical implementation. In the
specific case of Òpublic oversight by politically accountable officialsÓ it
should be observed that, in fact, that is the role that the DOC currently
plays and effects through its MoU with ICANN. For reasons adduced
before, it is not clear that the U.S. government would be agreeable to shar-26See Zo‚ Baird, ÒGoverning the Internet: Engaging Government, Business, andNonprofits,Ó Foreign Affairs, November/December 2002, pp. 15-20.27Baird, ÒGoverning the Internet,Ó 2002.28Baird, ÒGoverning the Internet,Ó 2002.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEing that oversight with officials of other governments. Even if it were,there is the question, once again, of which governments and which public
officials should play that role.Alternative B: Non-governmental Organization andAcademic ICANN Study Proposal (2001)DescriptionThe Non-governmental Organization and Academic ICANN Study(NAIS) group described itself as Òa collaboration of experts from around
the world, formed to explore public participation in ICANN and the se-
lection of At-Large Directors on ICANNÕs governing board.Ó29 The NAISgroup was self-selected and directed but was funded by a grant from the
Markle Foundation, whose president is Zo‚ Baird, author of the ForeignAffairs article in which alternative A appeared. In its report, published inAugust 2001, the NAIS group summarized its arguments for broad public
participation in ICANNÕs board:¥ÒThe mission, character, and history of ICANN requires [sic] glo-bal public participation and representation for its long-term legiti-
macy and stability.Ó¥ÒTo the extent possible, the entire affected Internet communityÑfrom companies in the business of providing DNS services, to do-
main name holders impacted by ICANNÕs rules, to individual
Internet users and consumers whose activities online could be
shaped by ICANNÕs rulesÑshould be considered stakeholders in
ICANNÕs activities.Ó¥ÒICANNÕs existing supporting organization structures [in 2001], orrepresentation by governments, do not alone provide appropriate
public participation.Ó¥ÒÔAt-LargeÕ Participatory Structures and Representation on theBoard are therefore essential channels for broader stakeholder in-
volvement and ICANNÕs legitimacy.ÓOn the basis of these arguments, the NAIS groupÕs report assertedtwo Òoverarching principles: The public membership [of ICANN] should
be given structure and the public membership should be given represen-
tation.Ó To fulfill those principles, it made six recommendations:29Non-governmental Organization and Academic ICANN Study Group, ÒICANN, Legiti-macy, and the Public Voice: Making Global Participation and Representation Work,ÓAugust, 2001, available at <http://www.naisproject.org>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES207¥ÒICANN should constitute a broad membership open to all whocomplete a relatively simple registration process.Ó¥Ò. . . the At-Large Membership should have internal structures thatpromote policy deliberation, coalition building and information
sharing among Members.Ó¥ÒThe public voice in ICANN should be represented at the Boardlevel through a number of At-Large Directors equal to the number
of Directors chosen by the Supporting Organizations.Ó¥ÒAt-Large Directors should be chosen through direct election bythe At-Large Membership. Direct elections, while imperfect, are
more likely to provide ICANN with global legitimacy than other
proposed options.Ó¥Specific processes should be followed to authenticate voters, toachieve both geographic and global representation, and to refine
election policies.¥To ensure the publicÕs voice in ICANN, it should develop struc-tural constraints on Board authority, create additional accountabil-
ity mechanisms, and should pursue Supporting Organization re-
formÑstructure, processes, and Board representation.ÒThus,Ó the NAIS groupÕs report concluded, Òit is essential for ICANNto establish an inclusive, open At-Large Membership, with a clear means
to participate in the decision-making process and substantial direct repre-
sentation on the Board.ÓEvaluationThis is a clear and full expression of the view that ICANNÕs influenceon the Internet is so broad and important that the InternetÕs end users
must have a strong role (equal to that of the supporting organizations) in
its governance. It avoids the question of determining which constituen-
cies should be represented by merging them all into a common ÒpublicÓ
constituency comprising all who sign up and are authenticated through
the best available method. Representation would be by region, with some
global representatives as well. Voting would be done online, which has
the advantages of speed, global availability, and economy but has been
criticized because of the potential for fraud, for capture or disruption by a
determined group, and for possibly wide national differences in partici-
pation. In addition, the populations and Internet participation rates differ
greatly among regions, suggesting that equal representation may not be
the best approach.While opening participation to such a broad potential membershipwould undoubtedly increase the perception of ICANNÕs legitimacySignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEamong a number of its constituencies, open participation might have theopposite effect on those constituencies that take a narrower view of
ICANNÕs role and stakeholders. This illustrates the point made in Section
5.2.2 that differing, perhaps irreconcilable, views of ICANNÕs role lead to
different views about the proper composition and selection of its board.
(The ICANN reform (alternative F) that is being implemented did create
the At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC) with a non-voting liaison
member on the board.)Alternative C: ICANN as Registry for the Root (2004)
30DescriptionThe opposite approach (to alternative B) to enhancing ICANNÕs per-ceived legitimacy would be to focus ICANN on its primary role as regis-
try for the root,
31 with responsibility for reliability, security, accuracy,and availability, and to design its governance and operations accordingly.Under this approach, ICANNÕs governance would be simplified bynarrowing its controlling constituencies to four groups of primary stake-
holders:¥The gTLD and ccTLD registries that depend on the root to directpotential users to them,¥The root name server operators that provide access to the root zonefile,¥The Internet service providers (ISPs) and intranets that rely on theroot to enable them to do lookups on the TLDs, and¥The technical community that defines protocols and standards af-fecting the root and its operation.Only these groups would participate directly in ICANNÕs governance.Since all of them are directly affected by or directly affect the operation of
the root, they would, in effect, constitute a self-governing body. Follow-
ing the tradition established by ICANN, these stakeholder groups could30This proposal has been constructed for discussion purposes only. It is not a recommen-dation by the committee. It was created to illustrate how a narrowly focused ICANN mightoperate and be governed. It bears some resemblance to, but differs in important ways from,the perspective presented in Elliot Noss, Timothy M. Denton, and Ross Wm. Rader, ÒA New
Approach to ICANN Reform: The Heathrow Declaration,Ó March 25, 2002, available at<http://www.byte.org/heathrow/heathrow-declaration-v0r0d5-032502.html>.31ICANNÕs other roles concerning the IP address space and protocols could be retained orturned over to a strictly technical body.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES209organize themselves into supporting organizations or forums to considerissues of special interest to their respective groups and to forward pro-
posals to the ICANN board.(The group of domain name registrants and the registrars that servethem are not directly included in this alternative, although they have a
more direct interest in the operation of the DNS than, say, the much larger
group of all Internet users. A variant of this alternative could include
them, but it would make voting and funding much more complex and
difficult to balance. This alternative assumes that their views will be heard
either through the registries and ISPs or through direct presentation to
the board.)All other interested partiesÑinternational agencies, governments,32private commercial and non-commercial users and suppliers, registrars,
domain name registrants, individual Internet users, and public interest
groupsÑwould be considered secondary stakeholders that could influ-
ence ICANN through one of the primary stakeholders, by testifying at
hearings and board meetings, and by lobbying individually or through
private and public interest organizations.Although ICANN would remain a not-for-profit organization, theTLDs, ISPs, and intranets would be required to pay a fee for listing in the
root (if a TLD) or for access to the root zone file (if an ISP, intranet, or
other large user33). A portion of the funds collected would compensatethe root name service providers34 for their service and would subsidizethe technical community to conduct testing and validation activities. The
funds would also cover the costs of the IANA function of ICANN and its
other registry activities.The boardÕs members would be elected for fixed terms by the fouror five stakeholder groups. The number of votes cast by each TLD or
ISP would be proportional to its annual fee to ICANN, which would
be in some relationship to its demand for root service, for example, as
measured by the number of registrations for TLDs and the number of
IP addresses for ISPs. The number of votes cast by each of the root
service providers and by each technical organization would be propor-
tional to the annual payments it received, which would be based on its32National governmentsÕ interests in their ccTLDs would not be subject to this body, ex-cept when a conflict over the operator of the ccTLD registry occurred.33Small, non-commercial users would be exempt unless they wanted to participate inICANN governance.34Full implementation of this alternative would probably require replacement of the U.S.government-operated root name servers so that they could receive payments.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACErequirements. (Note that the sum of the payment-based votes wouldequal the sum of the fee-based votes less a number of votes propor-
tional to the operating expenses of ICANN itself. These could form a
third category of votes that would be cast by the ICANN president.)
Tying board voting power to payments would provide an incentive
both for payment and for participation, particularly by the ccTLDs and
root name server operators.The board would operate like the board of a public agency, takingdecisions based on its collective judgment as informed by public hear-
ings. On special issues, stakeholders could petition for a stakeholder vote,
similar to a shareholder vote in a commercial corporation.EvaluationThe approach described in alternative C for narrowing ICANNÕsscope is in strong contrast to the proposals for a broadly representa-
tive board that relies on bottom-up consensus-based processes. It sub-
stitutes a board that is intended to reflect the interests and experi-
ence of the immediate providers and users of root name service only.
In doing so, it reconceives ICANN as a narrower, more technically
focused body whose decisions would be limited to those that affect
the ability of the root to meet the needs of those who have direct
recourse to it. It would have the means to exercise authority over the
root service providers through its payments to them, while they

would gain influence on its decisions through their consequent vot-
ing power. Each TLD would pay a fee to be listed in the root, but the
amount would depend on the number of its direct registrants (not
including registrants in the subdomains of its registrants) and would
be proportional to its voting power. Very large TLDs, such as .com,would have a substantial number of votes, but not enough to over-
come the sum of the votes of other TLDs, the root name service pro-
viders, and the technical community. The most difficult issue would
be imposing a fee on the ISPs for access to the root zone file since
there is no practical way to prevent access to those that have not paid.
The threat of exclusion from ICANN activities and decisions would
be the primary incentive for payment.Because it runs counter to the design intent of ICANN, to the cul-tural traditions of the Internet, and to ICANNÕs own recent reforms, the
approach of focusing ICANN on its role as registry for the root is un-
likely to be adopted in the near future. However, it illustrates one pos-
sible model of a narrowly focused ICANN and stands, therefore, as a
clear contrast to the more expansive models described in alternatives A,
B, E, and F.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES211Alternative D: New.net ProposalÑICANN as aPrivate Trade Association (2002)DescriptionAnother narrowly focused model for ICANN was proposed in 2002by New.net. 35 Under this proposal, ICANN would gain legitimacy byreconstituting itself as an international consensus-based trade association
for Òparties interested in issues related to domain names, IP addresses
and Internet protocols.Ó36 The association would be the vehicle for devel-oping and promulgating industry-wide practices and policies. Because
policies would be developed through industry consensus, its proponents
believe that these policies and practices would be more likely to be

adopted voluntarily by the association members. They point to the con-
sensus process, for example, that led to film producersÕ widespread adop-
tion of the Motion Picture Association of AmericaÕs film rating practices.ICANN as a trade association would also be characterized by a relianceon market forces as the Òdominant factor in regulating conduct of persons
buying, selling and using Internet-related products and services.Ó37 Theforces of the market would be expected to induce entrepreneurs and compa-
nies to introduce a wide range of innovative services that would succeed or
fail based on usersÕ experience with them, crucially including their
interoperability with other services. In other words, the proponents of this
alternative expect that many of the concerns that have driven ICANN to a
regulatory model and, in particular, the protection of a single authoritative
root and the controlled pace of new gTLD entries would be better handled by
letting the market decide. These proponents believe that the market would
reject any innovation that harms the functioning of the DNS and the Internet.Where regulation would be required to supplement industry agree-ments and market forces, this alternative would rely on existing practices,
using national, regional, and local governments or formal intergovern-
mental treaties. In the proponentsÕ view: ÒIt is hubris to assume that there
is something so special about Internet naming issues that the domain
name industry requires a unique form of government that is different from
all other industries.Ó38One consequence of adopting this alternative would be the possibleproliferation of DNS root zones, which might be created by countries un-35New.net (see Section 3.3.1) is a commercial organization that offers an alternative rootand related search service. It has an obvious self-interest in a proposal that calls for estab-lishment of alternative roots.36New.net, ÒA Proposal for More Realistic Domain Name Governance,Ó March 2002, p. 13,available at <http://www.new.net/WhitePaper_v2.pdf>.37New.net, ÒA Proposal for More Realistic Domain Name Governance,Ó 2002, p. 15.38New.net, ÒA Proposal for More Realistic Domain Name Governance,Ó 2002, p. 16.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEhappy with U.S. control of the Òlegacy rootÓ or desirous of one in theirnational language, or by corporations, like New.net, that see business op-
portunities in offering roots containing additional TLDs and operating un-
der different policies. To alleviate the concerns of key players, the proposal
suggests that the United States retain policy control of the legacy root; that
other nations form a ccTLD association that would agree on the contents of
the ccTLD component of the root; and that the United States contract with
that association to ensure inclusion of those entries in the legacy root. Other
root zone providers would decide whether to include the legacy root or the
ccTLD entries in their root. Finally, the workings of the market would de-
termine whether any root zone, other than the legacy root, would survive.EvaluationAs with alternative C, the approach of ICANN as trade association movesaway from the notion of a broadly representative board for ICANN and re-
places it with a smaller set of stakeholders that have a direct interest in oper-
ating the root. However, it retains the basic consensus decision-making pro-
cess and, while not specifically limiting the range of 
ICANNÕs action, doesindicate a strong preference for leaving decisions to the operation of market
forces. Because of that preference, it loosens restrictions on the technical sys-
tem of the DNS (such as maintenance of a unique root, regulation of TLD
registry services, and a relatively slow, controlled addition of new TLDs) that
many in the technical community have said are required to retain the
InternetÕs stability, openness, and uniform accessibility.While obviously serving the interests of its principal proponent in al-lowing alternative roots and, thereby, opening the market for gTLDs, alter-
native D does suggest how a market-based, free-entry management of the
root might be designed. Like the preceding alternative, new.netÕs proposal

challenges existing views, in this case those of the Internet technical com-
munity, about what constraints are required to protect the DNS technical
system. Although it is unlikely to be put into practice in the near future, it is
another model available for consideration should other reform efforts fail.Alternative E: Center for Democracy and Technology ProposalÑNarrowed Scope with Broad Participation (2004)DescriptionIn July 2004, the Center for Democracy and Technology published areport39 that called for both narrowing the scope of ICANNÕs mission and39See Center for Democracy and Technology, ICANN and Internet Governance, 2004. Allquoted material in this section, ÒDescription,Ó is from that report.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES213broadening participation in its activities. At the same time, it supportedthe consensus-based approach to decision making.With regard to mission, it urged ICANN to:¥ÒReaffirm the extremely limited mission that [it] was created toaccomplish . . . the technical function of coordinating the assigning
of names and numbers . . . and a few inextricably related policy
questionsÓ;¥ÒRefrain from using [its] coordination role as leverage to engage inpolicymaking in broader areasÓ;¥ÒReassess and ensure its contracts with registries provide both thereality and appearance of a limited approach to coordination of
registry activitiesÓ; and¥ÒAdopt an approach to coordination that seeks to minimize policyimpacts.ÓWith respect to participation in decision making, it urged ICANN to:
¥ÒStrengthen activities to engage diverse constituencies around theworld in [its] decision-making.ÓWith reference to decision processes, it urged ICANN to:
¥ÒSupport the consensus-based approach to decision-making thatwas core to the original concept under which [it] was createdÓ;¥Make its decision making Òtransparent, predictable and open tobroad global participation by stakeholders, including usersÓ; and¥Make its Òfuture policies binding only if they are supported by ademonstrable bottom-up consensus among affected parties.ÓIt also asserted that ICANNÕs Òonly real and legitimate power comesfrom voluntary [emphasis in the original] contracts and certain other mu-tually acceptable relationships and agreements.ÓEvaluationAlternative E was published as a proposal in the context of the WorldSummit on the Information Society to refute the arguments and correct
the misperceptions of those who see ICANN as a Òprecedent or justifica-
tionÓ for international centralization of Internet governance. It does so by
emphasizing the limited scope of ICANNÕs original mission and its char-
ter obligation to apply only policies arrived at by Òbottom-up consensus
among affected parties.ÓSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBecause it focuses on narrowing ICANNÕs scope and at the same timeencourages ICANN to broaden participation by diverse constituencies
around the world and rely on consensus decision-making policies, alter-
native E appears somewhat inconsistent. For it would seem that restrain-
ing ICANNÕs role to the technical-administrative function (and a few
tightly linked policy matters) would, at the same time, reduce the number
of interested constituencies and the range of policy issues requiring con-
sensus decision making, though it would make the latter more feasible. It
is primarily a call for ICANN to Òget back to basicsÓ and reverse the steps
taken to set and apply non-consensus policies beyond ICANNÕs original
narrow scope.Alternative F: Reformed ICANNÑNarrowed Scope with BroadParticipation (2003)DescriptionThe issues facing ICANN in 2002 of board composition, constituencyparticipation, funding, and decision processes were brought into the open
and given formal recognition when the then-president, M. Stuart Lynn,
published a critique of ICANNÕs operations.40 This led to the creation of acommittee to study and make recommendations on ICANNÕs governance.
The committeeÕs report was published in October 200241 and its recom-mendations, after board consideration in November 2002,42 have beenimplemented.The new ICANN bylaws, which took effect in 2003, have remade thegoverning structure of ICANN, especially the board and the supporting
organizations that represent its constituencies. They are derived from a
mission statement revised and sharpened in response to the widely held
perception that ICANN had suffered from a vague and undefined con-
cept of its mission. The new mission statement is as follows:The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) isthe private-sector body responsible for coordinating the global InternetÕs
systems of unique identifiers.The mission of ICANN is to coordinate the stable operation of theInternetÕs unique identifier systems. In particular, ICANN:40M. Stuart Lynn, ÒPresidentÕs Report: ICANNÑthe Case for Reform,Ó February 24, 2002,available at <http://www.icann.org/general/lynn-reform-proposal-24feb02.htm>.41Committee on ICANN Evolution and Reform, ÒFinal Implementation Report and Rec-ommendations,Ó October 2, 2002, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/evol-
reform/final-implementation-report-02oct02.htm>.42ICANN Board of Directors Meeting in Shanghai, ÒPreliminary Report,Ó November 1,2002, available at <http://www.icann.org/minutes/prelim-report-31oct02.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES2151.Coordinates the allocation and assignment of three sets of unique
identifiers of the InternetÑdomain names, IP addresses and au-tonomous system (AS) numbers, and protocol ports and param-
eter numbers.2.Coordinates the operation and evolution of the DNSÕs root name
server system.3.Coordinates policy-development as reasonably and appropriately
related to the performance of these functions.43In conjunction with the mission statement, ICANN adopted 11 corevalues that ICANN will adhere to, including preservation of Internet sta-
bility, reliability, security, and interoperability; limiting activities to those
benefiting from global scope; delegation where feasible; broad, informed
participation; dependence on market mechanisms where feasible; promo-
tion of domain name registry competition; open and transparent policy
development; application of documented policies; speedy action; account-
ability; and sensitivity to the public interest and related governmental con-
cerns.Under the new bylaws, the governing structure consists of a board ofdirectors with 15 voting members: 8 selected by a nominating committee;
6 selected by three supporting organizations44 (2 from each); and the
president of ICANN, ex officio. In addition, there are 6 non-voting liai-
sons to the board: 1 each from five advisory organizations,45 and 1 fromthe Internet Architecture Board (IAB)/IETF. The nominating committee
is charged to select directors to ensure that in aggregate the board has
functional, geographic, and cultural diversity; the capacity to understand
the global effects of ICANNÕs mission and decisions; and credibility.Each of the supporting organizations has its own internal structure,allowing for the representation of multiple constituencies. Each is respon-
sible for the development of policy recommendations to the ICANN board43ICANN Evolution and Reform Committee (ERC), ÒICANN: A Blueprint for Reform,ÓJune 20, 2002, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/evol-reform/blueprint-20jun02.htm>, with revisions from ICANN ERC, ÒFinal Implementation Report and Recom-
mendations,Ó October 2, 2002, available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/evol-reform/final-implementation-report-02oct02.htm>.44The three supporting organizations are the Address Supporting Organization (ASO),which deals with the system of IP addresses; the Country-Code Names Supporting Organi-zation (ccNSO), which focuses on issues related to the letter country-code top-level domains;and the Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO), which handles issues related to
the DNS and the generic top-level domains.45The four advisory committees are the At-Large Advisory Committee (ALAC) for theInternet community at-large; the DNS Root Server System Advisory Committee (RSSAC)
for root server operators; the Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC) for governments;and the Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) for security.  The fifth organiza-
tion is the Technical Liaison Group (TLG) for standards groups.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEand developing internal consensus. The Nominating Committee com-prises 11 members appointed by constituencies, 3 appointed by advisory
committees, and 5 unaffiliated public interest persons appointed by the
At-Large Advisory Committee. In addition, there are 2 non-voting liai-
sons from the other advisory committees and the Technical Liaison Group.
The board appoints its chair.In a move away from the consensus-based, bottom-up process thatguided ICANN initially, the policy responsibility of the ICANN board
has been strengthened:The ICANN Board of Directors is ICANNÕs ultimate decision-makingbody. . . . It is ultimately responsible for the management of the policy
development process. Therefore, while it is highly desirable to seek andwherever possible find consensus, it does not follow that even proposalsthat enjoy consensus support should receive uncritical Board approval.
The Board has a fiduciary responsibility to make decisions on the basis ofgood faith judgment in furthering the public interest.46In response to concerns about transparency and accountability, thenew bylaws call for the creation of an office of ombudsman, a manager of
public participation to encourage full public participation in ICANN, and
a strengthening of the reconsideration process applicable to both the staff
and board and requiring prompt consideration. It also establishes an in-
dependent review process to review whether the board has acted consis-
tently with the bylaws.To strengthen government participation without directly includinggovernment representatives on the board, the bylaws call for the Govern-
mental Advisory Committee to appoint a non-voting liaison to the board,
a delegate to the nominating committee, and non-voting liaisons to each
of the supporting organizations and to the other advisory committees.In place of having five at-large board members elected by Internetusers, that community is expected to be represented through the At-Large
Advisory Committee, which will seek to engage individual Internet users
through regional at-large organizations in five geographic regions.EvaluationThe restated ICANN mission is to focus on its original missionÑcoor-dinating the stable operation of the InternetÕs unique identifier systems. If
the board adheres to that mission statement, the effect could be to narrow
ICANNÕs scope from that which has evolved since 1998. The reform, at46ICANN ERC, ÒICANN: A Blueprint for Reform,Ó 2002, and ÒFinal Implementation Re-port and Recommendations,Ó 2002.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES217the same time, takes a broad view of ICANNÕs constituencies. The newbylaws define selection and representation mechanisms that could widen
the range and raise the quality of members on the board and, thereby,
strengthen ICANNÕs perceived legitimacy. However, some critics argue
that the board member selection mechanisms are vulnerable to capture by
the board itself, leading to a narrowing of representation. The structure
attempts to respond to concerns about ICANNÕs processes by defining
steps to increase the specificity, transparency, and accountability of
ICANNÕs processes.Whether this new structure and these new processes will enableICANN to achieve the perceived legitimacy that it has so far failed to
attain can be determined only through the practical experience of the com-
ing years.Summary of the AlternativesThe six alternative approaches to achieving an ICANN that is per-ceived as the legitimate steward of the root are summarized in Table 5.1.
They are characterized along two dimensions. The first is the breadth of
ICANNÕs roleÑbroad or focused. The second is the breadth of its com-
munity of stakeholdersÑbroad or narrow.5.2.5Conclusions and Recommendation
The discussion of alternatives in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 leads to fourobservations. First, the Department of Commerce has expressed the U.S.
governmentÕs intention to complete privatization of DNS governance by
transferring its stewardship role to ICANN by 2006, conditional upon
ICANNÕs satisfying certain pre-conditions. Second, the 2005 WSIS meet-
ing might produce a proposal for a private, non-governmental organiza-TABLE 5.1Alternatives for Organization of ICANN to Achieve
LegitimacyICANNÕs RoleConstituencyBroadFocused
BroadA.  Markle (2002)E.  CDT (2004)
B.  NAIS (2001)F.  ICANN reform (2003)
Pre-reform ICANNNarrowC.  Registry for the root (2004)
D.  Private trade association (2002)
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEtion designed to assume certain Internet governance responsibilities.However, as of March 2005, whether such a proposal would in fact be
presented and what form it would take were not known. Third, evalua-
tion of any organization proposed by WSIS in late 2005 as a DNS steward
would face practical difficulties: It could be done only on the basis of the
proposed organizationÕs design, whereas ICANN will be evaluated on
the basis of its record. And it might not be possible to complete an evalu-
ation before the intended transfer of stewardship to ICANN in 2006.
Fourth, the outcome of implementing ICANNÕs 2003 reform and other
ICANN changes may or may not result in the fulfillment of the DOCÕs
requirements.These observations suggest three conclusions.Conclusion: If ICANN satisfies the Department of CommerceÕs re-quirements and is generally perceived to be a legitimate manager of the
DNS in the view of a substantial majority of its constituencies, and if no
preferable alternative results from the 2005 WSIS meeting, the U.S. gov-
ernment is highly likely to transfer its role as steward of the DNS to
ICANN during 2006.Conclusion: Any private, non-governmental organization proposedas a result of the 2005 WSIS meeting is likely to be considered by the De-
partment of Commerce for DNS stewardship only if ICANN fails to sat-
isfy the DOCÕs requirements.Conclusion: If ICANNÕs reforms are not successful and if the 2005WSIS meeting does not propose an organization to assume DNS steward-
ship that is acceptable to the U.S. government, the likely outcomes will be
a continuation of the Department of CommerceÕs stewardship role and a
basic reconsideration of how DNS governance should be organized.A transfer of stewardship from the DOC will leave ICANN (and an-other organization if stewardship is kept separate) without the benefits
and controls that the DOC has provided. It independently reviewed
ICANNÕs recommended decisions, regularly oversaw ICANNÕs perfor-
mance subject to the sanction of non-renewal of its MoU, and implicitly
protected it from attempts by other governments and organizations to
gain control of or strongly influence ICANNÕs decisions. If the DOC does
transfer its stewardship either to ICANN or to another private body, how
will these benefits and controls be provided?Conclusion: Without additional protection, legitimacy based on theÒconsent of the governedÓ would be the only basis for ICANNÕs contin-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES219ued authority and its ability to resist inappropriate pressure from govern-ments and other powerful interests. Without additional oversight, final
responsibility for satisfying the needs of its constituencies in an equitable,
open, and efficient manner would lie solely with its board.Recommendation: Before completing the transfer of its stewardshipto ICANN (or any other organization), the Department of Commerce
should seek ways to protect that organization from undue commercial or
governmental pressures and to provide some form of oversight of perfor-
mance.5.3OVERSIGHT AND OPERATION OF ROOT NAME SERVERS
Issues: Is there a need for greater oversight of the root name server operators?If so, how might it best be conducted? Should there be a formal process for replac-
ing root name server operators? Should the root name server operators be com-
pensated for their service, and if so, how?The root has functioned well as the shared responsibility of a group of12 diverse, autonomous, informally coordinated, and independently
funded operators (see Table 3.1). Many observers believe that the diver-
sity and autonomy have been strengths, reducing vulnerability to single
point failures. Yet, other observers feel that the DNS and the Internet have
become too important to the global society and economy to permit such a
crucial system to continue to operate without the oversight of an organi-
zation responsible for its continued healthÑtechnical, operational, and
financial.The tension between these two viewsÑdiverse autonomy versus cen-tral oversightÑleads to several different potential approaches to the is-
sues identified above. In this section, the current situation is first reviewed
and evaluated and then four alternatives are similarly described and re-
viewed. The committeeÕs conclusions and recommendations follow a com-
parison of the four alternatives.5.3.1Current Situation: Diverse Autonomy
DescriptionThe effective daily operation of the root name servers, described inÒThe Root Name ServersÓ in Section 3.3.2, lies squarely in the hands of the
root name server operators. The operating organizations have taken on
the responsibility voluntarily, are not compensated by users for their base
operations (although all are subsidized by their home institutions or out-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEside contributors, and some receive payments from operators of theiranycast satellites47), and are self-regulating through extensive and con-tinuous intragroup coordination.Although ICANNÕs MoU with the DOC48 assigns it the responsibilityto manage the root name server system, its authority, as noted in ÒSelect-
ing the Root Name Server OperatorsÓ in Section 3.3.3, has not been suffi-
cient to enable it to manage or even regulate the root name server opera-
tors directly. The recent extension of the MoU places emphasis on ICANN
collaborating with the DOC on Òoperational procedures for the root name
server system, including formalization of relationships under which root
name servers throughout the world are operated and continuing to pro-
mote best practices used by the root system operators.Ó 49 To increase itsauthority, ICANN has established the DNS Root Server System Advisory
Committee,50 has sought to enter into formal agreements with each of the11 other root name server operators,51 and has prepared a draft ÒMemo-randum of Understanding Concerning Root Nameserver Operation.Ó52However, it has thus far been unable to complete an agreement with any
of the operators. This is not surprising since it is likely that the operators
do not expect to receive benefits that would compensate for the additional
obligations they would be expected to assume to ICANN or, through it, to
the DOC. In addition, many operators are subsidiary organizations within
larger U.S. and foreign academic, commercial, or governmental entities,
which themselves may not wish to incur the obligations and assume the
liabilities that would come with such an agreement.53 Indeed, it is diffi-47See Box 3.1 for a discussion of anycast satellites of root name servers.48ÒMemorandum of Understanding (MOU) Between ICANN and U.S. Department ofCommerce,Ó November 12, 1998, available at <http://www.icann.org/general/icann-mou-25nov98.htm>.49ÒAmendment 6 to MoU Between ICANN and U.S. Department of Commerce,Ó Septem-ber 16, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/general/amend6-jpamou-17sep03.htm>.See also DOC, ÒDepartment of Commerce Statement Regarding Extension of Memorandumof Understanding with ICANN,Ó September 16, 2003, available at <http://www.ntia.
doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/agreements/sepstatement_09162003.htm>.50For a description of its responsibilities and activities, see <http://www.icann.org/committees/dns-root/>.51ICANN operates the L root name server itself.52The draft memorandum of understanding is available at <http://www.icann.org/committees/dns-root/model-root-server-mou-21jan02.htm>.53As the then-president of ICANN, Stuart Lynn, noted Ò. . . some organizations that sponsora root name server operator have little motivation to sign formal agreements [with ICANN],even in the form of the MoU that is now contemplated. What do they gain in return, except
perhaps unwanted visibility and the attendant possibility of nuisance litigation?  They receive
no funding for their efforts, so why should they take on any contractual commitments, how-ever loose?Ó ÒPresidentÕs Report: ICANNÑthe Case for Reform,Ó February 24, 2002, available
at <http://www.icann.org/general/lynn-reform-proposal-24feb02.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES221cult to see how ICANN could induce the operators to sign the ÒMemoran-dum of Understanding Concerning Root Nameserver OperationÓ in the
absence of a very attractive quid pro quo. Thus, although ICANN has
been assigned the responsibility for Òformalization of relationshipsÓ
among the autonomous root name server operators, it currently has little
ability to convince the operators to agree to a stronger ICANN role.EvaluationFortunately, the current operators have operated the system success-fully and without major incident up to now, despite the enormous and
somewhat unanticipated rate of growth in demand for root name service
since the mid-1990s when usage of the Web took off, and despite at least
one malicious attack54 on the system. Recently, through the voluntaryadoption of anycast technology (see Box 3.1), the operators have effec-
tively multiplied the number of root name servers severalfold, reducing
the vulnerability of the system to denial-of-service attacks, improving the
global accessibility of the root, and moderating the political pressure for
relocation of the core 13 root name servers.The root name server operators assumed their responsibilities and,with a modest number of changes, have successfully operated within the
context of Internet culture that favors informal, voluntary, and non-bu-
reaucratic institutions run by technical specialists with primarily altruis-
tic motives. In addition, advances in computer technology and the ready
availability of free name server software have kept the cost of operating
root name servers relatively low,55 especially when run as an adjunct toother, larger computer operations, as most of them are.Nor would it be easy to change this situation without the agreementof the operators. Their incumbency and financial independence protect
their responsibility and authority, and their informal, collegial relation-
ships serve to strengthen their power as a group. Furthermore, although
they do not receive direct financial compensation for their service, they all
receive intangible benefits that, together with their fear of potentially de-
stabilizing change in a system that is working well, are evidently suffi-54On October 21, 2002, a distributed denial-of-service attack was launched against the 13DNS root name servers.  For more information on the impact of the attack, see <http://
www.caida.org/projects/dns-analysis/oct02dos.xml>.55According to discussions in June 2004 with Kurt Erik Lindqvist, managing director ofAutonomica AB, which operates i.root-servers.net, the average annual cost of operating anindependent root server, including the costs of multiple anycast satellite servers, is about
$1 million. However, other root servers are operated as adjuncts to already well-provisionedsecure Internet sites, requiring a minimal incremental expenditure on the order of tens ofthousands of dollars annually.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcient to support their continued activity. In the absence of strong justifica-tion, it appears that they are not inclined to favor a change in the current
state.But despite that fact that the current arrangement is functioning well,it might run into difficulties if for some reason the root name serversÕ
performance deteriorated or some of the operators resigned. Moreover,
ICANN is obliged under the MoU to try to take a more formal role in root
name server operations. Consequently, it is useful to consider the range of
alternatives there might be for operating the root name server system and
to see if they might offer advantages over the current arrangement, as
well as in meeting ICANNÕs MoU obligation.5.3.2Alternatives
Two alternative models for structuring management of the operationsof the root are (1) funding and regulation and (2) a competitive market.
They are described and evaluated below. A third, hypothetical possibil-
ityÑdistributing the root zone fileÑis here raised by the committee as a
means of opening a different kind of approach for consideration. A fourth
alternative would be for the DOC to release ICANN from its MoU require-
ment that it formalize relationships with the root name server operators.Alternative A: Funding and RegulationDescriptionUnder alternative A, ICANN (or a successor organization) would ac-quire the means to assume responsibilities for the root name server sys-
tem. As noted above, the most likely source of authority for ICANNÑas a
non-governmental bodyÑwould be financial. If funds were available to
cover all or a significant portion of the operating costs of the root name
server operators, ICANN might be in a position to use its financial au-
thority to do some or all of the following regulatory tasks:¥Establish minimal performance standards for the root name serveroperators.¥Support the implementation of a real-time performance monitor-ing system for each operator and the system as a whole, perhaps
based on the system under development by the Res”aux IP
Europ”ens Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC).56¥Monitor the performance of the root name server system.56See <http://dnsmon.ripe.net/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES223¥Enforce performance standards by adjusting compensation to theoperators according to the level at which they performed.¥Require performance improvement of operators that do not achieveminimum levels of root name server performance that would be
enforced through cut off or reduction of compensation.¥Remove operators whose performance does not meet minimumrequired levels despite requests and reduced or eliminated pay-
ments.¥Identify and qualify new operators to replace removed or resignedoperators.¥Use the contingent provision of additional funding to provide in-centives for the operators to achieve higher performance levels and
introduce new services.EvaluationIf it performed most or all of those tasks, ICANN would be the centraloverseer of the root name server system with full responsibility and au-
thority for its reliable and effective operation. It could establish a perfor-
mance-monitoring system and use financial rewards and punishments to
maintain and improve performance. Should change in an operator or in
operations be required, ICANN would be in a position to bring it about.
ICANN would, in fact, be carrying out natural responsibilities of the reg-
istry for the root (see alternative C in Section 5.2.4).ICANNÕs capabilities as a monitor and decision maker would stronglyinfluence the performance of the root name server system. If it had ca-
pable staff, excellent system understanding, and a knowledgeable board,
it could make timely and effective decisions. However, should any of
those conditions not apply, its influence could in fact be detrimental to the
performance of the root name server system.Moreover, this alternative depends on the operators responding tofinancial incentives. Many might, but it is clear that not all of them would.
There is some possibility of a significant number of them dropping out if
the alternative were additional controls from ICANN (or anyone else),
and a change in a number of root server operators at the same time might
be destabilizing. In addition, the dropouts could form an alternative root,
which could be further destabilizing. The three U.S. government agencies that run root name servers, forexample, would probably not legally be able to give up their autonomy in
exchange for a financial inducement, especially from a private organiza-
tion. They would have to be replaced by non-governmental organizations,
and that would probably require the agreement of the U.S. government.
The relevant elements of the U.S. government might, in turn, be reluctant
to agree for fear of thereby reducing overall stability.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACENor are the funds necessary for this approach available withinICANNÕs current budget. They would have to be incorporated into a fu-
ture budget and could require a corresponding increase in ICANNÕs fund-
ing from registries and registrars. (This would be available under ÒAlter-
native C, ICANN as Registry for the Root,Ó in Section 5.2.4.) Another
option would be to allocate to this purpose a portion of any funds re-
ceived from the procedure for selecting new TLDs through auction or
other processes, as described in ÒWhat Selection Process Should Be Used?Ó
in Section 5.4.2. below.An alternative proposal would be to charge ISPs and other users anannual fee for access to the root, which is similar to what is done today by
the root server operators when the cost of an anycast satellite is shared by
the ISPs and users that will benefit from it. (However, there is no practical
way that such a fee could be enforced, except through the voluntary agree-
ment of the ISPs and other users.)Alternative B: Competitive MarketThe second alternative would be to create a competitive market forroot service. To the committeeÕs knowledge, competitive service of the
same root has not been formally proposed elsewhere. However, since in-
creasing competition in the provision of DNS services is one of the stated
goals of the DOC, the committee has created an example of what a
straightforward approach to such competition might mean for root name
services.57 A less straightforward example, which is actually being imple-mented, is also described.B1: Competing Root Name Server SystemsIn the most straightforward form of market for root name service,competition would entail having two or more distinct groups offering ac-
cess to the authoritative root zone file. To avoid the confusion that could
arise with multiple root zones, each of the operator groups would have to
agree to offer access to the same root zone file, which would be provided
to each of them at the same time by the authoritative source, say, VeriSign
for ICANN.58 Every ISP, intranet, or other organization running a full-57The recent sixth amendment to the memorandum of understanding includes the state-ment, ÒThe Department reaffirms its policy goal of privatizing the technical management of
the DNS in a manner that promotes stability and security, competition [emphasis added],coordination, and representation.Ó See ÒAmendment 6 to MoU Between ICANN and U.S.Department of Commerce,Ó September 16, 2003,  p. 2.
58The authoritative root zone file is currently distributed by VeriSign, which operates thehidden primary. However, at some future time, ICANN may take over this function itself.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES225service resolver on the Internet would have to contract with one (or more)of the competing root server operators, which would charge them a
monthly or yearly subscription fee that could be based on volume of que-
ries or, more practically, on how many IP addresses the organization had
assigned to it. A technical means of ensuring that only subscribers could
gain access to an operatorÕs root name servers would be required.Evaluation. The committee was unable to conceive a version of this fullcompetitive market for root name service that would be both technically
and operationally feasible and beneficial enough to displace the current
system.There are two major technical difficulties. First, the communicationand computation overhead of ensuring that only subscribers could gain
access to the operatorsÕ servers could be a substantial and undesirable
load on the root name server system, with the servers spending signifi-
cantly more effort checking permissions rather than answering queries.
Second, there is the difficulty that arises because the content of the root
zone file includes the IP addresses of the root name servers. If there is one
authoritative root zone file, then there is only one set of IP addresses that
it can contain and, therefore, only one set of root name servers. Even if
these technical problems could be overcome, two major operational prob-
lems would remain.The first operational problem is that every system that contains a full-service resolver would need access to the root zone. Thus, every laptop
and home system so equipped (and there are many) would require a con-
tract with one of the competing root name server systems or would have
to change to a stub resolver and contract with an ISP for that service. This,
in turn, would cause problems for traveling users who typically encoun-
ter and would have to contract for root service from multiple different
ISPs in the course of their travels.The second operational problem is that the switchover to operation ofa competitive system would have to take place in a short time, unless the
current set of operators were the default choice, to which competitors
would likely object. That means that every ISP, organizational intranet,
and owner of a full-service resolver would have to sign up for service
with one of the competitors. Technically, the root name server Hints File
in every resolver/name server on the Internet would have to be changed
over in a short time to list the IP addresses of the root name servers of one
of the providers.Even if these technical and operational difficulties could be overcome,there are two pragmatic difficulties that the changeover to a full competi-
tive market for root name service would have to overcome.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEFirst, a fee would be introduced for what is currently a free good.That is only likely to be accepted if it is accompanied by significantly im-
proved performance on dimensions that its customers care about and if
the root zone file can be kept secure from all but subscribers. But there has
been no suggestion that dissatisfaction with current service is such that
any level of Òimproved performanceÓ would be willingly paid for.Second, the incumbent operators would have a great advantage, sincethey have the facilities, the skilled staff, and the operational experience
that newcomers would have to develop. However, that might not be a
problem for companies that already run large DNS name servers, such as
Neulevel or UltraDNS, or for national governments that wanted to estab-
lish their own system of local name servers.These potential difficulties, which mean that the probable costs wouldsignificantly outweigh the prospective benefits, effectively eliminate the
approach of a full competitive market for root name service. However,
there is another approach that is already developing.B2: Competing Providers of Anycast ServersThe current market for anycast satellite servers is a less direct form ofcompetition for root name service. The competitive providers are a num-
ber of the root name server operators who compete on price, service level,
and other features to attract customers, which are ISPs or others that want
to have an anycast satellite server nearby. The result of the development
of this market has been a rapid multiplication and broadened distribution
of the number of servers of the root zone file.Evaluation. Model B2 has shown itself to be a demonstrably feasible pathto reducing the geographically uneven distribution of response times and
to increasing the reliability of the root name server system without incur-
ring the technical, operational, or practical problems of the model first
described. Thus, it provides most of the benefits of model B1, ÒCompeting
Root Name Server Systems,Ó without its difficulties.Alternative C: Distributed Root Zone FileDescriptionA third alternative, which might avoid the difficulties of regulation orcompeting root name servers, would be for ISPs and organizational
intranets to obtain copies of the root zone file from ICANN (through
VeriSignÕs distribution server) and make local name servers authoritativeSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES227for the root zone. Something like this is, in fact, done today through thecaching of queries by ISPs and through the possibility of an ISP obtaining
an anycast satellite of one of the root name servers.59 However, in thisalternative, the intention would be to formalize this practice and have
ICANN require every ISP or intranet to subscribe to the authoritative root
zone file. The current public root name servers could be retained for use
by small and less technically skilled ISPs and intranets, but would be

scaled down to serve the smaller load.EvaluationThe wide distribution of the root zone file and root name serverswould significantly enhance the security of the root and the reliability of
its operation, in much the same way that anycast satellite sites already
have done, but to an even greater extent. Furthermore, the effects of erro-
neous or malicious queries would be limited to the ISP or intranet from
which they originated, and the ISP would have a strong incentive to find
and eliminate their sources. Some fear that widespread distribution of the root zone file and theprobable large numbers of poor local configurations and irregular updat-
ing of the local name servers would cause havoc at worst, and poor local
service at best. The concern is that widespread availability of the root zone
file would encourage the offering of alternative roots, from which some
TLDs had been removed or to which additional TLDs had been added.
The latter problem can, however, be partially addressed through DNS
Security Extensions (DNSSEC; see Section 4.2), which would detect, al-
though not prevent, unauthorized changes to the root zone file. What ac-
tions would be taken if a change is detected would have to be agreed in
advance and enforced through an agreement with the ISPs. The irregular
updating problem might be resolved through the use of a distributor-
driven process like that currently used to update the secondary root name
servers.If it could not be ensured that organizations (especially ISPs, which inturn have customers) would keep their copies of the root zone file up-to-
date and uniform, the approach of having a distributed root zone file

could cause a decrease in the integrity of the DNS, which relies on the root
zone file being consistent across the Internet.59In fact, the root zone file is available for download at <ftp://ftp.internic.net/domain/root.zone.gz>, but there is no encouragement to use it.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEAlternative D: DOC Relaxes MoU RequirementDescriptionThe DOC could relax its requirements for ICANN if it accepted thesuccess of the current diverse, autonomous, self-regulating root name

server system instead of viewing it as unsatisfactory because it is subject
to neither formal regulation nor the discipline of the market. In place of its
cooperation with the DOC on Òoperational procedures for the root name
server system, including formalization of relationships under which root
name servers throughout the world are operated,Ó ICANN could be
tasked simply to serve as a facilitator, if asked, of the voluntary coopera-
tion among the root name server operators. EvaluationThe DOCÕs relaxation of its requirements for ICANN would, in ef-fect, legitimate the current de facto relationship between ICANN and
the operators and relieve the pressure on ICANN to take on authority
and responsibility that the operators have not yet shown themselves
willing to cede.Summary of the AlternativesThe current state and the four alternatives for oversight of the rootname servers are summarized in Table 5.2. It compares them on two di-
mensions: first, whether the root name server operators are under formal
or informal oversight by ICANN, and second, whether there is one set of
root name server operators or multiple sets.TABLE 5.2Alternatives for Root Name Server Oversight and Operation
OversightRoot Name ServersFormalInformal
One set of operatorsA.  Funding and(Current situationÑdiverse autonomy)
      regulationB2.Competing providers of anycast
serversD.DOC relaxes MoU requirement
Multiple operatorsC.  Distributed rootB1.Competing root name servers
  zone filesystems
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES2295.3.3Conclusions and Recommendations
Conclusion: The effective daily operation of the root, and there-fore of the DNS and the Internet, lies squarely in the hands of the
root name server operators. Although ICANN has been assigned re-
sponsibility for the stability and security of the root name server sys-
tem by the Department of Commerce, its authority has not been suffi-
cient for it to manage or even regulate the root name server operators
directly.Conclusion: The committee commends the operators of the 13 rootname servers for their reliable and efficient provision of critical root name
service as the Internet has undergone rapid growth in the numbers of its
users and providers.Conclusion: The committee believes that greater oversight of the op-erators will not be necessary so long as they operate effectively and reli-
ably and continue to improve the root name systemÕs reliability and ca-
pability.Conclusion: The committee believes that in the longer term it is desir-able for there to be more formal coordination of the operators and that
ICANN would be the most appropriate organization to assume the coor-
dination role.Recommendation: ICANN should work with the root name serveroperators to establish a formal process for replacing operators that di-
rectly engages the remaining root name server operators.For example, should one of the current operators withdraw, ICANNcould convene the remaining root name server operators as a selection
committee to recommend a replacement operator to ICANNÕs board. The
board could after appropriate consideration (and after approval by the
DOC or a future stewardship organization, if any) then direct IANA to
enter the address of the new operator in the root zone file.Conclusion: Any central source of funds to compensate all the rootname server operators for their services is likely to carry an unacceptable
regulatory or control role for the funding organization and reduce the di-
versity of support that is one of the strengths of the current arrangement.Recommendation: The present independent funding arrangementsfor the root name servers are advantageous and should continue, because
the multiplicity of sources contributes to the resilience, autonomy, and
diversity of the root name server system.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE5.4REGULATION OF GENERIC TOP-LEVEL DOMAINS
Issues: Can and should new gTLDs be added? If so, how many new gTLDsshould be added, and how fast? What types should they be, and how should they
and their operators be selected?ICANN has faced a demand for the addition of gTLDs since its estab-lishment (see Section 2.7). At that time, the demand for .com addresseswas growing very rapidly. Some applicants that were unable to obtain
their preferred domain names within .com or .net called for the creationof new TLDs in which they might register. Potential registry operators,
seeing an opportunity for profit in the rapidly growing market for do-
main names, added their strong voices to the cry for more TLDs.Although the demand for domain names is not growing as rapidly asit did in those very early days, there remains a strong interest in adding
gTLDs to the root as well as a strong counterbalancing interest in moder-
ating such additions.In response to the pressure to add new gTLDs and to a requirement inits 2003 MoU with the DOC, ICANN agreed60 to deliver by September2004 a comprehensive evaluation of:¥ÒThe potential impact of new gTLDs on the Internet root serversystem and Internet stabilityÓ and¥ÒPotential consumer benefits/costs associated with establishing acompetitive environment for TLD registries.ÓIt also committed to:
¥ÒCreation and implementation of selection criteria for new and ex-isting TLD registries, including public explanation of the process,
selection criteria, and the rationale for selection decisions,Ó and¥ÒRecommendations from expert advisory panels, bodies, agenciesor organizations regarding economic, competition, trademark, and
intellectual property issues.ÓTo fulfill this commitment, ICANN at its October 2003 meetinglaunched a strategic initiative to allow new generic top-level domains.61The initiative comprises two stages intended Òto move to the full global-60Reported in ICANN board resolutions at the ICANN meeting in Carthage, Tunisia, Oc-tober 31, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/announcements/advisory-31oct03.htm>.61ICANN, ÒICANN Launches Broad Strategic Initiative for New Generic Top-LevelDomains,Ó announcement, October 31, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/announcements/announcement-31oct03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES231ization of the market for top-level domains.Ó One stage is a comprehen-sive evaluation that includes:¥An assessment of technical standards to support multilingualTLDs,¥An assessment of the introduction of competition into the TLDmarket and of possible business models for the TLD managerÐ

ICANN relationship,¥A study of intellectual property issues involved in the introductionof new TLDs,¥Reports on technical stability issues related to the introduction ofnew TLDs, and¥A review of consumer protection issues.These studies were carried out by independent outside organizations62as well as by ICANNÕs Security and Stability Advisory Committee.The second stage was an expedited process that was intended to adda new group of gTLDs before the end of 2004. In this process, each of these
gTLDs would be sponsored by a non-profit organization representing a
specific community, whose members would be the only ones eligible to
register domain names in it.Thus, the question of adding gTLDs is timely and open to careful ex-amination. Although ICANN has accepted the view that new gTLDs
should be added and is employing one specific means for doing so, it is
useful for a full understanding of the issues involved to take one step
back and consider first the fundamental questions: Should new gTLDs be
added to the root zone and, if so, how many and how fast? If new gTLDs
are to be added, what types should they be, and how should they and
their operators be selected?5.4.1Should New gTLDs Be Added? If So,
How Many New gTLDs, and How Fast?An increase in the number of gTLDs would have technical, opera-tional, economic, and service consequences that would affect domain
name registrants, registries, registrars, and Internet users generally. Thus,
responsible decisions about gTLD additions should take into account the
different potential effects on the several constituencies. In contrast, the
public discourse and controversy have often been framed narrowlyÑ62On August 31, 2004, ICANN published a report, prepared for it by Summit StrategiesInternational, entitled ÒEvaluation of the New gTLDs: Policy and Legal Issues.Ó The reporttouches on the second and third topics in the list of studies for a comprehensive evaluation.
It is available at <http://www.icann.org/tlds/new-gtld-eval-31aug04.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsometimes considering only one type of effect on one constituency. Fur-thermore, the arguments are often based on assumptions, rather than evi-
dence, and the assertions of one side are often vigorously disputed by the
other side.The issue is addressed here broadly in terms of effects as well as con-stituencies affected, but for simplicity, the multidimensional arguments
for and against new gTLDs are clustered into two groups: (1) technical
and operational performance issues and (2) user needs and economic is-
sues. Where relevant evidence is available to support or contradict an ar-
gument, it is reported.(Note: The amount of space devoted to each argument does not re-flect the committeeÕs judgment either of its importance or of its credibil-
ity. Rather, it is a consequence of the material available and the space
required to explain it.)Technical and Operational Performance IssuesArguments in FavorAs noted in Chapter 3, the root zone file is very small, comprisingdata for 258 TLDs and the 13 root name serversÑjust over 78 kilobytes in
total. It is searched on the root name servers about 8 billion times per day.
The committee did not find any purely technical reasons that the root
name servers could not provide the same level of response with a much
larger root zone file. Indeed, the ability of the .com name servers to re-spond to billions of queries a day against the .com zone file, with morethan 30 million entries, is a demonstration of the technical capacity that
could be applied to the root zone, if necessary.Nor are there any fixed limits in the design of the DNS on the size or therate of addition of domains at any level in the DNS hierarchy. Any such
limits would arise from practical matters of implementation and operation.Moreover, additions have already been made to the root zoneÑboth theseven gTLDs added in 2000 and the numerous ccTLDs added during the
mid-1990s, with no noticeable degradation of root name server performance.Arguments AgainstHowever, there are operational and administrative issues that sug-gest practical constraints on, at least, the rate of addition of new TLDs tothe root zone file, and potentially as well, on its total size. Of concern to
some members of the technical community are the number and the rate of
changes to the root zone fileÑboth at the time of creation of a TLD (as a
new entry into the root zone file) and in support of subsequent changesSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES233(as a modification of an existing entry to accommodate a changed IP ad-dress, for example). Errors or corrupted entries in the root zone file pose a
greater risk of harmful consequences for the DNS and Internet than do
analogous mistakes made elsewhere in the DNS hierarchy. An increase in
the number of root zone file updates increases the probability of inadvert-
ent errors and makes it more difficult to detect them in a timely manner.Yet, as discussed in Chapter 3, the design of the DNS makes heavyuse of address caching. This means that errors at the root will not affect a
significant number of users immediately, but rather will gradually be dis-
seminated as the caches time out. Errors at the root zone, while certainly
undesirable, should not have catastrophic consequences and should be
able to be caught before they do much significant damage.The administrative procedures for approving additions of new gTLDs(see ÒSelecting New TLDsÓ in Section 3.4.3) have been much more inten-
sive and extended than those, for example, for adding a new second-level
domain to one of the gTLDs. This has been for technical reasonsÑto en-
sure that the gTLDÕs name server operations will meet Internet standards;
for consumer protection reasonsÑto ensure that registrants in the new
gTLD will have reasonable assurance of a competent, reliable, and con-
tinuing service; and because of the need to deal with a variety of contend-
ing legal and commercial interests. Should a high level of scrutiny be re-
quired for approving additions of all new gTLDs and the ongoing
workload increase as a consequence of the additional gTLDs, then the rate
of buildup of an adequate administrative staff would also set a bound on
the rate of addition of new gTLDs.Committee ViewIn light of these considerations, several members of the committeehold the view that an extremely cautious approach should be taken to-
ward additions to the root zone file. Their preference would be for no
additions at all. And they would certainly limit new gTLDs to those that
can be shown to meet an important, unsatisfied need. Furthermore, they
think that a process for monitoring root zone operations capable of detect-
ing signs of degradation or instability and of acting to correct their causes
must accompany any process for regular addition of new gTLDs.Taking into account those views, the committee agreed that if addi-tions are to be made to the root zone, it would be prudent to limit their
rate. After balancing the various considerations and the differing views of
its members, the committee concluded that the addition of tens of new
gTLDs per year for several years would be unlikely to jeopardize the tech-
nical or operational stability of the DNS. The committee accepted that
additions at a faster rate would unacceptably increase the risk at present.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEHowever, further refinement of the practices for making and distributingroot zone file changes (as discussed in ÒMaintaining the Root Zone FileÑ
VeriSignÓ in Section 3.3.3), the addition of administrative capacity to
ICANN, and further closely monitored experience with gTLD additions
could provide the basis for larger-scale annual increases in the future,
should the demand be shown to exist.Conclusion: Considering technical and operational performancealone, the addition of tens of gTLDs per year for several years would pose
minimal risk to the stability of the root.User Needs and Economic IssuesArguments in FavorA principal argument for adding new gTLDs is that only by openingthe market for gTLD registry services would a true identification of do-
main name registrant (user) needs be possible, because only then would
entrepreneurs and other innovators have the opportunity to offer a range
of gTLDs to potential registrants. Two indicators of the potential demand
for new gTLDs are the more than 3 million registrants in .info, the millionor so registrants in .biz, and the more than 100,000 registrants in alternateTLDs offered by new.net, which are readily accessible from only 25 per-
cent of the Internet (see ÒUnique CharacteristicsÓ in Section 3.3.1).While the advocates of adding gTLDs do not claim to know when orif the user demand for new domains would be completely filled, they
accept the inevitability of some new gTLDs failing. In their view, such
failures would be a reasonable price to pay for clarifying and meeting
user needs, many of which may be latentÑunrecognized even by the po-
tential beneficiaries. Advocates of this position, however, generally ac-
knowledge that to protect domain name registrants in new gTLDs, regis-
try contracts should require zone file escrow and agreements with other
registries to assume responsibility in case a gTLD were to fail.One question that arises in this context is whether new gTLDs will pro-vide new users opportunities to register their desired (second-level) domain
names or whether gTLD proliferation will simply result in existing users reg-
istering similar domain names in all gTLDs for which they are eligible. In the
latter case, for example, .biz would simply replicate .com, duplicating regis-tration and administrative costs without any associated benefits.6363Indeed, there may be significant costs in addition to those associated with registering inmultiple domains as cybersquatters expend resources in order to acquire names that they
may later sell for prices that substantially exceed the costs of registration.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES235At least as judged by the experience of the operation of the .biz domain,there is only a small amount of duplication. To begin with, no more than a
very small fraction of .com registrants have chosen to register the same do-main name in .biz, since in February 2005 there were more than 33 millionnames registered in .com but just over 1 million names registered in .biz.64Moreover, even when the same name has been registered, the identity of the.biz and .com registrants is the same in only 25 percent of those cases, accord-ing to an earlier study.65 Thus, the 
.biz gTLD has, in fact, offered a substantialnumber of new registrants opportunities to register their desired domain
names, with proportionately little duplication of .com domain names.A demand for additional gTLDs could arise from the implementationof internationalized domain names that use non-Roman scripts (see Section
4.3). Although much of the early activity has been in registering second-
level domain names in non-Roman scripts in existing TLDs, that usage
could develop into a demand for gTLDs in non-Roman scripts. This de-
mand could be quite large, given that the number of non-English-speaking
users of the Internet is already very large and is growing rapidly.A new gTLD (e.g., .health) might induce additional value-addedservices at the second level (e.g., example.health) that would be more ac-cessible than the currently possible third-level services (e.g., example.health.com ) or second-level services (e.g., examplehealth.com).Another reason for favoring the addition of gTLDs is economic. First,it would open the opportunity for new participants to enter the registry
services market, promoting both price and non-price competition (which
includes diversity in naming methods) among registries. The August 2004
ICANN report on the policy and legal issues of new gTLDs noted that
Òthe ICANN community now has several registry operators, as opposed
to just one provider, which is [sic] able to operate a global registry of
significant scale. . . . Today the three companies [VeriSign, Afilias, and
NeuLevel] compete for the ability to provide registry services to new and
existing TLDs, both in the gTLD and ccTLD markets.Ó66 Second, it wouldencourage innovation. According to the report, Òthe new gTLDs have had
an impact beyond their size or market share . . . in terms of innovation.Ó67Furthermore, a steady and foreseeable supply of new gTLDs couldreduce the incentive to cybersquat by lowering the scarcity value of spe-64See <http://www.zooknic.com/Domains/counts.html>, accessed on June 18, 2005.65See Jonathan Zittrain and Benjamin Edelman, ÒSurvey of Usage of the .BIZ TLD,Ó avail-able at  <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/tlds/001/>, accessed July 22, 2002. This estimate is
based on a random sample of 823 .biz domain names, where the identities of registrantswere matched using zip codes, name server second-level domains, e-mail addresses, or some
combination thereof.66Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 111.67Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 111.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcific names and making it more costly to hoard names. Thus, the potentialvictims of cybersquatters may save money should new gTLDs be added.New gTLDs would also enable the establishment of additional re-stricted name spaces, whose registrants would be authenticated by the
registry to be members of a specific class and who might also have to
accept specified rules of conduct. These would be like the existing sites
.edu (primarily for accredited institutions of higher education), .pro (forprofessionals), and .museum (for the museum community). Possibilitiesinclude .kids (for kid-safe sites) and .health (for qualified health care pro-viders). In addition, many organizations, especially medium and large
ones, may want their own gTLDs, enabling their computer services to
assume responsibility directly for functions they currently must acquire
and pay for from TLD registries. For example, IBM might prefer to own
and operate the .ibm TLD, rather than rely on the .com registry for servicefor ibm.com.Arguments AgainstThere are strongly held opinions against opening the market in gTLDsas well.68On the question of user needs, opponents of gTLD addition contendthat the existing selection of gTLDs (and ccTLDs that act like themÑsee
ÒRecharacterizing TLDsÓ in Section 3.4.1) have met registrant needs quite
well and are capable of continuing to do so. They perceive few signs that
many prospective domain name registrants have an unmet need for new
gTLDs that could not be satisfied in one of the available second-level do-mains. Whatever truly unmet needs there might be are not sufficient, in
their view, to justify even a small threat to the reliable operation of the
DNS. The August 2004 ICANN report on the policy and legal issues of
new gTLDs notes that, despite the entry of the new gTLDs, .com, .net,and .org still have more than 93 percent of the registrations in all gTLDs.69It concludes that Ò.com remains the TLD of first choice for a majority ofgTLD registrants, including new registrantsÓ70 and that a Òchoice of TLDshas thus far been unable to overcome the advantages the .com TLD en-joys.Ó71 Nonetheless, the report concludes that Òthe new gTLDs presented
68See, for example, Tim Berners-Lee, ÒNew Top Level Domains Considered Harmful,ÓApril 30, 2004, World Wide Web Consortium, Design Issues, available at: <http://
www.w3.org/DesignIssues/TLD>.69Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 96.70Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 109.71Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 110. Nonetheless, thereport notes the views of some members of the Ònon-commercial communityÓ who believe that,although overcoming the advantages of .com would be difficult, it would not be impossible.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES237registrants with significantly greater choice, at least in terms of initial reg-istration.Ó72 Further, the report concludes that Òthere are indications thata respectable number of the new gTLD registrations have attracted new
users to the DNS, and that these new registrations are being actively
used.Ó73From the perspective of the user seeking a site through guessing orrelying on a possibly faulty memory, the addition of gTLDs increases the
number of possible domain names to try. For example, is it
Òexample.comÓ or Òexample.bizÓ or Òexample.infoÓ? This is already aproblem, but it could be exacerbated by the addition of new gTLDs.There are economic counterarguments as well. Trademark holders,for example, fear that they would face the possible need to defensively
register (to preclude cybersquatting) in all unrestricted gTLDs, incurring
an expense that could be substantial, particularly for small organizations
and individuals. However, the August 2004 ICANN report concludes that
Òthe start-up mechanisms proved generally effective in protecting legiti-
mate trademark owners against cybersquatting.Ó74 At the same time, thereport notes Òa contradiction between . . . trying to attract new users and
uses to the DNS, and allowing trademark holders to claim priority regis-
tration of the same names in new TLDs.Ó75 And it observes that the num-ber of sunrise registrations76 in the new gTLDs that used such a processÒhas turned out to be much smaller than anticipated.Ó77More generally, holders of existing domain names that have built areputation could find the value of that reputation reduced as similar sites
proliferate. For example, the owner of a discount ticket Web site might
fear that some of his customers would become confused and unable to
remember whether it is Ò
cheaptickets.comÓ or Ò
cheaptickets.bizÓ orÒcheaptickets.travelÓ that is known for offering the cheapest tickets.Furthermore, current registry services stand to lose some of their eco-nomic (scarcity) value as a result of the entry of new TLD registry service
providers. So trademark holders, the owners of existing sites, and current
registry services all fear possible additional costs or losses of value if new
gTLDs are added.Opponents are also concerned that each increment of new gTLDscould be followed by a period of administrative instability, set off by a72Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 97.73Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 99.74Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 79.75Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 80.76See ÒPossible Remedies to Conflicts Over NamesÓ in Section 3.5.2.77Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 81.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACErace to register potentially valuable domain names and the flurry of ad-ministrative and dispute resolution activity that it induces.In the extreme, if unlimited additions were permitted (say, for ex-ample, .ibm, .ge, .sony, .siemens, and so on), the root zone could becomecomparable to the .com gTLD, which would seem to have uncertain ben-efits, while threatening considerable upheaval in the technical operations
of the DNS and administrative processes of ICANN. However, the impo-
sition of a restriction on the allowable number and rate of additions, as
suggested by technical and operational considerations, would alleviate
this risk.Committee ViewAfter taking into account the user needs and economic benefits argu-ments for and against potential gTLD additions, the committee remained
divided on the addition of new gTLDs. Some members felt strongly that on
balance those needs and benefits were not great enough to risk the technical
and operational stability and reliability of the DNS. Other members be-
lieved that within the limits of tens of new gTLDs per year it was worth-
while to enable some form of market process to be used (with proper safe-
guards, discussed below) to determine how extensive the need might be.Conclusion: Neither the user needs and economic benefits argumentsin favor of nor those against additional gTLDs are conclusive.In addition to the question of whether and how many gTLDs shouldbe added is the question of how often. Thus far, additions have occurred
at an irregular and unpredictable pace: the initial group of 8, 7 more in
2000, and up to 10 more in 2004-2005. That uncertainty makes it difficult
for current and potential gTLD registries to develop and operate accord-
ing to reasonable business plans and has the effect of overvaluing new
gTLDs (because of the uncertainty of whether and when there will be any
further additions). A regular schedule would enable those who lose out
one year to anticipate additional chances in the next year, reducing the
price they would be willing to pay (in a gTLD auction, for example) were
there no certainty about the addition of gTLDs in the near future.RecommendationsRecommendation: If new gTLDs are added, they should be added ona regular schedule that establishes the maximum number of gTLDs (on
the order of tens per year) that could be added each time and the interval
between additions.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES239Recommendation: Since the effect of continuing increments of newgTLDs on the performance and stability of the root zone is not known,
and the consequences of reduced performance and instability can be great,
it would be prudent to accompany any process of addition with a process
for monitoring and identifying any technical or operational problems the
new gTLDs may cause.Recommendation: A mechanism to suspend the addition of gTLDs inthe event that severe technical or operational problems arise should ac-
company a schedule of additions. It should explicitly specify who has the
authority to suspend additions and under what conditions.Recommendation: A neutral, disinterested party should conduct anevaluation of new gTLDs approximately 1 or 2 years after each set of new
gTLDs is operational to make recommendations for improving the pro-
cess for selecting and adding gTLDs.As noted in the introduction to Section 5.4, ICANN has included aspart of its strategic initiative the need for an evaluation of the additions
made in 2000. The committee believes that ICANN should contract with
neutral, disinterested parties to conduct such evaluations for every subse-
quent addition of gTLDs.5.4.2If New gTLDs Are to Be Added, What Types Should They Be,
and How Should They and Their Operators Be Selected?If new gTLDs are to be added to the root zone, there remain the ques-tions of deciding which types of gTLDs should be added and which enti-
ties should be selected to operate the associated registries.In some selection processes used in comparable circumstances, whatshould be added and who should be their operators are considered com-
pletely separately.78 In other cases, what should be allocated and to whomit should be assigned have been determined in the same proceeding. In
the case of the DNS, both types of approach have been used. When seven
new gTLDs were authorized in 2000, ICANNÕs selection process combined
the choices of the types and the identities of the registries, so that a par-
ticular entity was selected as a registry because ICANN favored the type78In radio frequency management, this is referred to as the distinction between Òalloca-tion,Ó which denotes setting aside blocks of frequencies in specific geographic areas for aparticular use, and Òassignment,Ó which denotes the award of these frequencies to particu-lar users.  Of course, it may be possible to dispense with the determination of the type of

new entrant and to limit the process to determining which entrants to allow.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEof service it promised to provide. In contrast, the decision as to whichorganization would operate .org upon its transfer from VeriSign was in-dependent of the legacy decision to have such a gTLD.Whatever process is used to make such decisions, it should at a mini-mum satisfy four fundamental criteria:1.Fairness.The process should not favor an applicant or class of ap-plicants over others.2.Transparency.The reasons for the outcomes should be clear to allinvolved.3.Efficiency.The process should not place a heavy burden on the ap-plicants or the selection group.4.Economy.The process should not impose undue costs on the appli-cants or the administrator of the selection process.The discussion that follows provides a context against which to evaluateICANNÕs current round of selections and the process that it is following.Which Types of gTLDs Should Be Added?There are three approaches to determining the types of gTLDs. Theyderive from different views about the desirable structure of the gTLD
name space.Taxonomic/RestrictedThe first approach holds that the gTLDs should adhere, as much aspossible, to a taxonomic structure. Its adherents believe that such a struc-
ture can assist Internet navigation by serving as a high-order directory
and that it can channel and bound the addition of gTLDs. In an ideal
taxonomic structure, each gTLD would be restricted to members of a spe-
cific class, there would be a gTLD for each appropriate class of members,
and each possible member would fit into one and only one class.The current structure of gTLDs is already far from an ideal taxonomy.Although the names of the three largest gTLDs, .com, .net, and .org, im-ply a restriction to commercial, networking, and non-commercial regis-
trants, respectively, in practice the registries have not enforced such re-
strictions. Moreover, there is nothing to exclude a Web site having, say,
both .org and .edu domain names, even if both were strictly restricted toappropriate registrants. So the best that an adherent to this view could
hope for would be that each new gTLD would be restricted to a specific
class whose membership could be inferred from the domain name (e.g.,
names such as .travel, .xxx, .library, and .health).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES241The ÒtaxonomistsÓ favor an extension of the gTLDs only in the re-stricted form.79 In this case, each new gTLD would need a registry willingand able to enforce the specific restrictions, which can be arduous and
severely limit the rate of registration. For example, the .pro registry, whichwas formed in 2000, began registration only in the spring of 2004. It is
limiting its rollout to the rate at which it can gain access to records of
registered professionals so that it can identify those that it will permit to
have a .pro domain.Although it is no longer feasible to impose a full taxonomy on theDNS, this approach can strengthen its implicit directory function by en-
suring that all new gTLD names clearly identify a restricted class of sec-
ond-level domains. This is the approach taken by ICANN in adding new
gTLDs in 2004-2005 as described below.If there are benefits to using a tightly controlled taxonomy, there isnothing to stop this from occurring at the second level. For example, there
could be a gTLD called .industry, with second-level domains describingvarious instances of industries: travel.industry, health.industry,automobile.industry, and so on.Market-determinedThe second approach favors allowing the processes of supply anddemand to determine how many and which domains are offered, first by
the willingness of an operator to offer it (supply) and second by the will-
ingness of those desiring domain names to register in it (demand). Under
this approach, it would be up to the gTLD registry to decide whether or
not it would restrict registrations to members of a certain group.To the advocates of this approach, opening a new gTLD and thenclosing it down because of an insufficient number of registrations would
be an acceptable outcome, assuming (as noted above) that zone file es-
crow and alternate registry provisions could be made to protect domain
name holders for some period of time after the closure.In contrast to the taxonomic/restricted view, the market-determinedapproach holds that attempting to structure or control the gTLD name
space provides little navigational value in a world of search engines and
other navigational aids. Many also doubt the taxonomic/restricted
approachÕs practicality. They believe that a market-driven name space is
more flexible and reflective of usersÕ desires than is adherence to a limit-
ing structure imposed by some authority.79See, for example, Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the NamesSpace,Ó ICANN position paper, December 2002, available at <http://www.bizconst.org/positions/BCpositionpaperNewGTLDsV2.doc>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACERegulatedThe third approach takes a position intermediate between the firsttwo. It would add new gTLDs, both restricted and not, based on the
qualifications and justifications presented by those who propose to run
them, on a case-by-case basis. An administrative body, presumably
ICANN, would exercise judgment to select which new gTLDs were
added and who would operate them. This is effectively the approach
taken by ICANN in 2000 when it added seven new gTLDs, selected
from the more than 40 applicants because ICANN favored the TLD
name and the type of service proposed, as described in ÒNew gTLDsÓin Section 3.4.3.How Should the Operators of gTLDs Be Selected?The necessity for selection arises when the number of candidates for aresource exceeds the quantity of the resource that is available, when can-
didatesÕ qualifications to receive the resource must be validated, or both.
Three common forms for the selection process in situations comparable to
selection of new gTLDs and their operators are comparative hearings,
auctions, and lotteries.Comparative HearingA comparative hearing is an administrative process in whichwould-be entrants attempt to convince the decision body that they,
and their proposed service, are qualified for selection in competition
with other candidates. It is the form that has been and is being used by
ICANN. Comparative hearings typically feature discretionary entry,
merit assignment, and heavy regulation. Such hearings can take into
account a large number of factors, draw on a wide range of expertise,
offer opportunities to learn from experience, and enable judgment to
be employed. Through use of a non-refundable application fee, such as
ICANN has required, they can reduce speculative applications and be
self-funding.There are downsides to comparative hearings, however, as they canbe subject to capture by interest groups. Furthermore, the real decision
process may not be transparent, and thus may be perceived as arbitrary
and unfair, especially by the losers. Also, decision quality is highly de-
pendent on staff and decision maker competence, while the negotiation
and oversight of contracts can be time-consuming and expensive. In addi-
tion, depending on the nature of the process and the stakes involved, ap-
plication costs can be very high.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES243AuctionIn the basic auction model, the highest bidder wins, although partici-pation in the auction might be limited to those meeting a minimum set of
qualifications. The advantages of auctions are that they are fair and trans-
parent processes that reflect the economic value perceived by applicants,
they may be designed to self-fund the process, and they discourage an
excessive number of speculative applications. However, the tradeoffs with

the auction model are that it tends to favor well-funded applicants (which
could be corporations or non-profits) and thus does not necessarily reflect
societal value, only economic value.In principle, auctions could be designed to choose winners on the ba-sis of who can best minimize prices (say, for example, the price of a do-
main name registration). However, in such cases, it may be impossible to
prevent the winning bidder from later claiming (successfully) that chang-
ing conditions justify a higher price.To the extent that in a specific situation social welfare extends beyondeconomic considerations, auctions, at least in their pure form, become less
appealing.LotteryWinners in the lottery selection model are determined through arandom choice from all entrants, each of which may be required to
meet some minimum qualifications in order to participate and would
(in contrast to a fund-raising lottery) be restricted to one entry per en-
tity. The biggest advantage of lotteries is their transparency: they are
fair and transparent, giving all entrants an equal chance regardless of
means. Lotteries can also be self-funding if a charge is made for each
Òticket.Ó Although the cost to a given entrant may be quite small, lot-
teries can be expensive to society in the aggregate because they can
attract a very large number of participants.Because it can be difficult to determine whether an entry to thelottery is from a distinct qualified entity, a lottery can be gamed by one
participant obtaining multiple entries under different ÒlegitimateÓ
guises. Moreover, unless the qualification criteria are very restrictive
and carefully vetted, participants may not even have the financial or
technical capacity to operate a service if they win, and the winners
may simply sell the service to another entity for a significantly greater
price. In the latter case, the lottery is turned into an auction, with the
proceeds going to the lottery winner rather than the organization hold-
ing the lottery.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACECombination MethodsIt is also possible to integrate two or three of the basic methods into avariety of combination methods, some of which are described below.What Selection Process Should Be Used?There is a widely held view that the process employed by ICANN in2000 to add new gTLDs was faulty. There is much less agreement about
how to improve it, although the elements from which an alternative can
be developed are described above. In July 2004, the Organization for Eco-
nomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) issued a report that de-
scribes and compares two of those elements, comparative selection (hear-
ing) and auctions, as means for allocation of gTLDs.80 What follows is adescription of several of the alternatives that have been specifically sug-
gested, beginning with the process used in 2004-2005 by ICANN for the
next round of additions.Alternative A: Sponsored gTLDs Selected byModified Comparative Hearing (2004-2005)Description.ICANN is using a modified comparative hearing approachto select new sponsored gTLDs. Each new gTLD will be restricted to reg-
istrants from a well-defined and limited community and managed by a
sponsoring organization with ongoing policy-formulation responsibility
for the gTLD. The sponsoring organization will select the registry opera-
tor and, to some degree, establish the roles played by the registrars and
their relationships to the registry operator.81The request for proposal, evaluation, and selection processes aremodifications of those used in 2000 to select seven new gTLDs. Non-re-
fundable application fees of $45,000 have been charged to cover the costs
of the selection process.The eventual registry agreement will be similar to those entered intoby the .museum, .coop, and .aero registries. However, the August 2004report published by ICANN that evaluated the policy and legal issues of80Working Party on Telecommunication and Information Services Policies, ÒGeneric TopLevel Domain Names: Market Development and Allocation IssuesÓ July 13, 2004, OECDDirectorate for Science, Technology and Industry, available at <http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/56/34/996948.pdf>.81For full details, see ICANN, ÒNew sTLD Application. Part A. Explanatory Notes,ÓDecember 15, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/tlds/new-stld-rfp/new-stld-application-parta-15dec03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES245new gTLDs concluded that Òwhile it is understandable for ICANN to havewished to err on the side of caution as it undertook gTLD expansion . . .
the resulting legal framework is cumbersome.Ó82 It concludes that Òthenumber and length of appendices [in agreements between gTLDs and
ICANN] could be reduced in a future round. A streamlined base agree-
ment with perhaps a few appendices could provide a more workable for-
mat that also preserves the critical elements of registry performance and
mandates compliance with ICANN policies.Ó83Selection is to be determined by the degree to which independentevaluators judge the applicant to have met ICANNÕs requirements in four
major categories, which are divided into 15 subsidiary categories:1.Sponsorship
a.Definition of sponsored TLD community

b.Evidence of support from the sponsoring organization

c.Appropriateness of the sponsoring organization and the
policy formulation environmentd.Level of support from the community
2.Business Plan Information
a.Business plan

b.Financial model
3.Technical Standards
a.Evidence of ability to ensure stable registry operation

b.Evidence of ability to ensure that the registry conforms with
best-practices technical standards for registry operationsc.Evidence of a full range of registry services

d.Assurance of continuity of registry operation in the event of
business failure of the proposed registry4.Community Value
a.Addition of new value to the Internet name space

b.Protection of the rights of others

c.Assurance of charter-compliant registrations and avoidance of
abusive registration practicesd.Assurance of adequate dispute-resolution mechanisms

e.Provision of ICANN-policy-compliant Whois service
In light of the prior discussions of the types of gTLDs to be added andtheir potential value, it is useful to examine the specifics under topic 4a,
addition of new value to the Internet name space. The subtopics are:82Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, pp. 130-131.83Summit Strategies International, ÒEvaluation of New gTLDs,Ó 2004, p. 131.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE1.Name value.
 The proposed name must be of broad significance andestablish clear and lasting value. It should categorize a broad and lasting
field of human, institutional, or social endeavor or activity. It should rep-
resent an endeavor or activity that has importance across multiple geo-
graphic regions.2.Enhanced diversity of the Internet name space.
 The TLD must create anew and clearly differentiated space and satisfy needs that cannot be

readily met through existing TLDs. The proposed TLD should enhance
competition in registry services and should attract new suppliers and user

communities to the Internet.3.Enrichment of broad global communities.
 The TLD should have broadgeographic and demographic impact. ÒSignificant considerationÓ will be
given to those gTLDs that serve larger user communities and attract
greater numbers of registrants. ÒConsiderationÓ will be given to those

gTLDs whose charters have relatively broader functional scope.These specifics, together with the sponsorship requirement, indicatethat ICANN is adhering to a taxonomic/restricted approach in this selec-
tion, not allowing the TLD applicant to simply let the market decide which
TLD names will succeed, but requiring that a gTLD name should catego-
rize a Òbroad and lasting field of human, institutional, or social endeavor
or activity . . . that has importance across multiple geographic regions.ÓTen proposals84 were submitted by the March 2004 deadline. Evalua-tion of the proposals was carried out by teams external to ICANN and,
therefore, not involved in ICANN activities or subject to ICANN political
pressures. Each evaluation team comprised three members: a technical, a
financial, and a sponsorship-and-other-issues evaluator. The evaluators,
whose identities were kept secret during the process, were selected and
managed by an outside firm.85 The evaluation teams made recommenda-tions about the preferred applications from among those that were suc-
cessful in meeting the selection criteria. Some proposed domains met all
of the criteria and entered a contract negotiation with ICANN staff. Other
proposals did not meet all the criteria, were sent back to the sponsors with
suggestions for improvement, and were resubmitted. The result is that
new gTLDs will be announced one at a time and not all at once as in 2000.
In October 2004, ICANN announced that it was negotiating with two pro-
spective new gTLDs: .post and .travel; in December 2004, it began nego-tiations with .mobi and .jobs. In March 2005, ICANN announced the
84The list is available at <http://www.icann.org/tlds/stld-apps-19mar04/stld-public-comments.htm>.85Summit Strategies International in Washington, D.C. See Sarah Lai Stirland, ÒDomain-Name Registry Expansion Process Underway,Ó National Journal Tech Daily, May 26, 2004.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES247completion of negotiations with .jobs and .travel, and in April 2005 theboard announced their designation.Evaluation. Although ICANN adhered to the comparative hearing ap-proach in this selection process, it significantly reduced the use of staff
and board judgment and relied instead on the judgment of independent
outside evaluators using an explicitly defined set of criteria. By doing so
and by giving applicants the opportunity to revise and resubmit their ap-
plications, ICANN increased the apparent transparency (although keep-
ing evaluators anonymous) and apparent objectivity of the process (al-
though using criteria subject to a wide range of discretion), and reduced
the potential for disappointed applicants to challenge the scores awarded
by the evaluators.Alternative B: Unlimited gTLDs Awarded First-come,First-served to Qualified Sponsors (2003)Description.Almost at the opposite extreme from the preceding approachlies a proposal by Ross Wm. Rader in which an undetermined number of
new gTLDs would be awarded on a first-come, first-served basis to ap-
proved ÒdelegantsÓ that would in turn contract with ICANN-accredited
ÒoperatorsÓ for the day-to-day operation of the gTLD.86The delegant would be the Òpolicy coordinator for the gTLD that en-sures that the registry operates in a manner that benefits its target com-
munity.Ó A delegant would be approved by ICANN on the basis of four
criteria: (1) the requested gTLD name is not confusingly similar to an ex-
isting gTLD name; (2) the delegant has a satisfactory plan specifying all
significant operational policies; (3) an accredited operator is willing to
manage the gTLD; and (4) the delegant yields rights in the gTLD name so
that it can be transferred by ICANN to a new sponsor if required.The operator would perform the registry functions. To be accreditedby ICANN, the operator would have to satisfy the minimum standards
for technically operating a registry. There would be no limitation on the
number of gTLD registries an accredited operator could contract to run.Evaluation.Alternative B lies squarely in the market determinationcamp, both with respect to determining how many gTLDs there should be
and who should operate them and with respect to the organization of86Ross Wm. Rader, ÒA Sustainable Framework for the Deployment of New gTLDs Part I,ÓCircleID, February 26, 2003, available at <http://www.circleid.com/article/100_0_1_0_C/>;and Part II, March 26, available at <http://www.circleid.com/article/108_0_1_0_C/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEgTLD names. In fact, it essentially allows there to be an unlimited numberof gTLDs, simply determined by the number of delegants who qualify. It
does not even specify a limit to the rate of addition of new gTLDs. This process could be combined withÑfor exampleÑa policy of add-ing X new gTLDs per year by proceeding down the list of first-come, first-served requests and filling them as slots become available. But that raises
the question of how to actually implement a first-come, first-served pro-
cess. How would all the essentially simultaneous electronic entries sub-
mitted at the opening instant be prioritized? If a random selection were to
be used, for example, then this process would becomeÑat least initiallyÑ
a lottery.Nor does the proposal specify a process for resolving conflicts thatmight arise with trademark holders if, for example, someone other than
Sony wished to register .sony as a gTLD. Presumably, however, somevariant of the sunrise procedures used to protect trademark holders when
the .biz and .info domains were introduced could be used in this instance.Alternative C: Fixed Number of gTLDs AnnuallyAwarded by Auction and Lottery (2003)Description. Mueller and McKnight87 have proposed an auction/lotteryprocess to award a limited number of new gTLDs each year.88 No struc-ture would be imposed on the specific gTLDs awarded, resulting in a
supply-and-demand-driven approach to the types of gTLD names ac-
cepted.Forty new gTLDs would be made available for award each year. Thatnumber was chosen based on advice from members of the technical com-
munity with the goals of retaining the hierarchical structure of the DNS
and avoiding the introduction of errors into the root zone through too
many changes, made too fast. Although 40 was the number chosen for the
proposal, any number up to about 80 would be compatible with the au-
thorsÕ understanding of the advice they received.The 40 new gTLDs would be divided into two tranches: 30 would betargeted for commercial applicants (but open to non-commercial as well),
which could apply for any number of TLD names but be awarded no87Milton L. Mueller and Lee W. McKnight, ÒThe Post-.com Internet: Toward Regular andObjective Procedures for Internet Governance,Ó Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York,August 2003, available at <http://dcc.syr.edu/miscarticles/NewTLDs2-MM-LM.pdf>.88A similar auction model has been proposed in Karl Manheim and Lawrence Solum,ÒThe Case for gTLD Auctions: A Framework for Evaluating Domain Name Policy,Ó Re-search Paper No. 2003-11, Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, Calif., March 2003, available at
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=388780>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES249more than 2; 10 would be reserved for non-commercial and lesser devel-oped country (LDC) applicants, which could apply for and be awarded
only 1 name. Each applicant would pay a modest application fee, estimated
by Mueller and McKnight at $1000, to cover ICANNÕs costs of the selection
process. The authors leave open the question of whether applications should
include a fitness disclosure and statement of financial capability to operate
a registry or association with an already accredited registry.The 10 noncommercial gTLDs would be allocated first, if necessary,by a random selection process, such as a lottery. To avoid possible abuse,
the resultant TLD allocations could not be sold or transferred to commer-
cial entities.The selection of commercial gTLDs would follow. If there were morethan 30 commercial (and other) applicants, the selection would be made
by a simultaneous multiple-round Web-based auction, with each bidder
knowing whether it is in the top 30 or not at every time, just as with e-Bay.
When the auction period ended, the winning bidders would pay the
amount of the lowest successful bid in order to keep auction prices at a
reasonable level. However, should there be multiple bidders for the same
gTLD, such as .sex, the high bidder would receive the gTLD and pay the
amount bid by the second-highest bidder. Having a predictable annual
increment in gTLDs would also be expected to relieve some of the pres-
sure on the auction prices.If there were 30 or fewer eligible commercial applicants, each wouldpay ICANNÕs reserve price, which would be fixed to cover the costs of the
auction and of adding new names to the root. (Note that if, as some claim,
there is only a limited demand for new gTLDs, this would be the outcome
in the first, and possibly only, auction.)Mueller and McKnight suggest that the proceeds of the auction (orthe reserve price) go to maintaining and managing the root, with a por-
tion reserved for the root name server operators. (See Section 5.3.2.)After the award of the gTLDs, there would be a period during whichthe gTLD names could be challenged on intellectual property grounds or
because of possible confusion with another gTLD. The UDRP-like process
would be used to resolve such challenges.The winning gTLD applicants would enter into standardized anduniform registry agreements with ICANN that would require adherence
to a minimal set of ICANN-defined technical specifications and confor-
mity to existing ICANN policies. They would be required to meet stan-
dards for transferring a zone file that would allow the domain to be main-
tained if the registry failed.Evaluation.The result of the Mueller and McKnight proposal would be amarket-determined structure of the DNS name space, presumably re-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEspondingÑat least for commercial TLDsÑdirectly to the supplier-per-ceived demand for new TLDs. And except for the limitation on the rate of
additions and the division between commercial and non-commercial/
LDC awards, this is also a clear expression of the market-based approach
to gTLD operator selection.Those who favor a purer market-based approach could argue againstthe commercial/non-commercial/LDC division on the grounds that LDCs
already have country-code TLDs and that just as with the allocation of
other goods (e.g., office space, equipment, personnel) there is no need to
favor non-commercial organizations, which should be capable of raising
funds to acquire a gTLD if they need one.Consistent with its Òlet the market decideÓ approach, this proposaldoes not specify any restrictions on the registration practices of the
awarded TLDs except that non-commercial/LDC TLDs cannot become
commercial.Alternative D: Differentiated Expansion of gTLDs with Selection byComparative Hearing (2002)Description.In 2002, the Business Constituency (BC) of ICANN proposedthat all future expansion of gTLDs should occur within the framework of
a previously agreed set of principles.89 In its view:Given that there is pressure on ICANN to introduce additional names,the BC supports the development of a logical expansion, which will re-
sult in a name space with added value, rather than the cloning of theexisting space. Such a value-added space will create differentiation andreduce the need for entities to defensively register.UsersÑregardless whether they are businesses, non-profit organizationsor individualsÑwant certainty. Spending time searching is not cost-ef-
fective. The user community needs a certain process for identifying pro-spective names and a certain process for selecting sponsors/registries tooperate those names.90Under this approach all new domain names would have to satisfy sixprinciples:1.Differentiation: be clearly differentiated from other gTLDs,2.Certainty: give the user confidence that the name stands for what itpurports to stand for,89Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the Name Space,Ó 2002, p. 1.90Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the Name Space,Ó 2002, p. 1.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES2513.Honesty: avoid increasing opportunities for bad faith entities thatwish to defraud users,4.Competition: create value-added competition,5.Diversity: serve commercial or non-commercial users, and6.Meaning: have meaning to its relevant population of users.91In the view of the BC, Òthe principles . . . determine a taxonomized ordirectory-style domain name structure. . . . The structure does not imply a
rapid expansion. The choice of one name will preclude future non-differ-
entiated choices.Ó92 The BC also argues that all new gTLDs should beboth sponsored and restricted. Only bona fide members of the target
group would be able to register in a gTLD. The sponsor would be respon-
sible for ensuring that the registered names are appropriate for the regis-
trants and do not infringe on othersÕ intellectual property. The BC be-
lieves that this approach Òsimultaneously solves three intellectual
property issues. Cyber-pirates will not be able to obtain the names of oth-
ers. There will therefore typically be no need for costly defensive registra-
tion. New Whois databases will be verified and therefore accurate.Ó93The BC proposal recommends separation of the functions of sponsorand registry, similar to but less specific than the Rader proposal (alterna-
tive B) described above. The goal is to create a set of qualified registries
that can operate any number of gTLDs under contract with the gTLD
sponsor. Should a registry fail, it could readily be replaced by another
qualified registry.Evaluation.One goal of the BC proposal is to enhance the role of theDNS as a directory service for the Internet. (See Chapters 6 and 7 for a
discussion of the role of the DNS as an Internet navigation aid.) Its prin-
ciple of differentiation is intended to avoid the Internet usersÕ navigation
confusion that might result from overlap among gTLDs. But it would have
precluded the creation of .biz as a way of giving Internet providers an-other chance at a preferred second-level domain name that had been reg-
istered by someone else in .com. Moreover, by emphasizing differentia-tion, it would limit price competition in favor of non-price competition
between gTLDs.The BC proposal is not specific on the rate of addition of new names,other than that it is not necessarily a rapid expansion. Nor is it specific on
the process by which sponsors and registries for the new names would be91Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the Name Space,Ó 2002, p. 1.92Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the Name Space,Ó 2002, p. 2.93Business Constituency, ÒA Differentiated Expansion of the Name Space,Ó 2002, p. 2.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEselected. It is silent on the fact that, as noted above, many of the existingnames would not belong in a strictly taxonomic structure.By requiring that all TLDs be sponsored and restricted, this alterna-tive places on the sponsors and registries the responsibility of enforcing
intellectual property rights and qualifying an organizationÕs or
individualÕs right to use a specific domain name. By doing so, it moves
from ex post to ex ante enforcement of those rights and from consider-
ation of name assignments when an issue arises to examination of every
assignment in advance. This approach can be expected to raise the costs of
running a registry and, consequently, to increase the likely registration
fees.Comparison of the Four AlternativesThe four alternatives presented above for adding new gTLDs are com-pared in Table 5.3 on two dimensions: desirable structure of the name
space and the means of selecting gTLD operators. Both the BC and the
ICANN alternatives anticipate only sponsored and restricted gTLDs,
whereas the Mueller and McKnight and the Rader proposals allow, but
do not require, them.5.4.3Recommendations
ICANNÕs 2004 modification of its comparative hearing process so asto eliminate (or at least significantly reduce) subjective judgments by its
staff and board and increase the processÕs transparency and objectivity
has reduced the potential sources of dissatisfaction with the resultant se-
lections. However, the question still remains open as to whether it is re-
ally necessary for ICANN to qualify new gTLDs on such matters as spon-TABLE 5.3Alternatives for Adding Generic Top-Level Domains
Means of Selecting gTLD OperatorsDesirable StructureFirst-come,Auction
of Name SpaceFirst-servedComparative Hearing(and Lottery)
Taxonomic/restrictedD.  Business constituency
A.  ICANN 2004 addition
RegulatedICANN 2000 Addition
Market-determinedB.  RaderC.  Mueller and
      McKnightSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES253sorship by a community, business and financial plans, and addition ofnew value to the name space.An alternative approach would be qualification of applicants only ontechnical capability, basic financial viability, and adherence to registrant
protection standards and ICANN policies. Then a market-based selection
processÑessentially an auctionÑcould be used to select among qualified
applicants when their number exceeds the number of available slots.Recommendation: If new gTLDs are to be created, the currently em-ployed comparative hearing or expert evaluation processes should not be
assumed to be the only processes for selecting their operators. ICANNshould consider alternate processes that are less reliant on expert, staff, or
board judgments.Recommendation: Any gTLD auction selection process should bedesigned with reference to the substantial literature on auction design.94The following principal matters will have to be decided:¥What is being auctioned.Is it a ÒslotÓ that the winner can use for aTLD with its choice of name and operating policy, or the Òright to oper-
ateÓ one of a prespecified list of TLD names and policies, each of which is
subject to a separate auction? Is it an outright sale or the license to operate
for a fixed, potentially renewable term?¥How the winner is chosen.Does the high bid win, or the low bid? Inthe latter case the bid would be the maximum amount the winner would
charge for a basic registration in the TLD. (This latter case raises the issue
of tightly specifying levels of service so that the bids can be comparable.)¥What is done with the proceeds of a Òhigh bid winsÓ auction.Would theproceeds go to cover ICANN operating costs or be allocated to other orga-
nizations, such as the root name server operators or the IAB/IETF in sup-
port of technical activities related to ICANN responsibilities?¥How commercial and non-commercial bidders are treated.Would theyparticipate equally in the same auctions, or would there be separate selec-
tion processes for each?¥What the auction mechanism is.Would it be open or closed; single ormultiple iterations; with a reserve price or not; English or Dutch;95 and soon?94See, for example, Paul Klemperer, Auctions: Theory and Practice, Princeton UniversityPress, Princeton, N.J., 2004.95In an English auction, participants bid openly against one another, with each bid higherthan the previous one. By contrast, in a Dutch auction, the auctioneer begins with a highasking price that is lowered until someone accepts the auctioneerÕs price.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE¥How the bidders are qualified.Would it be Òno restrictionsÓ orthrough some combination of technical capability, financial strength, con-
tinuity provisions, and so on?¥How many ÒslotsÓ or ÒrightsÓ a bidder could win.Would it be just oneor two or as many as desired?¥How post-auction actions by winners are restricted.Would it be at all;no resale for X years; no change in policies; and so on?¥How various failure modes are dealt with.What happens if the winnerdoesnÕt pay, or doesnÕt proceed in a timely manner to set up the domain?
What if the winner operates the domain poorly from a technical or ethical
point of view?Because of the many choices for each of these matters and their manypossible combinations, there can be many different kinds of TLD auctions
with different goals and quite different processes. Furthermore, as the
previously cited OECD report96 suggests, there can be various combina-tions of comparative hearings (say, for qualification of prospective regis-
tries) and auctions (where demand for gTLDs exceeds the number made
available). The exploration of one or more such designs should be in-
cluded in ICANNÕs evaluation of alternative gTLD selection processes.5.5OVERSIGHT OF COUNTRY-CODE TOP-LEVEL DOMAINS
Issues: Does ICANNÕs responsibility for the root require that it work to in-crease its oversight of and authority over the ccTLDs? If so, what form should its
increased authority take, and how can it be implemented? And to what degree
should the ccTLDs accept ICANNÕs authority and participate in its activities?Although it does not have much visibility in the United States, theissue of who controls the delegation and redelegation of ccTLDs is highly
sensitive in many parts of the world. On the one hand, some nations97have expressed concern that the U.S. government, acting through ICANN,
could unilaterally remove their ccTLDs from the root zone file and, there-
fore, cut them off from the Internet. On the other hand, some non-govern-
mental ccTLD registries fear that their governments could take over con-
trol of the ccTLDs through the use of ICANNÕs redelegation responsibility.
In some sense, these fears are anomalous since although ICANN has been96Working Party on Telecommunication and Information Services Policies, ÒGeneric TopLevel Domain Names,Ó 2004, p. 5197For example, a Brazilian government representative at the February 2004 U.N. meetingon Internet governance expressed this concern.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES255given responsibility for management of the root, the vast majority of theTLDs in the rootÑthe ccTLDsÑhave, for the most part, eluded its direct
authority. Fewer than half of them (though they include some of the larger
ones) contribute to ICANNÕs budget. Although many participate in the
ICANN meetings (and the special ccTLD meetings that have occurred at
the same time), they have not fully participated in ICANNÕs decisions.
And few have signed agreements with ICANN. Yet, through its control of
the root zone file, ICANN does have the sole responsibility for recom-
mending delegations and redelegations of ccTLDs to the DOC. So the

policy issues that face ICANN are whether its responsibility for the root
requires that it work to increase its oversight and authority over the
ccTLDs and, if so, what form such oversight should take and how it can
be implemented. And the complementary issue for the ccTLDs is the de-
gree to which they should accept ICANNÕs authority and participate in its
activities. This latter issue is, of course, complicated by the fact that the
243 ccTLDs do not act in concert98 and, as described in ÒccTLDsÓ in Sec-tion 3.4.1, represent a very wide range of relationships between govern-
ment and registry and a very wide range of registry policies.5.5.1Current Situation
As the Internet has grown and matured, the role and importance ofccTLDs has grown and changed as well, as have their relationships with
their governments, with their local communities, and with ICANN.A study in 2002 of the ccTLDs of 45 countries revealed a wide diver-sity of relationships between ccTLDs and the countriesÕ governments.99The ccTLDs of 10 of the 45 countries surveyed were operated by govern-
ment agencies or departments, 9 by private commercial enterprises, 20 by
non-profit organizations, 5 by academic institutions, and 1 by an indi-
vidual. Of the 35 non-governmental sponsoring organizations, only 9 had
a formal contractual relationship with their governments and 13 had in-
formal relationships, of which 3 were awaiting formalization. Three of the
ccTLDs operators were battling government attempts to take over man-
agement of the ccTLD. Altogether, only half of the studied ccTLDs had
formal or soon-to-be formal relationships with their governments. Their98There are, however, a number of regional ccTLD associations such as CENTR, the Coun-cil of European National Top-Level Domain Registries, which has 39 member registries, not
all of which are European. See <www.centr.org>. CENTR has expressed strong positions onICANN matters, especially its relationships with the ccTLDs.99Michael A. Geist, ccTLD Governance Project, 2003, available at <http://www.cctldinfo.com/home.php>. Data for this project was obtained from ccTLD Web sites,ccTLD contacts, and GAC representatives between June and September 2002. It was notclaimed to be a representative sample.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEformal relationships with ICANN were also weak. By early 2005, only 12of the 243 ccTLDs had entered into formal agreements with ICANN.The consequence of this evolution is that the ccTLDs operate in a spacethat is only in part under the oversight of any higher authority. A few
ccTLDs are overseen by their national governments; some have estab-
lished representative non-governmental bodies to represent the local
Internet community and exercise varying degrees of oversight; some are
completely autonomous non-profit bodies that operate voluntarily to meet
local Internet community interests; and some are commercial bodies with
some linkage to the national government.The only body that currently has an opportunity to exercise oversightover all the ccTLDs is ICANN. According to ICANN, it does so on the
basis of RFC 1591 in conjunction with ÒICP-1: Internet Domain Name Sys-
tem Structure and Delegation (ccTLD Administration and Delegation)Ó100and the ÒPrinciples and Guidelines for the Delegation and Administra-
tion of Country Code Top Level Domains,Ó a revision of principles first
published in 2000, which was presented by the Governmental Advisory
Committee at the ICANN meeting in April 2005.101The delegations in the early days of the DNS placed highest priorityon the responsibility of the manager and less on notions of ownership.
However, with the current economic, political, and social importance of
the Internet to all nations, matters of accountability to the local govern-
ment, local Internet community, and the global Internet community have
assumed much greater significance. Thus, matters of delegation for new
ccTLDs and redelegations of responsibility for existing ccTLDs have be-
come much more important and, when combined with the many different
ccTLD-government relationships, have also become much more complex.The relationship between ccTLDs and ICANN has been difficult fromthe beginning of ICANN. First, a large number of the ccTLDs felt no need
to contribute to ICANNÕs budget, since they did not think they received
any corresponding benefits. Whether or not true,102 many ccTLDs be-lieved that 90 percent of ICANNÕs resources were devoted to gTLD is-
sues, while they were asked to provide 35 percent of its budget.103 Sec-100Available at <www.icann.org/icp/icp-1.htm>.101See <http://gac.icann.org/web/docs/cctld/ccTLD_Principles_MDP_ Final.rtf>. Thisnew, revised statement of principles was published in April 2005.102However, according to a reviewer with knowledge of ICANNÕs activities: ÒClose to 50percent of ICANN time/resources has been devoted to ccTLD and international issues. . . .much of that time is spent on small ccTLDs (with) complex redelegation issues. A consider-
able amount of time is also spent liaising with regional organizations and governments . . .participating in international fora.Ó103Peter de Blanc, ÒccTLD Briefing Document,Ó February 19, 2001, available at <http://www.wwtld.org/meetings/cctld/ccTLD-Briefing-document.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES257ond, many of them resented ICANNÕs major role in deciding on delega-tions and redelegationsÑessentially a policy roleÑthat they felt would be
better performed locally. They also believed that their position as one con-
stituency within ICANNÕs Names Supporting Organization, whose other
constituencies primarily addressed gTLD issues, did not adequately re-
flect their importance as 243 of the 258 TLDs.Under its 2003 reorganization (see Section 5.2.4, alternative F), ICANNhas responded to that concern by replacing the Names Supporting Orga-
nization with two supporting organizations, the Generic Names Support-
ing Organization (GNSO) and the Country-Code Names Supporting Or-
ganization (ccNSO), which formally came into being in March 2004.
ICANN hopes, thereby, to draw the ccTLDs more actively into its opera-
tions and build a stronger basis for their support. Furthermore, the re-
vised ÓPrinciples for the Delegation and Administration of Country Code
Top Level DomainsÓ issued in April 2005 by the Governmental Advisory
Committee addresses many of the concerns of the ccTLDs and govern-
ments.104Although ICANNÕs actions may have the desired effect, it is useful tolay out the alternative approaches to providing reasonable oversight of
the ccTLDs that have been suggested.5.5.2Alternatives
ICANN appears to have four goals for the ccTLDs. First, that theyoperate according to standards, protocols, and practices that are consis-
tent with the reliable and stable operation of the DNS and that allow open
connectivity to and from their registrants and the rest of the Internet. Sec-
ond, that they contribute proportionately105 to the overall costs of main-taining the DNS root zone file and ccTLD database in which they are
listed. Third, that they accept ICANNÕs authority to decide on delegations
and redelegations when controversies arise. And fourth, that they formal-
ize these expectations by means of an agreement with ICANN. However,
not all of the ccTLDs accept these as appropriate goals for ICANNÕs rela-
tionship with them. What is the current situation?The absence of significant and sustained operational problems sug-104See <http://gac.icann.org/web/docs/cctld/ccTLD_Principles_MDP_ Final.rtf>. Thisnew, revised statement of principles was published in April 2005.105In 1999, the Task Force on Funding recommended that the ccTLDs contribute a 35percent share of ICANNÕs continuing revenue requirements. See <http://www.icann.org/committees/tff/final-report-draft-30oct99.htm#4>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEgests that the ccTLDs generally meet the first of ICANNÕs goals, support-ing reliable, stable, and open operation of the DNS and Internet.106However, there is only a modest contribution, at present, from a mi-nority of the ccTLDs to ICANNÕs budget. (In 2004-2005, the 243 ccTLDsÕ
fixed contributions are budgeted at $1.02 million, whereas 10 gTLDs are
expected to provide $1.45 million. An additional $14 million is expected
from the accredited registrars and gTLD registries in proportion to actual
registrations.) So they do not appear to satisfy its second goal.The ccTLDs represented by the European association of ccTLD reg-istries, the Council of European National Top-level Domain Registries
(CENTR), favor a much more limited role for ICANN. In their view,
ICANN should restrict its operational responsibilities to maintaining the
ccTLD database (containing Whois information about the ccTLDs) and
the corresponding root zone file entries and ensuring that the ccTLDs
satisfy minimal technical requirements to function within the global
DNS. In their view, delegations and redelegations should be made only
by ICANN upon verified instruction from the current manager of the
ccTLD. Where there is controversy, it should be referred to a third party
for resolution. (This approach would be consistent with the proposals
noted earlier to increase ICANNÕs legitimacy by narrowing its range of
authority and by delegating sensitive decisions to appropriate third par-
ties wherever possible.)An even stronger view, held by a number of ccTLD managers, is thatthe maintenance of the ccTLD database should be the responsibility of a
ccTLD-sponsored organization independent of ICANN. This organization
would receive entries from the ccTLDs and have full responsibility for
updating the database to reflect the latest information. Through a contract
with ICANN, it would provide the relevant ccTLD entries for inclusion in
the root zone file, but ICANN would play no part in deciding what the
entries would be. Participation in the independent database would be
voluntary for each ccTLD. If a ccTLD desired, it could continue to submit
information directly to ICANN. As a result, each ccTLD would have a
ÒvoteÓ on whose management of the ccTLD database it favored.Thus, although ICANNÕs delegation and redelegation authority is ac-cepted de factoÑbecause it currently has sole authority to recommend
changes in the root zone file to the DOCÑthere are many ccTLDs that
dispute either the way that authority is exercised or that it should be an
ICANN function at all. Consequently, its third goal has not been satisfied.106On rare occasions, a ccTLD may temporarily disappear from the Internet as the LibyanccTLD did in April 2004. This is often the result of political or institutional disputes within anation over responsibility for the ccTLD, with which ICANN has to deal. See ÒWho Runs the
Dot LY?,Ó Libyan Jamahiriya Broadcasting Corporation, 2004, available at <http://en.ljbc.net/online/subject_details.php?sub_id=26&cat_id=1>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES259Finally, as noted above, only 12 agreements have been signed betweenICANN and ccTLDs. So ICANNÕs fourth goal has not been satisfied.It should be observed that a comparable list of the goals of the 243ccTLDs cannot be provided, since they are consistent neither with each
other nor, necessarily, with ICANN. As efforts are made to increase the
ccTLDsÕ role in ICANN and ICANNÕs influence over them, many inde-
pendent ccTLDs will straddle the fence, playing the various forces off
against each other until the ambiguities and uncertain power relation-
ships among the U.S. government, their own national governments,
ICANN, and the international community are worked out. Because of the
diversity of ccTLD models, histories, and relationships to national gov-
ernments, it is unlikely that any proposal will satisfy everyone; but some
aggressive or lopsided proposals are likely to antagonize all of them.How then can ICANN best interact with the ccTLDs? The differinggoals of ICANN and of some of the ccTLDs have led to four proposed
models for ICANNÕs ÒoversightÓ of the ccTLDs.Alternative A: ÒThickÓ ICANNDescriptionThe model initially implemented by ICANN has had ICANN attempt-
ing to achieve its goals by playing a strong role in the oversight of the
ccTLDs: maintaining the ccTLD database and ccTLD entries in the root
zone file, making recommendations to the DOC concerning delegations
and redelegations, establishing standards for ccTLD performance, and
inducing compliance through MoUs with the ccTLD managers or the rel-
evant governments. Currently, it is seeking through the newly established
ccNSO to engage the more active participation of the ccTLDs in ICANN
activities.EvaluationBy elevating the ccTLDs to the status of a supporting organization,similar to the GNSO, ICANN has both raised their profile in the organiza-
tion and given them influence over board membership and ICANN policy.
By engaging them more directly in its governance, it evidently hopes to
gain their support for its role in ccTLD oversight. At the same time, the
revised ICANN bylaws107 give the ccNSO the principal role in establish-107The changes in ICANN bylaws that establish the ccNSO and define its roles are inICANN, ÒAppendix A to Minutes of Regular Meeting of ICANN Board,Ó June 26, 2003,
available at <http://www.icann.org/minutes/minutes-appa-26jun03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEing policy for entry of data concerning ccTLDs into the root zone file.Over time, this may lead to a ccNSO-led redefinition of the delegation/
redelegation policies and practices of ICANN.However, some of the most important ccTLDs were not participantsin the ccNSO upon its formation. Most notably, only four of the European
ccTLDs (from the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, Gibraltar, and the
Cayman Islands) were among the 38 founding members. In April 2004,
the European Community (EC) member responsible for the Internet said
that the EC will stand by ICANN as long as it continues to make changes
and that unless the EC ccTLDs come to agreement with ICANN, the EC
will lose patience and the governments will step in, possibly turning
ICANNÕs ccTLD role over to the ITU.108 But the distance that remainsbetween ICANN and the European ccTLDs was clearly shown by the re-
sponse of CENTR to ICANNÕs proposed 2004-2005 budget. In a May 2004
letter to ICANN, CENTR accused ICANN of a Òlack of financial prudenceÓ
and refused to support it Òfinancially or otherwiseÓ in its Òunrealistic po-
litical and operational targets.Ó109 Specifically, it said: ÒICANN/IANAshould focus on doing a few administrative tasks well and not seek to
make decisionsÑdecisions are best handled elsewhere.ÓAlternative B: ÒThinÓ ICANNDescriptionMany ccTLDs would favor a much more limited role for ICANN, es-sentially reducing it to performance of a technical coordination function
and eliminating all policy functions. Under this approach, ICANN would
continue to run the IANA function, maintaining the database of ccTLDs
and the ccTLD entries in the root zone file. However, decisions about the
delegation of responsibility for a ccTLD when it is a subject of dispute
would not be made by ICANN. Rather, they would be made, in the first
instance, by the local Internet community relying on national laws and
processes as necessary, and if that failed, by a process established by the
ccTLD community. In this model, the ccTLDs would agree to pay the cost
incurred by ICANN in maintaining the database of ccTLDs and ccTLD
entries in the root zone file through a fee based on the size of each ccTLDÕs
membership.108Speech by EC Commissioner Erkki Liikanen quoted by Kieren McCarthy, ÒEC TellsEurope and ICANN to Make Peace,Ó The Register, April 28, 2004, available at <http://www.theregister.co.uk/2004/04/28/ec_icann_warning_shot/>.109Paul M. Kane, letter to Paul Twomey, May 26, 2004, available at <http://www.centr.org/docs/statements/CENTR-Response-2004-Budget.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES261EvaluationAlternative B would reduce ICANN to performance of a technical/administrative root registry function, eliminating its role in determining
who among alternative claimants should have the right to be the registry
for a specific ccTLD. In that sense, it is compatible with the approaches to
gTLD selection that favor the use of auctions to determine which gTLDs
should enter the root zone file. A combination of the two approaches
would virtually eliminate ICANNÕs role as a gatekeeper to the root and
leave it primarily as the record keeper and, presumably neutral, validator
of the technical qualifications of registries.Alternative C: International OversightDescriptionIn the third model, a major part of the IANA function would be re-moved from ICANN and turned over to a third-party organization estab-
lished by the ccTLDs. That organization would be responsible for main-
taining an up-to-date ccTLD database and sending the appropriate
information to ICANN for entry into the root zone file. Presumably, there
would be a corresponding agreement with the DOC (as long as it retained
its stewardship role) to accept the information from the third-party orga-
nization as authoritative. If that organization had broad international par-
ticipation in its governance and activities, this might alleviate some of the
discontent with the U.S. governmentÕs current central role as steward of
the DNS. One possibility would be, for example, to turn the ccTLD data-
base and delegation responsibilities over to the ITU. However, the ITU is
an intergovernmental organization, responsible primarily to the telecom-
munication ministries of governments. Yet, as noted earlier, many ccTLDs
are either simply independent from their governments or operating in
delicate balance with them. They would probably not like a process whose
only recourse is to the governments.EvaluationThis alternative takes alternative B a step further by eliminating eventhe record-keeping function of ICANN with respect to the ccTLDs. Its role
would simply be to pass the appropriate entries to the organization re-
sponsible for distributing the root zone file (currently VeriSign). In fact,
this amounts to establishing an ÒICANNÓ for the ccTLDs, leaving the
present ICANN with responsibility only for the gTLDs. Although alterna-
tive C would certainly eliminate any ccTLD discontent with ICANN, it
might simply shift the focus of concern to the new organization, depend-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEing on how the issue of delegation/redelegation decision making was
decided. This possibility suggests that finding a solution to the delega-
tion/redelegation decision process within the existing ICANN that is sat-
isfactory to the ccTLDs and their governments would preclude ccTLD
support for alternative C.Alternative D: Self-governing Root Management OrganizationDescriptionAn additional possibility would be an ICANN focused solely on rootmanagement responsibilities whose members are limited to those groups,
including the ccTLDs, having a direct interest in the root. (See ÒAlternative C:
ICANN as Registry for the RootÓ in Section 5.2.4.) This model assumes that
the ccTLDs would take an active role in ICANNÕs governance and would,
therefore, be more willing to see ICANN play an active, ÒthickÓ role in ccTLD
oversight. By creating a ccNSO and giving it greater influence on board com-
position and enabling it to submit recommendations to the board for its un-
modified approval or rejection, ICANN has taken a step in this direction.EvaluationAlternative D, discussed in greater detail as one of the ICANN alter-natives, could achieve the goal of bringing the ccTLDs fully into the man-
agement of an organization whose authority would be strictly limited to
management of the root. Once again, however, the issue would devolve
to the sensitive one of how delegation/redelegation decisions are made.
This alternative might be more attractive to the ccTLDs because it would
presumably increase the strength of their influence over ICANNÕs opera-
tions and decision-making processes. However, the issue still remains the
degree to which they, a highly diverse group, would all be comfortable
with the policies and practices that would determine which registry is
delegated or redelegated responsibility for a ccTLD.Comparison of the Four AlternativesThe four alternative models described above for oversight of ccTLDsare compared in Table 5.4 on two dimensions: who maintains the ccTLD
database and who recommends redelegations (to DOC). Three models
assume that ICANN will continue to manage the ccTLD database. Only
one posits an independent manager of the database. Two models foresee
the decision/policy responsibility for delegations and redelegations be-
ing removed from ICANN.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES2635.5.3Conclusions
Conclusion: Resolution of ICANNÕs role vis-‹-vis the ccTLDs is oneof the critical steps on the path to establishing an ICANN that is viewed as
a legitimate and appropriate steward for the DNS.The creation of the ccNSO represents progress in that direction whosesuccess will depend on the ccNSOÕs ability to attract an increasing num-
ber of members, both from the large ccTLDs that are needed for financial
and other support of ICANN and the smaller ccTLDs that can benefit from
the support that ICANN could offer them. Even more critical is the refine-
ment of the principles and processes for delegation and redelegation of
ccTLD registries and their acceptance by most of the ccTLDs.Conclusion: If the creation of the ccNSO does not result in increasedparticipation by the ccTLDs in ICANN policy making, then ICANN may
find itself subject to increasing pressures to constrain its role to that of
gTLD management and root zone file record keeping.5.6RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS OVER DOMAIN NAMES
Issue: Does the UDRP need to be improved? If so, how should it be im-proved?Administrative processes, such as the Uniform Domain Name DisputeResolution Policy (UDRP), are playing an important role in helping to re-
solve certain private-party disputes related to the use of domain names,
without requiring ISPs, registries, registrars, registrants, or other parties to
appear in court to provide evidence or to protect their interests. Such pro-
cesses contribute to the smooth operation of the economic and legal frame-
work associated with the DNS. At the same time, while the highly simpli-TABLE 5.4Alternatives for Oversight of the Country Code Top-Level
DomainsMaintainer of ccTLD DatabaseRecommender of RedelegationsICANNThird Party
ICANNA.  Thick ICANN
D.  Self-governing root

      management      organizationThird PartyB.  Thin ICANNC.  International oversight
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEfied rules created by the UDRP and similar dispute resolution procedures(e.g., those adopted by some ccTLDs) and dispute avoidance efforts (e.g.,
sunrise provisions) make it possible for some actual or potential disputes to
be resolved quickly at relatively low cost and without requiring the parties
to be represented by legal counsel, they can also undermine the potential
for fair outcomes. The UDRP is the primary subject of this section, since
most attention has been paid to issues concerning it.During 2003, the ICANN staff carried out a review of the UDRP. Itproduced an issues report in August 2003.110 The report cataloged andidentified the pros and cons of proposed solutions to both procedural and
substantive issues and concluded that Òwhile there are some areas where
improvements may be possible, there does not appear to be an urgent
need for revision.Ó Furthermore, it noted that Òrevision of the UDRP is
likely to be contentious; there are not many (if any) areas that are obvi-
ously amenable to achieving consensus.Ó (Since the UDRP is a consensus
policy, according to provisions of the ICANN registry and registrar agree-
ments it must be revised by consensus.)To provide an understanding of the issues that have given rise to thoseproposals, this section begins with an assessment of the UDRP and then
examines the major proposals for improvement. It incorporates the
committeeÕs conclusions and recommendations. The section concludes
with a discussion of the potential consequences of deployed internation-
alized domain names (IDNs) for dispute resolution.5.6.1Assessment of the UDRP
Many observers believe that the UDRP has functioned well to resolvedisputes over domain names.111 However, there are others who believethat the current system is biased toward the interests of trademark hold-
ers and away from the interests of individuals.112 Notwithstanding itsperceived disadvantages, numerous decisions have been rendered under110ICANN, ÒStaff ManagerÕs Issues Report on UDRP Review,Ó August 2003, available at<http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/udrp-issues-report-01aug03.htm>.111One such favorable assessment appears in Colm Brannigan, ÒThe UDRP: How Do YouSpell Success?,Ó Digital Technology Law Journal 5(1, July), 2004, available at <http://wwwlaw.murdoch.edu.au/dtlj/2004/vol5_1/brannigan.pdf>. A careful assessment of thepros and cons of the UDRP can be found in Laurence Helfer and Graeme Dinwoodie. 2001.
ÒDesigning Non-national Systems: The Case of the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolu-tion Policy,Ó William and Mary Law Review 43(1, October):141-273, 2001, available at <http://www.kentlaw.edu/depts/ipp/intl-courts/docs/dh.pdf>.112See, for example, A. Michael Froomkin, ÒICANNÕs ÔUniform Dispute ResolutionPolicyÕÑCauses and (Partial) Cures,Ó Brooklyn Law Review 67(3):608-718, 2002, available atSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES265the UDRP, and other domain name dispute policies have been modeledafter the UDRP as described in ÒResolving Domain Name ConflictsÓ in
Section 3.5.2. Thus, the UDRP has both positive and negative aspects,
which differ, however, depending on whether they are being considered
from the perspective of the complainants or of the respondents.¥General benefits.The UDRP crosses national boundaries and relieson communication technology to bring the parties together It is more in-
formal than litigation in national courts and relies on panelists who are
experts in the areas of trademark law and domain name issues. The pro-
ceedings are quasi-in-rem, meaning that even though both parties are in-cluded, the action is focused on resolving which party has rights to the
domain name, rather than assessing fault or monetary damages against
either party. Although it is international in scope, it raises no jurisdic-
tional issues, which may be present in court litigation in some countries,
by requiring all domain name registrants to agree to submit to a manda-
tory administrative proceeding as part of the registration agreement. The
UDRP requires that the proceeding be conducted in the language of the
registration agreement, which eliminates language as a potential barrier
to participation by domain name registrants.¥ComplainantÕs benefits.From the complainantÕs (generally, trade-
mark holderÕs) point of view, the UDRPÕs positive features include that it
provides a quick and relatively inexpensive method of resolving a do-
main name dispute and obtaining the transfer of a domain name to the
trademark owner. Domain name disputes brought under the UDRP are
generally resolved within 45 to 60 days of the domain name dispute
providerÕs receipt of the complaint. In addition, the UDRP is not limited
to registered trademarks identical to the domain name, and it allows trade-
mark owners to file a complaint against a registrant of a domain name
that is Òconfusingly similarÓ to the ownerÕs mark. Further, owners with
common-law rights in trademarks may also take advantage of the UDRP
as there are no trademark registration prerequisites to commencing a
UDRP action.The UDRP is a cost-effective dispute resolution mechanism overallbecause it (1) is based primarily on the pleadings of the parties, (2) only<http://personal.law.miami.edu/~froomkin/articles/udrp.pdf>. In addition, see MichaelGeist, ÒFair.com? An Examination of the Allegations of Systemic Unfairness in the ICANNUDRP,Ó University of Ottawa, Faculty of Law, August 2001, available at <http://
aix1.uottawa.ca/~geist/guistudrp.pdf>. See also a follow-up piece by the same author inMarch 2002, ÒFundamentally Fair.com? An Update on Bias Allegations and the ICANNUDRP,Ó available at <http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~geist/fairupdate.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEallows in-person hearings under exceptional circumstances, and (3) onlyallows additional evidence at the discretion of the panel.113 Furthermore,the parties are generally not required to travel in order to participate in
the proceeding, which is usually conducted by postal mail, e-mail, or fac-
simile. This last point can be seen as a greater advantage for the complain-
ants, since ordinary court proceedings would occur in the respondentsÕ
locales, thus, requiring the complainants to travel.¥RespondentÕs benefits.From the respondentÕs perspective, the panelcan grant the complainant the requested remedy (i.e., transfer or cancella-
tion of the domain name registration) only if the complainant succeeds in
showing all three of the UDRP elements (see ÒRemedies to Conflicts over
Names in the DNSÓ in Section 3.5.2), even if the respondent did not sub-
mit a response. Respondents see other advantages to the UDRP as well,
since it requires trademark owners to comply with a standard stricter than
that of the courtsÑdemonstrating that the respondent had both registered
and used the domain name in bad faith (although it has been argued that
not all panelists have adhered to this requirement). In addition, the UDRP
allows a party against which an adverse decision is rendered to take the
decision to the courts.Moreover, the UDRP provides limited remedies to trademark own-ers, namely simply transfer or cancellation of the domain name. To re-
ceive monetary damages or an injunction, a trademark owner would have
to proceed to litigation.¥ComplainantÕs disadvantages.From the complainantÕs perspective,the preparation of a proper complaint and necessary appendices can be
time-consuming and costly, and although much less costly than prepar-
ing for litigation, it is still viewed by many complainants as excessive.In addition, the only avenue, at present, for correcting what the com-plainant views as an improper decision by the panel is to litigate the same
matter before a court having in personam jurisdiction over the respondent,or in some cases in in rem jurisdiction over the domain name in dispute.This is not perceived as an advantage by all complainants, especially if
the respondent is not located in the same location as the complainant and
the domain name was not registered in the United States, where in remjurisdiction is possible in some cases.Moreover, complainants see disadvantages in the limitations on rem-edies (no potential damage recovery no matter how egregious the respon-
dent) and in panelsÕ inconsistent definitions of critical terms, such as Òcon-
fusing similarity,Ó Òuse,Ó and Òbad faith.Ó113ICANN, ÒRules for Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy,Ó October 24,1999, Paragraph 12.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES267¥RespondentÕs disadvantages.There are also, however, disadvantagesthat fall primarily on the respondents. Although the UDRP allows admin-
istrative proceedings to be conducted in languages other than English, the
UDRP itself is written in English. Many non-native-English speakers who
register domain names with registrars that do not provide translated ver-
sions of their registration agreements or the UDRP may not be aware that
they are subject to the provisions of the UDRP or that they should avoid
selecting a domain name that violates the trademark rights of other par-
ties.114 Additionally, since the complainant selects the dispute resolutionservice provider, it is possible for complainants to Òforum shopÓ (i.e., to
select a provider more likely to favor the complainant, or which has been
more sympathetic to similar complaints in the past).115Some critics have also alleged that providers, seeking to increase theirchances of being selected by future complainants, purposely choose arbi-
trators who are more likely to favor complainants, but little concrete evi-
dence supporting this allegation has been provided. Nevertheless, arbi-
trator selection bias would be a serious issue were it to occur, and service
providers should be reviewed on a periodic basis to make sure such bias
does not exist.Once a decision is rendered, the respondentÕs only recourse for deal-ing with a decision transferring or canceling the domain name is to pro-
ceed to court.¥General deficiencies.Critics of the current UDRP116 have pointed toa number of perceived deficiencies. Among them are that some panelists
do not apply the precedents of previous arbitrations appropriately, or in
some cases consistently; some panelists (and many respondents) are not
well-enough educated in either the operations of the DNS or the policies
and rules applicable to domain name disputes; the charges for a UDRP
proceeding and the ways in which panelist are compensated can lead to114As noted by one reviewer: Ò. . . many countries have consumer protection laws thatrequire all consumer contracts concluded within the jurisdiction to be in the local languagein order to be valid and enforceable. This condition is not satisfied by the UDRPÕs require-ment that the proceedings be conducted in the language of the registration agreement.Ó  See

Holger P. Hestermeyer, ÒThe Invalidity of ICANNÕs UDRP Under National Law,Ó MinnesotaIntellectual Property Review 3(1):1-57, 2002115An early analysis of the UDRP that asserted that Òforum shoppingÓ was a source of biasfavoring the complainant was in Milton Mueller, ÒRough Justice: An Analysis of ICANNÕsUniform Dispute Resolution Policy,Ó Convergence Center, Syracuse University School ofInformation Studies, 2000, available at <http://dcc.syr.edu/miscarticles/roughjustice.pdf>.
The INTA study, ÒUDRP-A Success StoryÓ (2002), is a rebuttal to the Mueller article. MichaelGeistÕs reports, ÒFair.com?Ó (2001) and ÒFundamentally Fair.com?Ó (2002), both provide fur-ther data on the asserted complainant-beneficial effects of forum shopping.116See, for example, the Froomkin, Mueller, and Geist articles cited above.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEundesired consequences; and there is no appeals process with the UDRPitselfÑthe only appeal is a de novo action before a court.Each of these perceived deficiencies is described and proposals forremedying them are addressed in the next section.Conclusion: The UDRP has generally satisfied the need for an effec-tive and cost-efficient means of resolving disputes concerning domain
names; however, it has weaknesses for which remedies have been pro-
posed.5.6.2Proposed Improvements to the UDRP
In response to the perceived deficiencies of the current UDRP, a num-ber of improvements have been proposed: a better, more consistent appli-
cation of arbitral precedents; an appeals process; required use of three-
member panels; improved training and self-help tools; and revised
funding and compensation structures.¥Better application of precedents.Some believe that more consistentapplication of arbitral precedents in UDRP proceedings is needed, so that
similar issues can be addressed in a more predictable manner that also
supports case-by-case knowledge building. In addition, greater consider-
ation of international legal issues is needed, given that laws vary from
country to country. Because the panelists in UDRP proceedings tend to be
most knowledgeable about their home countryÕs laws, new issues in dis-
putes tend to be examined through the legal lens of a particular panelistÕs
country. When these decisions are relied on in later cases, panelists unfa-
miliar with the legal context of the original decision will often assess
themÑinviting misinterpretation, however well-intentioned a panelist
may be. One way to encourage better and more consistent use of arbitral
precedents is to have an internal appeals process, whose panelists would
be in a better position to require and make use of precedents.¥Appeals process.An appeals process could serve the purpose of re-versing decisions that were clearly faulty or that covered a situation or
issue for which competing bodies of precedent exist.117 To remain consis-117For a specific proposal, see Patrick Kelley, ÒEmerging Patterns in Arbitration Under theUniform Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy,Ó Law and Technology Writing Work-shop, Annual Review of Exemplar Papers, School of Law (Boalt Hall), University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, 2001-2002, available at <http://www.law.berkeley.edu/institutes/bclt/pubs/annrev/exmplrs/final/pkfin.pdf>. Another proposal for an appeals process appears in M.Scott Donahey, ÒDivergence in the UDRP and the Need for Appellate Review,Ó 2002, avail-
able at <http://www.tzmm.com/content/articles/Mil2910.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES269tent with the original purpose of the UDRP, the intent of such a processwould be to re-examine only a small percentage of decisions, so as to pro-
vide an inexpensive mechanism (as compared to a court case) for resolv-
ing relatively straightforward cases. As noted above, an appeals process
would have the likely effect of encouraging better and more consistent
use of arbitral precedents. But support for an appeals process has been
limited, with the emphasis being placed on resolving such issues through
a national court proceedingÑrather than creating another layer to a rela-
tively quick and inexpensive dispute resolution process. Those who hold
that view emphasize that the UDRP, with or without an appeals process,
is not intended to serve as a full substitute for national and international
law or courts, but simply to provide a quicker and less costly process for
the majority of disputes, whose resolution is often obvious. With careful
design and restriction to very specific situations, the proposal for a lim-
ited appeals process could be consistent with that intent.¥Three-member panels.Analyses conducted during 2001 and early2002 of UDRP proceedings indicated a significant difference in their out-
comes, depending on whether they were heard by one-member or three-
member panels.118 (The choice is made by the complainant in the firstinstance, but the respondent can request a three-member panel.) Three-
member panels found for the complainant in a smaller percentage of the
cases. Critics have taken this as an indicator of greater bias toward com-
plainants by the one-member panels and have recommended, therefore,
that all panels have three members.119 (In three-member panels, the com-plainant, the respondent, and the provider each provide lists from which
one of the panelists is chosen.) Others have argued that the impression of
bias is due to other factors.120 Both sides agree that three-member panelsare more expensive and, therefore, that they erode the benefits of the
UDRP as a relatively inexpensive means of resolving domain name dis-
putes. Those who favor them argue that the increase in fairness is worth
the cost. In addition, they have suggested the payment of a bond by the
complainant that would be used to cover the respondentÕs costs of the
proceeding if the complainant lost and would be refunded if the com-
plainant won.121118Michael Geist, ÒFair.com? An Examination of the Allegations of Systemic Unfairness inthe ICANN UDRP,Ó 2001; and Michael Geist, ÒFundamentally Fair.com? An Update on BiasAllegations and the ICANN UDRP,Ó 2002.119Michael Geist, ÒFair.com?,Ó 2001.120INTA, ÒThe UDRP by All Accounts Works Effectively,Ó 2002.121Milton Mueller, ÒSuccess by Default: A New Profile of Domain Name Trademark Dis-putes Under ICANNÕs UDRP,Ó Convergence Center, Syracuse University School of Infor-
mation Studies, June 24, 2002.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE¥Improved training and self-help tools.In many UDRP proceedings thefocus is on the use of domain names in Web addresses (URIs). The role of
domain names in e-mail addresses and in other applications is often ig-
nored by the panelists, even though the effects can be different from those
in Web addresses. One possible reason for this oversight is that some pan-
elists may lack a technical understanding of how the DNS and the Internet
operate. Thus, some believe, UDRP proceedings could be improved by
enhancing the training requirements for panelists in the technology un-
derlying the DNS, the manner in which domain names can be used, and
the application of the policies and rules applicable to domain name dis-
putes. Improvements in the process might be developed to help panelists
verify the manner in which domain names are used, either through self-
help mechanisms or by changing the rules to request this information from
the respondents. Dispute resolution providers could provide training for
panelists on a regular basis, with such training being a requirement to
maintain panelist status with that provider.Thorough and detailed self-help tools might also be developed to en-able respondents to better understand the UDRP process itself, the
timeline involved, and the substance and format of an effective response
to better comprehend and respond to a UDRP action.122¥Revised funding and compensation structures.Under the current
funding structure, the revenue for panelists depends on the volume of
cases, thereby either creating a disincentive to spend a sufficient amount
of time reviewing the facts in a case and writing a well-thought-out opin-
ion, or creating an incentive for marketing strategy and tactics to attract
cases by defining lucrative niches, which may or may not correspond to
justice in dispute resolution proceedings. Observers assert that such
niches exist and that complainants often forum shopÑselecting dispute
resolution service providers based on their past record of favorable (to
the complainantÕs position) rulings.Since some parties believe that the $1150 to $1500 fee for filing a com-plaint regarding a single domain name is already expensive, there is some
resistance to any proposed increase. In addition, increasing the fees paid
to resolve or avoid a dispute raises the likelihood that, on the one hand,
individual domain name holders would be discouraged from employing
dispute resolution processes, while, on the other hand, well-financed do-
main name holders might be discouraged from filing large numbers of
not completely justified complaints.122Early in 2005 the World Intellectual Property Organization posted on its Web site anÒinformal overview of panel positions on key procedural and substantive issues,Ó includingreferences to decisions supporting each line of opinion. The ÒWIPO Overview of WIPO PanelViews on Selected UDRP Questions,Ó which is not binding on the panelists, is available at
<http://arbiter.wipo.int/domains/search/overview/index.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES271On the compensation side, the fee paid to panelists, typically $1000 to$1750, is below the level that highly qualified attorneys and consultants
say is needed to attract them to serve or continue to serve as panelists.
While it may never be possible to set the level high enough to attract and
retain highly paid specialists on the basis of compensation alone, it may
be worth examining the fee schedule to see whether a higher level could
be established while retaining the low cost of the UDRP.Recommendation: Arbitral domain name dispute resolution pro-cesses, rather than national courts, should continue to be encouraged as
the initial and primary vehicle for resolving most disputes associated with
the rights to domain names.Recommendation: The feasibility and desirability of five specificUDRP improvements should be further considered by ICANN: improv-
ing consistent use of arbitral precedents, establishing an internal appeals
process, using three-member panels, improving panelist knowledge about
the technology underlying the DNS, and improving the nature and struc-
ture of incentives in the process.5.6.3Disputes Concerning Internationalized Domain Names
The widespread deployment of internationalized domain names(IDNs)123 may well compound the difficulty of resolving disputes overdomain names by increasing the possibility that domain names will be
created that appear to be the same, but are not.The introduction of non-ASCII characters introduces a number of op-portunities for conflicts, not about domain names themselves, but about
characters that look alike. As the most trivial of examples, the upper-case
Greek alpha and its Cyrillic equivalent are indistinguishable on the
printed page from Roman upper case ÒA,Ó but the three have different
Unicode code points and strings containing them will compare differently.

There are several similar combinations involving Roman, Greek, and
Cyrillic scripts, but other examples appear in almost all pairings of alpha-
betic scripts. Another problem occurs because of the overlap between, for
example, Simplified and Traditional Chinese, where the characters look
different but have the same meanings.These concerns about similar-appearing, or similarly interpreted, do-main names are compounded by the observation that, in some circum-123See Section 4.3 for discussion of internationalized domain names.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEstances, a single registered domain name might have dozens, or even hun-dreds, of such variations. A cybersquatter could turn such conflicts into a
potentially lucrative business by offering to sell such variant names to the
ÒlegitimateÓ owner at a fee just below the cost of a UDRP proceeding.
Some of the registries and communities that would be most affected have
concluded that it is preferable to shift the problem, to the degree possible,
from conflict resolution to conflict avoidance by imposing restrictions on
the registration of domain names that would conflict or otherwise cause
confusion. ICANN has reinforced this approach by creating a guideline
that requires that an IDN must be registered only with regard to a speci-
fied language, which eliminates some of the difficulties encountered with
mixed scripts.124 This approach is discussed in more detail in Section 4.3.One view is that the potential for confusion in these cases is not reallydifferent from that of existing similar-appearing domain names, for which
it has been suggested that UDRP-based name conflict resolution is ad-
equate and appropriate. But variations among similar-looking domain
names are such as to generate, potentially, hundreds of possible conflicts
with a given character string.The Joint Engineering Team (JET) guideline model (see Section 4.3.3)addresses this problem by preventing some large fraction of the potential
conflicts, rather than devising remedies for them after they occur. The JET
guidelines take the position that IDN packages are atomic, and that there
should be no mechanism for moving domain names in or out of one once
it is created (see Section 4.3 for discussion of IDNs). Under that model, if a
domain name conflict arises in the creation of such a package, the conflict-
ing (already-registered or reserved) domain name is simply not placed in
the new package. But if the conflicting domain name is later deleted, it
does not become part of the later IDN package unless the domain names
associated with that package are explicitly deleted and reregistered.That

may or may not be the best possible model, but the alternatives, such as
having domain names appear as reserved in two or more packages, with
a priority order, lead to administrative, policy, or database management
nightmares.But there are constituencies that oppose such systems, some of themon the grounds that dispute resolution is adequate and others, perhaps,
on the more cynical grounds that letting things go to dispute resolution
permits them to collect registrar and registry fees on the names whether
they are valid or not and encourages even more business in defensive
registrations.124Guidelines are available at <http://www.icann.org/general/idn-guidelines-20jun03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES273Conclusion: The deployment of internationalized domain names in-troduces new sources of potential conflict over domain name rights. Re-
duction of such conflicts through guidelines and registration policies
should be encouraged.5.7 PROVISION AND PROTECTION OF WHOIS DATAIssue: What is the appropriate balance among the various interests in Whoisdata?As noted in Chapter 2, the Whois service began as a vehicle for net-work operators to find and contact those responsible for the operation of
an Internet host when, for example, an operational problem arose. How-
ever, with the commercialization of the Internet, the Whois service has
become an important and valuable tool for intellectual property owners
and is often used by trademark owners to determine the identity of sus-
pected infringers and cybersquatters. In addition, it is used by law en-
forcement agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission in the United
States, to track down the sources of fraudulent or other illegal uses of the
Internet. At the same time, there has been concern about its real and po-
tential exploitation by marketers and others who find the information
about domain name registrants valuable. These uses have, in turn, given
rise to significant and strongly held privacy concerns. Thus, while the
ability to search the Whois database has always been limited, because of
privacy concerns access and searching of Whois information have become
more and more restricted over time.5.7.1Assessment of Whois Data Issues
In the early days of the DNS, there were few, if any, concerns aboutthe misuse of Whois data, just as ensuring the integrity of DNS data was
deemed to be unnecessary. However, the population of users of Whois
data has increased markedly in scale and scope, and assumptions about
the good intent of all users have become unfounded. Furthermore, under
the UDRP, giving false Whois information and not responding to requests
for information have led to a presumption of bad faith by the respondent.For example, when Whois was used as a Unix command, trademarkowners were able to retrieve a wide range of information, including contact
information of the domain name registrant and a list of all domain names
registered by one particular registrant. Later, and until 2001, Network Solu-
tions, Inc. (NSI) allowed Internet users to retrieve a list of up to 50 domain
names registered by a particular registrant, but then changed the maximum
number to 10 registrations. Currently, none of the registrars allow InternetSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEusers freely to query their Whois databases to determine which domainnames a particular registrant has registered. Many registrars charge a fee
for each request for a list of domain names registered by one of their regis-
trants. In addition, some of the registrars do not provide a domain name
registrantÕs e-mail address in the contact information, but instead assign
each registrant a generic e-mail address125 that is linked to the e-mail ad-dress the registrant provided in registering its domain name.Data AccuracyWhois information can be inaccurate, out of date, or false. Indeed,registrants may provide fictitious names and addresses and fail to update
any of their contact information promptly, if ever. ICANNÕs Registrar
Accreditation Agreement contractually binds each of its accredited regis-
trars to investigate and correct any reported inaccuracies in contact infor-
mation for the domain names they maintain.ICANN established in September 2002 the Whois Data Problem Re-ports System (WDPRS) to receive public reports of inaccurate or absent
Whois data. The sixth amendment to its MoU with the DOC requires that
ICANN publish an annual report containing an analysis of the received
reports. According to its March 2004 report,126 over the 18-month periodfrom September 2002 through February 2004, the system received about
24,000 confirmed Whois inaccuracy reports, concerning about 16,000 dif-
ferent domain names. Of these, 82 percent concerned .com; 13 percent,.net; and 5 percent, .org. (An enhanced version of the system that willcover the new gTLDs as well as the legacy ones was launched in 2004.)
The complaints received by each registrar were generally proportional to
the number of names it registered. On average, each registrar received 4.8
complaints per year per 10,000 names managed. Somewhat more than a
third of these complaints resulted in the correction of data or the removal
of a domain name.As a further step to improve Whois data accuracy, ICANN adoptedthe Whois Data Reminder Policy (WDRP) on March 27, 2003.127 SinceNovember 2003, all ICANN-accredited registrars must comply with the125This could cause problems in a UDRP proceeding since the generic e-mail address couldbe interpreted as false and, consequently, a contributor to the presumption of bad faith on
the part of the respondent.126ICANN, ÒCommunity Experiences with the InterNIC Whois Data Problem ReportsSystem,Ó March 13, 2004, available at <http://www.icann.org/whois/wdprs-report-final-
31mar04.htm>.127ICANN, ÒWhois Data Reminder Policy,Ó June 16, 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/registrars/wdrp-htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES275WDRP with respect to registrations they sponsor in all top-level domainsfor which they are accredited. At least annually, a registrar must present
the current Whois information to registrants and remind them that provi-
sion of false Whois information can be grounds for cancellation of their
domain name registration. Registrants must review their Whois data and
make any corrections. Data PrivacyICANN posted a staff managerÕs issues report on privacy issues re-lated to Whois on May 13, 2003,128 that spelled out a catalog of the issues,the stakeholders, and their apparent positions on the issues. The issues
concerned the data collected, including its quality, handling, disclosure,
and use; the classification of registrants (i.e., political, commercial, indi-
vidual); and commercial confidentiality and rights in data.The various stakeholders were viewed as placing emphasis on differ-ent issues. Non-commercial users were viewed as focusing on privacy,
whereas commercial users were seen as concerned with accessibility to
enforce accountability of uses. The intellectual property interests were

understood to stress the importance of ready access to support investiga-
tions of intellectual property abuse, while ISPs support it to facilitate reso-
lution of network problems and identification of the sources of spam. Reg-
istrars and registries view registrant data as an important business asset
that should not be made available to competitors, while at the same time
registrars need to access registrant data of competitors to confirm authori-
zation of transfers. Registrars and registries both bear the expense of pro-
viding the services and, therefore, have strong incentives to reduce the
cost of doing so.As a consequence of these differences in emphasis among stakehold-ers, the policy issues surrounding Whois services (as opposed to the
Whois protocol) are often framed in adversarial terms. On the one hand,
trademark holders and their representatives want comprehensive and free
access to all Whois data and would like improvements in Whois services,
such as higher quality in the Whois data and the ability to consolidate
data across Whois services more easily. They see Whois data as an essen-
tial resource in the pursuit of those who compromise their trademarks in128ICANN, ÒStaff ManagerÕs Issues Report on Privacy Issues Related to Whois,Ó May 13,2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/whois-privacy-report-13may03.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEdomain names.129 On the other hand, those who are concerned about in-dividual privacy highlight the problems that could be associated with
unconstrained access to Whois dataÑfrom junk mailers and marketers to
those who may use such data to facilitate more serious, illegal activities
such as identity theft.In recognition of the complexity of the issues and interests involved,the ICANN staff managerÕs issues report recommended as the next step
the formation of a Whois/privacy steering group in the Generic Names
Supporting Organization (GNSO) to conduct a fact-finding and issues
definition process. Following on the work of that steering group, the
Names Council of the GNSO in October 2003 launched three simultaneous

task forces on various aspects of Whois privacy. The council intended to
align their recommendations for submission to the ICANN board.Task Force 1 (TF1) was charged with examining what contractualchanges (if any) would be required to allow registrars and registries to
protect domain name holder data from data mining130 for marketing pur-poses. Task Force 2 (TF2) was asked to address issues concerning the data
to be collected from registrants, their options to restrict access to the data
and be informed of its use, and their ability to remove certain data ele-
ments from public access and receive notice if it is accessed. Task Force 3
(TF3) was tasked with looking at verification of the data collected, consid-
ering both errors and deliberate falsification. The three task forces pre-
sented their preliminary reports at the end of May 2004. They have been
posted on the ICANN Web site for comment.131 Among the significantissues and positions identified were the following.¥Local law.132In some cases, national privacy laws conflict with theprovisions of ICANNÕs agreement requiring the registrars to collect and129In a UDRP proceeding, for example, trademark owners are often required to show aÒpattern of conductÓ by the respondent of registering domain names incorporating the trade-marks of other parties.  Unless a trademark owner can guess the domain names registered

by the respondent, it can incur considerable costs in obtaining this information, since therespondent may have used several different registrars in registering its domain names orprovided slightly different contact details for each registration.130ÒData miningÓ as used here means the use of computerized techniques to extract dataabout registrants from registrar Whois files in large quantities. Often these techniques aredesigned to overcome specific limitations imposed by registrars on the number of names
that may be requested. The lists are then used for unsolicited mailings (spam) and otherpossibly illicit (identity theft) purposes.131Links to the preliminary reports are available at <http://gnso.icann.org/issues/whois-privacy/index.shtml>.132For this and the next two items, see the report of TF2 available at <http://gnso.icann.org/issues/whois-privacy/index.shtml>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES277make accessible certain data elements about registrants. The ICANN reg-istry/registrar agreement should be modified to exempt registrars who
obey local law from the conflicting provisions of the agreement.¥Data elements.All of the data elements currently collected are con-sidered by at least some constituencies to be required, although some con-
stituencies dispute the needs for some of them. No consensus exists on
whether new elements are needed and whether some existing elements
should be made voluntary. The issue is less what should be collected by
registries/registrars and more what data should be made available for
public access.¥Publication of data.Whois data has a wide range of uses (as dis-cussed above.) It is also subject to abusesÑtelemarketing, identity theft,
spamming, stalking, and abuse and harassment have been reported,
though not quantified. There is a need to achieve a balance between acces-
sibility and privacy. Possible approaches include tiered access, in which
different types of users would have access to different subsets of the data;
proxy registration services that would substitute third-party for registrant
data and control access to the latter; and the ability of registrants to opt
out of publication of certain data on a case-by-case basis. The latter ap-
proach has been adopted by some ccTLDs.¥Data mining and marketing.133If only non-sensitive data (generally,technical information) were to be available via Whois, it would have little
value, be unlikely to be data mined, and have little impact on privacy. How-
ever, to the extent that sensitive data (generally, personal contact informa-
tion) is publicly available through registry/registrar Whois services, TF1
members agreed that at a minimum the requestor of Whois information
should be required to identify (and authenticate) itself to the Whois pro-
vider together with its reasons for seeking the data. They left open the issue,
however, of whether notice to the registrant of such a request should be
required. They also left open the question of whether and under what con-
ditions automated access to Whois data could be allowed and to whom.
Among the possibilities would be enabling a restricted license that would
provide data to approved requestors for recognized purposes in human-
readable format only. Requestors could be approved generally and cen-
trally (a white list) or locally and specifically (an individual use list).133See the report of TF1 available at <http://gnso.icann.org/issues/whois-privacy/index.shtml>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE5.7.2Whois and Internationalized Domain Names
134Just as it does for the UDRP, the introduction of internationalizeddomain names (IDNs) raises technical and institutional issues for the
Whois service. For the most part, these are issues about the languages in
which Whois queries will be posed and responded to.At the basic query level, the current Whois service expects to receiveASCII characters only; it cannot receive queries in Unicode (which is used
to encode the many different character sets of contemporary human lan-
guages), and its responses are similarly in ASCII. But in an international-
ized environment, domain names will not all be written in ASCII (al-
though, as explained in Section 4.3, they will all be mapped into ASCII
strings). This raises the first question: What character sets should be ac-
ceptable in a query? The choices include not only Unicode, but also IDNA
puny code (see Section 4.3) and local character sets, or some combination
of them.Similarly, responses to Whois queries are currently provided in ASCII.This raises the second question: What language should be acceptable in a
response, and how should it be encoded? The choices of language include
the language of the nation in which the registrar or the registrant is lo-
cated or English. Or one might permit some Òinternational languages,Ó
such as English, Chinese, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, and so on. If
the response is to be useful to most questioners on the international
Internet, then would it be reasonable to expect them to have to hire trans-
lators? Or should the Whois registrant be required to list its information
in some commonly accepted language? If the language is other than En-
glish, then issues about coding arise that are similar to the question re-
garding queries. For example, should Unicode be required and, if so,
which encoding form of Unicode? Or should local character encodings,
which might be in much more general use with the particular relevant
language or script, but less easily accessible internationally, be permitted?A third question arises since IDN practices for complex languagesactually create packages of reserved names (see Section 4.3). In such cases,
how much information should Whois provide about other names in the
package in response to a query about one of them?None of these issues had been resolved by September 2004. However,as IDNs are more widely adopted, the lack of their early resolution will
increase the likelihood of problems arising and the difficulty of introduc-
ing the necessary changes.134This section draws on material in John C. Klensin, ÒÔWhoisÕ Internationalization Issues,Ópresentation at the ICANN meeting in Carthage, Tunisia, October 2003, available at <http://www.icann.org/presentations/klensin-whois-carthage-29oct03.ppt>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM: INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES279On the other hand, the work on a new protocol to replace Whois (seeSection 5.7.3) has explicitly addressed some internationalization issues.
Although that work does not address all of the issues raised above, it at
least makes it possible to transmit and receive Unicode characters with-
out somehow encoding them into ASCII form and, if it is desired to sup-
port local character encodings, to construct a framework for identifying
and using them.Recommendation: The IETF and ICANN should address Whois datainternationalization issues with high priority in order to enable their reso-
lution and implementation of the results together with the widespread
introduction of IDNs. 5.7.3Conclusion and Recommendation
The issues concerning the accuracy of and access to Whois data en-gage the interests of many stakeholders with legitimate but sometimes
conflicting interests. They entail actual and potential conflicts with differ-
ing national privacy laws. Furthermore, the ICANN agreements with reg-
istrars and registries obligate them to accept only consensus policies. Con-
sequently, the best way to achieve improvements in the Whois policies
and practices appears to be through the consensus policy development
process in which ICANN is engaged. Attempts by individual govern-
ments to impose specific requirements on Whois, such as recent legisla-
tive initiatives in the U.S. Congress,135 can interfere with these efforts andhave counterproductive consequences by inducing registrants to find
ways to hide their identities.Conclusion: Legislative or technical initiatives that construe Whoisnarrowly will not be productive in the long run and serve only to energize
those constituencies that perceive their interests as being compromised.The committee agrees that access to Whois data should be viewed as atiered decision, and not as a binary decision. Gradations should exist, as
they do in local telephone directories where entries are included by de-
fault, but where unlisted numbers can be obtained. Moreover, under cer-
tain conditions, law enforcement officials can obtain an individualÕs infor-
mation, even if the individual has opted not to be included in the public
directory. Alternatively, individuals can sometimes embellish their ge-135H.R. 3754, 108th Congress, Fraudulent Online Identities Sanctions Act (FOISA).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE136The IETF had, by October 2004, approved as Òstandards-trackÓ documents (see Box 3.3)several elements of a proposed replacement protocol, which is called IRIS and defined bythe CRISP Working Group, that will implement this capability.  The protocol also addresses

most or all of the other perceived deficiencies of the Whois protocol, including its inability todeal with non-ASCII characters. More detail on those deficiencies is available in the state-ment of requirements for the new protocol in A. Newton, ÒCross Registry Internet Service
Protocol (CRISP) Requirements,Ó RFC 3707, February 2004, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.  However, in May 2005 it was still unclear how long it would take for all the
elements to be approved, published, and implemented.neric entry (for a fee). Thus, changes to the Whois process need to be con-ceived in a systematic way that accounts for the varying legitimate per-
spectives. The example of local telephone directories is offered for illus-
trative purposes only. The committee is not recommending this specific
model per se, although the analogy can also be helpful since personal data
(name, address, and phone number) are made publicly available through
printed (and now online) directories, just as they are through Whois ser-
vices.Recommendation: Future systems that support Whois data manage-ment and access should be designed to allow for gradations in access
while maintaining some degree of free access to Whois information. The
Whois protocol will have to be replaced to accommodate the desired gra-
dations in access.136Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2816Internet Navigation:Emergence and Evolution
As the previous chapters show, the Domain Name System has beena foundation for the rapid development of the Internet. Domain
names appear on the signposts designating origins and destina-tions linked by the Internet and in the addresses used by the principal ap-
plications traversing the InternetÑe-mail and the World Wide Web. And
they have been useful for navigating across the Internet: given a domain
name, many Web browsers will automatically expand it into the Uniform
Resource Locator (URL) of a Web site; from a domain name, many e-mail
users can guess the e-mail address of an addressee. For these reasons,
memorable domain names may often acquire high value. Their registrants
believe that searchers can more readily find and navigate to their offerings.However, as the Internet developed in size, scope, and complexity, theDomain Name System (DNS) was unable to satisfy many Internet usersÕ
needs for navigational assistance. How, for example, can a single Web page
be found from among billions when only its subject and not the domain
name in its URL is known? To meet such needs, a number of new types of
aids and services for Internet navigation were developed.1 While, in theend, these generally rely on the Domain Name System to find specific
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, they greatly expand the range of ways in
which searchers can identify the Internet location of the resource they seek.1The difference between a navigation aid and a navigation service is one of degree. Anavigation service, such as the offerings of a search engine service provider, are more elabo-rate and extensive than those offered by a navigation aid, such as the bookmark feature of a
Web browser.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThese navigational aids and services have, in return, relieved some ofthe pressure on the Domain Name System to serve as a de facto directory
of the Internet and have somewhat reduced the importance of the regis-
tration of memorable domain names. Because of these tight linkages be-
tween the DNS and Internet navigation, this chapter and the next ones
addressÑat a high levelÑthe development of the major types of Internet
navigational aids and services. This chapter is concerned with their past
development. The next chapter deals with their current state. And the
final chapter on Internet navigation, Chapter 8, considers the technologi-
cal prospects and the institutional issues facing them.After describing the distinctive nature of Internet navigation, this chap-ter traces the evolution of a variety of aids and services for Internet naviga-
tion. While its primary focus is on navigating the World Wide Web, it does
not cover techniques for navigation within Web sites, which is the subject of
specialized attention by Web site designers, operators, and researchers.26.1THE NATURE OF INTERNET NAVIGATION
Navigation across the Internet is sometimes compared to the well-stud-ied problem of readers navigating through collections of printed material
and other physical artifacts in search of specific documents or specific arti-
facts. (See the Addendum to this chapter: ÒSearching the Web Versus

Searching Libraries.Ó) That comparison illustrates the differences in the

technical and institutional contexts for Internet navigation. Internet navi-gation for some purposes is similar to searches in library environments
and relies on the same tools, whereas navigation for other purposes may
be performed quite differently via the Internet. The multiple purposes anddiverse characteristics listed below combine to make navigating to a re-
source across the Internet a much more varied and complex activity than
those previously encountered. The library examples provide a point of ref-
erence and a point of departure for discussion in subsequent chapters.6.1.1Vast and Varied Resources for Multiple Purposes
First, the Internet connects its users to a vast collection of heterogeneousresources that are used for many purposes, including the dissemination of in-
formation; the marketing of products and services; communication with oth-
ers; and the delivery of art, entertainment, and a wide range of commercial and
public services. The kinds of resources connected to the Internet include:2See, for example, Merlyn Holmes, Web Usability & Navigation: A BeginnerÕs Guide, McGraw-Hill/Osborne, Berkeley, Calif., 2002; and Louis Rosenfeld and Peter Morville, InformationArchitecture for the World Wide Web: Designing Large Scale Sites, 2nd edition, OÕReilly & Asso-ciates, Sebastopol, Calif., 2002.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION283¥Documents that differ in language (human and programming),vocabulary (including words, product numbers, zip codes, latitudes and
longitudes, links, symbols, and images), formats (such as the Hypertext
Markup Language (HTML), Portable Document Format (PDF), or Joint
Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) format), character sets, and source
(human or machine generated).¥Non-textual information, such as audio and video files, and inter-active games. The volume of online content (in terms of the number of
bytes) in image, sound, and video formats is much greater than that of
most library collections and is expanding rapidly.¥Transaction services, such as sales of products or services, auctions,tax return preparation, matchmaking, and travel reservations.¥Dynamic information, such as weather forecasts, stock market in-formation, and news, which can be constantly changing to incorporate
the latest developments.¥Scientific data generated by instruments such as sensor networksand satellites are contributing to a Òdata deluge.Ó3 Many of these data arestored in repositories on the Internet and are available for research and
educational purposes.¥Custom information constructed from data in a database (such asproduct descriptions and pricing) in response to a specific query (e.g., price
comparisons of a product listed for sale on multiple Web sites).Consequently, aids or services that support Internet navigation facethe daunting problem of finding and assigning descriptive terms to each
of these types of resource so that it can be reliably located. Searchers face
the complementary problem of selecting the aids or services that will best
enable them to locate the information, entertainment, communication link,
or service that they are seeking.6.1.2Two-sided Process
Second, Internet navigation is two-sided: it must serve the needs bothof the searchers who want to reach resources and of the providers that
want their resources to be found by potential users.From the searcherÕs perspective, navigating the Internet resembles tosome extent the use of the information retrieval systems that were developed3See Tony Hey and Anne Trefethen, ÒThe Data Deluge: An e-Science Perspective,Ó GridComputing: Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality, Fran Berman, Geoffrey Fox, and An-thony J.G. Hey, editors, Wiley, 2003.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEover the last several decades within the library and information science4 andcomputer science communities.5 However, library-oriented retrieval systems,reflecting the well-developed norms of librarians, were designed to describe
and organize information so that users could readily find exactly what they
were looking for. In many cases, the same people and organizations were
responsible both for the design of the retrieval systems and for the processes
of indexing, abstracting, and cataloging the information to be retrieved. In
this information services world, the providerÕs goal was to make description
and search as neutral as possible, so that every document relevant to a topic
would have an equal chance of being retrieved.6 While this goal of retrievalneutrality has carried over to some Internet navigation services and resource
providers, it is by no means universal. Indeed, from the perspective of many
resource providers, particularly commercial providers, attracting users via
the Internet requires the application to Internet navigation of non-neutral
marketing approaches deriving from advertising and public relations as de-
veloped for newspapers, magazines, radio, television, and yellow-pages di-
rectories.7 Research on neutral, community-based technology for describingInternet resources is an active area in information and computer science and
is a key element of the Semantic Web (see Box 7.1).84For an overview, see Elaine Svenonius, The Intellectual Foundation of Information Organiza-tion, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2000; and Christine L. Borgman, From Gutenberg to theGlobal Information Infrastructure: Access to Information in the Networked World, MIT Press, Cam-bridge, Mass., 2000.5For an overview, see Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribiero-Neto, Modern InformationRetrieval, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 1999; and Karen Sparck Jones and Peter Willett, editors,Readings in Information Retrieval, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1997. For typical ex-amples of early work on information retrieval systems, see, for example, George Schecter,editor, Information RetrievalÑA Critical View, Thompson Book Company, Washington, D.C.,1967. For work on retrieval from large databases, see the proceedings of the annual textretrieval conference (TREC), currently sponsored by the National Institute of Standards andTechnology and the Advanced Research and Development Activity, available at <http://
trec.nist.gov>.6See Svenonius, The Intellectual Foundation of Information Organization, 2000.7See, for example, John Caples and Fred E. Hahn, Tested Advertising Methods, 5th edition,Prentice-Hall, New York, 1998.8E. Bradley, N. Collins, and W.P. Kegelmeyer, ÒFeature Characterization in ScientificDatasets,Ó pp. 1-12 in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Advances in IntelligentData Analysis (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2189), Springer-Verlag, 2001; V.Brilhante, ÒUsing Formal Metadata Descriptions for Automated Ecological Modeling,Ó pp.90-95 in Environmental Decision Support Systems and Artificial Intelligence, AAAI  Press, Menlo
Park, Calif., 1999; E. Hovy,  ÒUsing an Ontology to Simplify Data Access,Ó 
Communications ofthe ACM 46(1):47-49, 2003; OWL Web Ontology Language Guide, ÒW3C Recommendation(10 February 2004),Ó November 24, 2004, available at <http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide>;
and P. Wariyapola, S.L. Abrams, A.R. Robinson, K. Streitlien, N.M. Patrikalakis, P. Elisseeff,and H. Schmidt, ÒOntology and Metadata Creation for the Poseidon Distributed CoastalZone Management System,Ó Proceedings of the IEEE Forum on Research and Technology Ad-vances in Digital Libraries, IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1999, pp. 180-189.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION285For commercial providers, therefore, the challenge is how to identifyand reachÑin the complex, diverse, and global audience accessible via
the InternetÑpotential users who are likely to be interested (or can be
made interested) in the providerÕs materials. That is done in traditional
marketing and public relations through the identification of media and
places (television or radio programs, magazines, newspapers in specific
locations) that an audience with the desired common characteristics (for
example, 18- to 24-year-old males) frequents. Similar approaches can be
applied on the Internet (see Section 7.2.2), but unlike the traditional me-
dia, the Internet also offers providers the distinctive and extremely valu-
able opportunity to capture their specific audience during the navigation
process itself, just when they are searching for what the provider offersÑ
for example, by paying to be listed or featured in a navigation serviceÕs
response to specific words or phrases. (See ÒMonetized SearchÓ in Section
7.1.7.) Marketers have found ways to use the specific characteristics of the
Internet,9 just as they have developed methods appropriate for each newmedium.10 This has led, for example, to the establishment of companiesthat are devoted to finding ways to manipulate Internet navigation ser-
vices to increase the ranking of a clientÕs Web site and, in response, to the
development of countermeasures by the services. (See ÒSearch Engine
Marketing and OptimizationÓ in Section 7.1.7.)For non-commercial resources, the situation is somewhat different,since the providers generally have fewer resources and may have less
incentive to actively seek users, at least to the extent of paying for Web
advertising or search engine marketing. At the same time, the existence of
a specific non-commercial resource may be well known to the community
of its potential users. For example, the members of a scholarly community
or a non-profit organization are likely to be aware of the Internet resources
relevant to their concerns. Those new to a community or outside it are
dependent on Internet navigation tools to locate these resources.Internet navigation is a complex interplay of the interests of both thesearchers for and the providers of resources. On the Internet, the9See, for example, Joe Cappo, The Future of Advertising: New Media, New Clients, New
Consumers in the Post-Television Age, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003; and Barbara Cox andWilliam Koelzer, Internet Marketing, Prentice-Hall, New York, 2004.10It should be noted that the Internet, by making the marginal cost of an e-mail messageextremely low, has also enabled providers to conduct a non-discriminating search for poten-tial users by broadcasting spam e-mail. Although this might be considered a variant ofInternet navigation, where the provider actively advertises its location to a vast audience
whose members may or may not be interested, its one-sided benefits and frequent use fordishonest or illegal purposes disqualify it for inclusion in this report, which focuses onsearcher-beneficial navigation aids and services.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACElibrarianÕs ideal of neutral information retrieval often confronts the realityof self-interested marketing.6.1.3Complexity and Diversity of Uses, Users, and Providers
Third, the complexity and diversity of uses of resources on theInternet, of their users, and of their providers significantly complicate
Internet navigation. It becomes a multidimensional activity that incorpo-
rates behaviors ranging from random browsing to highly organized
searching and from discovering a new resource to accessing a previously
located resource.11Studies in information science show that navigation in an informationsystem is simplest and most effective when the content is homogeneous,
the purposes of searching are consistent and clearly defined, and the
searchers have common purposes and similar levels of skills.12 Yet,Internet resources per se often represent the opposite case in all of these
respects. Their content is often highly heterogeneous; their diverse usersÕ
purposes are often greatly varied; the resources the users are seeking are
often poorly described; and the users often have widely varying degrees
of skills and knowledge. Thus, as the resources accessible via the Internet
expand in quantity and diversity of content, number and diversity of us-
ers, and variety of applications, the challenges facing Internet navigation
become even more complex.Indeed, prior to the use of the Internet as a means to access informa-tion, many collections of information resources, whether in a library or an
online information system, were accessed by a more homogenous collec-
tion of users. It was generally known when compiling the collection
whether the content should be organized for specialists or lay people, and
whether skill in the use of the resource could be assumed. Thus, naviga-
tion aids, such as indexes or catalogs, were readily optimized for their
specific content and for the goals of the people searching them. Health
information in a database intended for searching by physicians could be
indexed or cataloged using specific and highly detailed terminology that
assumed expert knowledge. Similarly, databases of case law and statute
law assumed a significant amount of knowledge of the law. In fields such
as medicine and law, learning the navigation tools and the vocabularies
of the field is an essential part of professional education. Many such data-
bases are now accessible by specialists via the Internet and continue to
assume a skillful and knowledgeable set of users, even though in some11See Shan-ju Chang and Ronald E. Rice, ÒBrowsing: A Multidimensional Framework,ÓAnnual Review of Information Science and Technology 28:231-276, 1993.12See Borgman, From Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure, 2000.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION287cases they are also accessible by the general public. With the growth inInternet use, however, many more non-specialist users have ready access
to the Web and are using it to seek medical, legal, or other specialized
information. The user community for such resources is no longer well
defined. Few assumptions of purpose, skill level, or prior knowledge can
be made about the users of a Web information resource. Consequently, it
is general-purpose navigation aids and services and less specialized (and
possibly lower-quality) information resources that must serve their needs.6.1.4Lack of Human Intermediaries
Fourth, the human intermediaries who traditionally linked searcherswith specific bodies of knowledge or servicesÑsuch as librarians, travel
agents, and real estate agentsÑare often not available to users as they
seek information on the Internet. Instead, users generally navigate to the
places they seek and assess what they find on their own, relying on the
aid of digital intermediariesÑthe InternetÕs general navigation aids and
services, as well as the specialized sites for shopping, travel, job hunting,
and so on. Human intermediariesÕ insights and assistance are generally
absent during the navigation process.Human search intermediaries help by selecting, collecting, organiz-ing, conserving, and prioritizing information resources so that they are
available for access.13 They combine their knowledge of a subject areaand of information-seeking behavior with their skills in searching data-
bases to assist people in articulating their needs. For example, travelers
have relied on travel agents to find them the best prices, best routes, and
best hotels, and to provide services such as negotiating with hotels, air-
lines, and tour companies when things go wrong. Intermediaries often
ask their clients about the purposes for which they want information (e.g.,
what kind of trip the seekers desire and how they expect to spend their
time; what they value in a home or neighborhood; or what research ques-
tions their term paper is trying to address), and elicit additional details
concerning the problem. These intermediaries also may help in evaluat-
ing content retrieved from databases and other sources by offering coun-
sel on what to trust, what is current, and what is important to consider in
the content retrieved.With the growth of the Internet and the World Wide Web, a profoundchange in the nature of professional control over information is taking
place. Travel agents and real estate agents previously maintained tight
control over access to fares and schedules and to listings of homes for13See Chapter 7, ÒWhither, or Wither, Libraries?,Ó in Borgman, From Gutenberg to the GlobalInformation Infrastructure, 2000.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsale. Until recently, many of these resources were considered proprietary,especially in travel and real estate, and consumers were denied direct ac-
cess to their content. Information seekers had little choice but to delegate
their searches to an expertÑa medical professional, librarian, paralegal,
records analyst, travel agent, real estate agent, and so on. Today, travel
reservation and real estate information services are posting their informa-
tion on the Internet and actively seeking users. Specialized travel sites,
such as Expedia.com and travelocity.com, help the user to searchthrough and evaluate travel options. Similar sites serve the real estate
market. Travel agents that remain in business must get their revenue from
other value-added services, such as planning customized itineraries and
tours and negotiating with brokers. Although house hunters now can do
most of their shopping online, in most jurisdictions they still need real
estate agents with access to house keys to show them properties and to
guide them in executing the legal transactions. Libraries have responded
to the Web by providing Òvirtual reference servicesÓ in addition to tradi-
tional on-site reference services.14 Other entities, including the U.S. De-partment of Education, have supported the creation of non-library-based
reference services that use the Internet to connect users with Òpeople who
can answer questions and support the development of skillsÓ without
going through a library intermediary.156.1.5Democratization of Information Access and Provision
Fifth, the Internet has hugely democratized and extended both theoffering of and access to information and services. Barriers to entry,
whether cost or credentials, have been substantially reduced. Anyone with
modest skill and not much money can provide almost anything online,
and anyone can access it from almost anywhere. Rarely are credentials
required for gaining access to content or services that are connected to the
public Internet, although paid or free registration may be necessary to
gain access to some potentially relevant material. Not only commercial
and technical information are openly accessible, but also the full range of
political speech, of artistic expression, and of personal opinion are readily
available on the public InternetÑeven though efforts are continually be-14See, for example, the more than 600 references about such services in Bernie Sloan, ÒDigi-tal Reference Services Bibliography,Ó Graduate School of Library and Information Science,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, November 18, 2003, available at <http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/~b-sloan/digiref.html>.15For example, the Virtual Reference Desk is Òa project dedicated to the advancement ofdigital reference.Ó See <http://www.vrd.org/about.shtml>. This service is sponsored bythe U.S. Department of Education.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION289ing made to impose restrictions on access to some materials by variouspopulations in a number of countries.16In a great many countries, anyone can set up a Web siteÑand manypeople do. The freedom of the press does not belong just to those who
own one; now nearly anyone can have the opportunity to publish via a
virtual pressÑthe World Wide Web.17 Whether or not what they publishwill be read is another matter. That depends on whether they will be
found, and, once found, whether they can provide content worthy of pe-
rusalÑat least by someone.For the most part, in many places, provision of or access to content orservices is uncensored and uncontrolled. On the positive side, the Internet
enables access to a global information resource of unprecedented scope
and reach. Its potential impact on all aspects of human activity is pro-
found.18 But the institutions that select, edit, and endorse traditionallypublished information have no role in determining much of what is pub-
lished via the Internet. The large majority of material reachable via the
Internet has never gone through the customary editing or selection pro-
cesses of professional journals or of newspapers, magazines, and books.19So in this respect as well, there has been significant disintermediation,
leaving Internet users with relatively few solid reference points as they
navigate through a vast collection of information of varying accuracy and
quality. In response to this widely acknowledged problem, some groups
have offered evaluations of materials on the World Wide Web.20 One16These range from the efforts of parents to prevent their children from accessing age-inappropriate sites to those made by governments to prevent their citizens from accessingpolitically sensitive sites. The current regulations placed on libraries in the United States tofilter content are available at <http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-
03-188A1.pdf>. See also, information on the increasing sophistication of filtering efforts inChina in David Lee, ÒWhen the Net Goes Dark and Silent,Ó South China Morning Post, Octo-ber 2, 2002, available at <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/people/edelman/pubs/scmp-

100102-2.pdf>. For additional information, see Jonathan Zittrain and Benjamin Edelman,Empirical Analysis of Internet Filtering in China, Beckman Center for Internet & Society,Harvard University, 2002, available at <http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/filtering/china/>.17The rapid growth in the number of blogs (short for Web logs) illustrates this. Accordingto ÒHow Much Information?,Ó there were 2.9 million active Web logs in 2003. See PeterLyman and Hal R. Varian, ÒHow Much Information?,Ó 2003, retrieved from <http://
www.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/how-much-info-2003> on April 27, 2005.18See Borgman, From Gutenberg to the Global Information Infrastructure, 2000; and ThomasFriedman, ÒIs Google God?Ó, New York Times, June 29, 2003.19However, it must be acknowledged that many ÒtraditionalÓ dissemination outlets (e.g.,well-known media companies) operate Web sites that provide material with editorialreview.20See, for example, The Information Quality WWW Virtual Library at <http://www.ciolek.com/WWWVL-InfoQuality.html> and Evaluating Web Sites: Criteria and Tools at<http://www.library.cornell.edu/okuref/research/webeval.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEexample is the LibrariansÕ Index to the Internet,21 whose motto is ÒInfor-mation You Can Trust.Ó6.1.6Lack of Context or Lack of Skill
Sixth, most general-purpose Internet navigation services can assumenothing about the context of a search beyond what is in the query itself.
The circumstances of the person searching the InternetÑwho could be
anyone, searching for almost any purpose, from almost any placeÑare
generally not known or, if known, not used.22 While an unskilled userplanning a European trip who types ÒParisÓ into a navigation service may
expect to receive back only information on the city of Paris, France, or if
studying the Iliad may expect to find out about the Greek hero, the navi-gation service has no knowledge of that context. If it relies on the text
alone, it may return information about both, as well as information about
sources for plaster of paris, the small town in Texas, movies set in Paris,
and people with the first or family name of Paris.While any general-purpose navigation service would be unable to as-certain which of those specific answers was desired, the person initiating
an Internet request always knows its context, and if experienced or
trained, should be able to incorporate some of that information in the
query. An experienced searcher could incorporate context by expanding
the query to ÒParis France,Ó ÒParis and Iliad,Ó ÒParis Texas,Ó or Òplaster of
paris.Ó So the lack of context in many navigation requests is closely re-
lated to the userÕs level of training or experience in the use of navigation
services.2321ÒLibrariansÕ Index to the Internet (LII) is a searchable, annotated subject directory ofmore than 12,000 Internet resources selected and evaluated by librarians for their usefulnessto users of public libraries. LII is used by both librarians and the general public as a reliableand efficient guide to Internet resources.Ó Quoted from <http://lii.org/search/file/about>,
accessed on May 2, 2004.22An online advertising company, DoubleClick, launched a service in 2000 to track peopleÕsInternet usage in order to serve ads based on personal taste. After considerable controversy,
especially from federal regulators and privacy advocates, and an inability to develop anadequate market, the profiling service was terminated at the end of 2001. See Stefanie Olsen,ÒDoubleClick Turns Away from Ad Profiles,Ó c/net news.com, January 8, 2002, available at<http://news.com.com/2100-1023-803593.html>. However, Yahoo! indicates in its privacypolicy that it does use information provided by those who register at its site Òto customizethe advertising and content you see, fulfill your requests for products and services . . . .Ó23See, for example, Steven Johnson, ÒDigging for Googleholes,Ó Slate.com, July 16, 2003,available at <http://slate.msn.com/id/2085668/>; Donald O. Case, Looking for Information:A Survey of Research on Information Seeking, Needs, and Behavior, Academic Press, San Diego,Calif., 2002; and Paul Solomon, ÒDiscovering Information in Context,Ó Annual Review of In-formation Science and Technology, Blaise Cronin, editor, Information Today, Inc., Medford,N.J., 2002, pp. 229-264.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION291The incorporation of context is also related to the degree to which thenavigation service is itself specialized. When people searched in tradi-
tional information sources, the selection of the source usually carried in-
formation about the context for a search (e.g., seeking a telephone number
in the White Pages for Manhattan in particular, or looking for a home in
the multiple listing service for Boston specifically). Furthermore, there
were often intermediaries who could obtain contextual information from
the information seeker and use that to choose the right source and refine
the information request. Although the former approach is also available
on the Internet through Internet white pages and Internet real estate
search sites, the latter is just developing through the virtual reference ser-
vices mentioned earlier.General-purpose navigation services are exploring a variety of mecha-nisms for incorporating context into search. For example, both Yahoo! and
Google now allow local searches, specified by adding a location to the
search terms. The site-flavored Google Search customizes searches origi-
nating at a Web site to return search results based on a profile of the
siteÕs content. Other recent search engines such as Vivisimo
(www.vivisimo.com) return search results in clusters that correspond to
different contextsÑfor example, a search on the keyword ÒnetworkÓ re-
turns one cluster of results describing cable networks, another on net-
work games, and so on.24Still, issues of context complicate Internet navigation because the mostwidely used navigation services are general purposeÑsearching the vast
array of objects on the Internet with equal attentionÑand because many
users are not experienced or trained and have no access to intermediaries
to assist them.6.1.7Lack of Persistence
Seventh, there is no guarantee of persistence for material at a particu-lar location on the Internet. While there is no reason to believe that every-
thing made accessible through the Internet should persist indefinitely,
there are a great many materials whose value is such that many users
would want to access them at the same Internet address at indefinite times
in the future. For example, throughout this report there are two kinds of
references: those to printed materialsÑbooks, journals, newspapersÑand
those to digital resources that are located via Web pages. There is a very
high probability that whenever this report is read, even years after its
publication, that every one of the referenced printed materials will be ac-24See Chris Gaither, ÒGoogle Offers Sites Its Services,Ó Los Angeles Times, June 19, 2004, p. c2.Also see <http://www.google.com/services/siteflavored.html>, accessed on June 18, 2004.
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEcessible in unchanged form through (though not necessarily in) any goodlibrary (at least in the United States). There is an equal certainty that when-
ever this report is read, even in the year of its publication, some of the
referenced Web pages either will no longer be accessible or will no longer
contain the precise material that was referenced. The proportion of miss-
ing or changed references will increase over time. To the extent that it
would be valuable to locate the referenced Web material, there is a prob-
lem of persistence (see Box 6.1) of resources on the Internet.25The problem of persistence arises because material connected to theInternet is not generally governed by the conventions, standards, and
practices of preservation that evolved with regard to printed material.
The material may change in many ways and for many reasons. It may
remain the same, but the location may change because of a change of com-
puters, or a redesign of a Web site, or a reorganization of files to save
space, or a change in Internet service providers (ISPs).26 Or it may bereplaced at the same location by an improved version or by something
entirely different but with the same title. It may disappear completely
because the provider stops operating or decides not to provide it any more
or it may be replaced by an adequate substitute, but at a different location.
Thus, navigation to an item is often a one-time event. Incorporating a ref-
erence or a link to that item in another document is no guarantee that a
future seeker will find the same item at the same location. Nor is there any
guarantee that something once navigated to will be there when the re-
corded path is followed once more or that it will be the same as it was
when first found.The problem is exacerbated for material on the World Wide Web byits structureÑa hyperlinked web of pages. Even if a specific Web page
persists indefinitely, it is unlikely that the many pages to which it links
will also persist for the same period of time, and so on along the path of
linked pages. So to the extent that the persistent page relies on those to
which it links, its persistence is tenuous.25One example of the lack of persistence of important information is U.S. Governmentdocuments published only on the Web. The U.S. Government Printing Office has begun aneffort to find and archive such electronic documents. See Florence Olsen, ÒA Crisis for Web
Preservation,Ó Federal Computer Week, June 21, 2004, available at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2004/0621/pol-crisis-06-21-04.asp>.26Thomas Phelps and Robert Wilensky of the University of California at Berkeley have sug-gested a way to overcome the difficulties caused by shifting locations. They add a small numberof words carefully selected from the page to its URL. If the URL is no longer valid, the words canbe used in a search engine to find the pageÕs new location. See Thomas Phelps and RobertWilensky, ÒRobust Hyperlinks:  Cheap, Everywhere, Now,Ó 
Proceedings of the 8th Interna-tional Conference on Digital Documents and Electronic Publishing (Lecture Notes in ComputerScience, Vol. 2023), Springer-Verlag, 2004.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION293BOX 6.1Discovery, Retrieval, and Persistence
Navigation is a two-step process: discovery and then retrieval. The dis-covery process involves identifying the location of the desired material ona Web site. The retrieval process involves obtaining the located material at
the identified URL. (See Box 6.2.) Discovery may find dynamically gener-ated pages for which only a transient URL exists, such as driving directionsbetween two locations or an online order, or a constant URL that has ever
changing information, such as a weather service. It may not be possible oreven feasible (last yearÕs weather forecast) to retrieve the same pages again.Thus, not even a hyperlink to that material can be embedded in other
pages, nor can the page be bookmarked for future reference.Even if the resource is itself static, such as the text of a research report,it may be moved, invalidating the URL. More problematically, it may be
necessary to decide whether what is retrieved a second time (even if it is inthe same place) is the same as what was retrieved previously. Unless theoriginal object and the (possibly) new one are identical bit-by-bit, the ques-
tion of whether the two are Òthe same,Ó or identical, raises long-standingquestions that are typically very subjective and/or contextual: Is a transla-tion into another language the same as the original? If a document is refor-
matted, but all of the words are the same, is it identical to the original? If adocument is compressed, or transposed into a different character code, oradapted to a different version of a viewer program, is it still the same docu-ment? Is a second edition an acceptable match to a request for the firstedition? And so on. For each of these questions, the correct answer is prob-
ably Òsometimes,Ó but ÒsometimesÓ is rarely a satisfactory answer, espe-cially if it is to be evaluated by a computer system.If things are abstracted further so that, instead of discovering a URLdirectly, the user utilizes an updatable bookmark that incorporates a refer-ence to the discovery processes, the meaning of persistence becomes evenmore ambiguous. Such a bookmark, intended to reference a list of restau-
rants in a particular city, might upon being used not only discover a newerversion of the same list, but also find a newer, more comprehensive, listfrom a different source and at an entirely different location on the network.
So what is persistent in this case is not the answer, but the question.These are arguably not new conundrumsÑanalogies occur with edi-tions of books and bibliographies, but the opportunities on the Internet for
faster turnover and for changes of finer granularity, as well as the ability toupdate search indexes at very high frequency, make the meaning andachievement of Internet persistence more complex and ambiguous and
difficult to understand for the casual user.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE6.1.8Scale
Eighth, the InternetÑin particular, the World Wide WebÑvastly ex-ceeds even the largest traditional libraries in the amount of material that it
makes accessible.27 In 2003, the World Wide Web was estimated to con-tain 170 terabytes of content in its surface, readily accessibleÑpublicÑ
sites. This compares with an estimated 10 terabytes of printed documents
in the Library of Congress (which also contains many terabytes of mate-
rial in other media). In addition, the ÒdarkÓ Web is estimated to contain
400 to 450 times as much content in its databases and in other forms inac-
cessible to search engines,28 a ratio that may be increasing. (See in Section7.1.7 the discussion titled ÒThe Deep, Dark, and Invisible Web.Ó)6.1.9The Sum of the Differences
For all the reasons described above, navigation on the Internet is dif-ferent from navigating through traditional collections of documents; find-
ing information or services through the use of knowledgeable intermedi-
aries; locating the television audience for a commercial or political
message; or reaching the readers for an essay. Navigating the Internet is
even more than the sum of all those differences over a much larger extent
and variety of resources and a much greater number and diversity of us-
ers and providers.Conclusion: Finding and accessing a desired resource via the Internetposes challenges that are substantially different from the challenges faced
in navigating to resources in non-digital, non-networked environments
because of differences in content, purpose, description, user community,
institutional framework, context, skill, persistence, and scale.Fortunately, the Internet has also served as the infrastructure for thedevelopment of new means for responding to these challenges. As the
following section and the next chapter show, a wide range of navigation
aids and services now permit large segments of the Internet to be tra-
versed rapidly and efficiently in ways previously unimaginable, provid-
ing ready access to a vast world of human knowledge and experience to
users across the globe and opening an international audience to purvey-
ors of content and services no matter where they may be located.27Because the Web contains a large amount of Òformat overheadÓ and non-reliable infor-mation, this comparison was disputed for the Web of 2000 (25-50 terabytes estimated) byresearchers from OCLC. See Edward T. OÕNeill et al., ÒTrends in the Evolution of the PublicWeb 1998-2002,Ó D-Lib Magazine 9(4), 2003, at <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/april03/lavoie/04lavoie.html>.28These data are taken from Lyman and Varian, ÒHow Much Information?,Ó 2003.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION2956.2INTERNET NAVIGATION AIDS AND SERVICESÑHISTORY
Aids and services to assist Internet navigation have had to evolvesteadily to keep pace with the growth in the scale, scope, and complexity
of material on the Internet.29In the first years of the Internet,30 the 1970s and 1980s, informationwas accessed through a two-step process: first, the host on which a de-
sired resource resided was found,31 and then the desired file was found.32A good example of this host-oriented navigation is the File Transfer Pro-tocol (FTP). Retrieving a file using FTP required that the user (using FTP
client software) already know the name of the host (which would be us-
ing FTP server software) on which the file was stored,33 have a login nameand password for that host (unless anonymous login was permitted),
know a file name, and sometimes have other information such as an ac-
count name for computer time billing.34 The File Transfer Protocol madeit possible to retrieve data from any FTP server to which one was con-
nected by a network. File names and server locations could be obtained in
various waysÑfrom friends, from newsgroups and mailing lists, from

files that identified particular resources, or from a few archive servers
that contained very large collections of files with locally created indexing.
However, such ad hoc and labor-intensive processes do not scale well.
More automated processes were needed as the number of Internet users
and topics of interest increased substantially.29The early period of rapid development of Internet navigation aids was not well docu-mented, nor are there many good references. Many of the critical developments are includedin this brief history, but it is not intended to be comprehensive.30In this section, the ÒInternetÓ also includes the ARPANET. See Chapter 2.31While a few protocols did not explicitly name a host, in most cases that meant that thehost name was implicit in the service being requested (e.g., running a program that querieda central database that resides only on the Network Information Center (NIC) computer
implies the host name of interest).32At a technical level, this still occurs, but is less visible to the user. For example, a URLcontains a domain (host) name, and the client (browser in the case of the Web) uses some
protocol (usually the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) in the case of the Web) to open aconnection to a specified host. The rest of the URL is then transmitted to that host, whichreturns data or takes other action.33Once the desired FTP server was located, FTP eventually included capabilities to traveldown directory hierarchies to find the desired files. (At the time FTP was designed, theprotocol did not contain any provision for dealing with hierarchical filesÑthat was added
somewhat later.) User names and the account command were, on many systems, the pri-mary mechanism for providing context for the file names. That is, ÒuserÓ and ÒacctÓ werenavigational commands as much as they were authentication and authorization commands.34Frequently, some documentation about the content of directories was provided in fileswith the file name of Òreadme.txtÓ or some variation thereof, such as AAREAD.ME, to takeadvantage of alphabetic sorting when the directory was retrieved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE6.2.1Aiding Navigation via the Internet
The first response to the need for automated processes was Archie,35a selective index of those files thought to be ÒinterestingÓ by those whosubmitted them to the index and of the FTP servers on which they were
located. When Archie was first released in 1989, many people were skep-
tical of the idea of having an index of such large size on one computer, but
Archie was a success. It consisted of three components: the data gatherer,
the index merger, and the query protocol. The gathering of data was not
done by brute force. The company that took over operation of the Archie
service (Bunyip Information Systems) relied on licensed Archie server
operators all over the world (who knew which FTP archives were reli-
able) to run a data gatherer that indexed local files by searching each local
site.36 Each local gatherer passed the partial index upstream, and eventu-ally the partial indexes were merged into a full index having fairly simple
functionality, primarily limited to single-level alphabetic sorting. This pro-
cess of collaborative gathering saved time and minimized the bandwidth
required. A special protocol allowed clients to query the full index, which
was replicated on servers around the world, to identify the FTP server
that contained the requested file. Archie still required users to employ FTP to download the files ofinterest for viewing on their local computers. The next aid, Gopher, was
developed as a protocol for viewing remote files, which were in a speci-
fied format, on a userÕs local computer. It became the first navigation aid
on the Internet that was easily accessible by non-computer-science spe-
cialists.37 The Gopher ÒbrowserÓ provided users with the capability tolook at the content of a file on the computer that stored it, and if the file
included a reference to another file, to ÒclickÓ directly on the link to see
the contents of the second file. Gopher included some metadata38 so that,for example, when a user clicked on a link, the userÕs client software would35ÒArchieÓ is not an acronym but is a shortening of the word ÒarchiveÓ to satisfy softwareconstraints. Peter Deutsch, Alan Emtage, Bill Heelan, and Mike Parker at McGill Universityin Montr”al created Archie.36The burden this imposed on the FTP servers led the operators of many of them to createand keep up to date an Archie-usable listing of the server in its root directory and to keepthose listings up to date, obviating the need for Archie to search the server.37Gopher, created in 1991 by Marc McCahill and his technical team at the University ofMinnesota, is not an acronym but is named after the mascot at the University of Minnesota.See Chris Sherman, ÒSearchDay,Ó Number 198, February 6, 2002, available at <http://
searchenginewatch.com/searchday/02/sd0206-gopher.html>.38Metadata are data that describe the characteristics or organization of other data. SeeMurtha Baca, Introduction to Metadata: Pathways to Digital Information, Getty Information In-stitute, Los Angeles, 1998.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION297automatically check the metadata, choose the desired document format,and start the appropriate program to deal with the data format.To overcome GopherÕs limitation to files on a single computer, a cen-tral search aid for Gopher filesÑVeronicaÑwas created in 1992.39 It didfor Gopher what Archie did for FTP. Veronica was the first service that
used brute-force software robots (software that automatically searched
the Internet) to collect and index information and, therefore, could be seen
as the forerunner of Web search engines. In 1993, Jughead added key-
words and Boolean search capabilities to Veronica.40The next step in the evolution of Internet navigation aids was the wide
area information server (WAIS) that enabled search using word indices of
specified files available on the Internet.41 The WAIS search engine re-ceived a query, sought documents relevant to the question in its database
by searching the word indices, and returned a list of documents ordered
by estimated relevance to the user. Each document was scored from 1 to
1000 based on criteria such as its match to the userÕs question as deter-
mined by how many of the query words it contained and their impor-
tance in the document. WAIS did not index the entire Internet, but rather
only specific files and servers on it. At its peak, WAIS linked up to 600
databases, worldwide.42 It was used, for example, by Dow Jones to createa fully indexed online file of its publications. WAIS was an important step
beyond FTP, Gopher, and Archie (and friends) because it built on known
information-retrieval methods43 and standards, including the Z39.50Òsearch and retrieveÓ standard as its key data representation model.4439Veronica (Very Easy, Rodent-Oriented, Net-Wide Index to Computerized Archives) wascreated in November 1992 by Fred Barrie and Stephen Foster of the University of NevadaSystem Computing Services group.40Jughead (JonzyÕs Universal Gopher Hierarchy Excavation And Display) was created byRhett ÒJonzyÓ Jones at the University of Utah computer center. The names of these twoprotocols were derived from characters in Archie comics. See <http://www.
archiecomics.com/>.41WAIS was developed between 1989 and 1992 at Thinking Machines Corporation underthe leadership of Brewster Kahle. Unlike Archie (and friends), Gopher, and the Web, WAIS
was firmly rooted in information sciences approaches and technology.42Richard T. Griffiths, ÒChapter Four: Search Engines,Ó History of the Internet, Leiden Uni-versity, The Netherlands, 2002, available at <http://web.let.leidenuniv.nl/history/ivh/
chap4.htm>.43Many of the navigation aids and services described in this history drew inspiration andmethodology from the long line of research in information science, as well as computer
science. It has not been possible to give full credit to those antecedents in this brief history.44For information about the Z39.50 protocol, see National Information Standards Organiza-tion, Z39.50 resource page, available at <http://www.niso.org/z39.50/z3950.html#other>;

and Mark Needleman, ÒZ39.50ÐA Review, Analysis and Some Thoughts on the Future,ÓLibrary HiTech 18(2):158-65, 2000, available at <http://www.biblio-tech.com/html/z39.50.html>, accessed on June 23, 2004.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEFTP with Archie, Gopher with Veronica and Jughead, and WAIS dem-onstrated three ways to index and find information on the Internet.45 Theylaid the foundation for the subsequent development of aids for navigat-
ing the World Wide Web.6.2.2Aiding Navigation Through the World Wide Web
While those early navigation aids were being developed, a new wayof structuring information on the Internet46Ñthe World Wide WebÑwasunder development at the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN) in Geneva.47 Many of the concepts underlying the Web existed inGopher, but the Web incorporated more advanced interface features, was
designed explicitly for linking information across sites, and employed a
common language, called Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), to de-
scribe Web content. With the deployment of the Mosaic browser48 and itswidely adopted commercial successorsÑNetscapeÕs Navigator and
MicrosoftÕs Internet ExplorerÑit became easy to view HTML formatted
documents and images located on the Web, making it much more appeal-
ing to most users than GopherÕs text-oriented system.Indeed, the use of browsers on the Web eventually replaced the use ofWAIS, FTP/Archie and Gopher/Veronica. At the same time, the Web
unintentionally made domain names valuable as identifiers, thereby rais-
ing their profile and importance. While FTP and Gopher sites used do-45See Michael F. Schwartz, Alan Emtage, Brewster Kahle, and B. Clifford Neuman, ÒAComparison of Internet Discovery Approaches,Ó Computing Systems 5(4):461-493, 1992.46The WebÕs structure is hypertext, which was anticipated in the form of Òassociative in-dexingÓ by Vannevar Bush in a famous article, ÒAs We May Think,Ó published in the Atlan-tic Monthly in July 1945. The term ÒhypertextÓ was coined by Theodor (Ted) Nelson in theearly 1960s. Nelson spent many years publicizing the concept and attempting early imple-
mentations. Douglas C. EngelbartÕs NLS/Augment project at the Stanford Research Insti-tute (which in 1977 became known as SRI International) first demonstrated a hypertext sys-tem in 1968. Apple Computer introduced HyperCard, a commercial implementation of
hypertext for the Macintosh, in 1987. The practical implementation of a hypertext data struc-ture on the Internet at a time when computer capacity and network speed were finally suf-ficient to make it practical was CERNÕs contribution.47Tim Berners-Lee and his team developed the Web in 1990. It was first released to thephysics community in 1991 and spread quickly to universities and research organizationsthereafter. See <http://public.web.cern.ch/public/about/achievements/www/history/
history.html>.48Mosaic, which was released in 1993 by the National Center for Supercomputing Appli-cations (NCSA) at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, was the first Web browser
with a graphical user interface for the PC and Apple environments. It had an immediateeffect on the widespread adoption of the Web by non-research users. Marc Andreessen, oneof the developers of Mosaic, became a co-founder of Netscape. See <http://
www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Divisions/Communications/MosaicHistory/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION299main names, these names attracted little attention per se. However, thedevelopment of the Web and its meteoric growth linked domain names
and the Web very closely through their prominent inclusion in browser
addresses as a key part of Uniform Resource Locators (URLs). (See Box
6.2.) As noted in Chapter 2, it was commonplace to navigate across the
World Wide Web just by typing domain names into the address bar, since
browsers automatically expanded them into URLs. Often, at that time, the
domain names were simply guessed on the assumption that trying a brand
name followed by .com had a high probability of success.The Web, whose underlying structure is hypertextÑresources con-nected by linksÑalso introduced a new and convenient means of naviga-
tion: ÒclickingÓ on hyperlinks on a page displayed in a browser. Hyperlinks
generally have text, called anchor text, which many browsers display by
underlining and color change. When the user moves the pointer to the an-
chor text of a hyperlink and clicks the mouse button, the browser finds the
associated URL in the code for that page and accesses the corresponding
page.49 Thus, navigation across the Web from an initial site can consist ofnothing more than a series of clicks on the anchor text of hyperlinks.The World Wide Web has experienced rapid and continual growth50since the introduction of browsers. In 1993, when the National Center for
Supercomputing ApplicationsÕ (NCSA) Mosaic browser was made pub-
licly available, there were just 200 sites on the Web. The growth rate of
Web traffic in 1993 in transmitted bytes was 340,000 percent, as compared
with 997 percent for Gopher traffic.51 By March 1994, Web traffic exceededGopher traffic in absolute terms.52 Based on one estimate of the numberof Internet hosts,53 the exponential growth of Web sites continued from49Since there is no required association between the hyperlink and its anchor text, there isan opportunity for malicious or criminal misdirection to deliberately bogus sites, which has
been exploited recently as a vehicle for identity theft and is referred to as ÒphishingÓ orÒbrand spoofing.Ó50There is difficulty in measuring the rate of growth of and the volume of information onthe Web because of the lack of consistent and comprehensive data sources. The lack of con-sistent measurements over time is also attributable to the very factors that continue to enablethe WebÕs growthÑas the technology and architecture supporting the Web have evolved, so
have the methods of characterizing its growth.51See Robert H. Zakon, ÒHobbesÕ Internet Timeline,Ó RFC 2235, November 1997, availableat <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.52See Susan Calcari, ÒA Snapshot of the Internet,Ó Internet World 5(1, September):54-58,1994. Also, Merit Network, Inc., Internet statistics, 1995, available at <ftp://nic.merit.edu/nsfnet/statistics>. Graphics and tables of NSFNET backbone statistics are available at <http://
www.cc.gatech.edu/gvu/stats/NSF/merit.html>.53Internet Systems Consortium provides host data, which are available at <http://www.isc.org/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 6.2Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)
The Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)1 is a general name for resourceidentifiers on the Internet. Several distinct types of URIs have been defined:Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), Uniform Resource Names (URNs), andUniform Resource Characteristics (URCs), each of which identifies a re-
source differently. URLs are, by far, the most commonly used of the three.URLs are URIs that identify resources by their location. Although URLscan be used to locate many different types of resources on the Internet, the
most common URLs are those used to identify locations on the World WideWeb.2 Web URLs, such as <http://www.nas.edu>, include ÒhttpÓ to desig-nate the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and Òwww.nas.eduÓ to desig-

nate the Web location of interest. The example below shows the URL for thecommitteeÕs charter document in HTML format located in the directory3/cstb/committees/indns, located on the www.nas.edu HTTP server.A URL cannot separate the location from the name of a resource. There-fore, a URL is outdated when a resource is moved to a new location, yet itremains unchanged even when the resource at that location is changed.The URN type of URI was defined to meet the need for a more persistentidentifier. A URN identifies a resource by assigning it a permanent andglobally unique name drawn from a specified name space that is not tied to
a location.4 However, there needs to be a continually updated table link-ing each URN to the current location of the resource it names.A third class of URI, the URC, was proposed to incorporate metadataabout resources and their corresponding URNs. URCs have not achievedwidespread acceptance or use.1993 to 1998, with the number of hosts approximately doubling each year.After 1998, the rate of growth in hosts slowed to a doubling every 2 years.
Web server data54 provides the number of active Web sites located via theDNS as a measure of the growth in the volume of information on the Web.
Although data are discontinuous, from June 1993 to December 1995, the
number of Web sites doubled every 3 months; from December 1997 to
December 2000, the number doubled approximately every 10 months.54Matthew Gray of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology compiled data on the growthof Web sites from June 1993 to June 1995, which is available at <http://www.mit.edu/people/mkgray/net/web-growth-summary.html>; the Netcraft Web Server Survey beganin August 1995 and is available at <http://www.netcraft.com/Survey/Reports/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION301An approach different from URIs for naming resources on the Internetmotivates the Handle System.5 A handle consists of two parts separated bya forward slash. The first part is a naming authorityÑa unique, arbitrary
number assigned within the Handle System, which identifies the adminis-trative unit that is the creator of the handle, but not necessarily the continu-ing administrator of the associated handles. The part after the slash is a
local name that identifies the specific object. It must be unique to the givennaming authority. The Handle System allows a handle to map to more thanone version or attribute of a resource and resolve more than one piece of
data. The multiple resolution capabilities of handles support extended ser-vices such as reverse lookup, multi-versioning, and digital rights manage-ment.1For a formal definition, see T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, and L. Masinter, ÒUniformResource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax,Ó RFC 2396, August 1998, available at <http://
www.rfc-editor.org>. For further information, see M. Mealling and R. Denenberg, editors,
ÒReport from the Joint W3C/IETF URI Planning Interest Group: Uniform Resource Identifi-
ers (URIs), URLs, and Uniform Resource Names (URNs): Clarifications and Recommenda-tions,Ó RFC 3305, August 2002, available at <http://www.rfc-editor.org>.2The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority maintains a register the types of resourcesand access methods supported by URIs. See <http://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes>.3More generally, this string is passed to a server and then interpreted. Frequently, thisstring is interpreted as a (partial) directory path and file name.4IANA maintains a register of name spaces at <http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces>.5The Handle System was developed in 1994 by Robert E. Kahn, founder and presidentof the Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI). For the foundational paper
describing the components of this system, see Robert E. Kahn and Robert Wilensky, ÒAFramework for Distributed Digital Object Services,Ó May 13, 1995, Corporation for Na-tional Research Initiatives, Reston, Va., available at <http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/k-w.html>.
Current status and available software can be found at <http://www.handle.net/>.As the volume of material on the Web grew exponentially, simpleguessing and hypertext linking no longer served to find the sites users
wanted. Nor was the almost daily un-indexed list of new sites that NCSA
published (as ÒNCSA WhatÕs NewÓ) from June 1993 to June 199655 suffi-cient. New methods for navigating to Web resources were badly needed
and the need unleashed a flurry of innovation, much of it based in univer-
sities and often the product of graduate students and faculty, who recog-
nized the opportunity and had the freedom to pursue it. The new naviga-55An archive of those listings is available at <http://archive.ncsa.uiuc.edu/SDG/Software/Mosaic/Docs/whats-new.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEtion services took two primary forms: directories and search engines. Di-rectories organized Web resources by popular categories. Search engines
indexed Web resources by the words found within them.The sequence of key developments from 1993 through 2004 in bothforms of Web navigation system is shown in detail in Box 6.3. A broad
overview of the development follows.Web navigation service development began in 1993, the year the Mo-saic browser became available, first to universities and research laborato-
ries, and then more generally on the Internet. The first directory and the
first search engines were created in that year. But it was 1994 when the
first of the widely used directoriesÑYahoo!Ñand the first full-text search
engineÑWebCrawlerÑwere launched. Over the next few years, techno-
logical innovation occurred at a rapid pace, with search engines adding
new features and increasing their speed of operation and their coverage
of the Web as computing and communication technology and system de-
sign advanced. Lycos, launched in 1994, was the first Web search engine
to achieve widespread adoption as it indexed millions of Web pages. It
was followed in 1995 by Excite and Alta Vista. Alta Vista in particular
offered speed improvements and innovative search features. With the
launch of Google in beta in 1998 and as a full commercial offering in 1999,
the general nature of the technology of search engines appeared to reach a
plateau, although there is continual innovation in search algorithms and
approaches to facilitate ease of use. The commercial evolution of search
services continued rapidly both through additional entries into the mar-
ket and an increasingly rapid pace of consolidation of existing entries.
The evolution of directory technology has been less visible and probably
less rapid. The focus of that evolution appears, rather, to have been on the
means of creating and maintaining directories and on the addition of of-
ferings, including search engines, to the basic directory structure.By the first years of this century, the two worlds of search engines anddirectories had merged, at least commercially. In 2004, Google offered
Google directory (supplied by Open Directory) and Yahoo! offered Yahoo
search (provided by its acquisitionÑInktomi) with paid ads (provided by
its acquisitionÑOverture). By 2004 most commercial navigation services
offered advertisements associated with specific responses. These paid ads
are the principal source of funding and profit for commercial navigation
services. (Commercial Internet navigation is discussed in further detail in
Section 7.2.) Associated with this latter development has been the rapid
rise of the business of search engine marketing, which helps commercial
Web sites to decide in which search engines and directories they should
pay for ads; and search engine optimization, which helps to design Web
sites so search engines will easily find and index them. (OrganizationsSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION303that provide these services generally also provide assistance with biddingstrategies and assistance in advertising design.) Finally, by 2004, many
search services had established themselves as portalsÑsites whose front
pages offer access to search; news, weather, stock prices, entertainment
listings, and other information; and links to travel, job search, and other
services.The development of Internet navigation aids and services, especiallythose focused primarily on the Web, stands in interesting contrast to the
development of the Domain Name System as described in Chapter 2.Conclusion: A wide range of reasonably effective, usable, and readilyavailable Internet navigation aids and services have been developed and
have evolved rapidly in the years since the World Wide Web came into
widespread use in 1993.Large investments in research and development are currently beingmade in commercial search and directory services. Still, many of the un-
expected innovations in Internet navigation occurred in academic institu-
tions. These are places with strong traditions of information sharing and
open inquiry. Research and education are Òproblem-richÓ arenas in which
students and faculty nurture innovation.Conclusion: Computer science and information science graduate stu-dents and faculty played a prominent role in the initial development of a
great many innovative Internet navigation aids and services, most of
which are now run as commercial enterprises. Two of those services have
become the industry leaders and have achieved great commercial suc-
cessÑYahoo! and Google.Conclusion: Because of the vast scale, broad scope, and ready accessi-bility of resources on the Internet, the development of navigation aids and
services opens access to a much wider array of resources than has hereto-
fore been available to non-specialist searchers. At the same time, the de-
velopment of successful Internet navigation aids and services opens ac-
cess to a much broader potential audience than has heretofore been
available to most resource providers.One cannot know if the past is prelude, but it is clear that the numberand the variety of resources available on the Internet continue to grow,
that uses for it continue to evolve, and that many challenges of Internet
navigation remain. Some of the likely directions of technological develop-
ment are described in Section 8.1Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 6.3Key Events in the Development of Navigation Aids and
Services for the World Wide Web1989Work started on the InQuery engine at the University of Massachusetts thateventually led to the Infoseek engine.1993First Web robot or spider.1 The World Wide Web Wanderer was createdby MIT student Matthew Gray. It was used to count Web servers andcreate a databaseÑWandexÑof their URLs.Work on the Architext search engine using statistical clustering was startedby six Stanford University undergraduates, which was the basis for Ex-cite search engine launched in 1995.First directory. WWW Virtual Library was created by Tim Berners-Lee.ALIWEB, an Archie-like index of the Web based on automatic gathering ofinformation provided by webmasters, was created by Martijn Kosters at
Nexor Co., United Kingdom.First robot-based search engines launched. The World Wide Web Worm,JumpStation, and Repository-Based Software Engineering (RBSE) were
launched. None indexed the full text of Web pages.1994The World Wide Web Worm indexed 110,000 Web pages and Web-ac-cessible documents; it received an average of 1500 queries a day (inMarch and April).First searchable directory of the Web. Galaxy, created at the MCC Re-search Consortium, provided a directory service to support electroniccommerce.First widely used Web directory. Yahoo! was created by two Stanfordgraduate students, David Filo and Jerry Yang, as a directory of theirfavorite Web sites. Usage expanded with the growth in entries and ad-dition of categories. Yahoo! became a public company in 1995.First robot-based search engine to index full text of Web pages. WebCrawler was created by Brian Pinkerton, a student at the University ofWashington.Lycos was created by Michael Mauldin, a research scientist at CarnegieMellon University. It quickly became the largest robot-based searchengine. By January 1995 it had indexed 1.5 million documents and by
November 1996, over 60 millionÑmore than any other search engineat the time.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION305Harvest was created by the Internet Research Task Force Research Groupon Resource Discovery at the University of Colorado. It featured a scal-able, highly customizable architecture and tools for gathering, index-
ing, caching, replicating, and accessing Internet information.Infoseek Guide, launched by Infoseek Corporation as a Web directory, wasinitially fee based, and then free.The OpenText 4 search engine was launched by Open Text Corporationbased on work on full-text indexing and string search for the OxfordEnglish Dictionary. (In 1996 it launched ÒPreferred Listings,Ó enablingsites to pay for listing in top-10 search results. Resultant controversymay have hastened its demise in 1997.)1995The Infoseek search engine was launched in February and in Decemberbecame NetscapeÕs default search service, displacing Yahoo!First metasearch service. SearchSavvy, created by Daniel Dreilinger, agraduate student at Colorado State University, queried multiple searchengines and combined their results.First commercial metasearch service. MetaCrawler, developed by gradu-ate student Erik Selberg and faculty member Oren Etzioni at the Univer-sity of Washington, was licensed to go2net.The Excite commercial search engine, based on the Stanford Architext en-gine, was launched.The Magellan directory was launched by the McKinley Group. It wascomplemented by a book, The McKinley Internet Yellow Pages, thatcategorized, indexed, and described 15,000 Internet resources and thataccepted advertising.Search engine achieved record speed: 3 million pages indexed per day.AltaVista, launched by Digital Equipment Corporation, combined com-puting power with innovative search featuresÑincluding Boolean op-erators, newsgroup search, and usersÕ addition and removal of their own
URLsÑto become the most popular search engine.1996First search engine to employ parallel computing for indexing: 10 millionpages indexed per day. Inktomi Corporation launched the HotBot searchengine based on work of faculty member Eric Brewer and graduate stu-dent Paul Gauthier of the University of California, Berkeley. HotBot usedclusters of inexpensive workstations to achieve supercomputer speeds. It
adopted the OEM search modelÑproviding search services through oth-ersÑand was licensed to Wired magazineÕs Web site, HotWired.ContinuedSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 6.3Continued
First paid listings in an online directory. LookSmart was launched as adirectory of Web site listings. Containing both paid commercial listingsand non-commercial listings submitted by volunteer editors, it also
adopted the OEM model.First Internet archive. Archive.org was launched by Brewster Kahle as anInternet repository with the goal of archiving snapshots of the WebÕscontent on a regular basis.Consolidation begins: Excite acquired WebCrawler and Magellan.1997First search engine to incorporate automatic classification and creation oftaxonomies of responses and to use multidimensional relevance rank-ing. The Northern Light search engine also indexed proprietary docu-ment collections.AOL launched AOL NetFind, its own branded version of Excite. The Min-ing Company directory service, started by Scott Kurnitt and others, useda network of ÒguidesÓ to prepare directory articles.First Òquestion-answerÓ style search engine. Ask Jeeves was launched. Thecompany was founded in 1996 by a software engineer, David Warthen,and a venture capitalist, Garrett Gruener. The service emphasized ease
of use, relevance, precision, and ability to learn.Alexa.com was launched by Brewster Kahle. It assisted search users byproviding additional informationÑsite ownership, related links, and a
link to Encyclopedia BritannicaÑand also provided a copy of all in-dexed pages to Archive.org.Alta Vista, the largest search engine, indexed 100 million pages total andreceived 20 million queries per day.Open Text Corporation ceased operation.1998First search engine with paid placement (Òpay-per-clickÓ) in responses.Idealab! launched the GoTo search engine. Web sites were listed in anorder determined by what they paid to be included in responses to aquery term.First open source Web directory. Open Directory Project was launched (ini-tially with the name GNUhoo and then NewHoo) with the goal of be-coming the WebÕs most comprehensive directory through the use of the
open source modelÑcontributions by thousands of volunteer editors.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION307First search engine to use Òpage rank,Ó based on number of links to apage, in prioritizing results of Web keyword searches. Stanford gradu-ate students Larry Page and Sergey Brin announced Google, which was
designed to support research on Web search technology. Google be-came available as a Òbeta versionÓ on the Web.Microsoft launched MSN Search using the Inktomi search engine.
The Direct Hit search engine was introduced. It ranked responses by thepopularity of sites among previous searchers using similar keywords.Yahoo! Web search was powered by Inktomi.
Consolidation heats up: GoTo acquired WWW Worm; Lycos acquiredWired/HotBot; Netscape acquired the Open Directory; Disney acquireda large stake in Infoseek.1999Google, Inc. (formed in 1998) opened a fully operational search service.AOL/Netscape adopted it for search on its portal sites.The Norwegian company Fast Search & Transfer (FAST) launched theAllTheWeb search engine.The Mining Company was renamed About.com.
Northern Light became the first engine to index 200 million pages.The FindWhat pay-for-placement search engine was launched to providepaid listings to other search engines.Consolidation continued: CMGI acquired AltaVista; At Home acquiredExcite.2000Yahoo! adopted Google as the default search results provider on its portalsite.Google launched an advertising program to complement its search ser-vices, added Netscape Open Directory to augment its search results,
and began 10 non-English-language search services.Consolidation continued: Ask Jeeves acquired Direct Hit; Terra NetworksS.A. acquired Lycos.By yearÕs end, Google had become the largest search engine on the Webwith an index of over 1.3 billion pages, answering 60 million searchesper day.2001Google acquired the Deja.com Usenet archive dating back to 1995.ContinuedSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEBOX 6.3Continued
Overture, the new name for GoTo, became the leading pay-for-placementsearch engine.The Teoma search engine, launched in April, was bought by Ask Jeeves inSeptember.The Wisenut search engine was launched.Magellan ceased operation.By the end of the year, Google had indexed over 3 billion Web documents(including a Usenet archive dating back to 1981).2002Consolidation continued: LookSmart acquired Wisenut.The Gigablast search engine was launched.2003Consolidation heated up:Yahoo acquired Inktomi and Overture, which had acquired AltaVista andAllTheWeb.FindWhat acquired Espotting.Google acquired Applied Semantics and Sprinks.
Google indexed over 3 billion Web documents and answered over 200million searches daily.2004Competition became more intense:Yahoo! switched its search from Google to its own Inktomi and Overtureservices.6.3ADDENDUMÑSEARCHING THE WEB VERSUS
SEARCHING LIBRARIESSearching on the public Web has no direct analog with searching li-braries, which is both an advantage and a disadvantage. Library models
provide a familiar and useful comparison for explaining the options and
difficulties of categorizing Web resources.First, locating an item by its URL has no direct equivalent in librarymodels. The URL usually combines the name of a resource with its pre-
cise machine location. The URL approach assumes a unique resource at a
unique location. Library models assume that documents exist in multipleSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION309Amazon.com entered the market with A9.com, which added Search Insidethe Bookª and other user features to the results of a Google search.Google included (in February) 6 billion items: 4.28 billion Web pages, 880million images, 845 million Usenet messages, and a test collection ofbook-related information pages.Google went public in an initial public offering in August. Ask Jeeves ac-quired Interactive Search Holdings, Inc., which owned Excite and iWon.In November, Google reported that its index included over 8 billion Webpages.2In December, Google, four university libraries, and the New York PublicLibrary announced an agreement to scan books from the library collec-tions and make them available for online search.3SOURCES:  Search Engine Optimization Consultants, ÒHistory of Search Engines and Direc-
tories,Ó June 2003, available at <http://www/seoconsultants.com/search-engines/history.asp>;
iProspect, ÒA Brief History of Search Engine Marketing and Search Engines,Ó  2003, available at
<http://www.iprospect.com/search_engine_placement/seo_history.htm>; Danny Sullivan,
ÒSearch Engine Timeline,Ó SearchEngineWatch.com, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/subscribers/factfiles/article.php/2152951>; and Wes Sonnenreich, ÒA
History of Search Engines,Ó  Wiley.com, available at <http://www.wiley.com/legacy/compbooks/sonnenreich/history.html>.1A spider is a program that collects Web pages by traversing the Web, following linksfrom site to site in a systematic way. See Box 7.2.2See David A. Vise, ÒSearch Swagger,Ó Washington Post, November 11, 2004, p. E1.3John Markoff and Edward Wyatt. 2004. ÒGoogle Is Adding Major Libraries to ItsDatabase,Ó New York Times, December 14, 2004, available at <http://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/14/technology/14google.html>.locations, and separate the name of the document (its bibliographic de-scription, usually a catalog record or index entry) from its physical loca-
tion within a given library. Classification systems (e.g., Dewey decimal or
Library of Congress) are used for shelf location only in open-stack librar-
ies, which are prevalent in the United States. Even then, further coding is
needed to achieve unique numbering within individual libraries.56 In56The shelf location ZA3225.B67 2000 for Borgman, From Gutenberg to the Global InformationInfrastructure, 2000, at the University of California at Berkeley library consists of the Libraryof Congress Call Number (ZA3225) plus a local number to order the author name (B67 forBorgman) and the date (2000) to create a unique shelf placement in this library.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEclosed-stack libraries where users cannot browse the shelves, such as theLibrary of Congress, books usually are stored by size and date of acquisi-
tion. The uniqueness of name and location of resources that is assumed in
a URL leads to multiple problems of description and persistence, as ex-
plained in this chapter.Second, resources on the Web may be located by terms in their pagesbecause search engines attempt to index documents in all the sites they
select for indexing, regardless of type of content (e.g., text, images, sound;
personal, popular, scholarly, technical), type of hosting organization (e.g.,
commercial, personal, community, academic, political), country, or lan-
guage. By comparison, no single index of the contents of the worldÕs librar-
ies exists. Describing such a vast array of content in a consistent manner is
an impossible task, and libraries do not attempt to do so. The resource that
comes closest to being a common index is WorldCat,57 which Òis a world-wide union catalog created and maintained collectively by more than 9,000
member institutionsÓ of the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) and
in 2004 contained about 54 million items.
58 The contents of WorldCat con-sist of bibliographic descriptions (cataloging records) of books, journals,
movies, and other types of documents; the full content of these documents
is not indexed. Despite the scope of this database, it represents only a frac-
tion of the worldÕs libraries (albeit most of the largest and most prestigious
ones), and only a fraction of the collections within these libraries (individual
articles in journals are not indexed, nor are most maps, archival materials,
and other types of documents). The total number of documents in WorldCat
(54 million) is small compared with those indexed by Google, InfoSeek,
AltaVista, or other Internet search engines.Rather than create a common index to all the worldÕs libraries, consis-tent and effective access to documents is achieved by dividing them into
manageable collections according to their subject content or audience. Li-
brary catalogs generally represent the collections of only one library, or at
most a group of libraries participating in a consortium (e.g., the campuses
of the University of California59). These catalogs describe books, journals(but not individual journal articles), and other types of documents. Many
materials are described only as collections. For example, just one catalog
record describes all the maps of Los Angeles made by the U.S. Geological
Survey from 1924 to 1963. It has been estimated that individual records in
the library catalog represent only about 2 percent of the separate items in
a typical academic library collection.60 Thus, library catalogs are far less57See <http://www.oclc.org/worldcat/default.htm>.58Accessed May 7, 2004.59See <http://melvyl.cdlib.org/>.60See David A. Tyckoson, ÒThe 98% Solution: The Failure of the Catalog and the Role ofElectronic Databases,Ó Technicalities 9(2):8-12, 1989.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: EMERGENCE AND EVOLUTION311comprehensive than most library users realize. However, online librarycatalogs are moving away from the narrower model of card catalogs.
Many online catalogs are merging their catalog files with records from
journal article databases. Mixing resources from different sources creates
a more comprehensive database but introduces the Web searching prob-
lem of inconsistent description.Nor do libraries attempt the international, multilingual indexing thatsearch engines do. The catalogs of libraries may be organized consistently
on a country-by-country basis, at best. The descriptive aspects of catalog-
ing (e.g., author, title, date, publisher) are fairly consistent internation-
ally, as most countries use some variation of the Machine Readable Cata-
loging (MARC) metadata structure. (Metadata are data about data or,
more generally, about resources.) However, many variations of the
MARC format exist, each tied to a national or multinational set of cata-
loging rules. The United States and United Kingdom share the Anglo-
American Cataloging Rules but store their data in USMARC and
UKMARC formats, respectively. These formats are finally being merged,
after nearly 40 years of use. In 2004, the national libraries of the United
States and the United Kingdom implemented a common format, MARC
21, and other countries are following suit.61 Other MARC formats in-clude UNIMARC, HUMARC (Hungary), and FINNMARC (Finland). The

OCLC WorldCat database merges these into an OCLC MARC format.
Each catalog describes its holdings in its local language and may also
include descriptions in the language of the document content. For ex-
ample, OCLC WorldCat contains records describing resources in about
400 languages; each record has some descriptive entries in English. Thus,
libraries achieve interoperability through highly decentralized catalog-
ing activities. The cataloging enterprise is economically feasible in the
United States because most published resources are described by the
publishers and the Library of Congress and contributed to OCLC
WorldCat and other shared databases. Despite the relative national and
international success in establishing cataloging rules and formats among
libraries, incompatibilities continue to exist within these communities,
and the archives and museum communities employ yet other metadata
formats. Given the difficulty of achieving agreement on basic descriptive
models among these established institutions run by information man-
agement professionals, the likelihood of getting universal agreement on61See British Library, MARC 21 and UKMARC, British Library, London, November24, 2004, available at <http://www.bl.uk/services/bibliographic/nbsils.html>; andMARC 21 Concise Format for Bibliographic Data
, Concise Edition, Library of Congress, Wash-
ington, D.C., November 24, 2003, available at <http://www.loc.gov/marc/bibliographic/ecbdhome.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEdescriptive standards for Web documents is low. Decentralized modelsfor data creation, combined with mapping between similar formats, are
the most feasible way to achieve interoperability.Third, while a rich subject index to the Web would certainly be ex-tremely useful, universal subject access is almost impossible to achieve.
American libraries attempt general subject access via the Library of Con-
gress Subject Headings (LCSH), but these apply only two or three head-
ings per book. Few other countries appear to use the LCSH, as many of
the concepts are specific to U.S. culture. Unified access via classification
systems such as the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) and Library of
Congress Classification (LCC) are more common. These are also country-
and culture-specific. DDC and LCC are little used outside the United
States; the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) system has broader
international adoption. Many other country-specific classifications exist.Consistent subject access in any depth is feasible only within topicalareas due to a number of well-understood linguistic problems.62 Theseinclude synonymy (multiple terms or phrases may have the same mean-
ing), polysemy (the same terms and phrases may have multiple mean-
ings), morphological relationships (structure of words, such as variant
endingsÑe.g., acid and acidic; dog and dogs; mouse and mice, and se-
mantic relationships (conceptual relationships (e.g., two words may have
the same meaning in one context and different meanings in other con-
texts). Both automatic and manual methods to provide consistent retrieval
by controlling the meaning of words work best when the subject area is
constrained. Controlled sets of terms (e.g., thesauri, ontologies) can be
constrained to their meaning within one field, such as computer science,
economics, arts, or psychology. Libraries construct or purchase indexes
specific to each field within the scope of their collections.Fourth, Web directories are more analogous to topic-specific libraryindexes than to library catalogs. However, Web directories cover only a
small portion of the content of the Web, and their descriptions of each
item are often less complete and can be less reliable than those created by
professional librarians. Consequently, structured and formal character-
izations of material can be accomplished most effectively in a library cata-
log or bookstore database, rather than in a general Web directory.Selecting the proper resource to search remains an important startingpoint in seeking information, whether online or offline.62See Richard K. Belew, Finding Out About: A Cognitive Perspective on Search Engine Technol-ogy and the WWW, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2000; Peter Brusilovskyand Carlo Tasso, ÒPreface to Special Issue on User Modeling for Web Information Retrieval,Ó
User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction:  The Journal of Personalization Research
 14(2-3):147-157, 2004; and William A. Woods, ÒSearching vs. Finding,Ó ACM Queue 2(4), 2004, availableat <http://www.acmqueue.com/modules.php?name=Content&pa=showpage&pid=137>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3137Internet Navigation:Current State
At this point in the development of Internet navigation, there are atleast seven basic ways for a user to navigate to a desired Web
resource, which is generally located on a page within a Web site.Five of them are directÑusersÕ actions take them immediately to the de-
sired resource. Two are indirectÑusers must first employ a navigation
service, either a directory or a search engine, to find the address of a de-
sired resource and then, using that information, go to the desired resource.
These basic ways can be and often are used in combination with one an-
other. Table 7.1 summarizes and characterizes the various Internet navi-
gation aids and services.This discussion is concerned with navigation across the Internet andnot specifically with navigation within sites, although the tools deployed
in both cases are usually similar. Most Web sitesÑexcept those with only
a few pagesÑnow incorporate one or more means of navigation within
the site itself. These include hyperlinks, directories (menus), site maps,
and search engines. Because they are usually limited to the contents of the
site, the problems of general-purpose Web navigation aids are diminished.
For example, the context is delimited, the users are relatively homoge-
neous, the scale is relatively small, and material that is difficult to auto-
matically index (such as multimedia and images) can usually be manually
indexed.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE7.1NAVIGATION AIDS AND SERVICES
7.1.1Direct Access via a Uniform Resource Locator or Domain Name
 One of the major factors in the success of the Web was the develop-ment of Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) for Web sites. Because those
identifiers offered a standardized way to identify resources on the Web,
resource providers and resource seekers had a common way to refer to
their locations. But the URLs were intended as codes hidden behind mean-
ingful objectsÑthe anchor textÑin a document, not directly typed by the
user. The designers of the Web may have been surprised when URLs be-
gan appearing on the sides of buses and on billboards.URLs are typically not managed to be permanent and can be difficultto remember, especially when they require many elements to describe a
resource deep within a Web site. (Examples of such URLs abound in the
footnoted references throughout this report.) Despite their flaws, how-
ever, they have thrived as a robust means of navigation.In some browsers, users can also navigate through the Web by typingonly a domain name because the browsers will automatically expand it
into a URL that may identify a Web site. This use of domain names for
navigation is effective to the degree that the searcher knows or is able to
guess the domain name exactly and is satisfied with being taken to the
home page of a Web site. If the name entered is incorrect, then the browser,
e-mail server, or other Internet service consumes resources (in the local
computer and in the Internet) trying to find a DNS match. MistakenTABLE 7.1Principal Internet Navigation Aids and Services
MethodStepsIndexing ProcessFile StructureMatch
1. Domain NameÑ1 or 2HumanHierarchicalExact
  known or guessed2. Hyperlink1HumanNetworkExact
3. Bookmark1HumanFlat or hierarchicalExact
4. KEYWORDa1HumanFlat or hierarchicalExact
5. Metadata1HumanFlat or hierarchicalExact
6. Directory2Human/computerHierarchical orFuzzy
multi-hierarchical7. Search engine2ComputerInvertedRanked
aÒKEYWORDÓ is capitalized to distinguish it from the use of keywords in traditionalinformation retrieval or in Internet search engines (see Sections 7.1.4 and 7.1.7). In this use,each KEYWORD is part of a controlled vocabulary for which the match to a specific Internetresource is one to one.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE315guesses can create extra traffic and burden the DNS, as discussed in Chap-ter 3. However, most browsers now treat invalid domain names as search
terms and return a list of possible matches.1Furthermore, as Web sites have grown more complex, discovering thesite has often had to be followed by a second navigation process to find
relevant information or pages within the site. But some users would prefer
to go directly to the page that contains the specific information being sought.
Remembering or guessing does not suffice for such navigation because the
URLs of inner pages comprise more than the domain name.In addition, as network services proliferate and as additional top-level domains are added, users will have many more sites of interest to
which to navigate, but at the probable cost of domain names that are
more difficult to remember or guess. Furthermore, not only informa-
tion, entertainment, and service resources, but also many personal elec-
tronic devices and home appliances may well be connected to the
Internet. For convenience, users will probably want to assign easy-to-
remember domain names to such devices. But because of competition
for the easiest and shortest names, they may have to settle for less-readily
remembered ones. In either event, they can use bookmarks (see Section
7.1.3) to simplify access.For these reasons, remembering or guessing correct domain names islikely to become less dependable and, therefore, a less important aid to
navigation as the number of locations on the Internet continues to expand.7.1.2Direct Access via Hyperlinks
Because the Web is a network of sites through which users can navi-gate by following links between documents on the sites, once the first site
has been found, one can move across sub-networks of related and rel-
evant information and services. The address of the linked-to information
may be visible or, more typically, hidden behind anchor text. A human
being defines the linkages within and from a site during site design.There is no publicly available Internet-wide file of links; they aremaintained locally. However, linkage information is collected and used
by all major search engines as an important part of the ranking of re-
sponses. For example, Google maintains an extensive file of linkages, and
it is possible to use Google to find all the pages that link to a given page
(within the scope of what is indexed by Google; see ÒThe Deep, Dark, or
Invisible WebÓ in Section 7.1.7).1As discussed in Chapter 4, VeriSign tried to offer a service to users who enter an incorrect.com or .net domain name that directed them to possible matches, raising technical andpolicy issues.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACENavigation by following hyperlinks is an effective tool for movingbetween related sites once the first relevant site has been found. However,
since Web site operators establish the linkages, they may or may not lead
to the specific sites of interest to the user. Thus, navigation by hyperlinks
is both a valuable and a limited aid. It generally must be supplemented by
other means of finding starting sites and of identifying sites of interest
that may not be on the radiating set of paths from the initial point.7.1.3Direct Access via Bookmarks
The URLs for sites of continuing interest that have been found after asearch and those of frequently accessed sites can be stored locallyÑ
ÒbookmarkedÓ or placed on a ÒfavoritesÓ listÑand managed in most brows-

ers. By doing so, the user can return directly to a location, perhaps deep
within a site, with a single click. However, these local files can become dif-
ficult to manage over time, due both to scaling problems (as the list of book-
marks grows, it may require its own database) and to the likelihood of bro-
ken links or changed content as URLs age. For these reasons, bookmarks
may become less useful with the scaling and maturing of the Internet, lead-
ing users to rely on search engines to find even familiar sites and Web pages.The bookmark/favorite mechanism as implemented in current browsersand described above is fairly weak, providing a simple association between a
name (provided by either the user or the Web page) and a URL. Richer meth-
ods are possible. For example, prior experience in both information retrieval
and software engineering suggests that it would be useful to store, in some
form, both the query that produced the reference and information about how
long the reference was likely to remain current. With this information avail-
able, it would become easier to repeat the discovery process when a link went
bad, perhaps even automatically. Some work is now underway to recast
bookmarks as a type of local cache with this information included and some
reference updating and recovery capabilities. That work also expects to unify
the results of multiple types of navigation, from search engine output, to
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) obtained from colleagues, to links ob-
tained from pages being traversed, into a single framework. (In information
retrieval and library practice since the early 1960s, queries have been stored
and then periodically executed to support Current Awareness or Selective
Dissemination of Information services.2 However, unlike the bookmark case,the queries are run by a service on a regular schedule and not by users only
when they need to update their bookmarks.)2See Robert R. Korfhage, Information Storage and Retrieval, Wiley, New York, 1997; and C.B.Hensley, R.R. Savage, A.J. Sowarby, and A. Resnick, ÒSelective Dissemination of Informa-tionÑA New Approach to Effective Communication,Ó IRE Transactions of the ProfessionalGroup on Engineering Management EM-9:2, 1962.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE3177.1.4Direct Access via KEYWORDS
The term ÒkeywordÓ is used in several contexts, with slightly differ-ent meanings, in Internet navigation.Its most common current use is to denote the terms entered into thesearch window of a search engine for matching against the search engineÕs
index of words appearing on Web pages.3 In this meaning, a ÒkeywordÓcan be any phrase and can be treated in a variety of ways by individual
search mechanisms. It is also used in this sense in search engine market-
ing to refer to the search terms for which a particular marketer is willing
to pay.4However, ÒkeywordÓ has also been used to denote terms in a controlledvocabulary linked to specific Internet locations by a specific Internet (gener-
ally, Web) service. To distinguish this meaning, it is written here in capitals.
Typically, KEYWORDS are associated with a particular organization or ser-
vice and that organization or service has paid to have them linked uniquely
to its location. Usually, just a single KEYWORD (or phrase) is entered and
only one site appears in the response. They apply, however, only within a
specific Web service and are not generally interpretable in the same way by
others. One of the best-known uses of KEYWORDS is that of America
Online (AOL) in which KEYWORDS can be typed into the AOL address
bar.5 AOL KEYWORDS link uniquely to a network resourceÑÒNYTIMESÓlinks to www.nytimes.com, or to an AOL feature or serviceÑÒSTOCKMARKETÓ links to the AOL Market News Center. (The latest versions of
AOL now offer a choice between: ÒGo to AOL keyword: ÔNY TimesÕÓ or
ÒSearch the Web for ÔNY TimesÕÓ.) Typing the AOL KEYWORDS into MSN
or into Internet Explorer will not necessarily lead to the same location. In-
deed, both ÒNYTIMESÓ and ÒSTOCK MARKETÓ when typed into Internet
Explorer and Netscape Navigator6 are treated as search terms (keywordsin the more general sense), and the response is a ranked list of possiblymatching sites.3This is similar to the sense in which ÒkeywordÓ has conventionally been used in informa-tion retrieval, where a ÒkeywordÓ is Òone of a set of individual words chosen to representthe content of a document.Ó See Korfhage, Information Storage and Retrieval, 1997, p. 325.4The marketerÕs site or advertisement will appear as one of the responses to any query thatincludes those keywords. In this context, there generally are several keywords entered in thequery and many responses in the list produced by the search engine. This use of ÒkeywordÓis treated in detail in Section 7.2.2.5See Danny Sullivan, ÒAOL Search Big Improvement for Members,Ó SearchEngineWatch.com,1999, available at <http://searchenginewatch.com/sereport/article.php/2167581>. See alsoDominic Gates, ÒWeb Navigation for Sale,Ó The Industry Standard, May 15, 2000, available at<http://www.thestandard.com/article/0,1902,14735,00.html?body_page=1>.6Test carried out in March 2005.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACESeveral years ago, there were a number of attempts to offer morewidely applicable KEYWORDS on the public Internet. A service offered
by RealNames, Inc. was available for several years. It was adopted, for
example, by MSN, which, however, terminated its use in June 2002.7RealNames closed shortly thereafter. KEYWORDS have been replaced in
most casesÑexcept for services catering to non-English language users8and AOLÑby search engines, which provide a wider-ranging response to
keyword terms, and by the sale of search engine keywords to multiple
bidders.KEYWORDS have many of the same strengths and weaknesses asdomain names for navigation. If known, they lead exactly to the location
to which the purchaser of the KEYWORD wishes to lead the searcher
(which may not be the same as the searcherÕs intent). If guessed, they
either succeed, lead to the wrong site, or fail. However, since many brows-
ers and services now treat non-URL entries in their address lines as search
terms, ÒfailureÓ now generally produces a ranked list of possible matches.
Thus, KEYWORD systemsÑincluding AOLÕsÑnow default to search sys-

tems, just as domain name guesses generally do.9Unlike the DNS, a variety of KEYWORD systems applicable to spe-cific topic areas and with or without hierarchical structure are conceptu-
ally possible. Implementation of a KEYWORD system on the Web requires
an application or a service, such as a browser or Netpia, that recognizes
the KEYWORD terms when entered into its address line or when they
reach the serviceÕs name server. And, whereas in the early days of the
Web such an innovation might have been relatively easy, the general
implementation of standardized browser software in various versions
makes the widespread introduction of a new feature much more difficult7See Danny Sullivan, ÒRealNames to Close After Losing Microsoft,Ó 
SearchEngineWatch.com,June 3, 2002, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/sereport/article.php/2164841>. The committee heard testimony from Keith Teare, then chief executive officer ofRealNames, at its July 2001 meeting.8Two prominent native language KEYWORD systems are the following: (1) Netpia, a Ko-rean Internet service, offers Native Language Internet Address (NLIA) for 95 countries (as ofMay 2, 2005). NLIA enables substitution of a native language word or phrase (a KEYWORD)
for a unique URL. See <http://e.netpia.com>. (2) Beijing 3721 Technology Co., Ltd., hasoffered Chinese language keywords since 1999. See <http://www.3721.com/english/about.htm>.9In July 2004, Google added a ÒBrowse by NameÓ feature to its search, enabling a user toenter a single name in the tool bar and returning a single site if the term is specific or wellknown; if not, it defaults to a traditional search. It is not clear how the single response names
are selected and whether or not they are paid for. See Scarlett Pruitt, ÒGoogle Goes Browsingby Name,Ó PC World, July 15, 2004, available at <http://www.pcworld.com/news/article/0,aid,116910,00.asp>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE319(although specific services, such as AOL or Netpia, can still implementthem for their users).Moreover, within any specific database, digital library, or communityrepository (such as the large databases of primary scientific data being
assembled around the world), terms can take on local meanings. Gener-
ally speaking, meanings are constrained by the use of a controlled vo-
cabulary, which defines each term as applied in this system. Well-known
examples of controlled vocabularies include the Library of Congress Sub-
ject Headings, the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), Subject Headings
for Engineering (SHE), and the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) Classification System.KEYWORD systems also face the problems that arise from scale. Thelarger the number of locations to which they seek to assign simple and
unique names, the greater the pressure to become complex and structured.
The system must either remain manageably small or develop an institu-
tional framework that allows decentralization, while centrally determin-
ing who can use which names to designate which locations. AOL and
Netpia both centrally determine the assignment of names. However,
Netpia implements KEYWORDS through decentralized name servers lo-
cated at collaborating ISPs, while AOL implements its smaller list of KEY-
WORDS through its own service system.7.1.5Direct Access via Metadata
Since the early days of the Web, there has been a desireÑespecially,but not only, by those in the library and information science communityÑ
to establish a more consistent and more controlled way to categorize and
describe Web resources based on the use of Òdata about data,Ó or
metadata.10However, differences between the Web11 and conventional librariesand data collections complicate fulfillment of that desire. First, the num-
ber, scope of content, and diversity of form of resources on the public
Web exceed that in any library. Second, the quality of the, often self-pro-
vided, metadata is highly variable. And third, there is no organization or
group of organizations that is able and willing to assume responsibility10For an overview, see Tony Gill, Introduction to Metadata: Metadata and the World Wide Web,Getty Research Institute, July 2000, available at <http://www.getty.edu/research/
conducting_research/standards/intrometadata/2_articles/gill/index.html>.11Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)Ñthe programming language of Web site con-structionÑspecifies the expression of metadata in the form of ÒmetatagsÓ that are visible to
search engines (as they collect data from the WebÑsee Box 7.2) but are not typically dis-played to humans by browsers. To see metatags, if they are present on a Web page, go toView/Source in Internet Explorer or View/Page Source in Netscape Navigator.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEfor assigning metadata tags to a significant portion of the resources acces-sible on the Web, as the Library of Congress does for books.Efforts to adapt metadata for the description and categorization ofsufficiently valuable Web resources began in the mid-1990s, when stan-
dard ways to express metadataÑmetadata schemesÑwere proposed as
the answer to interoperability and scaling of the expanding Web.12 But areexamination in 2002 of the mid-1990sÕ recommendations forced their
proponents to consider why metadata had not been successfully used.13The error was in their assumptions: They had expected to find high-qual-
ityÑclean and honestÑinformation, not the large amount of misrepre-
sented and deliberately incorrect metadata that was provided for re-
sources on the Web.It seems that any feasible attempt to develop metadata schemes andapply them broadly to the Web would have to be decentralized and based
on the efforts of a large number of autonomous organizations with spe-
cific knowledge of the content and quality of the resources they describe.
Yet decentralization raises the question of coordination among the many
potentially inconsistent and non-interoperable metadata schemes that the
autonomous organizations might otherwise develop. Through coordina-
tion, their separate efforts could cover a significant portion of the Web
and open access to their resources to a wider audience beyond the organi-
zations themselves. Two approaches have been taken to the coordination
of metadata schemes produced by autonomous organizations.The first approach to coordination is for organizations to collaboratein defining common metadata elements that will be used by all of them as
a core for their metadata schemes. The best known and best developed of
these is the Dublin Metadata Core Element Set, known as the Dublin
Core,14 so named because it originated at a meeting in Dublin, Ohio, thatwas sponsored by the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC). It com-
prises fifteen metadata elements, which were thought to be the minimum
number required to enable discovery of document-like resources on the
Internet. Thus, Dublin Core can be used to discover an item, to determine12See Clifford A. Lynch and Hector Garcia-Molina, Interoperability, Scaling, and the DigitalLibraries Research Agenda, 1995, available at <http://www-diglib.stanford.edu/diglib/pub/reports/iita-dlw/main.html>, accessed July 9, 2004.13Christine L. Borgman, ÒChallenges in Building Digital Libraries for the 21st Century,ÓProceedings of the 5th International Conference on Asian Digital Libraries (ICADL 2002),Ee-Peng Lim, Schubert Foo, Christopher S.G. Khoo, H. Chen, E. Fox, U. Shalini, and C.Thanos, editors (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2555), Springer-Verlag, 2002, avail-able at <http://www.springer.de/comp/lncs/index.html>.14The Dublin Core Web site is at <http://www.purl.org/dc/>. Official reference defini-tions of the metadata elements can be found there.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE321where fuller descriptions can be found, and to identify its detailed format(e.g., MARC for books or the Environmental Markup Language for
biocomplexity data). Dublin Core works best when a professional cata-
loger creates descriptions. To achieve wide adoption, some believe that it
needs to be made more suitable to machine-generated descriptions.15The second approach to coordination is to provide a higher-level struc-ture that can incorporate multiple metadata schemes, enabling them to be
deployed in combination to describe a resource with the assurance that the
resultant description will be correctly interpreted by any computer program
that is compatible with the higher-level structure. The best known and best
developed of these higher-level structures is the Resource Description Frame-
work (RDF) developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).16 It ex-tends another W3C standard, Extensible Markup Language (XML),17 whichis used to describe data where interchange and interoperability are impor-
tant, to describe resources. Any Web resourceÑthat is, any object with a
URIÑcan be described in a machine-understandable way in the RDF, al-
though for some objects the description might contain little information. The
resourceÑWeb objectÑis described by a collection of propertiesÑits RDF
description. These properties can come from any metadata scheme since the
RDF description incorporates reference information about the metadata
scheme and the definition for each property. The advantage of the RDF is that
it provides a widely applicable framework within which specialized metadata
sets can be combined. For example, to describe geographic resources on the
Web, an RDF description might incorporate the Dublin Core to describe the
bibliographic provenance and a geographic metadata scheme to describe the
geographic coverage of each resource. The developers of the RDF believe that
its existence will encourage the development of a large number of metadata
schemes for different resource domains and that where there is overlap in
their coverage, they will, in effect, compete for adoption by those who de-
scribe resources. See Box 7.1.While the RDF may provide a useful framework within which variousmetadata schemes may be developed and combined, it does not resolve the
more difficult problem of actually using these metadata schemes to describe
resources on the Web. That problem has three components: determining15See Carl Lagoze, ÒKeeping Dublin Core Simple: Cross-Domain Discovery or ResourceDescription,Ó D-Lib Magazine 7(1), 2001, available at <http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january01/lagoze/01lagoze.html>. Lagoze provides a useful discussion of the tradeoffs in
simple and complex metadata descriptions and the relationship between Dublin Core, RDF,and other schema.16See Resource Description Framework (RDF)/W3C Semantic Web Activity, available at <http://www.w3c.org/rdf>, and RDF Primer Primer [correct as written], available at <http://notabug.com/2002/rdfprimer/>.17See Extensible Markup Language (XML), available at <http://www.w3c.org/xml>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEwho will assign the metadata to each resource; finding incentives formetadata use; and determining how the metadata will be used.The resolution of that three-component problem is easiest within com-munities, whether organized by topic, geographic region, or some other
shared subject area.18 Individual communities in several academic disci-plines are creating their own repositories with their own metadata frame-
works. Among the repositories that have been established are IRIS forBOX 7.1The Semantic Web
Despite the problems of characterizing most resources on the public Webwith RDF metadata, there are islands of application and, over the long term,they may extend to cover ever more terrain. With that prospect in mind, Tim
Berners-Lee and his colleagues at the W3C have proposed a way of linkingthese islands into a formalized network of knowledge that they call the ÒSe-mantic Web.Ó1 They do so by introducing ÒontologiesÓ that consist of rela-tional statements (propositions) and inference rules for specific domains ofknowledge and are used to define terms used on the Web. In their vision, theSemantic Web would enable Web agents to draw upon that network of
machine-accessible knowledge to carry out complex functions with less ex-plicit direction than is currently required. While its area of application is farbroader than navigation, its developers foresee, for example, that software
agents will Òuse this information to search, filter, and prepare information innew and exciting ways to assist the Web user.Ó2 Like metadata and RDF, theapplicability and feasibility of the Semantic Web remains the subject of dis-
pute between its advocates and the skeptics.3The practical implementation and use of the Semantic Web is highlydependent on the broad adoption of RDF and the ontologies it requires.
That work has proceeded slowly thus far.1See Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila, ÒThe Semantic Web,Ó ScientificAmerican, May 2001, available at <http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleID=00048144-10D2-1C70-84A9809EC588EF21&catID=2>.2See James Hendler, Tim Berners-Lee, and Eric Miller, ÒIntegrating Applications on the Se-mantic Web,Ó Journal of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan 122(10):676-680, 2002,available at <http://www.w3c.org/2002/07/swint>. For an imaginative exploration of the possi-
bilities, see Paul Ford, ÒAugust 2009: How Google Beat Amazon and Ebay to the Semantic
Web,Ó July 26, 2002, available at <http://www.ftrain.com/google_takes_all.html>.3See, for example, Clay Shirky, ÒThe Semantic Web, Syllogism, and Worldview,Ó November7, 2003, available at <http://www.shirky.com/writings/semantic_syllogism.html>. Also see PaulFord, ÒA Response to Clay ShirkyÕs ÔThe Semantic Web, Syllogism, and WorldviewÕ,Ó November
13, 2003, available at <http://www.ftrain.com/ContraShirky.html>.18See Chris Sherman, ÒSearch DayÑMetadata or Metagarbage,Ó SearchEngineWatch.com,March 4, 2002, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/2159381>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE323seismology, KNB for biocomplexity, and NCARÑamong othersÑfor en-vironmental data.19 Other communities have established portals to gatherresources and links to other resources on their topic of interest. Commu-
nities build these metadata-based repositories and portals out of self-in-
terestÑwith accurate metadata they can provide better access to commu-
nity resources. As both the creators and the users of the metadata, the
self-interest of cohesive communities leads them to want trustworthy
metadata and to provide the resources needed to create and keep them
current and accurate.20Solving that three-component problem is more difficult for the gen-eral Web user Òcommunity.Ó Metadata would either have to be supplied
by independent editors (as it is now for use in directory services) or ap-
plied by the resource providers and collected automatically by search en-
gines. Although search engines look at the metatagsÑa type of informa-
tion about a Web page that can be placed in the code describing the page
but not made visible to usersÑon Web sites, it is not always clear whether
and how they make use of the metadata they find there. And the funda-
mental difficulty of unreliable self-assigned metadata is difficult to over-
come through automatic means.However, one important current use of metadata is to characterizeimages and audio and video files on the general Web so that they can be
indexed and found by search engines. The metadata tags are generally
either extracted from text accompanying the images or supplied manu-
ally by editors or the resource provider and appear, generally, to be reli-
able. (See Section 8.1.3.)Thus, it is highly unlikely that general metadata schemes, even if theywere designed, could be reasonably implemented for the Web generally.
However, metadata schemes may be practical and useful for specific sets
of resources with interested user communities, such as professional orga-
nizations, museums, archives, libraries, businesses, and government agen-
cies and for non-textual resources, such as images, audio, and video files.
Moreover, even in specialized resources, establishing the framework and
assigning the metadata terms to a large number of items are very different
matters, since the latter is far more labor intensive. Thus, the widespread
use of metadata would become easier with the improvement of automatic19IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology) is at <http://www.iris.edu/>;KNB (The Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity) is at <http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/home.html>; and NCAR (National Center for Atmospheric Research) is at <http://www.ncar.ucar.edu/ncar/>.20See, for example, work done by the Education Network Australia, including EdNAOnline, The EdNA Metadata Standard, 2003, available at <http://www.edna.edu.au/edna/go/pid/385>, and the listing of activities at <http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/metadata>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEindexing (automatic metadata tagging), a topic that has long been pur-sued in information retrieval.217.1.6Navigation via Directory Systems
In general, the term ÒdirectoryÓ refers to a structured collection ofobjects organized by subject, much like a library card catalog or yellow
pages telephone listing. Structuring a directoryÑusually using a tax-
onomy of some formÑand placing objects under specific subject head-
ings are done by humans. They may assign the same subject heading to
more than one object and the same object may be assigned to more than
one subjectÑthat is, it may appear under more than one heading. In the
case of Internet directories, the objects are Internet locationsÑWeb sites
or Web pages, typically.Only the Web sites that have been submitted to or found by anInternet directory service and whose content has been classified and de-
scribed, either by the editors of the directory or by the creators of the Web
site, will be available in the directory. As a result of the heavy require-
ments for skilled labor, Internet directories can include only a small selec-
tion of all the sites connected by the Web. However, in contrast to search
engines, they have the advantage of being able to incorporate listings of
many Web sites in the ÒdarkÓ Web (see ÒThe Deep, Dark, or Invisible
WebÓ in Section 7.1.7) because the sites themselves solicit a listing or be-
cause they become known to the directory editors through other means.The listings, categorized under subject hierarchies, can be browsed bynarrowing down subject categories or can be searched by matching search
terms against summary descriptions of the Web site content.22 For ex-ample, the Yahoo! directory of the Internet classifies Web sites by 14 top-
ics. Under the Òcomputers and InternetÓ topic, there are two commercial
(sponsored) categories and 48 additional categories. The latter grouping
includes topics such as Òcommunications and networkingÓ with 1108 en-
tries grouped into 40 subtopics; Òsupercomputing and parallel comput-
ingÓ with 9 subtopics and 11 sites; and ÒsoftwareÓ with 50 subtopics.23Users search a typical, hierarchically organized directory by startingat the top of the tree and moving deeper along branches labeled (by the
directory editors) with terms that seem to match their interests.24 Thus, a21See, for example, Gerard Salton, editor, The SMART Retrieval System: Experiments in Au-tomatic Document Processing, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1971.22Three of the largest directories include the Open Directory, Yahoo!, and LookSmart.23Directory accessed on March 5, 2005.24Many directories have added the ability for users to jump directly to a subtopic within adirectory.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE325user interested in administration tools for the DNS could trace the follow-ing path in Yahoo!:DirectoryComputers and InternetCommunications andNetworkingProtocolsDNSAdministration Tools25The success of the userÕs navigation depends on the userÕs skill inidentifying appropriate paths (but backing up and trying another path is
relatively easy), on the editorsÕ skill in describing and placing the site in
the directory, and on the siteÕs accuracy in describing itself to the editors
(unless they visit and characterize each site themselves).Directories present the user with a taxonomic view of some of theWeb sites on the Internet, which can enable users to reach their goals
through successive refinement. However, if the taxonomy is poorly imple-
mented or does not roughly match the view of the user, it can be very
difficult to use. There are hundreds of directories, general and specific,
available on the Web and listed in various directories of directories.26Work is now underway by several groups (a majority with at leastloose links to each other)27 to reexamine analogies to the time-tested Òyel-low pagesÓ model for the Internet. Whereas search engines are modeled
on a Òsearch through the visible Web and see where appropriate material
can be foundÓ model (augmented, as discussed below, by paid place-
ments), a yellow pages system is one in which all of the entries are there
because their owners want them there, there is considerable content-
owner control over presentation, and although a classification system is
used to organize the information, the categories in which a listing is placed
are generally chosen by the listing (content) owner, not the site operator
or an automated process. In its paper form, that type of system has been
thoroughly demonstrated over the years and is useful precisely because
the information content is high and the amount of extraneous material
low. Since the combination of several of the factors discussed in this sec-
tion has resulted in most searches for products leading to merchants that
sell those products, and to a good deal of extraneous information as well,
a directory that is organized the way the merchants want (and pay for)
may be more efficient technically and economically. Of course, these mod-
els can apply to many types of listings, goals, and content other than com-
mercial ones.25Directory accessed on March 5, 2005.26See, for example, the directory of directories at Galileo (GeorgiaÕs Virtual Library) <http://www.usg.edu/galileo/internet/netinfo/director.html>.27For example, the work by Beijing 3721 Technology Co., Ltd. (also known as Ò3721Ó),which was recently acquired by Yahoo!Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEOne of the major differences between a traditional yellow pages andsome of these systems is that the yellow pages (and even their online ver-
sions that support broader geographical scope28) are organized around asingle hierarchical category system. That is necessitated by the organization
of the material for publication on paper. But a computer-based system can
take advantage of a multi-hierarchical environment in which, for example,
the location of an entity (at various degrees of precision) is specified in a
hierarchy different from that for content descriptors (such as category of
store), rather than having to be a superior category in the hierarchy.Because directories are typically built and maintained by humans, theycan cover only a small portion of the Web, have difficulty keeping up with
changes in locations, and are labor intensive. (However, as noted above, spe-
cialized directories that are supported by those who want to be found, such
as commercial yellow pages listings, can overcome the latter two problems.)
One way to address all of these problems is to decentralize responsibility for
maintaining the directory, just as the DNS name files are decentralized. For
example, 475 ÒguidesÓ who are selected and trained to cover a specific sub-
ject area maintain the About.com directory.29 Its 475 ÒguidesÓ are respon-sible for Òmore than 50,000 topics with over 1 million pieces of original con-
tent, which are grouped into 23 channels.Ó30 Another way, which is becomingcommon, is to combine directories with search engines, which index a much
larger portion of the Web using automated processes. Netscape began an
ambitious directory project using volunteers and called Open Directory,

which continues to this day and is incorporated into Google.7.1.7Navigation via Search Engines
Search engines rely on indices generated from Web pages collectedby software robots, called crawlers or spiders.31 These programs traversethe Web in a systematic way, depositing all collected information in a
central repository where it is automatically indexed.32 The selection andranking of Web pages to include in the response to a query are done by
programs that search through the indices, return results, and sort them
according to a generally proprietary ranking algorithm. Consequently,
basic search by search engines is often referred to as algorithmic search.
(See Box 7.2 for an expanded description of how search engines work.)28See <http://www.superpages.com>.29See <http://www.about.com>.30About.com Web site, March 5, 2005. For more information see <http://ourstory.about.com/>.31See <http://www.searchenginewatch.com> for a wealth of information about searchengines and directories.32Many search algorithms do not depend on the script or language used, so almost all theInternetÕs visible Web pages can be includedÑregardless of their language.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE327When Web site operators pay to have their sites listed in response to que-ries, the search is referred to as monetized search. The desire of Web sites
to obtain advantageous positions in the listing of responses to queries
relevant to their offerings has led to the development of specialized strat-
egies and tactics that are called search engine marketing and optimiza-
tion. Despite their best efforts, search engines cannot, for a variety of rea-
sons, reach all sites on the World Wide Web. The untouched part of the
Web is called, variously, the Òdeep,Ó the Òdark,Ó or the ÒinvisibleÓ Web.
Finally, the searcher can obtain more comprehensive results to a query by
looking at the results of searches conducted by several search engines
combined by a ÒmetasearchÓ engine. The following sections examine these
search engine topics in more detail.Algorithmic SearchBecause they are automated, search engines are the only currently avail-able navigation aids capable of finding and identifying even a moderate frac-
tion of the billions of Web pages on the public Internet. To index and retrieve
that much information from the Web, search engine developers must over-
come unique challenges in each of the three main parts that make up a search
engine: the crawler, the indexer, and the query engine. (See Box 7.2.)The principal challenges facing the crawler (robot or spider) are de-termining which Web sites to visit and how frequently to do so. Search
engines vary substantially in the number of Web sites visited, the depth of
their search, and the intervals at which they return. In general, increasing
the size of the computing facility can increase the number, the depth, and
the frequency of visits and, consequently, it is a business judgment by the
search engine operators that determines these parameters.The principal challenge facing the indexer is in determining whentwo terms are equivalent, bearing in mind singular versus plural versions,
misspellings, differing translations or transliterations, synonyms, and so
on. Moreover, these challenges are language-specific. These problems canbe addressed to some extent during the creation of an index, but are often
left to the search engine. A search engine typically allows for partial
matching to the query and returns many results. Searching for Òcook ruta-
bagaÓ may return pointers to results with those words, but also to results
containing Òcooked rutabagaÓ or Òcooking rutabaga.ÓThe major challenges facing the query engine are matching the querywords appropriately and calculating the relevance33 of each response.33Research on relevance in traditional information retrieval has identified dozens of fac-tors, such as degree of topical match, authority of the source, how current the material is,
familiarity of the terminology, ease and cost of acquiring the content, and so on. See, forexample, Linda Schamber, ÒRelevance and Information Behavior,Ó Chapter 1 in Martha E.Williams, editor, Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, Vol. 29, pp. 3-48, 1994.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEDetermining the relevance of a response to a query is a complex problem,since relevance depends on the userÕs specific needs, which may not be
clear from the words chosen for the query. (See the example of a search
for ÒParisÓ in Section 6.1.6.) Different search engines use different criteria
to calculate relevance, with examples being the location and frequency of
words matching the query terms on a Web page and the patterns and
quality of links among Web pages.Relevant results, once retrieved, can be sequenced by other factorsthat the system or the user considers appropriate. Few people will view
dozens, much less thousands, of matches to a query; typically, only the
first one or a few pages of results are viewed. Among the 1400 or so re-BOX 7.2How Search Engines Work
Search engines are technical systems comprising computer programs thatperform three interrelated functions: searching the Web to collect Web pages,indexing the Web pages found, and using the index to respond to queries.The Web search programs, called crawlers or spiders, collect Web pagesby traversing the Web, following links from site to site in a systematic way.By beginning with Web sites that are densely populated with links, a
crawler is able to spread across the most frequently accessed parts of theWeb, and then increase speed as it travels to other less frequently visitedsites. Search engines use different algorithms to determine the coverage
and depth of the pages that are visited. Some may focus more on breadth,covering only pages linked from the home page of a Web site, rather thandepth, visiting pages deeper within the Web siteÕs hierarchical structure.
Because of the constant changes of Web site content and the addition ofnew Web sites, Web crawling by search engines is never completed. Thefrequency with which Web pages are re-crawled directly affects the fresh-
ness of the results returned from a search engine query.Once the Web pages are retrieved, indexing programs create a word in-dex of the Web by extracting the words encountered on each Web page and
recording the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) and possibly additional infor-mation for each one. Indexes are then created that list the URLs of all pageson the Web for a given word. They may also record additional information
about the word such as whether it appeared in a title, anchor text, heading,or plain text; the relative size of its type; and its distance from other words.In response to queries, query engines will search the index for the querywords to find the pages where they appear. For example, if the query is forÒCSTB committees,Ó the search engine will retrieve a list of all the pages onwhich both the strings ÒCSTBÓ and ÒcommitteesÓ appear. A search may
return tens or thousands or even millions of responses, which users willtypically not examine in full. Therefore, the critical question is the order inwhich the retrieved list of pages is returned. The goal is to return the pagesSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE329spondents to a survey of search engine users in the spring of 2002, only 23percent went beyond the second page and only about 9 percent read more
than three pages.34 Thus, the matching and ranking criteria of search en-gines strongly influence the material that people actually view and use.No single set of matching and ranking criteria is likely to suit all us-ersÕ purposes. Consequently, it is in general usersÕ interest that multiplein decreasing order of relevance. The determination of relevance is bothcritical to the quality of response and very difficult to assess, because of the
large number of indexed pages and the short queries that search enginestypically receive. Each distinct search engine has developed its own pro-prietary algorithms for determining relevance.Google, currently the general-purpose search engine with the largestdatabase, is noted for its algorithm, PageRankª, which uses the link struc-ture of the Web as a key part of the relevance calculation. It assumes that
a link from page A to page B is a vote by page A for the quality of contenton page B. AÕs vote is given higher weight if the Web site of page A is alsohighly linked. The relevance ranking assigned to a page by PageRankª is
based on the intrinsic value of the page plus the endorsements from theother pages linked to it. The qualitative performance of the PageRankªalgorithm is better than keyword algorithms alone, since it makes use of
more information than just the content on the pages.1The retrieved Web pages used to create the index may also be stored, orcached, beyond the time needed to create the index. Caching of results
enables them to be returned more quickly in response to a request but alsoadds to the enormous storage capacity needed to create indexes requiredfor large-scale search engines. Estimates of the computing resources used
by one search engine to index the Web and handle 200 million queries perdayÑapproximately one-third of the total daily Web searchesÑis 54,000servers, over 100,000 processors, and 261,000 disks.2Currently operating search engines include AlltheWeb, Alta Vista,Google, Inktomi, MSN Search, and Teoma.1See Arvind Arasu, Junghoo Cho, Hector Garcia-Molina, Andreas Paepcke, and SriramRaghavan, ÒSearching the Web,Ó ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 1(1, August): 2-43,2001.2See John Markoff and G. Pascal Zachary, ÒIn Search of the Web, Google Finds Riches,ÓNew York Times, Sec. 3, p. 1, April 13, 2003; and John Markoff, ÒThe Coming Search Wars,ÓNew York Times, February 1, 2004.34See ÒiProspect Search Engine Branding Survey,Ó reported in ÒiProspect Survey Con-firms Internet Users Ignore Web Sites Without Top Search Engine Rankings,Ó iProspectpress release, November 14, 2002, available at <http://www.iprospect.com/media/press2002_11_14.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.330SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEsearch engines employing different relevance criteria be available. Themore options, the more likely it is that users will find a search engine that
consistently ranks highly the content or services they seek. Very skilled
and experienced users might even want to know the criteria by which a
search engine ranks its results, enabling them to choose the search engine
whose criteria best meets their needs. However, commercial search ser-
vices treat the details of their ranking algorithms as proprietary since they
are a primary means of the services differentiating themselves from their
competitors and of minimizing the capacity of Web site operators to
ÒgameÓ the system to achieve higher ranks.Search engines are able to return a high proportion of all the relevantWeb pages that are available for indexingÑthough often in such a large
number that they exceed the searcherÕs ability to review most of themÑ
and to give a reasonable probability of retrieving less-well-known Web
pages related to particular topics, though not necessarily in the first few
pages of results. Furthermore, since information on the Web is dynami-
cally changing, heterogeneous, and redundant, no manual system can list
and remain current with more than a small fraction of all sites. Only search
engines have the capacity to keep their indices relatively current by con-
tinually revisiting accessible sites, although (as noted above) the frequency
with which sites are visited varies among search engines and, probably
also, depends on specific site characteristics. As the Web expands, so may
the number of responses that search engines return for a query, although
the relationship is not generally proportional. Because it is likely that they
will receive large numbers of responses to a query, searchers naturally
favor search engines whose ranking of responses reliably provides close
to the top of the listing the pages that best meet their needs.Monetized SearchThe growing use of search engines offers the opportunity for infor-mation and service providers to affect the presentation of search results to
users through a variety of direct and indirect means. When viewed from
the traditional information retrieval perspective, this appears to contra-
dict a userÕs ÒrightÓ or expectation of neutrality in his or her information
sources (except when seeking information from sources with an obvious
viewpoint, such as political or commercial sources.) However, when seen
from the marketing perspective, it is an especially efficient way for pro-
viders to reach prospective users just at the time when the users have
expressed interest in what they have to offer.The search engine companies have responded to the providersÕ inter-est through a variety of advertising, Òpay for placementÓ and Òpay for
inclusionÓ opportunities. These practices as a group are often called mon-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE331etized search. Payment can result in having an advertisement placedahead or alongside of the search results for specified search terms, having
a site visited more frequently or more deeply by the crawler, having a
page assured a place in the results, or having a link placed at the top of the
list of results. (However, concerns about the latter two practicesÑpaid
inclusion and paid rankingÑhave led some search engines that offer them

either to phase them out or to consider doing so.35)The consequence of these opportunities is that the first page of resultsof a search engine query for, say, ÒFlorida holidaysÓ generally now in-
cludes not only the neutral results ranked according to the relevance algo-
rithm used by the engine, but also sponsored listings along the top or the
sides from advertisers that paid to have their listings presented whenever
the keywords ÒFloridaÓ or ÒholidayÓ or ÒFlorida holidaysÓ appeared in
the query.ProvidersÕ payments have become the major source of revenue formost search engines, which searchers use for free. (See Section 7.2.2 for a
further discussion of advertising and the search engine market.)Search Engine Marketing and OptimizationThe opportunity to pay for listings in response to certain key wordson specified search engines has led to the development of search engine
marketing. Its practitioners help operators of Web sites to decide which
key words to pay for on which search engines to attract the greatest num-
ber of prospective customers to their sites. This is very similar to the role
that advertising agencies play in helping advertisers to decide what ads
to run in which media. However, advertising on search engines has the
distinct advantage that the message is presented only to prospective cus-
tomers who have expressed an interest in a topic that may be related to
the advertisersÕ wares at the time of their interest. In many cases, the ad-
vertiser pays only if prospective customers actually click on the link that
takes them to the advertiserÕs site.Web site operators have also responded to their perceived businessneed to be ranked higher in the non-paid results of searches (e.g., florists
in the search for ÒflowersÓ) by adopting means to improve their
rankings.36 This has led to the development of search engine optimiza-tion in which the site design is optimized to include simple, common35See Stefanie Olsen, ÒSearch Engines Rethink Paid Inclusion,Ó c/net news.com, June 23,2004, available at <http://news.com.com/2100-1024-5245825.html>.36See Mylene Mangalindan, ÒPlaying the Search-Engine Game,Ó Wall Street Journal, June16, 2003, p. R1.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.332SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEterms likely to turn up in searches and to include metatags (metadata)that are invisible to users but are picked up by some search engines. Spe-
cialized firms have grown up to help companies both in marketing andoptimizing their Web sites.Other approaches are less savory. For example, ÒpagejackersÓ falsifyinformation in the meta tags on their site to emulate the appearance of
another Web site that would rank higher; ÒspamdexersÓ seek placement
under search terms that are unrelated to the content of their pages by
placing many repetitions of the unrelated terms on their site in invisible
form (e.g., white text on white background, which can nevertheless be
read by the search engine). In response to providersÕ tactics, search en-
gines eliminate from their databases those companies that they believe
are using unscrupulous methods to improve rankings.37 Not surprisingly,this has led to a continuing battle between Web site operators trying new
ways to improve their ranking and search engines introducing counter-
measures as each new tactic is discovered.The Deep, Dark, or Invisible WebAlthough they are far more comprehensive than directories, generalsearch engines still index and retrieve only a portion of the content avail-
able on the Internet. First, they do not reach every page that is visible to
them because of limits on how often they will crawl the Web, on the capa-
bilities of their crawlers, and on how much of each visited site they will
crawl. Second, a large majority of the information potentially reachable
on the Web is not visible to them. The parts that they cannot see are called
the Òdeep,Ó the Òdark,Ó or the ÒinvisibleÓ Web.38 Various estimates placethe size of the invisible Web at hundreds of times larger than the visible or
public World Wide Web.39 Web pages can be invisible to search enginesfor a variety of reasons.40A primary reason is the increasing use of databases to deliver content37See, for example, GoogleÕs guidelines at <www.google.com/webmasters/guidelines.html>.38See Chris Sherman and Gary Price, The Invisible Web, Information Today, Inc., Medford,N.J., 2001.39See Michael K. Bergman, ÒThe Deep Web: Surfacing Hidden Value,ÓAugust, Journal ofElectronic Publishing 7(1, August), 2001, available at <http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/o7-01/bergman.html>.40See Genie Tyburski and Gayle OÕConnor, ÒThe Invisible Web; Hidden Online SearchTool,Ó presentation to ABA Techshow, April 3, 2003, Chicago, available at <http://www.virtualchase.com/iweb>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE333dynamically. If material is available only in response to queries and actu-ally does not exist until a question is asked, there is no practical way for a
general search engineÕs crawler to ÒseeÓ it since those systems cannot syn-
thesize the queries that will generate the relevant material. Thus, engines41cannot crawl inside searchable databases such as library catalogs, the Tho-
mas register of manufacturing information, or indexes of journal litera-
ture. A search engine query on ÒShakespeareÓ may retrieve sites that spe-
cialize in Shakespearean memorabilia (as described in their Web pages),
sites of theaters that are currently performing Shakespearean plays, and
Shakespeare fan clubs, but usually will not retrieve catalog records for
books in libraries or for records in archives. There are Web sites that serve
as directories to many ÒinvisibleÓ resources, such as library catalogs and
databases, on the Internet.42 Moreover, specialized search engines, suchas those used by shopping comparison43 or travel reservation sites,44 aredesigned to synthesize the appropriate queries and submit them to mul-
tiple databases in order to obtain the comparison information requested
by the user. Furthermore, as noted earlier, directories can be useful in this
situation since they can manually identify or seek submission of database
sites, enabling the searcher to find a relevant database and then submit a
specific query to it.Content virtualization45 produces a considerable amount of dynamicinformation that is unavailable to Web crawlers. Google has made an at-
tempt to overcome some of the challenges of rapidly changing content
and the increasing use of ÒvirtualÓ content, particularly among large news
Web sites, by creating special arrangements with news organizations to
continually update, retrieve, and index content from a preselected list of
news Web sites.4641See Clifford A. Lynch, ÒMetadata Harvesting and the Open Archives Initiative,Ó ARLBimonthly Report 217:1-9, 2001.42One such directory is ÒThose Dark Hiding Places: The Invisible Web Revealed,Ó whichcan be found at <http://library.rider.edu/scholarly/rlackie/Invisible/Inv_Web.html>.43Such as, for example, epinions (www.epinions.com) and bizrate (www.bizrate.com).44For example, Travelocity (www.travelocity.com) and Expedia (www.expedia.com), ormetasites, such as SideStep (www.sidestep.com) and Mobissimo (www.mobissimo.com).45ÒContent virtualizationÑor content integration as some know itÑleaves data in its origi-nating system and pulls it together in real time when requested by the user.Ó Quoted from
Lowell Rapaport, ÒManage Content Virtually,Ó Transform Magazine, April 2003, available at<http://transformmag.com/shared/cp/print_article_flat.jhtml?article=/db_area/archs/2003/04/tfm0304tp_1.shtml>.46For more information about news aggregation services by Google, see <http://news.google.com/>. For other approaches to news aggregation services, see Blogdex at<http://blogdex.net/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.334SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe dark Web also encompasses the vast intranets of many corpora-tions, governments, and other organizations. Resources are not indexed if
they are behind firewalls, require payment, or are otherwise coded Òoff
limitsÓ to search engines.Progress on the dark Web problem is being made via efforts such asthe Open Archives Initiative (OAI), which enables information providers
to offer their metadata for harvesting.47 Additionally, new kinds of Webpages for which indexing is probably infeasible are emerging. Personal-
ized content such as the ÒMy Yahoo personal news pageÓ is an example of
this type of content, since it is created only when the user requests it and
is not available to others on the Web. However, it comprises a selection of
materials from public Web pages, so indexing it would add little other
than information about an individualÕs selectionsÑand that would prob-
ably be constrained by considerations of privacy. Some ephemeral con-
tent, such as Òinstant messagingÓ and Òchat,Ó is not indexed because it is
dynamic and not readily accessible to search engines unless it is archived.
Google indexes the complete Usenet archives and the archives of many
important Internet mailing lists.Another source of new and rapidly changing information on the Webis the profusion of journals in the form of Web logs, called blogs. Software
that has made it very easy for individuals to construct and modify Web
sites and the availability of services to house them have made Web pub-
lishing common. The ease of creating and changing blogs has lowered the
barriers to entry for publishing to large audiences. This has led to their
increasing number, types, and ranges of quality. They often incorporate a
large number of links to other blogs and Web sites, making them a dis-
tinctive medium that contains not only the authorsÕ contributions, but also
the authorsÕ identification of Òcommunities of interestÓ whose ideas are
germane to theirs.These new forms of content pose further requirements for search en-gines to retrieve information more frequently and also to return the wide
variety of information posted to Web logs in a useful way. Some of these
challenges are being met by specialty search engines, which go beyond
the features presented by Google. One of these is Daypop,48 which usesits own kind of link analysis to identify Web logs that are pointed to other
Web log sites from their front pages, rather than from archived or back47Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition, ÒThe Case for InstitutionalRepositories: A SPARC Position Paper,Ó available at <http://www.arl.org/sparc/IR/ir.html>.48See Greg Notess, ÒThe Blog Realm: News Source, Searching with Daypop, and ContentManagement,Ó Online 26(5), 2002. For more information about Daypop, see <http://www.daypop.com/>; see also Technorati for another search engine approach to Weblogging, at
<http://www.technorati.com/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE335pages, and allows popular commentary, or responses to original posts ona Web log, to be comparatively searched across a number of Web logs.Finally, multimedia materials are increasingly populating the Internet.They range from still photographs to full-length videos and films. These can
readily be indexed by their descriptions, but unless a human indexer pro-
vides descriptive termsÑmetadataÑa photo or song cannot yet be automati-
cally searched and indexed by its content at a commercially viable scale.The inability to search everything accessible via the Internet is notnecessarily a problem, since much of it may not be useful and there is
necessarily a cost associated with sorting through ever larger amounts of
material. However, while some of the unsearchable material may be of
little value, it is likely that some of it (say, major library catalogs or gov-
ernment databases) would be of great value, if it could be readily searched.Metasearch EnginesÒMetasearchÓ engines take the keywords entered by the user and sub-mit them to a number of independent search engines. They present the
combined results to the user. This would appear to offer the advantage of
time saving and the possibility of getting the best results from the sum of
the engines searched. However, whether those advantages are realized
depends on how the metasearch engine combines and orders the results
from several search engines, each using different relevance and ranking
criteria. Among the metasearch engines available in 200449 were Dogpile,Vivisimo, Kartoo, and Mamma.7.1.8Use of Navigation Aids
How much use is made of these aids to navigation? Complete dataare unavailable, but use of search engines (and their associated directory
services) is being measured. According to the Pew Internet & American
Life Project:50¥In total, Americans conducted 3.9 billion searches in June 2004.¥The average search engine user conducted 33 searches in June 2004.49For a listing of metasearch engines, see Chris Sherman, ÒMetacrawlers andMetasearch Engines,Ó SearchEngineWatch.com, March 15, 2004, available at <http://searchenginewatch.com/links/article.php/2156241>.50See Deborah Fallows, Lee Rainie, and Graham Mudd, ÒThe Popularity and Importanceof Search Engines,Ó data memo, Pew Internet & American Life Project, August 2004, avail-able at <http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Data_Memo_Searchengines.pdf>. The re-sults came both from a telephone survey of 1399 Internet users and from tracking of Internet
use by comScore Media Metrix.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE¥Eighty-four percent of Americans who use the Internet have usedsearch enginesÑmore than 107 million people.¥On an average day, about 38 million of the 64 million Americanswho are online use a search engine. Two-thirds of Americans who are
online say they use search engines at least twice a week.¥Using search engines is second only to using e-mail as the mostpopular Internet activity, except when major news stories are breaking,
when getting the news online surpasses using search engines.¥ÒThere is a substantial payoff as search engines improve and peoplebecome more adept at using them. Some 87% of search engine users say
they find the information they want most of the time when they use search
engines.Ó¥ÒMore than two-thirds of search engine users say they considersearch engines a fair and unbiased source of information.Ó¥Ò. . . 92% of searchers express confidence in their skills as search-ersÑover half of them say they are Ôvery confidentÕ they can accomplish
what they want when they perform an online search.Ó¥Ò. . . 44% of searchers say that all or most of the searches they con-duct are for information they absolutely need to find.Ó¥ÒA third of searchers say they couldnÕt live without Internet searchengines.Ó However, about a half say that, while they like using search
engines, they could go back to other ways of finding information.How do Internet users deploy the available aids to navigation? Dothey generally go to the Web sites they seek by entry of a domain name or
keyword or through bookmarks? Do they follow hyperlinks from Web
page to Web page? Or do they commonly make use of search engines and
directories? There is little publicly available research that addresses these
specific questions. One analysis, based on survey data from March 2003
and 1 year earlier, provides some insights.51 According to that analysis,search engines produced 13.4 percent of site referrals on the day mea-
sured, which was an increase from 7.1 percent 1 year earlier. Navigation
through entry of a known or guessed URL or use of a bookmark also
increased from 50.1 percent to 65.5 percent over the year. The decline oc-
curred in the flow along hyperlinks, which decreased from 42.6 percent to
21 percent. This survey indicates that Internet users tend to use certain
sites and services consistently, visiting them repeatedly, using their book-51The data were collected on March 6, 2003, by WebSideStoryÕs StatMarket from about 12million visitors to 125,000 sites using its proprietary analytical platform and were comparedwith figures from the previous year. Reported in Brian Morrissey, ÒSearch Guiding More
Web Activity,Ó CyberAtlas, March 13, 2003, available at <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/big_picture/traffic_patterns/article/0,1323,5931_2109221,00.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE337marks or remembered URLs. This suggests that much of their Web use isroutine: checking e-mail, visiting a few standard sites, and exchanging
instant messages with some Internet buddies. The need for search engines
or directories arises primarily when a user needs a specific piece of infor-
mation or wants a new or a replacement source of information, entertain-
ment, or other material.When a search is required, a survey of 1403 Internet users in spring200252 showed a strong user allegiance to one or a small number of navi-gation services. More than half (52 percent) generally relied on the same
search engine or directory and close to 35 percent used several inter-
changeably. Only 13 percent used different services for different kinds of
searches. With respect to the usefulness of search engines, at that time
almost half (45.9 percent) believed their searches were successful almost
always. When they were not successful, 27 percent of the users switched
to another search engine, rather than refining the search with more
termsÑonly 7.5 percent did that. One third of the users felt that their
searches were successful three-quarters of the time and 13 percent re-
ported successful searches only half the time. (Though presented differ-
ently, these figures are not inconsistent with the results of the Pew study
reported above.)Users of diverse skills and interests, located across the world, have arange of information and services literally Òat their fingertips,Ó whether at
work, at home, or on the road, that far exceeds that available even to in-
formation specialists before 1993. This is true especially for those seekingcommercial products and services. Comparable navigation tools for schol-
arly and public interest materials are generally less well developed.Conclusion: The further development of Internet navigation services,such as subject-specific directories, that enable discovery of specialized da-
tabases and similar resources not readily indexed by search engines, is de-
sirable. They can be of particular value to non-commercial groups, whose
information resources may not be able to support active marketing.Conclusion: As the material accessible through the Internet continuesits rapid increase in volume and variety and as its societal importance
grows, Internet navigation aids and services are likely to be challenged to
deliver more precise responses, in more convenient forms, to more di-
verse questions, from more users with widely varying skills.52See ÒiProspect Search Engine Branding Survey,Ó reported in ÒiProspect Survey Con-firms Internet Users Ignore Web Sites Without Top Search Engine Rankings,Ó iProspectpress release, November 14 2002, available at <http://www.iprospect.com/media/
press2002_11_14.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.338SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEProspective improvements in Internet navigation technology and pro-cesses are discussed in Section 8.1.7.2INTERNET NAVIGATIONÑINSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
In contrast to the provision of domain name services, Internet naviga-tion is not the function of a single integrated technical system. While there
is just one Domain Name System, there are many ways of navigating the
Internet, only three of which currently involve distinct technical systems
dedicated to navigationÑKEYWORDS,53 search engines, and directories.Moreover, the institutional framework of the technical systems support-
ing Internet navigation is an open market, with many independent and
competing providers offering their services. While some providers are
non-profit or governmental institutions, such as national libraries or pro-
fessional societies, the most frequently used navigation systems are pro-
vided by commercial organizations. This section concentrates on the com-
mercial market for directory and search engine services.7.2.1The Commercial Providers of Navigation Services
As noted in Section 6.2.2, the early distinctions between providers ofdirectories and providers of search enginesÑwhen each Web search site
featured either algorithmic search engine results or human-powered direc-
tory listings54Ñhave increasingly become blurred. Technology has helpedto automate some of the classification processes for the Yahoo! directory,55and most general-purpose Web search sites now feature search results from
both human-based directories and crawler-based search engines, with one
type providing the majority of search results. See Table 7.2 for a listing of
navigation services and the sources of the results they provide.The navigation services market is dynamic. The relationships shownin Table 7.2, which applied in July 2004, are continually changing. For53In June 2004, the commercial market for KEYWORDS comprised primarily AOL, Netpia,and Beijing 3721. Yahoo! purchased Beijing 3721 in 2004.54See Danny Sullivan, How Search Engines Work, October 14, 2002, available at <http://searchenginewatch.com/webmasters/article.php/2168031>.55In ÒA History of Search Engines,Ó Wes Sonnenreich explains that Òas the number of linksgrew and their pages began to receive thousands of hits a day, the team created ways tobetter organize the data. In order to aid in data retrieval, Yahoo! became a searchable direc-
tory. The search feature was a simple database search engine. Because Yahoo! entries wereentered and categorized manually, Yahoo! was not really classified as a search engine. In-stead, it was generally considered to be a searchable directory. Yahoo! has since automated
some aspects of the gathering and classification process, blurring the distinction betweenengine and directory.Ó See ÒA History of Search Engines,Ó available at <http://www.wiley.com/legacy/compbooks/sonnenreich/history.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.339TABLE 7.2Navigation Services and the Providers of Their Results
Process Used toProvider of
NavigationObtainProvider ofProvider ofDirectory and/or
ServiceMain ResultsMain ResultsPaid ResultsBackup Results
AllTheWeb (Overture-owned; SearchAllTheWebOverturen/a
Yahoo!-acquired)Alta Vista (Overture-owned;SearchAlta VistaOvertureLookSmart
Yahoo!-acquired)AOL SearchSearchGoogleGoogleOpen Directory
Ask JeevesSearchTeomaGoogleOpen Directory
GoogleSearchGoogleGoogleOpen Directory

HotBotSearchChoice of: Inktomi
Overturen/a
(Yahoo!-owned)Google, Ask JeevesLookSmartDirectoryLookSmartLookSmartZeal
LycosSearchAllTheWebOvertureOpen Directory
MSN SearchSearchMSN/SearchOverturen/a

NetscapeSearchGoogleGoogleOpen Directory
Overture (Yahoo!-owned)PaidOvertureOvertureBackup from Inktomi
Open DirectoryDirectoryOpen Directoryn/an/a

Teoma (Ask Jeeves-owned)SearchTeomaGooglen/a
Yahoo!Search/Directory
Inktomi (Yahoo!-owned)OvertureYahoo!
SOURCE: Based on SearchEngineWatch.com, 2003, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/webmasters/article.php/2167981#chart>and updated in March 2005.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.340SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEinstance, the early search engine Lycos, which began in 1994, ceased pro-viding its own search listings in April 1999 and has since used AllTheWeb
to power its Web search site. Google, which generates it own Web searchresults, also provides algorithmic search services to others such as AOL
and, until March 2004, Yahoo!, which paid Google $7.2 million in 2002 for
the search queries it handled.56Over the past 4 years from 2000 to 2004 in the United States, Googlerose from eleventh position among navigation sites with a 5.8 percent
market share in December 2000, as measured by Òaudience reach,Ó57 tofirst position with an estimated share of 34.7 percent in February 2004,
as measured by Òshare of search.Ó58 (See Figure 7.1.) The previous lead-ing Web navigation site, Yahoo!, fell from a 48 percent share to second
position with 30 percent during that time. Two of the other high-rank-
ing Web navigation sites were MSN with 15.4 percent and AOL with 15
percent of searches in February 2004. However, note that during that
period Inktomi provided search services for MSN, while Google pro-
vided search services for AOL. For international Internet users (English-
language using populations), Google had an even larger lead in Febru-
ary 2004, capturing more than 43 percent of searches to Yahoo!Õs 31
percent, MSNÕs 14 percent, and AOLÕs 7 pecent. (Since Google still pro-
vided search results to both Yahoo! and AOL in February 2004, its actual
share of searches was closer to 80 percent, both internationally and in
the United States After March 2004, without Yahoo!, its share dropped
to 50 percent.)7.2.2The Business of Internet Navigation
The primary source of income for commercial Internet navigation ser-vices, which provide access to material on the public Internet, has become56See Yahoo proxy statement filed March 2002, p. 30, available at <http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1011006/000091205702010171/a2073396zdef14a.htm>.57Nielsen NetRatings reported in Danny Sullivan, ÒNielsen NetRatings Search EngineRatings,Ó February 2003, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/reports/print.php/34701_2156451>. ÒAudience reachÓ is the percentage of U.S. home and work
Internet users estimated to have searched on each site at least once during the month througha Web browser or some other ÒonlineÓ means.58The new metric generated monthly by comScore Media Metrix, beginning in January2003, provides a better measure of market share by focusing on the number of searches thata search engine handles per month rather than the number of searchers that perform at leastone query on the Web search site. The Web search site queries are based on a panel of 1.5
million Web users located within the United States and in non-U.S. locations. The February2004 results are from a comScore Media Metrix press release on April 29, 2004, available at<http://www.comscore.com/press/default.asp>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE341selling advertising and placement on their sites.59 Consequently, as inmany broadcast media, it is the content and service providers that are
subsidizing usersÕ access to navigation services in order to present adver-
tisements to them at the time of their expressed interest in a topic. This
contrasts sharply with traditional commercial information search services,
such as Lexis, Westlaw, and Dialog, which have obtained their income
directly from their users, who pay to access the servicesÕ proprietary (but
free of marketing influence) information. Typically, those pay-for-access
companies also provide other services, such as training, documentation,
and extensive customer support, to their users.FIGURE 7.1Company share of U.S. Web searches by home and work users, Feb-
ruary 2004. SOURCE: comScore Media Metrix qSearch press release, April 28,2004, available at <http://www.comscore.com/press/default.asp>.59Commercial search engine companies are exploring possibilities beyond their own searchsites. For example, publishers such as the Washington Post have turned to Google or Over-ture to sell advertisements associated with the content that a visitor selects. See Bob Tedeschi,
ÒIf You Liked the Web Page, YouÕll Love the Ad,Ó New York Times, August 4, 2003, availableat <http://www.nytimes.com/2003/08/04/technology/04ECOM.html>. In addition,Google and others license their search engine technology for use by other Web sites and by
corporate intranets.Yahoo, 30%Google, 35%Others, 3%Ask Jeeves, 2%AOL, 15%MSN, 15%Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.342SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEThe advertising that supports search services can take several forms:banner advertisements, popup advertisements, or search-linked ads. Ban-
ners are typically displayed at the top or side of a Web page and are gen-
erally priced on a per-impression (view) basis, which means that the ad-
vertiser pays based on how many people see its advertisement, with prices
quoted in CPMs (cost per thousand impressions), as is traditional in the
advertising industry. A typical rate for a generic banner advertisement is
2 cents per impression, or $20 CPM. Banner sizes are standardized so that
sellers and buyers of advertising space can find it easy to negotiate pric-
ing and other contract terms.60 So-called ÒskyscrapersÓ are vertically ori-ented banner ads. Popup advertisements are similar to banners, except
that they pop up as separate windows. Their shape is also standardized.
(The intrusive nature of popup advertisements has led to a variety of soft-
ware productsÑseparate programs or browser featuresÑthat automati-
cally prevent them from appearing.61)Search-linked advertisements appear as the result of a search. For ex-ample, the searcher mentioned above who enters the keyword search term
ÒFlorida vacationÓ might see advertisements for Florida hotels, condo
rentals, theme parks, towns and cities, and the like. These may be dis-
played as banners, popups, sidebars, orÑas noted earlierÑpresented with
the search results themselves. Sophisticated algorithms are used by the
search services to select which advertisements will appear. These algo-
rithms take into account, among other things, the amount the advertiser is
willing to pay if the user clicks on the advertisement, the relevance of the
advertisement, and the historic success of the advertisement in generat-
ing clicks. All services place limits on the number of advertisements they
will display.Not surprisingly, search-linked advertisements are much more valu-able than generic banners. They are priced both by impression and by
click-through. Practices differ among search services, but Google displays
up to two advertisements at the top of the page (which it calls ÒPremium
SponsorshipsÓ and up to eight advertisements on the right side of the60Further information regarding these standards may be found at <http://www.iab.net/standards/guidelines.asp>.61Additionally, software known as ÒadwareÓ or ÒspywareÓ has been developed that is in-stalled on a userÕs computer and covertly gathers information about a user during navigationof the Internet and transmits such information to an individual or company. In turn, the indi-
vidual or company transmits information back to the userÕs computer to display specific ban-ner advertisements based on the userÕs navigation of the Internet. Such activity has resulted instate legislatures considering or enacting spyware regulation laws; see, for example,
 UtahSpyware Control Act (H.B. 323 2004), California 
 law (A.B. 2787 April 13, 2004; S.B. 1436 March23, 2004), and Iowa 
law (S.F. 2200 March 1, 2004), and litigation to undo such laws; see, forexample, WhenU.com, Inc. v. Utah, No. 040907578 (Utah Dist. Ct. 3d Dist. April 23, 2004).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE343page (which it calls ÒAdwords SelectÓ). Typically, these ads can appearon every page of results.At one time Google priced the top ads on a CPM basis and the sideads on a CPC (cost per click) basis. In the latter case, the advertiser pays
only when the user actually clicks on an advertisement. However, Google
has eliminated the CPM pricing, and now all its ads are priced on a CPC
basis. The ads placed at the top of the page are chosen from the side ads
on the basis of price and performance. Prices for a click-through are over
10 times as much as the price of a generic impression.62 However, somesearch engines will drop a click-through advertiser that does not produce
a sufficient number of hits.The two leading providers of search-linked advertisements (or mon-etized search) are Overture (now owned by Yahoo!) and Google, which
also distribute search-linked advertisements to other search sites. The paid
listings provided by Overture to its affiliated network of Web search sites,
including Yahoo!, MSN, Infospace, and Alta Vista, have been estimated to
have handled 46.8 percent of all U.S.-based paid searches; and the paid
listings provided by Google, appearing on the search results pages of
Google, AOL, Infospace and Ask Jeeves, accounted for 46.6 percent of all
U.S. paid searches in January 2003.63 Google provides search services toseveral hundred other partners, in the United States and abroad, although
AOL and Ask Jeeves are the biggest U.S. customers.Search-linked advertisements have been very successful. Accordingto its initial public offering (IPO) prospectus, Google had revenues of
$961.9 million in 2003 and profits of $105.6 million, but without some un-
usual provisions, its operating profit margin is 62 percent. Before its ac-
quisition by Yahoo!, Overture reported revenues of $103 million in 2000,
$288 million in 2001, and $668 million in 2002. In 2003 it claimed over
95,000 advertisers, who received over 646 million clicks in the second
quarter of 2003 for which they paid an average of 40 cents per click.64These figures dramatically illustrate that Internet navigation servicesÑ
unlike many other Internet services that were tested in the 1990sÑhave
apparently found a financial model that is capable of supporting them
and enabling their continued development. At the same time, the struggle
to capture advertising dollars has been one of the forces driving the con-
tinuing consolidation of the industry, as some of the most successful
search services have acquired their competitors in order to increase their
share of the market.62From Overture, ÒAnnual Report,Ó January 2003.63See <http://www.imediaconnection.com/content/news/050503c.asp>.64Data collected on August 16, 2002, and December 4, 2003, from <http://www.overture.com/d/USm/about/news/glance.jhtml>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.344SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACESpending on paid listings (guaranteed separate listings on the searchengine results pages) and paid inclusion (guaranteed inclusion in the regu-
lar search engine results, but ranking not assured)65Ñtwo of the threeforms of search-related marketingÑgrew by 40 times in 4 years since
2000.66 Globally such spending is expected to grow 5-fold to $7 billion ayear by 2007, from $1.4 billion in 2002. Outside the United States, 10-fold
growth to $2 billion in 2007 from about $200 million in 2003 is expected. 67The revenues from monetized search are often shared between thesite and the search service that provides the advertisements. For example,
Google currently provides algorithmic search and monetized search for
AOL and they split the revenues from the monetization. Overture pro-
vided monetized search for Yahoo! on a shared-revenue basis until its
acquisition, while Google provided algorithmic search service to Yahoo!
until March 2004 for a flat fee. Google and Overture both use an auction
model to price their search-linked advertisements: Users can specify a
price that they are willing to pay for various positions, and the highest
bidder gets the highest position in response to a specific query. For ex-
ample, a rental car agency could bid to be listed first in any search for
Òrental cars.Ó Minimum bids vary, but generally the range of bidding
starts at 5 cents a click and goes up to $100 for some mortgage-related
items, although Google caps bids at $50. The model is sufficiently popular
that, as noted earlier, a secondary market of search engine marketers/
optimizers has arisen to advise Web sites on how to optimize their bid-
ding for queries.68 The details of the auction systems differ, but the ad-vantage of auctions is that hundreds of thousands of prices can be set by
actual demand rather than having to be preset and posted.Since these auctions are subject to gaming, navigation services activelywatch for potential fraud by advertisers and monitor the content of adver-
tisers with editorial spot-checking. If they suspect cheating, the advertiser
will be removed from bidding. To become qualified bidders, advertisers65Ask Jeeves announced in June 2004 that it was phasing out its paid inclusion programbecause its algorithmic search had become sophisticated enough to find all necessary Websites and refresh them as required, making paying for inclusion unnecessary. See StefanieOlsen ÒSearch Engines Rethink Paid Inclusion,Ó c/net news.com, June 23, 2004, available at<http://news.com.com/2102-1024_3-5245825.html>.66See Wall Street Journal On-line, accessed May 5, 2004. Data from InterActive Advertis-ing Bureau, PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLP, eMarketer.67According to U.S. BancorpÕs Piper Jaffray as reported by Mylene Mangalindan, ÒPlayingthe Search-Engine Game,Ó Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2003, available at <http://www.morevisibility.com/news/wsj-playing_the_searchengine_game.html>.68See sites such as Wordtracker, at <http://www.wordtracker.com/>, and <http://www.paid-search-engine-tools.com/> for a description of their Keyword Bid Optimizer(KBO); and Traffick at <http://www.traffick.com/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE345provide information about themselves, their business, their interests, thekeywords on which they wish to bid, and how much they wish to bid.These advertiser-driven business models for navigation services contrastwith the non-commercial model of neutral information searching and navi-
gation of public and academic libraries, although they more closely resemble
the business models for newspapers and other media where advertising and
editorial matter are expected to be rigorously separated. Nevertheless, users
need to be cautious about how they treat the results of Internet searches,
especially those about subjects with commercial significance. As noted above,
the major search services currently identify the sponsored results (sponsored
links or sponsored search listings) and set them off from the direct results of
the algorithmic search, following the newspaper model. As long as the dis-
tinction is clear and users are aware of it, sponsored search should present
few problems while providing the great benefit of ÒfreeÓ search services to
the user. However, the potential for abuse exists. It would be possible, for
example, for a search service to accept payment for assured placement in the
Òtop 10Ó of what would appear to be a neutral listing. (None have been ac-
cused of doing so, but some will accept payment to ensure inclusion, but not
ranking, in the otherwise neutral listing.) Or the distinct placement and ty-
pography of the sponsored listing could be weakened to the point that a
casual user would not be aware of its difference from the algorithmic search
results. Thus far, competition among sites and third-party evaluations have
served as important countervailing forces. Should abuses grow, however,
search services could find themselves under increased public pressure for
government scrutiny or facing more disputes and criticism concerning such
activities from other commercial entities. (See the discussion in Section 8.2.1.)7.2.3The Navigation Services Market
As seen above, a large number of navigation services have enteredthe market, attempting to achieve profitability by selling advertising. Al-
though it can be very profitable, this has turned out to be a difficult and
expensive venture. Furthermore, competition among search engines has
forced them to invest in improved software and extensive computer and
storage facilities with substantial communications capacity to increase the
breadth, depth, and frequency of their coverage of the Web.ConsolidationOver the past 4 years, there has been considerable consolidation inthe search services market.69 Several large search engine service provid-69See, for example, <http://www.imediaconnection.com/content/news/050503c.asp>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.346SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEers have left the market, and others have been combined into a singlefirm. At the same time, there has been increased vertical integration as
operators of Web sites have acquired operators of search engines. In 2003,
Overture, with a primary focus on providing paid search listings, acquired
Alta Vista for $140 million and AlltheWeb, the Fast Search and Transfer
(FAST) Web search unit, for $70 million. Overture aimed to strengthen its
core business of paid search listings by eventually integrating it with its
algorithmic search and paid inclusion services.70 Also in 2003, however,the directory-based Yahoo! purchased the search engine Inktomi for $235
million, and then in July 2003, acquired Overture for $1.62 billion.71Google, while not an aggressive acquirer, went public with an IPO in 2004
that raised $1.67 billion,72 which provided it with a war chest that can beused for acquisitions. The one new player that has entered the search ser-
vices market is Microsoft, which built the staff and technology to launch
its own search service, which it is very likely to integrate into its next-
generation operating system. In February 2005, Microsoft unveiled a re-
vised MSN search that bore strong visual similarities to GoogleÕs search
interface.73Yahoo! has apparently decided to vertically integrate by buying both apaid-listing provider and a search engine. It is now able to produce by itself
the paid listings previously supplied by an independent Overture and the
algorithmic search services previously provided by Google. The net result
of this latest phase of consolidation is that there are only a few major inde-
pendent navigation services leftÑGoogle and Yahoo! are the largest.In 2004, Google, which then provided search services to both Yahoo!and AOL, actually had 80 percent share of searches. This dropped when
Yahoo! replaced Google with its own algorithmic search engine. How-
ever, whether the acquisitions result in sustained shifts in search shares
will depend on whether, for example, users of the Yahoo! search site con-
tinue to search there or instead switch to another site that uses Google.
These changes in the search services industry are likely to influence other70See Brian Morrissey, ÒOverture to Buy FAST,Ó Australia Internet.com, February 26, 2003,available at <http://www.breakfastforums.com.au/r/article/jsp/sid/12837>.71See ÒYahoo! to Acquire Overture,Ó press release, July 14, 2003, available at <http://www.corporate-ir.net/ireye/ir_site.zhtml?ticker=OVER&script=410&layout=
0&item_id=430830>; and Mylene Mangalindan, Nick Wingfield, and Robert Guth, ÒRisingClout of Google Prompts Rush by Internet Rivals to Adapt,Ó The Wall Street Journal, July 16,2003.72See Dawn Kawamoto and Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Gets to Wall StreetÑand Lives,Óc/net news.com, August 19, 2004, available at <http://news.com.com/Google+gets+to+Wall+StreetÑand+lives/2100-1038_3-5317091.html>.73See Juan Carlos Perez, ÒMicrosoft Turns Spotlight on Its Search Engine,Ó Computerworld,February 1, 2005, available at <http://www.computerworld.com/softwaretopics/software/story/0,10801,99416,00.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: CURRENT STATE347Web search sites, primarily AOL, which currently outsource both Websearch results and paid listings, to consider creating or acquiring their
own in-house services. Now that Microsoft has entered the search engine
competition, it is possible that AOL will feel compelled to do the same.InnovationIn the past, as described in Section 6.2, there has been a cycle of inno-vation, adoption, and displacement of navigation services. It began when
some new search engine or directory emerged with new technology, or a
better user interface, or both than the incumbent-favored service. The new
service attracted attention and gained market share. Then as it and the
Internet grew, its searches returned a larger number of irrelevant answers,
even though its precision may not have changed. Then yet another new
service with better technology or a better interface or both appeared. The
market tipped to the new leader and the cycle repeated. If this innovative
cycle were to continue into the future, or if more specialized navigation
services were developed and succeeded, then the current consolidation
might be only temporary, a pause until a significant new and better tech-
nology or services arose. Rapid changing of the leader is unlikely to happen under currentconditions in the navigation services industry (though the entry of
Microsoft may represent an exception). The current consolidation reflects
the increasing importance of economies of scaleÑthe fact that the consid-
erable hardware and software costs of developing and operating a search
engine are independent of the number of users, whereas revenues from
advertising are directly dependent on them. This makes it difficult for
innovative services to start small and build volume over time unless they
have a very large amount of patient investment capital. So in the future,
competition among navigation services is more likely to take the form of
rivalry among a small number of established large players rather than
competition with a large number of small newcomers.Conclusion: The Internet navigation services industry has success-fully financed the development and evolution of services that meet many
of the needs of a wide range of searchers at little or no cost to them, espe-
cially when they are seeking commercial material. At the same time, it has
provided advertisers with an efficient, cost-effective means to gain access
to potential customers at the time that they are most interested in the
advertiserÕs product or service.Conclusion: The consolidation of the Internet navigation services in-dustry could reduce the opportunity for innovative new services to enterSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.348SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe market for general Internet-wide navigation in competition with ex-isting services. However, the new services or their technology could alter-
natively be acquired by an incumbent, thus making it available to users,
or could focus on a niche that is not well served by the more general ser-
vices.So long as no single service becomes dominant, each competitor willhave continuing pressure to improve its offerings. The net effect of these
factors on innovation cannot be predicted.Conclusion: The importance of the Internet as the infrastructure link-ing a growing worldwide audience with an expanding array of resources
means that improving Internet navigation will remain a profitable goal
for commercial developers and a challenging and socially valuable objec-
tive for academic researchers.Conclusion: Since competition in the market for Internet navigationservices promotes innovation, supports consumer choice, and prevents
undue control over the location of and access to the diverse resources
available via the Internet, public policies should support the competitive
marketplace that has emerged and avoid actions that damage it.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3498Internet Navigation:Selected Prospects and Issues
In this chapter, the committee explores a number of factors that arelikely to shape the future of Internet navigation. The exposition that
follows should not be construed as a comprehensive or representativetreatment of these issues. Internet navigation encompasses a number of the
established subdisciplines of computer and information science such as in-
formation retrieval, database management, human-computer interface,
computer algorithms, information economics, and intellectual property law,
to name only some of them. The brief discussion that follows only touches
on a selected number of these subdisciplinesÑand only for those issues
that came to the attention of the committee during its deliberations.8.1TECHNOLOGICAL PROSPECTS
Despite the relative success of the current array of Internet navigationservices in satisfying their diverse and numerous users and providers, in
the future they will be faced both with pressures to improve further and
with technology-driven opportunities to do so.Those pressures and opportunities have motivated a wide range ofresearch and development activity. Part of this activity is devoted to ad-
vancing key technologies, three of which are navigation service algorithms
and operations, navigation interfaces, and navigation to audio and visual
materials. Another part is dedicated to improving navigation performance
by addressing some of the distinctive features of Internet navigation (as
noted in Section 6.1)Ñmaking use of contextual information, improving
persistence, and understanding user behavior.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.350SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACE8.1.1Navigation Service Algorithms and Operations
Efforts to improve Internet navigation services1 are being undertakenin several areas that include:¥Increasing the amount of material indexed and the frequency of indexing.2This is a topic of competitive research and development among commer-cial search services and is dependent primarily on the available comput-
ing and storage capacities. Most of the effort goes into increasing the com-
puting capabilities and storage facilities deployed. There is also a trade-off
between the size of the computational resources and the depth to which
sites are searched.¥Improving algorithms for matching requests with results.3Commercialsearch services devote substantial effort to improving these algorithms,
and there is a large and vibrant community studying them in academic
and other research institutions.4¥Delimiting and describing specific regions of search.In many cases, us-ers wish to limit the scope of their search. For example, searches may be
limited to a particular site or Uniform Resource Locator (URL), to defini-
tions, to telephone numbers, to a range of dates, to specific locations, and
to a number of other special regions. Many other categories could be used
to limit or filter results (e.g., a person, a book, an article).¥Autonomous collection of information by search agents.Softwareagents5 to automate access to information have long been predicted. Re-search efforts continue to look for ways to use agents automatically to
aggregate news and information based on a personÕs interests. Some of1For an overview of research on information retrieval that underlies much of Internet navi-gation technology, see Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, Modern InformationRetrieval, Addison-Wesley, Wokingham, U.K., 1999.2See, for example, Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, Chapter 8, ÒIndexing and Searching,Ówritten with Gonzalo Navarro, in Modern Information Retrieval, 1999.3See, for example, Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, Chapter 5, in Modern Information Re-trieval, 1999.4For example, see Michael Kanellos, ÒNext Generation Search Tools to Refine Results,ÓTechrepublic.com, August 9, 2004, available at <http://techrepublic.com.com/5100-22_11-5302095.html>. In addition, the considerable worldwide research activity is reported in con-ferences and publications sponsored by TREC (Text Retrieval Conference), which is sup-ported by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the Department of
Defense, and the Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR) of the Associationfor Computing Machinery (ACM). Information on TREC can be found at <http://trec.nist.gov>. Information on SIGIR can be found at <http://www.acm.org/sigir>.5According to the Dublin Core Metadata Glossary, ÒA computer program that carries outtasks on behalf of another entity. Frequently used to reference a program that searches theInternet for information meeting the specified requirements of an individual user.Ó The
Dublin Core Web site is at <fttp://www.purl.org/dc/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES351the more interesting recent examples look for ÒdealsÓÑon, for example,auction sites and travel sites.6¥Search specialized for non-Roman scripts and various cultures.Therehas been a considerable amount of work on commercial navigation tools,
much of it government supported, in Asia, especially Korea and China.
Although it is inspired by the need to work with distinctly different Asian
language/culture/character sets, the techniques developed may prove to
be applicable globally. The work has focused on intentionally populated
directory systems and especially KEYWORD (see Section 7.1.4) systems.7Efforts to improve the algorithms and operations of Internet naviga-tion services will continue, and are likely to increase, because of competi-
tive pressures, evolving user requirements, and technological advances.
Unlike the early days, when almost all research and even development
was done within academic settings, commercial organizations now de-
vote substantial resources to development and even research. However,
research at universities and research organizations continues to be active,
often with federal government support, and can be a source of distinctly
new approaches. Furthermore, many academics are working
collaboratively with commercial technologists, facilitating the transfer of
ideas between academia and industry.8.1.2Navigation Interfaces
Interfaces play a key role both in the creation of a query and in thedisplay of the results of that query.8 One of GoogleÕs most attractive fea-tures, which has been adopted by other search services, for many of its
general users is the simplicity of its single-line basic query interface. For
those so inclined and skilled, queries can be further specified through the
additional capabilities in ÒAdvanced Search.Ó The clarity of the structure
of GoogleÕs display of results, with a clear separation between algorith-6For flights, hotels, and rental cars, SideStep (<http://www.sidestep.com>) claims tosearch the Web for travel values, presenting them to the user side by side with Expedia orTravelocity results, allowing for comparisons. For extensive information on software agents,see the University of Maryland, Baltimore CountyÕs Agent Web, accessible at <http://
agents.umbc.edu/about.shtml>.7Two examples are (1) Netpia, a Korean Internet service that enables substitution of anative language word or phrase (a KEYWORD) for a unique URL (see <http://
e.netpia.com>) and (2) Beijing 3721 Technology Co., Ltd., which has offered Chinese lan-guage keywords since 1999 (see <http://www.3721.com/english/about.htm>).8For background on this subject, see, for example, Marti Hearst, ÒUser Interfaces and Vi-sualization,Ó Chapter 10 in Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information Retrieval, 1999.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.352SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEmic search results and those that are sponsored, has also contributed to itssuccess with many users.Further improvements in the query interface that would enable rela-tively unsophisticated users to characterize their queries more precisely
would be desirable, although to succeed they will have to remain very
easy to use.There is, as well, room for improvement in the display of query re-sults. For example, the relevance-ranked listing that most search engines
produce or the alphabetical listing that many directories provide might be
improved by displaying the relationships among the listed responses in a
more-readily grasped visual form.A substantial body of research on the display of information exists. Inthe late 1980s and early 1990s, the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
(PARC),9 in particular, developed several novel display representationsincluding cones, fish-eye views, and hyperbolic trees.10 Researchers atApple, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and elsewhere have
experimented with arranging webs of information (including search re-
sults) as three-dimensional spaces; see, for example, the (now discontin-
ued) Apple Hot Sauce project.11 Others have experimented with mappingresults on to two-dimensional spaces. See, for example, Kartoo, a
metasearch engine that displays the search term (keyword) in a map with
links to a range of related terms,12 and Grokker2 that groups and mapsthe results of a metasearch of the Web (and some sites, including
Amazon.com) by subtopics.13 The display of query results is a subset ofthe larger field of information visualization, which incorporates the vi-
sual display of data of all kinds.14 Research in that field may very welllead to new methods for visualizing query results.Still other experiments have been directed at simplifying the manage-ment of the search. Built-in search boxes, add-in tool bars, frames (in Web
pages), sidebars, and tabs are a few of the browser additions that help
users manage searches (among other things). At times, a number of com-
panies offered browser add-ons or browser companions to aid Web navi-
gation and searching by collecting and displaying commentary on the9Xerox PARC was founded in 1970. In 2002, it became incorporated as PARC, a subsidiaryof the Xerox Corporation. See <http://www.parc.com/about/factsheet.html>.10See <http://www2.parc.com/istl/projects/uir> for a description of the Palo Alto Re-search CenterÕs user interface research projects.11See <http://www.eclectica-systems.co.uk/complex/hotsauce.php>.12See <http://www.kartoo.com/>.13See <http://www.groxis.com/>.14The annual IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization is a good source of informa-tion on current research on the subject. For information about the 2004 conference, see
<http://infovis.org/infovis2004/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES353pages being viewed. Most of these applications failed as commercial prod-ucts, even though their interface ideas appeared to have merit.Microsoft is expected to incorporate an Internet search interface in itsnext-generation operating system, code-named ÒLonghorn.Ó It is antici-
pated that the search interface will be the same for searching the Internet,
the local networkÕs files, and the local computer files.15 This feature willencourage users to consider search an integral function of the operating
system, rather than a separate application available only through a
browser.Future interface designers will also continue to be faced with de-signing interfaces to fit within form factors16 ranging from small (e.g.,cell phones17 and personal digital assistants) to expansive (multiscreenwall-size displays) and with employing one or more of a variety of sen-
sory systems (auditory, visual, tactile) to communicate under diverse
circumstances.8.1.3Navigation to Audio and Visual Materials
The increase of multimedia materialsÑcontaining digital images, au-dio, or videoÑavailable via the Internet has complicated the process of
navigation by search engines whose crawlers are challenged to extract
index terms from still or moving images or from sounds. Tools to index
audio well enough to support search services exist, but generally only for
a particular input domain such as television news broadcasts or applica-
tion-specific telephone conversations. Commercial video often has closed-
captioning, obviating the need for recognition. Some technologies exist
for searching images based on colors and shapes, but they are still in a
relatively early stage of development.18 Resources that incorporate mul-15See Michael Kanellos, ÒMicrosoft Aims for Search on Its Own Terms,Ó c/netnews.com,
November 24, 2003, available at <http://news.com.com/Microsoft+aims+for+search+on+its+own+terms/2100-1008_3-5110910.html?tag=nl>. ÒMicrosoft has set a firmer date for
the release of its desktop search software, after Google launched a test version of its rivalprogram for scouring a PCÕs hard drive,Óreported in Ina Fried, ÒMicrosoft Fixes Date forDesktop Search Tool,Ó c/net news.com, October 22, 2004, available at <http://news.zdnet.com/2100-3513_22-5423080.html>.16The Òform factorÓ of a device is its physical size and shape. The form factors of cellphones, personal digital assistants, and laptop computers differ substantially, resulting in
different size displays that generally require different interface designs.17In October 2004, both Yahoo! and Google began offering search services from cell phones.Yahoo!Õs service is called Yahoo! Mobile, and GoogleÕs is Google SMS.18For background on this subject, see, for example, Christos Faloutsos, ÒMultimedia IR:Indexing and Searching,Ó Chapter 12 in Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, Modern InformationRetrieval, 1999.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.354SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEtiple media, such as electronic literature that contains text, images, anima-tion, and voice, are a particularly challenging search problem.19Full accessibility for most multimedia materials, comparable to thatfor textual materials, will require development of technologies for their
automatic indexing by search engines, which is a very difficult technol-
ogy problem. For the foreseeable future, most effective multimedia search
will depend on the use of metadata and associated text (see Section 7.1.5).
This can be done manually; can be picked up by Web crawlers from page
metatags; or can be extracted from text associated with still image, video,
or audio files. A number of navigation services using these techniques are
available on the Web to find multimedia materials.20 Among them areGoogle Images, Yahoo! Search Images, Alta Vista Photo Finder, FAST
Multimedia Search, and Lycos Pictures and Sounds.A navigation challenge common to all forms of multimedia search isstandardization and automatic capture of the metadata to be used for in-
dexing, which would improve the availability and accessibility of such
materials.21 Considerable research progress is being made in the search-ing of music by text, sound, and music notation,22 which is an active areaof academic research.23 Video metadata is being pushed by industryforces, so it is reasonably far along. The MPEG-7 standard24 for describingmultimedia content in a form that can be used by a device or a program is
highly developed, and deployment is likely to begin soon.19For background on this subject, see, for example, Elisa Bertino, Barbara Catania, andElena Ferrari, ÒMultimedia IR: Models and Languages,Ó Chapter 11 in Baeza-Yates and
Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information Retrieval, 1999. Current research activities are reported, forexample, in the Conferences on Image and Video Retrieval (CIVR), a series held since 1998.Links to the conferences can be found at <http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/
conf/civr/>.20See Danny Sullivan, ÒMultimedia Search Engines,Ó SearchEngineWatch, January 25, 2002,available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/links/article.php/2156251>.21See <http://www.chin.gc.ca/English/Standards/metadata_multimedia.html> for anoverview of the topic. Research on computer-assisted extraction of metadata from scholarlymaterial associated with images is underway in the CLiMB project at Columbia University.
See <http://www.columbia.edu/cu/cria/climb/>.22For example, look at the work presented at the 5th International Conference on MusicInformation Retrieval, available at <http://ismir2004.ismir.net/>.23One example is the work underway at Carnegie Mellon University in the infomediaproject on Òdigital video understanding,Ó which aims Òto achieve machine understanding ofvideo and film media, including all aspects of search, retrieval, visualization and summari-
zation in both contemporaneous and archival content collections.Ó See <http://www.informedia.cs.cmu.edu/>.24See <http://www.chiariglione.org/mpeg/index.htm> and also Rob Koenen, ÒFromMPEG-1 to MPEG-21: Creating an Interoperable Multimedia Infrastructure,Ó 2001, availableat <http://www.chiariglione.org/mpeg/from_mpeg-1_to_mpeg-21.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES355Query by example25 is another promising approach to multimediasearch. Given an image, it is possible in experimental systems (and in
some commercial image-processing software) to find others with similar
shapes and colors.26 However, given an image of horses, such techniquescan only find other images with the general shapes, colors, and textures in
the sample image, while missing images that have to do with horses, but
differ in those respects.Conclusion: Indexing and retrieving multimedia materials on theInternet is an extremely difficult technical problem in its full generality,
when there are few textual clues. However, for specific purposes or con-
texts, where textual descriptions are associated with the media, or where
relatively low precision can be tolerated, the existing systems can suffice.
Research prototypes and commercial offerings can be expected to con-
tinue to make slow but useful progress by focusing on specific subcases.8.1.4Making Greater Use of Contextual Information
As noted in Section 6.1.6, most current general Internet navigationservices do not remember usersÕ recent searches. In most cases, each query
is treated the same; the service collects no information about its usersÕ
interests or search goals. While this protects the searcherÕs privacy, it can
also reduce the responsiveness of the search. In contrast, some site-spe-
cific navigation services make considerable use of previous search history
to create user models and provide context for specifying searches.
Amazon.com, for example, gathers and displays a running history of whathas been seen within the current session and retains considerable infor-
mation about what has been searched for or purchased previously that it
uses to make user-specific recommendations. Theoretically, general
Internet search engines could offer similar services to improve the rank-
ing or filtering of results or to suggest additional searches.Another approach, which is less likely to raise privacy concerns,would be to have a navigation aid that captures contextual information
on the userÕs computer and uses that information to formulate context-
aware requests to an Internet navigation service.For many searches, knowing the geographical location of the userscan help in providing the desired information. But should navigation ser-
vices assume that users are seeking local or global information? At
present, the default assumption of a general Internet navigation service is25Query by example for textual queries is used in several conventional database systems.The concept was developed by IBM in 1975.26See <http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu/vision.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.356SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthat users are seeking global information. However, in theory, navigationservices could sort multiple matches by geographic location (for objects
with geographic data, such as stores, restaurants, and libraries), listing
the nearest matches first, as specialized travel reservation services already
can do for hotels around a specific place. In response to this perceived
need, both Google and Yahoo! now allow searches to be localized through
the entry of an address, a zip code, or a city name together with the sub-
ject keyword (e.g., ÒSan Francisco Italian restaurantsÓ).27 The result is alisting of locally relevant Web sites, maps, and listings from businesses in
the area. Both services also offer local businesses the opportunity to ad-
vertise in response to localized keyword queries. In addition, Google can
obtain general information about the location of a query from the Internet
Protocol (IP) address of the user, while Yahoo! could make use of its us-
ersÕ addresses, which they provide when registering for e-mail, photo ex-
change, or other Yahoo! services.The demand for geographically localized context information is likelyto grow rapidly as information appliances become smaller and more por-
table. A New Yorker searching the Web from his or her cell phone while
in Chicago is likely to want to find a restaurant in Chicago.28 A navigationtool that made that assumption might, in that situation, be appreciated.
However, although with todayÕs Internet there is no fully reliable way to
determine the location of a searcher, technical tools do exist that offer
good enough guesses to allow search engines to tune results to specific
geographic areas (through, for example, the IP address). For example, such
tools are currently being used to implement certain nationally required
censorship practices on Yahoo! and e-Bay, such as the prohibition of the
sale of Nazi memorabilia in France or of Mein Kampf29 in Germany. Googlewill recognize Canada as the source of a search dialed in from there.30 Ofcourse, when the user enters geographic information voluntarily, or the
device enters it automaticallyÑas cell phones may soon be able to doÑ27See Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Goes Local,Ó cNet news.com, March 17, 2004, available at<http://news.com.com/2100-1038-5173685.html>; and Jefferson Graham, ÒWebsites Test
Local Search Marketing,Ó USA Today, February 6, 2004, available at <http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2004-02-04-localsearch_x.htm>.28However, it is worth noting that while geographic context can increase the likelihood ofobtaining more relevant information, it is not a perfect process. In the example given, theNew Yorker might be searching for the name and phone number of a New York restaurantto provide to a Chicagoan in response to a query about recommendations for good restau-
rants in New York.29There are a number of versions of Adolf HitlerÕs Mein Kampf. One version is a translationto English by Ralph Manheim, Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, 1971.30Examples provided by an anonymous reviewer.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES357such geographic searches can be made easily. However, the automaticreporting of a userÕs location to a search engine or other Internet service
would raise significant privacy concerns.31Conclusion: The collection of some contextual information about us-ers by navigation services can be used to improve Internet navigation, but
as the data become more detailed, difficult conceptual and implementa-
tion issues should be resolved and the associated privacy concerns ad-
dressed.The increased use of contextual information is likely to include somecombination of improvements in the collection and use of such informa-
tion by the navigation services, extension of the option for users to enter
specific contextual information (e.g., location), development of context-
sensitive local aids directly under the userÕs control, and improvements in
the training and experience of users. The incorporation into queries of
information about the location of users, either automatically or voluntar-
ily, and the addition of location filters into navigation servicesÕ ranking
algorithms is already underway and is likely to expand rapidly under the
impetus of local advertising revenue.32User modelingÑthe collection, retention, and use of informationabout specific users to assist in responding to their queriesÑis an active
research area.33 Creation of user models generates privacy concerns, andthis is another area of active research.34 Those user models where theuserÕs identity is known to the organization creating the model (such as31Such systems are likely to work effectively only if the user wants to be located. The userwill have the option to disguise her location or to disable the system.32In the latter part of 2004, several major Internet navigation service providers took steps toincrease the level of personalization in their services. See Chris Sherman, ÒYahoo Introduces
Personal Search,Ó SearchEngineWatch, October 5, 2004, available at <http://searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/3417111>; Gary Price, ÒAsk Jeeves Serves It Your Way,ÓSearchEngineWatch, September 21, 2004, available at <http://searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/3410441>; and Leslie Walker and David A. Vise, ÒGoogleÕs New ToolBrings Search Home,Ó Washington Post, October 15, 2004, p. E1, available at <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A34099-2004Oct14.html>.33See Peter Brusilovsky and Carlo Tasso, ÒPreface to Special Issue, User Modeling for WebInformation Retrieval,Ó User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Personaliza-tion Research 14(2):147-157, 2004.34See Alfred Kobsa, ÒPersonalized Hypermedia and International Privacy,Ó Communica-tions of the ACM 45(5):64-67, 2002; Alfred Kobsa, ÒTailoring Privacy to UsersÕ Needs,Ó 8thInternational Conference on User Modeling, Springer-Verlag, Sonthofen, Germany, 2001, avail-able at <http://www.ics.uci.edu/~kobsa/papers/2001-UM01-kobsa.pdf>; and AlfredKobsa and Jırg Schreck, ÒPrivacy Through Pseudonymity in User-adaptive Systems,Ó ACMTransactions on Internet Technology, 2003, available at <http://www.ics.uci.edu/~kobsa/papers/2003-TOIT-kobsa.pdf>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.358SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEAmazon.com) raise the greatest privacy concerns, as discussed further inSection 8.2.2. User models that are maintained on the client-side and
where the user can maintain control over what is known about him or her
raise relatively fewer privacy concerns.8.1.5Improving Persistence
Section 6.1.7 characterizes the many reasons that resources once dis-covered at a particular location on the Internet may not be there when
subsequently sought. While this transience is not a problem for many re-
sources, it can be a difficulty for many others. For example, the references
to Web resources throughout this report provide examples of materials
that the reportÕs authors and readers would like to see persistÑbut can-
not control.The notion of ÒpersistenceÓ of materials on the Internet is related to,but not identical with, the more traditional notion of Òpreservation.Ó Gen-
erally speaking, the goal of persistence is to maintain the same material at
the same address for an indefinite period, so that once discovered there it
can always be retrieved from that location in the identical form. Preserva-
tion, however, has the goal of saving the material for future reference, but
not necessarily at the same address. In other words, to find something
that has been preserved will require at least one additional discovery
stepÑfinding the location (e.g., in an archive) at which it has been pre-
served.Persistence is most likely to be achieved through the adoption of prac-tices by Web site managers and designers that leave unchanged the URLs
of material judged valuable enough to persist and locate modified ver-
sions of those materials at new URLs. Consequently, unless there were to
be widespread adoption by Web site managers and designers of common
persistence practices, the problem of transient persistence will persist.However, there are services that provide a degree of persistence forsome materials on the World Wide Web. Google offers access to the cached
version, which is the version of a resource available at the time it was
most recently added to the index. However, there is no attempt to provide
access to earlier versions, and so persistence is very short.That leaves preservation as the most viable alternative. Web preser-vation initiatives comprise three approaches: harvesting, selection, and
deposit.3535Michael Day, ÒPreserving the Fabric of Our Lives: A Survey of Web Preservation Initia-tives,Ó Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, 7th European Conference, EDCL,Trondheim, Norway, Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2003.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES359The most far-reaching approach to preservation has been taken by theInternet Archive,36 a non-profit corporation founded and run by BrewsterKahle, which is supported by contributions from individuals, foundations,
and corporations. Rather than being concerned with the persistence of
specific material on the Internet, the Internet Archive is devoted to cap-
turing (and preserving) a sequence of snapshots of what is publicly acces-
sible on the Internet. Its goal is preserving the history both of the Internet
and of the vast range of human activities reflected in the constantly evolv-
ing materials on it. The Internet Archive, also called the ÒWayback Ma-
chine,Ó has taken and stored snapshots of materials on the Internet since
1996. In December 2003 it comprised over 11 billion Web pages and over
300 terabytes of data storage, increasing at 12 terabytes per month.37 It isoften the only way to locate digital documents that were moved to other
sites or taken offline and, therefore, is of great value to users and schol-
arsÑand to copyright holders, who can track the use of their content.At present, the Internet Archive is the only active effort in the UnitedStates to preserve and provide access to the history of a significant por-
tion of Internet materials.38 In other countries, however, the national li-braries are undertaking similar efforts.39 The International Internet Pres-ervation Consortium (IIPC) was formally chartered at the Biblioth‘que
Nationale de France with 12 participating institutions, all national librar-
ies (including the Library of Congress) and the Internet Archive.40 Its goalsare as follows:¥To achieve the collection of a rich body of Internet content fromaround the world to be preserved in a way that it can be archived,
secured and accessed over time.¥To foster the development and use of common tools, techniques andstandards that enable creation of international archives.¥To encourage and support national libraries everywhere to addressInternet archiving and preservation.During the 3 years of IIPCÕs initial agreement, membership is limited tothe charter institutions. It will open to other national libraries in 2006.36For information on the Internet Archive, see <http://www.archive.org>.37Paul Marks, ÒWay Back When,Ó New Scientist (date unknown), available at <http://www.newscientist.com/opinion/opinterview.jsp?id=ns23701>; latest information at
<http://www.waybackmachine.org>.38The Internet Archive is mirrored at the New Library of Alexandria, Egypt, and at thetime of writing it is in the process of establishing a European Internet Archive in Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.39For example, the Australian National LibraryÕs PANDORA project, which has beenarchiving Australian online publications since 1996, is described at <http://
www.nla.gov.au/initiatives/digarch.html>.40See <www.netpreserve.org> for full information on the IIPC.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.360SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEHowever, the IIPC will not serve as an operational archive. Rather, it willprovide a forum for sharing knowledge; develop and recommend stan-
dards; develop tools and techniques to acquire, archive, and provide ac-
cess to Web sites; and raise awareness of preservation issues through
meetings and publications.41In a similar vein, the Library of Congress has been leading since 2001a cooperative national digital-strategy effort, called the National Digital
Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program.42 The Library,working with government and private partners, is to Òdevelop a national
strategy to collect, archive and preserve the burgeoning amounts of digi-
tal content, especially materials that are created only in digital formats,
for current and future generations.Ó There is currently no commonly ac-
cepted way to decide which material on the Internet should be retained or
to ensure the availability of the resources or incentives needed to achieve
that goal. These are among the issues that the Library of Congress effort is
addressing.8.1.6Understanding User Behavior
User behavior in navigating through traditional information resourceshas been a subject of considerable research, but less is known about the
Internet case. If such information were available, it is likely that more
effective Internet navigation aids and services could be designed.Research on information seeking in print environments dates back toearly in the 20th century, and research on information seeking in elec-
tronic environments dates to the 1960s. Although a large body of empiri-
cal data exists, it is not clear how much of it is relevant to Internet naviga-
tion. Much of the prior research is in library (or comparable) contexts and
assumes more homogeneous content, more constrained searching goals,
and non-commercial environments. Although relatively little is known
about how people navigate the Internet generally, there is a small but
growing body of empirical research on the use of the World Wide Web.
However, research on the Web is severely restricted because search com-
panies have been unwilling to share samples of the enormous amount of
data they collect every day with researchers in academic environments.Conclusion: Basic research aimed at a better understanding of userbehavior in a variety of Internet navigation tasks using a variety of meth-
ods and services is highly desirable.41Information obtained from the IIPC Web site on September 3, 2004.42See the programÕs Web site at <http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES361However, standard methods to evaluate searching performance onthe Internet are lacking. The most advanced evaluation methods are con-
strained to text searching in bounded databases. A broader set of metrics,
measures, and test beds is needed for the Internet and digital libraries,
and their development would also be desirable.43 An array of new Na-tional Science Foundation initiatives in cyberinfrastructure may contrib-
ute to these efforts.448.2INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES
Most of the institutional issues affecting Internet navigation arise withrespect to the commercially supported navigation services, and especially
with respect to services whose results are influenced by advertiser pay-
ments. The expectation by users that they will be able to understand and
trust the results presented by navigation systems leads to efforts by gov-
ernments to impose disclosure requirements on navigation system opera-
tors, similar to the way other advertising practices are regulated in many
countries. The desire by information providers to protect their ownership
of trademarked and copyrighted material must be balanced with the needs
of other providers to incorporate some of that material in descriptions of
their own material. These issues are examined in this section.8.2.1Regulation
It is generally assumed by researchers and other observers of the in-dustry that users want access to navigation services that are neutral, or at
least services whose biases match their own.45 In either event, they areassumed to want to know enough about the criteria by which results are
returned so that they can judge if those results are trustworthy. Yet these43See Christine L. Borgman, 
Evaluation of Digital Libraries: Testbeds, Measurements, andMetrics, final report to the National Science Foundation, Fourth DELOS Workshop, Hungar-ian Academy of Sciences, Computer and Automation Research Institute (MTA SZTAKI),Budapest, Hungary, June 6-7, 2002, available at <http://www.sztaki.hu/conferences/deval/presentations/final_report.html>.44See Daniel Atkins, Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure:Report of the National Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon Panel on Cyberinfrastructure, January 2003,available at <http://www.cise.nsf.gov/sci/reports/toc.cfm/>. See also the new NSF Divi-
sion on Shared Cyberinfrastructure, whose Web site is available at <http://www.cise.nsf.gov/div/index.cfm?div=sci>, and similar programs in other directorates.45See Deborah Fallows, Lee Rainie, and Graham Mudd, ÒThe Popularity and Importanceof Search Engines,Ó data memo, Pew Internet & American Life Project, August 2004, avail-able at <http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Data_Memo_Searchengines.pdf>; 68 per-cent of respondents to the Pew/Internet survey thought that Internet search engines are a
fair and unbiased source of information, while 19 percent thought they were not.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.362SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEassumptions are not proven; more complete understanding is needed ofthe value that users place on the explicit disclosure of search and results
ranking criteria and on having a choice among navigation systems em-
ploying a range of different criteria. In addition, there is a presumed so-
cial benefit in having an information infrastructure that can be trusted. A searcherÕs need to understand the criteria for ranking the results ofa search has risen in importance now that advertising has become the
primary source of revenue for search engine companies. That need con-
flicts with the objectives of some advertisers, who would like their listings
to appear as much as possible like the high-ranking results of a neutral
search. Consequently, it is not surprising that U.S. Federal Trade Com-
mission (FTC) regulators concluded in June 2002 that some Internet search
engines46 were not adequately informing consumers when advertiserspaid for prominent placement in search results. The FTC Division of Ad-
vertising Practices sent a letter47 to major search services recommendingthat theyreview their Web sites and make any changes necessary to ensure that:¥any paid ranking search results are distinguished from non-paid re-sults with clear and conspicuous disclosures;¥the use of paid inclusion is clearly and conspicuously explained anddisclosed; and¥no affirmative statement is made that might mislead consumers as tothe basis on which a search result is generated.In addition, Òto the extent that search engine companies providesearch results to third-party Web sites, including other search engines or
guides, [the FTC is] encouraging the companies to discuss with the third-
party Web sites whether the above criteria are being met with respect to
any supplied search results that involve a payment of any kind for rank-
ing, insertion of paid results into unpaid results, or any pay-for-inclusion
program.Ó Furthermore, the FTC staff recognized Òthat search engine
companiesÕ business models vary and that there is a need for flexibility in
the manner in which paid placement and paid inclusion are clearly and
conspicuously disclosed.ÓThe FTC letter went on to say that the few studies of consumer viewson paid inclusion and paid placement that have been done indicate that
many consumers are not aware of the practice. It referred explicitly to two
studies:46Other search engines, such as Google and AltaVista, clearly designate or segregate thesponsored listings. See section 5.4.2.47Letter from FTC to Gary Ruskin, executive director of Commercial Alert, June 27, 2002,available at <http://www3.ftc.gov/os/closings/staff/commercialalertletter.htm>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES363A Consumers Union national survey found that 60% of U.S. Internet us-ers had not heard or read that certain search engines were paid fees to listsome sites more prominently than others in their search results. After
being told that some search engines take these fees, 80% said it is impor-tant (including 44% who said it is very important) for a search engine todisclose, in its search results or in an easy-to-find page on its site, that it
is being paid to list certain sites more prominently. If clearly told in thesearch results that some sites are displayed prominently because theypaid, 30% said they would be less likely to use that search engine, 10%
said more likely, and 4% said donÕt know/refused. Consumers Unionalso reported that Ògiven the complicated situation, 56% say it wouldmake no difference to them.Ó It stated that the Òcombination of usersÕ
low level of knowledge of search engine practices and their strong de-mand that search engines should come clean leaves users splinteredabout how to react.Ó48 A recent BBC-commissioned survey found that71% of U.K. users were unaware that some search engines let advertiserspay to get more prominent positions in search results.49Against this background, the FTC also issued, in September 2002, aconsumer alert, ÒBeing Frank About Search Engine Rank,Ó which advises
users to be aware that the results of their searches may be affected by
various pay-for-placement programs of Internet search engines.50Although neither of these actions constitutes an enforcement actionwith the force of law, they do alert the navigation services operators to the
interest of the FTC and the possibility that in the absence of change it
might consider more formal action.In addition, Internet advertising, whether search engine linked or not,is subject to the same types of national regulation as other advertising
with respect to fraudulent or misleading claims and so on. In the United
States, the FTC has pursued various cases on those grounds. Furthermore,
search engines typically have guidelines for the content they will provide.
In 2003, Yahoo! and Google announced that they would restrict advertise-
ments from unlicensed pharmacies in response to consumer concerns
about illegal online drug sales.51The way in which search engines provide rankings has also been thesubject of a U.S. District Court case. SearchKing, an online advertising
network, sued Google because it asserted that Google reduced the48See ÒA Matter of Trust: What Users Want from Web Sites,Ó April 16, 2002, available at<www.consumerwebwatch.com/news/report1.pdf>.49See, for example, ÒBBC Launches Its Non-Commercial Search Engine in Response toÔTaintedÕ Results,Ó May 2, 2002, available at <http://www.VentureReporter.net> (subscrip-
tion required).50Available at <http://www3.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/alerts/searchalrt.htm>.51Saul Hansell, ÒSearch Engines Limit Ads for Drugs but Ease Rules on Sex,Ó New YorkTimes, December 3, 2003.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.364SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEPageRankª of its site after SearchKing created a network of sites that hadthe effect of boosting all the membersÕ PageRanksª. By reducing
SearchKingÕs PageRankª, Google also had the countervailing effect of
reducing the PageRankª of the network members. SearchKing asserted
that GoogleÕs action harmed its business. The court, however, found that
Google had the right to adjust PageRankª value since it constituted an
opinion and was covered by First Amendment protections.52These two examples illustrate the nascent engagement of nationalregulatory agencies and legal systems with issues arising in navigation
services. As Internet navigation continues its growth as a major source of
contacts for information and service providers and as a major advertising
medium, it may be expected that the scrutiny and activity of regulatory
agencies and legal systemsÑand legislaturesÑwill increase as well.Conclusion: The behavior of commercial navigation services can havea substantial influence on the kind, quality, and appropriateness of the
information that Internet users receive. Although there is no evidence that
abuse has yet occurred, the potential for abuse is inherent in the naviga-
tion servicesÕ ability to affect usersÕ access to information for commercial
or other reasons.Recommendation: Although competition and the desire to be seen asuseful by searchers are incentives for fair and open behavior, appropriate
regulatory agencies of the U.S. federal government and of other govern-
ments should pay careful and continuing attention to the result ranking
and display practices of Internet navigation services and their advertisers
to ensure that information can flow freely and that those critical practices
are fully disclosed.Recommendation: Since competition in the market for Internet navi-gation services promotes innovation, supports consumer choice, and pre-
vents undue control over the location of and access to the diverse resources
available via the Internet, public policies should support the competitive
marketplace that has emerged and avoid actions that damage it.8.2.2Privacy
Privacy issues affect Internet navigation, in both overt and subtleways. The crux of the privacy concerns rests on the ability of Web sites
and other online resources to track their visitors and to capture data about52See ÒGoogle Wins Over SearchKing in PageRank Case,Ó Pandia Search Engine News, June2, 2003, available at <http://www.pandia.com/sw-2003/21-searchking.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES365what is being viewed, read, downloaded, or otherwise used without theconsent of users.53 As noted in the discussion of context (Section 6.1.6), themore that a system knows about a personÕs goals, intentions, and prior
activities, the greater the context that can be provided and the more tai-
lored the searching can be. The negative sides of tracking are equally sig-
nificant, however.Tracking what people read or view could violate long-established lib-erties in the United States and in many other free societies if that informa-
tion were made available, freely or under subpoena, to government agen-
cies. Lack of privacy also has a potential Òchilling effect.Ó People are less
likely to act on their freedom of speech if they feel that their queries are
being recorded and may be disclosed without their permission.Yet the Internet is the site of illegal activities, such as identity theft,illegal transactions, and non-protected speech, such as child pornogra-
phy. Law enforcement has always had means to target illegal activities
without undermining basic democratic principles and needs them on the
Internet as well. The designers of future navigation services and of the
laws that affect them will, of necessity, be trying to find a workable bal-
ance among the servicesÕ desire to use individual information to improve
service, the individualÕs right to privacy, and the governmentÕs legitimate
needs to know.54Issues of privacy are both important and complex and relate to theInternet and information technology more broadly, not only to naviga-
tion. This study could not do them justice, but there are a number of re-
ports and ongoing studies on Internet privacy.558.2.3Trademarks and Copyright
Intellectual property rights is an issue whose link to Internet naviga-tion may not be obvious. However, a number of court cases have arisen in
which the use of trademarked material in the navigation process has been
in dispute.56 Moreover, the extent to which search engines may make use53See Fallows, Rainie, and Mudd, ÒThe Popularity and Importance of Search Engines,Ó2004. According to the Pew/Internet survey, 85 percent of search engine users rate Òknow-ing that personal information will not be shared without permissionÓ as an important at-
tribute of search engines, but only 55 percent believe that they deliver.54GoogleÕs privacy policy is available at <http://www.google.com/privacy.html>;Yahoo!Õs, at <http://privacy.yahoo.com/>.55For example, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Re-search Council has an ongoing study, whose report is forthcoming in 2006, on privacy in theinformation age. For further details, see <http://www.cstb-privacy.org/>.56See Cindy Sherman, ÒSearch Engines and Legal IssuesÑOctober 23, 2002,ÓSearchEngineWatch, 2002, available at <http://www.searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/2161041>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.366SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEof copyrighted material has been and is certain to continue to be a signifi-cant issue.TrademarkAs in the DNS, the use of trademarked names is a source of conten-tion in Internet navigation. Whereas for the DNS the issue is the use of
trademarks in domain names, in navigation the issue is their use in
metatags and keywords. Unlike the DNS, for which the non-judicial Uni-
form Domain Name Dispute Resolution Process (UDRP) has been estab-
lished, most disputes in Internet navigation that are not resolved through
navigation servicesÕ own policies have found their way to the courts.
However, thus far, there have been far fewer trademark cases concerning
navigation than concerning domain names.One trademark dispute that reached the courts concerned the right touse such terms in metatags, the invisible markers of a Web site selected by
the site creator and sometimes used by search engines as keywords. Play-
boy Enterprises sued a former playmate for incorporating some of its
trademarked terms in the metatags at her site. The court, however, de-
cided in her favor on the grounds that she had a legitimate right to use
those terms in describing herself and had not done so with the intent of
attracting users seeking the Playboy site.57Another trademark dispute concerned allowing non-trademark hold-ers to bid for a trademarked term. Mark Nutritionals filed suit against
Overture (then GoTo) and other paid placement providers for auctioning
its trademarked phrase ÒBody SolutionsÓ to their competitors. As a result,
those competitors were showing up higher in searches for Òbody solu-
tionsÓ than was Mark Nutritionals, which claimed that this constituted
trademark infringement as well as unfair competition.58In a third dispute, J.K. Harris & Co. sued Taxes.com because theTaxes.com site was higher ranked in search engine results than the J.K.
Harris site for the search term ÒJ.K. Harris.Ó The suit was for trademark
infringement, unfair competition, false and misleading advertising, and
defamation. The reason for the higher ranking was that the phrase ÒJ.K.
HarrisÓ appeared frequently (75 times) on the Web page entitled ÒCom-
plaints about J.K. Harris,Ó which contained e-mails detailing the site
ownerÕs conversations with investigators about J.K. Harris. The judge57The court decision is available at <http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/data2/circs/9th/0055009p.pdf>.58See Christopher Saunders, ÒWeight Loss Company Sues Search Engines,ÓInternetnews.com, February 1, 2002, available at <http://www.internetnews.com/IAR/article.php/12_966901>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES367ruled that the site had the right to use the ÒJ.K. HarrisÓ term, but did notlike the number of times that it was used. A preliminary injunction against
Taxes.com was issued by the court but was due for reconsideration as a
result of a brief filed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation.59 Note thatthis case was against the Web site owner, not the search engine company.Presumably to avoid becoming the subject of frequent suits, Googlehas established a complaint procedure to enable companies to claim Òrea-
sonableÓ rights to their trademarked terms.60 In a prominent use of thatprocedure, eBay asked Google in August 2003 to refuse to sell ads that use
eBayÕs trademarked name, either alone or in phrases and variations, Òso
that third-party advertisers do not abuse the intellectual property of the
company.Ó eBay submitted a 13-page list of terms, such as ÒeBay sellingÓ
and ÒeBay power seller,Ó that it wanted Google to bar. eBay says that
Google has complied with its requests.61 eBayÕs trademarks can still bereferenced under fair-use provisions, which allow an advertiser to use
some one elseÕs trademarked term for description or comparison of its
productÑfor example, to sell the book eBay for Dummies.62However, in France, Google has been sued by three companies and inthree significant cases has been ordered by regional French courts to stop
selling a companyÕs trademarked terms as keywords to other companies
and to pay damages. In the first case, a regional court ordered Google to
pay 75,000 euros to two travel companies whose trademarked terms were
sold as keywords to rival companies. The court said that Google should
Òfind the means to block advertisements by third parties who have no
right to [the] trademarks.Ó In the second case, a Nanterre court told Google
to stop selling trademarked terms of the Le Meridien hotel chain as key-
words to its competitors or pay a daily fine of 150 euros.63 In the thirdcase, a Paris district court ordered Google not to sell keywords incorpo-
rating trademarks of the luxury goods firm Louis Vuitton Malletier and to
pay a fine of 200,000 euros.64In an effort to block a similar case in the United States, Google has59See Cindy Sherman, ÒSearch Engines and Legal IssuesÑOctober 23, 2002,Ó 2002, avail-able at <http://searchenginewatch.com/searchday/article.php/2161051>.60See <http://www.google.com/tm_complaint.html>.61See Brian Morrisey, ÒeBay Invokes Trademark on Google Keywords,Ó Internetnews, Au-gust 11, 2003, available at <http://www.internetnews.com/IAR/print.php/2447071>.62Marsha Collier and Roland Woerner, eBay for Dummies, 2nd edition, Hungry Mind Press,St. Paul, Minn., 2000.63See Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Loses Trademark Dispute in France,Ó c/net news.com, Janu-ary 20, 2005, available at <http://news.com.com/Google+loses+trademark+dispute+in+France/2100-1030_3-5543827.html?tag=nl>.64See Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Loses Trademark Case in France,Ó c/net news.com, February4, 2005, available at <http://news.com.com/Google+loses+trademark+case+in+France/2100-1030_3-5564118.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.368SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEasked a U.S. district court judge for a declaratory judgment on trademarkissues raised by American Blind, which sells wallpaper and window cov-
erings. The company complained that Google was selling AdWords in-
fringing its trademarks, listing over 30 terms ranging from the obvious to
more generic terms, such as ÒAmerican wallpaper discount.Ó Google
agreed to block the trademarks, but not variant terms because they were
descriptive terms that other advertisers had the right to use. In January
2004, American Blind filed a lawsuit.65 Shortly before, Google had made arequest for a judgment that AdWords do not infringe American BlindÕs
trademarks and demanded a jury trial. The outcome can be quite signifi-
cant for Google, and other advertising-dependent search engines, since it
could affect the degree of scrutiny that they would have to apply to each
keyword sale, potentially increasing costs and reducing the number of
available words.In December 2004, Google won a U.S. victory when a judge of the U.S.District Court granted GoogleÕs request to dismiss a trademark-infringe-
ment complaint from the insurance company, Geico. The judge ruled that
it is not trademark infringement to use trademarks as keywords to trigger
advertising.66CopyrightOnly a few contentious issues have arisen regarding copyright andnavigation services. One such issue involves the so-called Ònotice and take
downÓ provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA),67which requires any Internet service provider (ISP) (which would include
any search engine operator) to remove or disable access to any third-party
content that has been identified in a statutorily compliant notice provided
to the ISP by the owner, or its agent, of the copyright in such content. In
order to be statutorily compliant, a DMCA notice must (1) be signed by
someone authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the exclusive right
that is allegedly infringed; (2) identify the copyrighted work allegedly
infringed; (3) identify the allegedly infringing content or activity and pro-
vide enough information to enable the ISP to find the content; (4) provide
information that is reasonably sufficient to permit the ISP to contact the
complaining party, such as a mailing address, telephone number, or65See Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Faces Trademark Suit Over Keyword Ads,Ó c/net news.com,January 28, 2004, available at <http://news.com.com/Google+faces+trademark+suit+over+keyword+ads/2100-1024_3-5149780.html?tag=nl>.66See Stefanie Olsen, ÒGoogle Wins in Trademark Suit with Geico,Ó c/net news.com, Decem-ber 15, 2004, available at <http://news.com.com/Google+wins+in+trademark+suit+with+Geico/2100-1024_3-5491704.html?tag=nl>.67Public Law 105-304.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNET NAVIGATION: SELECTED PROSPECTS AND ISSUES369e-mail address; and (5) include a statement that the complaining party hasa good-faith belief that use of the allegedly infringing content is not au-
thorized by the copyright owner, its agent, or the law.  Back in 1996 and

1997, when the DMCA was being negotiated, hyperlinks to third-party
content were thought to be outside the scope of the notice and take down
(NTD) provisions of the DMCA, and in fact a few courts have refused to
enforce the DMCA when asserted in this context. However, the nature of
providing links, at least within the context of search engines, has changed
over the years, in that many search engines now include excerpts of the
information as part of the link, and so the applicability of the NTD provi-
sions is less clear. Accordingly, some search engine operators have taken
to complying with DMCA notices, even though they may not be techni-
cally required to do so. For example, in 2002, Google removed some 126
pages that the Church of Scientology claimed infringed its copyright. One
of the pages was the home page of an anti-Scientology site that had gained
a high ranking in searches on the term ÒscientologyÓ through the efforts
of anti-Scientology activists to build links to it. After protest, Google re-
stored that page, saying that it was Òinadvertently removed.Ó68 The caseshows the potential danger from use of the DMCA to unfairly shut down
access to Web sites. However, according to Google, the case was unusual.
It generally gets one or two DMCA complaints per week that it describes
as Òopen and shut.ÓAlthough the DMCA requires only that the complaining party attestto its good-faith belief that the content in question is infringing, the DMCA
also provides a counternotice provision that enables the provider of the
questionable content to challenge the complaining partyÕs notice and have
the information restored until the complaining party avails itself of the
federal courts and obtains injunctive relief. One of the primary purposes
of the DMCA, other than to extend the protections of the copyright laws
to digital works published over the Internet, was to remove ISPs from
being caught in between third-party providers of content and the owners
of copyrights when a fight broke out over who owned the rights to that
content. By filing a counternotice, the provider of the content is effectively
accepting the jurisdiction of a U.S. court should the original complainant
want to pursue its complaint, and so many content providers may choose
not to avail themselves of this protection. It should also be noted, how-
ever, that the DMCA does not obligate search engines to inform content
providers when their content has been removed or blocked. According to
the statement of DMCA policy on its Web site,69 however, Google will68See David F. Gallagher, ÒNew Economy; a Copyright Dispute with the Church ofScientology Is Forcing Google to Do Some Creative Linking,Ó New York Times, April 22, 2002,p. C4.69Available at <http://www.google.com/dmca.html>.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.370SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEmake a Ògood-faith attempt to contact the owner or administrator of eachaffected site so that they may make a counter notification.ÓConclusion: As with the Domain Name System, the most contentiousintellectual property issues affecting navigation services concern trade-
marks. Since there is no arbitral process, such as the UDRP, by which such
disputes could be resolved outside the courts and with worldwide effect,
it seems likely that conflicting court decisions in different jurisdictions,
worldwide, will establish the potentially conflicting rules by which navi-
gation services will have to abide. Potential rulings in some jurisdictions
could substantially reduce the ability of search engines to sell keywords
using the current automated methods with restriction of specifically trade-
marked terms only.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3719The Domain Name System andInternet NavigationAs the preceding chapters show, the relationship between Internetnavigation and the Domain Name System is complex and multi-
dimensional.The Domain Name System (DNS) was defined centrally under theleadership of a relatively small group of Internet engineers in response to
an operational need. Although its effective implementation occurred over
several years, during which relatively small changes were made as re-
quired, the basic design of the system has remained the same for two
decades. As described in Chapter 3, the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) provide technical lead-
ership and coordination for developing changes to the protocols and other
standards affecting the DNS. Changes in the root zone file are controlled
by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
and the U.S. Department of Commerce. But a mix of academic, govern-
mental, commercial, and non-profit organizations with distributed re-
sponsibilities operates and manages the domains. The DNS stands, there-
fore, as an example of a technical system that was designed centrally but
is operated by a distributed set of organizations.In contrast, Internet navigation aids and services have evolvedthrough a sequence of innovations by separate and independent individu-
als and organizations, initially primarily by academics, and more recently,
by commercial entities. Their evolution has been shaped by the response
to the cumulative knowledge obtained through publication, the responses
of the market to successive offerings, and the close study of competitiveSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.372SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEofferings. Innovation continues, although perhaps at a slower pace thanin the first few years. No central organization has affected the design or
evolution of navigation aids and services, except to the extent that widely
accepted Web protocols specify the structure of Web sites to be searched
by search robots. Internet navigation aids and services are good examples
of technologies that have developed and operated in a decentralized envi-
ronment with investors, users, and advertisersÑthat is, market forcesÑ
determining which designs are successful.Despite the differences in the way in which they developed, the rela-tionship between the DNS technical system and Internet navigation aids
and services is strong and fundamentalÑthe DNS has served as the stable
core on which the incremental evolution of the different navigation aids
and services has depended. Domain names are a key part of the Uniform
Resource Locators (URLs) that identify the Web resources found by all
Internet navigation aids and services, and when the user navigates to an
identified resource, it is the DNS that retrieves its Internet Protocol (IP)
address. However, since search engines and directories actually identify
the IP address of a server resource directly, they could simply display it as
the link to the resource without displaying its URL. That, of course, would
deprive the user of the additional information that the descriptive ele-
ments of the URL, specifically the domain name, provide about the re-
source. But it suggests that, in the absence of a functioning DNS, search
engines and directories could still allow users to navigate to many (if not
all) desired locations on the public Internet.In sum, it is the DNS and Internet navigation aids and services work-ing together that enables searchers to have successful and convenient ac-
cess to the vast realm of Web resources.The institutional frameworks of the DNS and navigation services pro-vide illuminating contrasts. The DNS is a single hierarchical technical sys-
tem whose implementation is decentralized, but which adheres to open
technical standards promulgated by an international technical commu-
nity. It is guided by the general oversight of a non-profit organization and
the stewardship of the U.S. government, and is operated by a diverse,
global collection of organizations and individuals. Except for the leasing
of domain names, its services are made available at no direct charge to
users. In contrast, Internet navigation services are provided by a large
number of autonomous organizations, both commercial and non-commer-
cial, operating proprietary or licensed technical systems, without any gen-
eral oversight of either their technology or their operations. However,
Internet navigation services are also offered at no direct charge to the us-
ers; advertisers cover much of the costs through the purchase of advertis-
ing insertions associated with search terms.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM AND INTERNET NAVIGATION373The rapid development of navigation technology in the past decadeappears to have had a significant effect on the unintended uses of the
DNS and the commercial pressures on it. In the early days of the Web,
guessing of domain names played an important role in navigation to Web
sites. As noted in Chapter 2, that led to a rapid increase in the economic
and social value of ÒgoodÓ domain names, especially those in the .comdomain, and to a correspondingly ÒhotÓ market in their sale and resale.
While such domain names remain valuable for their identifier function (in
a URL or on the side of a bus), their role in navigation has been replaced
to a significant degree by the use of search terms in search engines. Corre-
spondingly, much of the commercial concern about registering notable
domain names appears to have been transferred to the commercial busi-
ness of purchasing effective search terms on the various navigation ser-
vices. To some extent, this also appears to be shifting some of the concern
with protecting trademark rights on the Internet from domain names to
search terms.Conclusion: Both the Domain Name System and Internet navigationservices will be significant elements of the Internet for the foreseeable fu-
ture. Both will continue to evolve, as will the interrelationships between
them.Conclusion: The governance and administration of the DNS shouldnot become a vehicle for addressing political, legal, or economic issues
beyond those of the DNS itself.Conclusion: The development of Internet navigation services is likelyto continue to relieve some of the commercial pressures on the DNS as
users become increasingly comfortable with using these services as their
primary means to navigate the Internet.Conclusion: The preservation of a stable, reliable, and effective Do-main Name System will remain crucial both to effective Internet naviga-
tion and to the operation of the Internet and most of the applications that
it supports.Recommendation: The demonstrated success of the DNS and naviga-tion aids and services in meeting the basic needs of Internet users should
not be jeopardized by efforts to constrain or direct their evolution outside
of the open architecture of the Internet, or to use them to enable control of
the free flow of information across the Internet.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.377ABiographies of CommitteeMembers and Staff
ROGER LEVIEN, Chair, is the principal and founder of Strategy & Inno-vation Consulting, a personal consultancy established to provide strategy
and innovation consulting services to the senior managers of public and
private organizations. His career has focused on the integrative use of
information from social, environmental, and physical science research and
technology to analyze and inform the choices faced by public and private
institutions. Previously, he was corporate vice president for strategy and
innovation at Xerox Corporation; director of the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis in Austria; and department head and deputy
vice president with responsibility for system sciences and nonmilitary
policy research at the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, California,
and Washington, D.C. He is the author of three books: The Emerging Tech-nology (McGraw-Hill, 1972), R&D Management (Lexington, 1975), and Tak-ing Technology to Market (Crisp, 1997). He has also written chapters in Sys-tems, Experts and Computers (MIT Press, 2000) and Technology 2001 (MITPress, 1991). He was awarded the Ehrenkreuz, First Class, in Science and
Arts by the Austrian government and is a member of the Connecticut
Academy of Science and Engineering, Phi Beta Kappa, Sigma Xi, and Tau
Beta Pi. Dr. Levien received his Ph.D. (1962) and M.S. (1958) degrees in
applied mathematics (computer science) from Harvard University. He
also received his B.S. degree in engineering (highest honors) from
Swarthmore College in 1956.S. ROBERT AUSTEIN
 is a software engineer at the Internet Systems Con-
sortium, focused primarily on development and deployment of standards-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.378SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEbased Internet protocols. Prior to this, he was vice president of Engineer-ing at InterNetShare, Incorporated, architect for the Epilogue Embedded
Products Group at Integrated Systems, Inc., vice president of Engineering
at Epilogue Technology Corporation, and a member of the research staff
at MITÕs Laboratory for Computer Science. At various times he has served
as a member of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), a member of the
gTLD-MoU Policy Oversight Committee, as chair of the Internet Engi-
neering Task ForceÕs (IETFÕs) Domain Name System, DNS Operations,
IPsec Key, and Intellectual Property Rights working groups, and has
helped both to specify extensions to the DNS protocol within the IETF
and to implement various portions of the DNS on everything from main-
frames to embedded systems since 1985. He holds a B.A. in mathematics
from Wesleyan University.STANLEY M. BESEN is a vice president at Charles River Associates,Washington, D.C. Besen has served as a Brookings Economic Policy fel-
low, Office of Telecommunications Policy, Executive Office of the Presi-
dent (1971-1972); co-director, Network Inquiry Special Staff, Federal Com-
munications Commission (1978-1980); co-editor, RAND Journal ofEconomics (1985-1988); senior economist, RAND Corporation (1980-1992);and a member of Office of Technology Assessment Advisory Panels on
Communications Systems for an Information Age (1986-1988) and Intel-
lectual Property Rights in an Age of Electronics and Information (1984-
1985) and on the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on Licensing
Geographic Data and Services (2002-2004). He currently serves as a mem-
ber of the editorial board of Economics of Innovation and New Technology.Dr. Besen has taught at Rice University (1965-1980) where he was the
Allyn M. and Gladys R. Cline Professor of Economics and Finance, Co-
lumbia University (1988-1989) where he was the visiting Henley Profes-
sor of Law and Business, and the Georgetown University Law Center
(1990-1991) where he was a visiting professor of law and economics. He
holds a Ph.D. in economics from Yale University (1964). Dr. Besen has
published widely on telecommunications economics and policy, intellec-
tual property, and the economics of standards and has consulted with
many companies in the telecommunications and information industries.
He is the author of ÒThe Economics of Telecommunications StandardsÓ in
R.W. Crandall and K. Flamm (eds.), Changing the Rules: TechnologicalChange, International Competition, and Regulation in Communications (withG. Saloner); ÒChoosing How to Compete: Strategy and Tactics in Stan-
dardization,Ó Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994 (with J. Farrell); ÒIntel-lectual Property,Ó in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law,Macmillan Press, 1998; ÒAdvances in Routing Technologies and Internet
Peering Agreements,Ó American Economic Association Papers and Proceed-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A379ings,Ó 2001 (with P. Milgrom, B. Mitchell, and P. Srinagesh); and ÒVerticaland Horizontal Ownership in Cable TV: Time Warner-Turner (1996),Ó in
J.E. Kwoka and L.J. White, The Antitrust Revolution, Scott, Foresman, 1998(with E.J. Murdoch, D.P. OÕBrien, S.C. Salop, and J.R. Woodbury).CHRISTINE L. BORGMAN holds the Presidential Chair in InformationStudies at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), where she
has been a faculty member since 1983. She spent a sabbatical year (2004-
2005) at the Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, U.K. Dr.
BorgmanÕs teaching and research interests include digital libraries, infor-
mation infrastructure, scholarly communication, social studies of science,
and information technology policy. Dr. Borgman has published more than
150 articles, conference papers, reports, and books in the fields of infor-
mation studies, computer science, and communication; she has lectured
or conducted research in more than 20 countries. She is currently a co-
principal investigator for the Center for Embedded Networked Systems
(CENS) and for the Alexandria Digital Earth Prototype (ADEPT) project,
both funded by the National Science Foundation. She currently chairs Sec-
tion T (Information, Computing, and Communication) of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and is a fellow of the
AAAS. Her professional responsibilities include current membership on
the advisory board to the Electronic Privacy Information Center and on
the Association for Computing Machinery Public Policy Committee, and
prior membership on the Advisory Committee to the Computer, Informa-
tion Sciences, and Engineering Directorate of the National Science Foun-
dation (1998-2001), the Board of Directors of the Council on Library and
Information Resources (1992-2000), and the International Advisory Board
to the Soros Foundation Open Society Institute Regional Library Program
(1994-1997). She was program chair for the First Joint Conference on Digi-
tal Libraries (ACM and IEEE) in 2001 and continues to serve on program
committees for the International Conference on Asian Digital Libraries,
the Joint Conferences on Digital Libraries, and the European Conference
on Digital Libraries. Other international activities include service as a vis-
iting professor at Loughborough University, U.K. (1996-2002), a scholar-
in-residence at the Rockefeller Foundation Study and Conference Center
in Bellagio, Italy (1994), and as a Fulbright visiting professor in Budapest,
Hungary (1993). Her most recent book, From Gutenberg to the Global Infor-mation Infrastructure: Access to Information in a Networked World (MIT Press,2000), won the Best Information Science Book of the Year award from the
American Society for Information Science and Technology. She holds the
Ph.D. in communication from Stanford University, an M.L.S. from the
University of Pittsburgh, and a B.A. in mathematics from Michigan State
University.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.380SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACETIMOTHY CASEY is the executive director of the Institute for Innova-tion and Informatics at the University of Nevada, Reno as of July 1, 2005.
Casey was a partner in Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver, and JacobsonÕs Wash-
ington, D.C., and New York offices, where he was chair of the firmÕs Intel-
lectual Property and Technology Law Department. Casey has also been

an adjunct professor of law at American University, Washington College
of Law, since 2003, where he has taught advanced patent law. Casey

joined Fried Frank in 2000 after serving as chief technology counsel, se-
nior vice president, and assistant secretary for MCI since 1995. In addi-

tion to managing the worldwide technology law and intellectual property
operations of MCIÕs predecessors WorldCom and MCI Communications
Corporation, Casey played a pivotal role in the development of the U.S.
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and the European UnionÕs E-
Commerce Directive. Casey was also an invited, but unpaid, advisor to
WIPO leading up to the first WIPO process and an informal mediator
between the parties negotiating the terms of the Uniform Domain Name
Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP). He has been a UDRP panelist and has
rendered over 28 decisions. Casey was director of intellectual property

for Silicon Graphics from 1992 to 1995, divisional patent counsel for Apple
Computer from 1989 to 1992, and in private practice in California from
1986 to 1989. Casey received his J.D. from Santa Clara University School

of Law, where he was editor-in-chief of the Computer & High TechnologyLaw Journal and where he was also an adjunct professor of law. He re-
ceived his B.S. in electrical engineering from the University of Nevada,
Reno. He is admitted to the bar in California and the District of Columbia

and is registered to practice before the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.HUGH DUBBERLY is a principal in Dubberly Design Office (DDO), aSan Francisco-based consultancy that focuses on making software easier
to use through interaction design and information design. At Apple Com-
puter in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Dubberly managed cross-func-
tional design teams and later managed creative services for the entire com-
pany. While at Apple, he co-created a technology-forecast film called
ÒKnowledge NavigatorÓ that presaged the appearance of the Internet in a
portable digital device. Intrigued by what the publishing industry would
look like on the Internet, he next became director of interface design for
Times Mirror. This led him to Netscape, where he became vice president
of design and managed groups responsible for the design, engineering,
and production of NetscapeÕs Web portal. In 2000, he co-founded DDO.
In addition to his practice, Dubberly also teaches. While at Apple, he also
served at Art Center College of Design in Pasadena as the first and found-
ing chair of the computer graphics department. He has also taught classes
in the Graphic Design Department at San Jose State University, at the In-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A381stitute of Design at IIT, and in the Computer Science Department atStanford University. He graduated from Rhode Island School of Design
with a B.F.A. in graphic design and earned an M.F.A. in graphic design
from Yale University.PATRIK F•LTSTR–M is a consulting engineer in the Corporate Devel-opment section of Cisco Systems. At Cisco, F−ltstrım is involved with
many things touching applications, especially the Domain Name System,
electronic mail, and Internet telephony. Previously, F−ltstrım was a tech-
nical specialist in the Internet Strategies and Coordination group at Tele2,
systems manager at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and a
programmer in the Swedish Royal Navy as well as at Bunyip Information
Systems in Montr”al, Canada. He has been working with Unix since 1985
and has been involved in Internet-related standardization since 1989, both
in Sweden and worldwide. F−ltstrım also works with the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF), was one of two area directors of the applica-
tions area between 1998 and 2003, and is the author of several RFCs.
Among those are RFCs on how to send Apple Macintosh files with e-mail,
on the Whois++ directory service, on global indexing of textual data, on
ENUM (the Telephone Number Mapping protocol) on Uniform Resource
Names, and on Internationalized Domain Names. Since 2003 he has been
a member of the Internet Architecture Board and from September 2003
also an appointed advisor to the IT Minister of Sweden as a member of the
Swedish Government IT Policy and Strategy Group. F−ltstrım holds an
M.Sc. degree in mathematics from the University of Stockholm.PER-KRISTIAN (KRIS) HALVORSEN is vice president and director ofthe Solutions and Services Research Center (SSRC) at Hewlett-Packard
(HP). The center creates and transfers technology for HPÕs services and
solutions businesses and it houses HPÕs research initiatives for develop-
ing markets. There are six research laboratories in the United States, the
United Kingdom, and India. SSRCÕs research focus is on software and
systems that enable secure, inter- and intra-enterprise collaboration, with
a particular emphasis on trust, security, and content management. This is
complemented by a new and growing activity aimed at bringing the ben-
efits of information technology to large groups of people and enterprises
in developing countries through the discovery of new functionalities and
design. Prior to joining HP in 2000, Halvorsen was the founding director
of the Information Sciences and Technologies Laboratory at Xerox PARC.
Under his direction, the lab became a leading center for research on the
fundamental forces driving the evolution of the Web and the Internet. Dr.
Halvorsen is an inventor on more than 10 patents, and he has published
widely in the areas of linguistics, natural language processing, and knowl-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.382SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEedge management and information access. He holds a Ph.D. in theoreticallinguistics and he received his education at the University of Oslo, the
University Texas at Austin, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy. He has been a professor at the University of Texas at Austin and the
University of Oslo, and a consulting professor at Stanford University, as
well as a principal at the Center for Study of Language and Information at
Stanford. Dr. Halvorsen has been a member of the board of directors of
several technology companies (Symantec, Autodesk, Finn and FinnTech),
and a member of the National Advisory Board of the College of Com-
puter Sciences at the University of Arkansas.MARYLEE JENKINS is a partner at the law firm of Arent Fox, PLLC andheads the firmÕs New York Intellectual Property Group. Ms. Jenkins spe-
cializes in intellectual property matters involving computers and the
Internet and counsels an array of international companies on domain
name disputes and domain name strategy and enforcement and manage-
ment issues. She is the American Bar Association (ABA) Section of Intel-
lectual Property LawÕs representative to the Intellectual Property Con-
stituency of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN) and is also the SectionÕs Division Chair on Information Technol-
ogy. Ms. Jenkins has previously been a member of the SectionÕs Council
and is a former chairperson of the SectionÕs Special Committee on Trade-
marks and the Internet. Ms. Jenkins is a member of the ABA Standing
Committee on Technology and Information Systems (SCOTIS) and is a
domain name panelist to the World Intellectual Property Organization
Arbitration and Mediation Center. She is also a member of Columbia Uni-
versity School of Engineering and Applied ScienceÕs Engineering Council
and a member of John Marshall Law SchoolÕs Intellectual Property Law
Advisory Board. She writes and lectures frequently on computer- and

Internet-related intellectual property issues to legal, business, and gov-
ernmental groups at conferences worldwide. She holds a B.S. in mechani-
cal engineering from Columbia University School of Engineering and
Applied Science, a B.S. in physics from Centre College of Kentucky, and a
J.D. from New York Law School.JOHN C. KLENSIN is an independent consultant, focusing primarily onInternet standards, application protocols, and their implementations and
deployment. Formerly, he was Internet Architecture vice president at
AT&T Labs. He served as a member of the Internet Architecture Board
from 1996 to 2002 and as its chair for the last 2 of those years and, before
that, as area director for Applications of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), chair of its working group on electronic mail transport ex-
tensions, and in several other capacities. Since 2004 he has served as liai-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A383son from the IETF to the ICANN board, a position that gives him someinsight into ICANN internal processes but no obligations to, or benefits
from, ICANN itself. Prior to joining AT&T, he was distinguished engi-
neering fellow at MCI and then MCI WorldCom. Outside his corporate
commitments, he has had significant responsibility for the present gen-
eration of Internet applications standards, as well as standards work in
other areas. He served as a member of ANSIÕs Information Systems Stan-
dards Board from 1986 to 2000 and was its vice chair for 2 years. His
involvement with what is now the Internet began in 1969 and 1970, when
he participated in the working group that created the File Transfer Proto-
col (FTP) and that made the decision to include electronic mail capability
in the networkÕs design. Dr. Klensin was on the permanent research staff
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for about 25 years, partici-
pating in or directing a wide variety of projects, many of them involving
the application or development of computer networking or related tech-
nologies to applied problems including measurement of mass media use
and impact, taxation policy, automatic indexing of politically oriented
natural language texts, management of statistical databases, statistical
computing, and urban development planning. Dr. Klensin has also been
involved with international development work with a United Nations
University project on food composition data, archives of images in Islamic
architecture, and the Network Startup Resource Center. Dr. Klensin
served on the CSTB committee that produced the report The InternetÕsComing of Age. He holds a Ph.D. from MIT in computer applications anduse in the social and policy sciences.MILTON L. MUELLER is professor and director of the graduate pro-gram in telecommunications and network management, Syracuse Uni-
versity School of Information Studies. Since 1982 he has conducted re-
search on the political economy of telecommunications and information,
including topics such as monopoly and competition in communication
industries, Internet trademarks and domain names, DNS economics, ra-
dio-frequency allocation, and telecommunication industry reform in New
Zealand, China, and Hong Kong. Two recent publications of import in-
clude the book Ruling the Root: Internet Governance and the Taming ofCyberspace (MIT Press, 2002) and Universal Service: Competition, Intercon-nection, and Monopoly in the Making of the American Telephone System (MITPress, 1997). His current research focuses on Internet governance, civil
society advocacy, and the impact of digital convergence on market struc-
ture. Dr. Mueller founded and directs the Convergence Center at Syra-
cuse University. He is a founder of the Internet Governance Project, a
multi-university consortium for research and policy analysis. He partici-
pates in the WSIS-Civil SocietyÕs Internet Governance Caucus. He is onSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.384SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEthe editorial boards of the scholarly journals The Information Society, Tele-communications Policy, and Info: the Journal of Policy, Regulation and Strategyfor Telecommunications, Information and Media. Dr. Mueller received thePh.D. from the University of Pennsylvania, Annenberg School of Com-
munication, in 1989. Dr. Mueller was a founder of, and currently chairs,
ICANNÕs Noncommercial Users Constituency, a part of the policy-mak-
ing structure in ICANNÕs Generic Names Supporting Organization. As a
member of NCUC, he has shaped policy on the .org reassignment, Whois
and privacy, and other issues. He served as a Uniform Domain Name
Dispute Resolution Policy panelist for WIPO from 2000 to 2003.SHARON L. NELSON is the senior assistant attorney general serving aschief of the Consumer Protection Division of the Washington State Attor-
ney GeneralÕs office. From 2000 to 2003 she served as director of the
Shidler Center for Law, Commerce, and Technology at the University of
Washington School of Law. Previously, Ms. Nelson served two terms as
chair of the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission
(WUTC), from February 1985 to August 1997. Prior to joining the WUTC,
she taught history and anthropology in secondary schools (1969-1973),
served as staff counsel to the U.S. Senate Commerce Committee (1976-
1978), and served as legislative counsel to Consumers Union of the United
States (1978-1981). She has also been a lawyer in private practice (1982-
1983) and served as staff coordinator for the Washington State
LegislatureÕs Joint Select Committee on Telecommunications (1983-1985).
Ms. Nelson received her B.A. from Carleton College, an M.A.T. from the
University of Chicago, and a J.D. from the University of Washington. She
is the past president of the National Association of Regulatory Utility
Commissioners (1989-1990). She currently serves as chair of the Board of
Directors for Consumers Union and sits on the Board of Trustees for the
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) and the Board of Di-
rectors of the Itron Corporation, and serves as a commissioner on the Na-
tional Energy Policy Commission (funded by the William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation).CRAIG PARTRIDGE is a chief scientist at BBN Technologies (an inde-pendent high-tech research company), where he has led a variety of
Internet-related research projects. Recent major projects involved build-
ing and developing a method for tracing packet attacks across the Internet
and designing a high-performance encrypter. In the 1980s, Dr. Partridge
developed the rules for how systems use the DNS to route email. Dr. Par-
tridge is the past-chair of the Association for Computing MachineryÕs Spe-
cial Interest Group in Data Communication (one of the two major profes-
sional societies in data communications). He is the former editor-in-chiefSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A385of both ACM Computer Communication Review and IEEE Network Magazineand a consulting editor for Addison-WesleyÕs Professional Computing
Series. From 1992 to 2001, he was a consulting professor of computer sci-
ence at Stanford University and in 1991 was a research fellow at the Swed-
ish Institute of Computer Science. Partridge holds A.B., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees from Harvard University. He is a fellow of the IEEE and ACM.WILLIAM J. RADUCHEL is the chair and CEO of Ruckus Network, adigital entertainment network for students at colleges and universities
over the university network. He is a director of Chordiant Software and
In2Books and serves as chair of PanelLink Cinema Partners PLC and as
adviser to its parent company, Silicon Image. Dr. Raduchel is also an ad-
viser to Myriad International Holdings, Hyperspace Communications,
and Wild Tangent. Through 2002 he was executive vice president and
chief technology officer of AOL Time Warner, Inc., after earlier being se-
nior vice president and chief technology officer of AOL, where he also
served as a strategic adviser after leaving AOL Time Warner. In 2001 he
was named CTO of the year by Infoworld. Dr. Raduchel joined AOL inSeptember 1999 from Sun Microsystems, Inc., where he was chief strategy
officer and a member of its executive committee. In his 11 years at Sun, he
also served as chief information officer, chief financial officer, acting vice
president of human resources, and vice president of corporate planning
and development and oversaw relationships with the major Japanese part-
ners. He was recognized separately as CIO of the year and as best CFO in
the computer industry. In addition, Dr. Raduchel has held senior execu-
tive roles at Xerox Corporation and McGraw-Hill, Inc. He is a member of
the National Advisory Board for the Salvation Army (and chair of its com-
mittee on business administration), the Conference of Business Econo-

mists, and the Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy of the
National Research Council. He has several issued and pending patents.
Raduchel received his undergraduate degree in economics from Michi-
gan State University and earned his A.M. and Ph.D. degrees in economics
at Harvard University. In both the fall and spring of 2003 he was the Castle
Lecturer on computer science at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point.HAL R. VARIAN is a professor in the School of Information Manage-ment and Systems at the University of California, Berkeley. He is also a
professor in the Haas School of Business and in the Department of Eco-
nomics, and he holds the Class of 1944 Professorship. From 1995 to 2004,
Dr. Varian served as dean of the School of Information Management and
Systems. He has taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Stanford University, Oxford University, the University of Michi-
gan and other universities around the world. Dr. Varian is a fellow of theSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.386SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEGuggenheim Foundation, the Econometric Society, and the AmericanAcademy of Arts and Sciences. He has served as co-editor of the AmericanEconomic Review and is on the editorial boards of several journals. Dr.Varian has published numerous papers in economic theory, industrial
organization, financial economics, and econometrics and information eco-
nomics. He is the author of two major economics textbooks, which have
been translated into 11 languages. His recent work has been concerned
with the economics of information technology and the information
economy. He has been a consultant and advisor to several technology
companies, including IBM and Google. He is the co-author of a best-sell-
ing book on business strategy, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to theNetwork Economy, and writes a monthly column on economics for The NewYork Times. He received his S.B. degree from MIT in 1969 and his M.A.(mathematics) and Ph.D. (economics) from the University of California,
Berkeley in 1973.STAFFALAN S. INOUYE, Study Director (through December 2004),  is the Coor-
dinator of the PresidentÕs Information Technology Advisory Committee
(PITAC), a federal advisory committee that provides advice to the Presi-
dent through the National Science and Technology Council. From 1997
through 2004, Dr. Inouye served as a study director at the National Re-
search CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB). His completed CSTB studies include Beyond Productivity: Informa-tion Technology, Innovation, and Creativity; LC21: A Digital Strategy for theLibrary of Congress; The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Informa-tion Age; and Trust in Cyberspace. In addition, Dr. Inouye served as thestaff liaison on projects in other units of the National Academies, result-
ing in the completion of four reports: National Automated Highway SystemResearch Program: A Review; Advanced Engineering Environments: Achievingthe Vision, Phase 1; Advanced Engineering Environments: Design in the NewMillennium; and Review of the U.S. Department of Defense Air, Space, andSupporting Information Systems Science and Technology Program. Prior to join-ing CSTB, Inouye completed a Ph.D. from the School of Information Man-
agement and Systems at the University of California, Berkeley. In a previ-
ous life, Dr. Inouye worked in Silicon Valley as a programmer (Atari
Corporation), statistician and programmer/analyst (Verbatim Corpora-
tion), and manager of information systems (Amdahl Corporation). Dr.
Inouye also completed other degreesÑin information systems (M.S.), sys-
tems management (M.S.), business administration/finance (M.B.A.), lib-
eral studies (B.S.), and mathematics (B.A.).Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A387CHARLES N. BROWNSTEIN is the director of the Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council.
He is also the study director for the project on improving cybersecurity
research in the United States. He joined CSTB in 2004 from the Corpora-
tion for National Research Initiatives (CNRI), where since 1994 he directed
the Cross Industry Working Team and did independent research with
support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) and DARPA. His
interests are in innovation, applications, and impacts of information tech-
nology, Internet performance, and the technology-policy interface. Dr.
Brownstein joined CNRI in 1994 after a 20-year career at NSF. There he
served in positions including program director for Telecommunications
Policy and IT Applications, division director for Information Science and
Technology, deputy assistant director and assistant director of NSF for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), and director
of the Office of Planning and Assessment. At NSF, he led in the creation of
CISE, nurtured the development of NSFnet, and set strategic directions
for federal information infrastructure. He was a principal in organizing
the interagency High Performance Computing and Communications ini-
tiative, and he was executive director of the National Science Board Spe-
cial Committee on the Future of NSF. He presided over information tech-
nology and policy working groups at the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, was founding chair of the Federal Net-
working Council, and participated on the Board of Regents of the Na-
tional Library of Medicine. He organized and co-chaired the White House
National Performance Review Working Group for Reinventing Govern-
ment through Information Technology. He was a founding trustee of the
Internet Society, chaired the Association for Computing Machinery pub-
lic policy activity, USACM, and is currently a director of Fortec, which
provides the IETF Secretariat. From 1971 to 1975, Dr. Brownstein taught
at Lehigh University and was a founder of the Institute of Social and Be-
havioral Research. There he was a principal investigator on NSF and in-
dustry-supported research awards on telecommunications policy, infor-
mation industry innovation, two-way cable field experimentation, and
interactive learning technologies. He also taught research design at the
University of Michigan Inter-university Consortium for Social and Politi-
cal Research. His Ph.D. is in political science, from Florida State Univer-
sity, 1971.MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, senior program assistant, has been withthe Computer Science and Telecommunications Board since January 1999
supporting several projects. She is currently supporting studies on wire-
less technology prospects and policy options, and biometrics. She previ-Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.388SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACEously worked on the studies that produced the reports Getting Up to Speed:The Future of Supercomputing; Beyond Productivity: Information Technology,
Innovation, and Creativity; IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future; Building aWorkforce for the Information Economy; and The Digital Dilemma: IntellectualProperty in the Information Age. Ms. Huynh also assisted with the projecton exploring information technology issues for the behavioral and social
sciences (Digital Divide and Digital Democracy). She assists on other
projects as needed. Prior to coming to CSTB, Ms. Huynh worked as a
meeting assistant at Management for Meetings (April 1998 through Au-
gust 1998) and as a meeting assistant at the American Society for Civil
Engineers (September 1996 through April 1998). Ms. Huynh has a B.A.
(1990) in liberal studies with minors in sociology and psychology from
Salisbury University, Salisbury, Maryland.KRISTEN BATCH is a research associate with the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board of the National Research Council. She is cur-
rently involved with projects focusing on wireless communication tech-
nologies, biometrics, and privacy in the information age. While pursuing
an M.A. in international communications from American University, she
interned at the National Telecommunications and Information Adminis-
tration, in the Office of International Affairs, and at the Center for Strate-
gic and International Studies, in the Technology and Public Policy Pro-
gram. She also earned a B.A. from Carnegie Mellon University in literary
and cultural studies and Spanish, and received two travel grants to con-
duct independent research in Spain.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.389BSpeakers at Meetings andParticipants at Site Visits
COMMITTEE MEETINGAPRIL 9-10, 2001NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCILWASHINGTON, D.C.J. Beckwith Burr, Wilmer, Cutler and PickeringAubrey Bush, National Science Foundation
Alan Davidson, Center for Democracy and Technology
Michael Froomkin, University of Miami
M. Stuart Lynn, Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
Steven Metalitz, Copyright Coalition on Domain Names
Amy Page, U.S. Department of Commerce, Patent and Trademark Office
David Post, Temple University
Michael Roberts, formerly of the Internet Corporation for AssignedNames and NumbersKaren Rose, U.S. Department of Commerce, NationalTelecommunications and Information AdministrationShari Steele, Electronic Frontier Foundation
Robert Stoll, U.S. Department of Commerce, Patent and TrademarkOfficeGeorge Strawn, National Science Foundation
Emerson Tiller, University of Texas, AustinSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.390SIGNPOSTS IN CYBERSPACECOMMITTEE MEETINGJULY 11-13, 2001UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIASCHOOL OF INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMSBERKELEY, CALIFORNIAYves Arrouye, RealNamesKarl Auerbach, Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
Eric Brewer, University  of California, Berkeley and Inktomi

kc claffy, Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis, San DiegoSupercomputer Center, University of California, San DiegoLeslie Daigle, VeriSign, Inc. (by telephone)
Mark Handley, AT&T Center for Internet Research, InternationalComputer Science Institute, University of California, BerkeleyMarti Hearst, University of California, Berkeley
Joe Hellerstein, University of California, Berkeley
Paul Hoffman, Internet Mail Consortium
David Lawrence, Nominum
Clifford Lynch, Coalition for Networked Information
Carl Malamud, NetTopBox, Inc.
Eric Schmidt, Novell and Google, Inc.
Keith Teare, RealNames
Tan Tin Wee, National University of SingaporeCOMMITTEE MEETINGNOVEMBER 5-6, 2001NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCILWASHINGTON, D.C.Ari Balogh, VeriSign Global RegistryElana Broitman, Register.com
Brian Kahin, University of Maryland
Elliot Noss, TucowsSITE VISITNOVEMBER 7, 2001VERISIGN AND AOL TIME WARNERDULLES, VIRGINIAMichael Aisenberg, VeriSign, Inc.Ari Balogh, VeriSign, Inc.
Joe Barrett, AOL Time Warner, Inc.
Leslie Daigle, VeriSign, Inc.Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B391Matt Korn, AOL Time Warner, Inc.Mark Kosters, VeriSign, Inc.
Geraldine MacDonald, AOL Time Warner, Inc.
Michael Mealing, VeriSign, Inc.
Mark Rippe, VeriSign, Inc.
Ken Silva, VeriSign, Inc.SITE VISITNOVEMBER 12-15, 2001ICANN MEETINGMARINA DEL REY, CALIFORNIACarl Bildt, AG Global Solutions and ICANN At-large Study CommitteePaul Twomey, ICANN Government Advisory CommitteeCOMMITTEE MEETINGJANUARY 7-8, 2002BECKMAN CENTERIRVINE, CALIFORNIAM. Stuart Lynn, Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and NumbersCOMMITTEE MEETINGFEBRUARY 27-MARCH 2, 2002HARVARD UNIVERSITYJOHN F. KENNEDY SCHOOL OF GOVERNMENTCAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTSTim Berners-Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and WorldWide Web Consortium (W3C)David D. Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Francis Gurry, World Intellectual Property Organization
Richard Hill, International Telecommunication UnionSignposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet NavigationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.