DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11252Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency:Third Edition94 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38785-9 | DOI 10.17226/11252Margaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, Editors; Committeeon National Statistics; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducation; National Research CouncilPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on National StatisticsMargaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, Editors
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.www.nap.edu
PrinciplesandPracticesfor aFederal Statistical AgencyTHIRD EDITIONPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, D.C. 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils
of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the

Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were
chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. SES-0112521 between the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Science Foundation, which provides funding
from a consortium of federal agencies. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, orrecommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for

this project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09599-9 (Book)
International Standard Book Number 0-309-54895-0 (PDF)
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 2101
Constitution Avenue, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055
Call (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
This report is also available online at http://www.nap.edu.

Printed in the United States of America
Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Suggested citation: National Research Council (2005). 
Principles and Practices for a
Federal Statistical Agency, Third Edition
. Committee on National Statistics. Margaret E.
Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, Editors. Division of Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Uponthe authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has amandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical
matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.
It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal govern-ment. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs
aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizesthe superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the NationalAcademy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in theexamination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, toidentify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is
president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciencesin 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has becomethe principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the
National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public,and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointlyby both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
2004-2005WILLIAM F. EDDY (
Chair), Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon
UniversityKATHARINE ABRAHAM, Joint Program in Survey Methodology,
University of Maryland
ROBERT BELL, AT&T Research Laboratories, Florham Park, NJ
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, Department of Statistics, Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania
ROBERT M. GROVES, Survey Research Center, University of
Michigan, and Joint Program in Survey Methodology, Ann Arbor
JOHN HALTIWANGER, Department of Economics, University of
MarylandPAUL W. HOLLAND, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ
JOEL L. HOROWITZ, Department of Economics, Northwestern
UniversityDOUGLAS MASSEY, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
VIJAYAN NAIR, Department of Statistics and Department of Industrial
and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
DARYL PREGIBON, Google, Inc., New York City

KENNETH PREWITT, School of International and Public Affairs,
Columbia University
LOUISE RYAN, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University
NORA CATE SCHAEFFER, Department of Sociology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison
CONSTANCE F. CITRO, 
Director
, Committee on National Statistics
MARGARET E. MARTIN, 
ConsultantMIRON L. STRAF, 
Deputy Director
, Division of Behavioral and Social
Sciences and Education
vPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgments
viiThe Committee on National Statistics thanks the many people who
contributed their time and expertise to the preparation of this report. We
are most appreciative of their cooperation and assistance.
In expressing our gratitude to the staff, a special measure of recogni-
tion is due to Margaret Martin and Miron Straf, who were coeditors of the
original edition of this report. In preparing the second edition and this
third edition, they were joined as editors by Constance Citro. Earl Pollack

and Christine Covington Chen assisted in preparing the third edition,
which benefited from the editing of Eugenia Grohman. We also are
indebted to many others who offered valuable comments and suggestions.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with
procedures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National

Research Council (NRC). The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in
making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the

report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon-
siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript
remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We
wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: Joel
Greenhouse, Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University; Jay E.
Hakes, DirectorÕs Office, Jimmy Carter Library, Atlanta, GA; Daniel
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kasprzyk, Surveys and Information ServicesDivision, Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc., Washington, DC; and Janet Norwood, consultant, Chevy
Chase, MD.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions
or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release. The review of this report was overseen by John C. Bailar III, Depart-
ment of Health Studies (emeritus), University of Chicago. Appointed by
the NRCÕs Report Review Committee, he was responsible for making
certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in

accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were
carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests
entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Finally, we recognize the many federal agencies that support the
Committee on National Statistics directly and through a grant from the
National Science Foundation. Without their support and their commit-
ment to improving the national statistical system, the committee work that
is the basis of this report would not have been possible.
William F. Eddy, 
ChairCommittee on National Statistics
viiiACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsPreface to the Third Editionxi
Preface to the Second Editionxiii
Preface to the First Editionxv
Part I: Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency1
Part II: Commentary13
References49
AppendicesAFundamental Principles of Official Statistics of the United Nations
Statistical Commission59
BRelevant Legislation and Guidelines Adopted Since 200162
CSelected Federal Statistical World Wide Web Sites, January 200567
ixPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiPreface to the Third Edition
The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) last revised its white
paper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency in 2001.First issued in 1992 on the committeeÕs 20th anniversary, the white paper
presents and comments on three basic principles for statistical agencies to
carry out their mission effectively: relevance to policy issues, credibility
among data users, and trust among data providers. The paper also discusses

11 important practices, including a strong measure of independence, a com-
mitment to quality and professional practice, and an active program of
methodological and substantive research.
The CNSTAT report has been widely cited and used by Congress and
federal agencies. It has shaped legislation and executive actions to establish

and evaluate statistical agencies, and agencies have used it to inform newly

appointed department officials, advisory committees, and others about
what constitutes an effective and credible statistical organization.
This third edition retains the outline and content of the second edition.
The changes and additions reflect new circumstances, such as new forms of

threats to data confidentiality and individual privacy. This third edition
also adds an appendix that documents legislation and regulations adopted

since 2001 that importantly affect the operation of federal statistical
agencies.The principles and practices for a federal statistical agency articulatedhere remain guidelines, not prescriptions. We intend them to assist
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical agencies and to inform policy makers, data users, and others aboutthe characteristics of statistical agencies that enable them to serve the public
good.William F. Eddy, 
ChairCommittee on National Statistics, 2005
xiiPREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface to the Second Edition
In 1992 the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) issued a
white paper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. The
paper responded to requests from Congress and others for advice on what

constitutes an effective statistical agency. It identified and commented on
three basic principles: relevance to policy issues, credibility among data
users, and trust among data providers. It also discussed 11 important prac-

tices, including a strong measure of independence and commitment to qual-
ity and professional practice (National Research Council, 1992).
The CNSTAT report has been used by federal statistical agencies to
inform department officials, advisory committees, and others. It has also

been used in a congressionally mandated study by the U.S. General Ac-
counting Office (1995) to evaluate the performance of major statistical

agencies and in a review of the federal statistical system by a former com-
missioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (Norwood, 1995). Its principles
informed the establishment and later assessment of a new statistical agency,

the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (see National Research Council,
1997b).Eight years have passed since the white paper was first issued, and the
committee decided that it would be useful to release a revised and updated

version at this time. This second edition does not change the basic 
prin-ciples for federal statistical agencies, because the committee believes these
principles are and will continue to be important guides for effective prac-

tice. The second edition does revise and expand the discussion of some of
xiiiPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the practices
 that characterize an effective federal statistical agency and brings
the discussion up to date with references to recent reports by the committee
and others.Driving the revisions is our recognition of the need for statistical agen-
cies to keep up to date and to meet the challenges for their missions that are
posed by such technological, social, and economic changes as the wide-
spread use of the Internet for the dissemination and, increasingly, the col-

lection of data, the heightened concern about safeguards for confidential
information, and the information requirements of a changing economy.
New and revised text addresses the reasons for establishing a federal statisti-
cal agency, the necessity for and characteristics of independence of a federal
statistical agency, the need for continual development of more useful data,
for example, by integrating data from multiple sources, practices for fair

treatment of data providers, the role of the Internet in the release of data,
and the need for effective coordination and cooperation among statistical
agencies to ensure that policy makers and citizens receive data that are ac-

curate, relevant, and timely for their needs.
We stress that the principles and practices for a federal statistical agency
articulated here are guidelines, not prescriptions. We intend them to be

helpful not only to the agencies, from whose experience we benefited in
preparing this revised edition, but also to inform others of the characteris-
tics of effective statistical agencies that can serve policy makers in the execu-

tive and legislative branches, other data users, and the public well.
John E. Rolph, 
ChairCommittee on National Statistics, 2001
xivPREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface to the First Edition
From time to time the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) is
asked for advice on what constitutes an effective federal statistical agency.
For example, congressional staff raised the question as they were formulat-
ing legislation for a Bureau of Environmental Statistics, and the Secretary
of the U.S. Department of Transportation asked CNSTAT for advice on
establishing a new Bureau of Transportation Statistics, called for in the

Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991. The National
Research CouncilÕs Transportation Research Board had earlier turned to
CNSTAT for information on common elements of the organization and

responsibilities of federal statistical agencies for its study on strategic trans-portation data needs. Of interest in all of these requests are the fundamen-

tal characteristics that define a statistical agency and its operation.Statistical agencies sometimes face situations that tax acceptable stan-dards for professional behavior. Examples occur when policy makers, regu-

lators, or enforcement officials seek access to data on individual respon-

dents from a statistics agency or when policy interpretations are added to
press releases announcing statistical data. Because the federal statistical sys-
tem is highly decentralized, statistical agencies must operate under the poli-

cies and guidance of officials in many departments of government. Not all
of these officials are knowledgeable about what is generally accepted as
proper for a federal statistical agency, and issues involving judgments about

conflicting objectives also arise.In response to these situations, CNSTAT has prepared this Òwhite pa-
xvPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviPREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
perÓ on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. This paper
brings together conclusions and recommendations made in many CNSTAT
reports on specific agencies, programs, and topics, and it includes a discus-
sion of what is meant by independence of a federal statistical agency and of

the roles of research and analysis in a statistical agency. The commentary
section contains supplementary information to further explain or illustrate
the principles and practices.In preparing this paper, CNSTAT and its staff solicited suggestions
from many involved with federal statistical agencies. A draft of the paper
was discussed by the heads of some federal statistical agencies at an open

meeting of CNSTAT, and a draft was also discussed at a meeting of the
Council of Professional Associations on Federal Statistics. The committee
is grateful for the many suggestions and comments it received. When the

report is published, CNSTAT plans to seek an even wider discussion of it at
meetings of professional societies and to encourage reviews and commen-
taries. We hope that, in this way, the paper may evolve further and possibly

influence legislation, regulations, and standards affecting federal statistical
agencies.As we were completing our work on this report, the Conference of
European Statisticians drafted a resolution on the fundamental principles
of official statistics in the region of the Economic Commission for Europe
(ECE). Although the two documents were done independently, there is a

large amount of agreement between them. We note particularly the empha-
sis the ECE resolution places on the need for independence for officialstatistics agencies (United Nations Statistical Commission and Economic

Commission for Europe, 1991).
1Although focused on federal statistical agencies, many of the principlesand practices presented here also apply to statistical activities elsewhere,

particularly to those in state and local government agencies and other sta-
tistical organizations. In addition, this paper and the ECE resolution may
be useful to emerging democracies that seek to establish statistical organiza-
tions in their governments.
The principles and practices articulated here are statements of best
1The ECE resolution was later adopted by the Statistical Commission of the United
Nations (United Nations Statistical Commission, 1994).
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
xviipractice rather than legal or scientific rules. They are based on experience
rather than law or experiment. Some of them may need to be changed as
laws change, society changes, or the practice of statistics changes. They are
thus intended as guidelines, not prescriptions.
Burton H. Singer, 
ChairCommittee on National Statistics, 1992
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Part I:
Principles and Practices
for a Federal Statistical Agency
Definition of a Federal Statistical Agency
Establishment of a Federal Statistical Agency
Principles for a Federal Statistical Agency
¥Relevance to Policy Issues¥Credibility Among Data Users
¥Trust Among Data Providers
Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
¥A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
¥A Strong Position of Independence¥Continual Development of More Useful Data¥Openness About Sources and Limitations of the Data Provided
¥Wide Dissemination of Data¥Cooperation with Data Users¥Fair Treatment of Data Providers
¥Commitment to Quality and Professional Standards of Practice¥An Active Research Program
¥Professional Advancement of Staff
¥Coordination and Cooperation with Other Statistical Agencies
NOTE: Part I is a summary statement of principles and practices foran effective statistical agency. Part II, Commentary, further explains,
defines, and illustrates the topics in Part I.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
DEFINITION OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal government
whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of data
and the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.
The theory and methods of the discipline of statistics and related fields
and the practice of the profession of statistics are brought to bear on the
compilation of data, on producing information from the data, and on
disseminating that information.¥The unit is generally recognized as a distinct entity. It may be located
within either a cabinet-level department or an independent agency, or it

could itself be an independent agency.
¥Compilation may include direct collection of data from individuals,
organizations, or establishments or the acquisition of information from

administrative records. It may include assembling information from a
variety of sources, including other statistical agencies, in order to produce
an integrated data series, such as the national income and product accounts.
¥Analysis may take various forms. It includes methodological research
to improve the quality and usefulness of data. It also includes substantive
analysisÑfor example, developing indicators, modeling, making projec-

tions, interpreting data, and explaining relationships among survey statistics
at various levels of aggregation and other variables. Analysis by a statistical
agency does not advocate policies or take partisan positions.
¥Dissemination means making information available to the public, toothers in the executive branch, and to Congress.
¥Statistical purposes include description, evaluation, analysis,
inference, and research. For these purposes, a statistical agency may collect
data from individuals, establishments, or other organizations directly, or it
may obtain data from administrative records, but it does not do so for

administrative, regulatory, or law enforcement purposes. Statistical pur-
poses relate to descriptions of groups and exclude any interest in or identi-
fication of an individual person or economic unit. The data are used solely

to describe and analyze statistical patterns, trends, and relationships in-
volving groups of persons or other units.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
3ESTABLISHMENT OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Statistics that are publicly available from government agencies are
essential for a nation to advance the economic well-being and quality of life
of its people. Its public policy makers are best served by statistics that are
accurate, timely, relevant for policy decisions, and credible. Individuals and
organizations rely on high-quality, publicly available data as the basis for

informed decisions on a wide variety of issues. Even more, the operation of
a democratic system of government depends on the unhindered flow of
statistical information that citizens can use to assess government actions

and for other purposes. Federal statistical agencies are established to be a
credible source of relevant, accurate, and timely statistics in one or more
subject areas that are available to the public and policy makers.
ÒRelevant statisticsÓ are statistics that measure things that matter to
policy making and public understanding. Relevance requires concern for

providing data that help users meet their current needs for decision making

and analysis, as well as anticipating future needs. ÒAccurate statisticsÓ are
statistics that match the phenomena being measured and do so in repeated
measurements. Accuracy requires proper concern for consistency across geo-

graphic areas and across time, as well as for statistical measures of errors in
the data. ÒTimely statisticsÓ are those that are known close in time to the
phenomena they measure. Timeliness requires concern for issuing data as

frequently as is needed to reflect important changes in what is being studied,
as well as disseminating data as soon as practicable after they are collected.
ÒCredibilityÓ requires concern for both the reality and appearance of

impartiality and of independence from political control. It is the primary
mission of agencies in the federal statistical system to work to ensure the
goals of accuracy, timeliness, relevance, and credibility of statistical information.
One reason to establish a separate statistical agency is the need for data
series to be independent of control by policy makers or regulatory or

enforcement agencies. Other reasons include:
¥the need for ongoing, up-to-date information in a subject area that

extends beyond the scope of individual operating units, possibly

involving other departments or agencies;¥the need to protect the confidentiality of responses; and
¥the opportunity to achieve greater efficiency of statistical produc-

tion or higher data quality through a consolidated and more highly
professional activity.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
The principles and practices for a federal statistical agency that are
reviewed in this report pertain to individual agencies as separate organiza-
tional entities in the context of a decentralized system for providing federal
statistics. Historically, the response of the U.S. government to new infor-

mation needs has been to create separate statistical units, so that the United
States now has one of the most decentralized statistical systems of any
modern nation. This report does not comment on the advantages or dis-

advantages of the U.S. system compared with other models for organizing
government statistics. It discusses the need for federal statistical agencies to
coordinate and cooperate with other agencies on a range of activities,

describes the coordinating role of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), and reviews some mechanisms for interagency collaboration.
PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Principle 1: Relevance to Policy Issues
A federal statistical agency must be in a position to provide
information relevant to issues of public policy.
A statistical agency must be knowledgeable about the issues and
requirements of public policy and federal programs and able to provide
objective information that is relevant to policy and program needs. In
establishing priorities for statistical programs for this purpose, a statistical
agency must work closely with the users of such information in the execu-

tive branch, Congress, and interested nongovernmental groups.
Often, the provision of statistics concerning a particular subject area is
itself a public policy, with the goal of serving a broad range of information

needs of private- and public-sector users as well as the public. To establish
priorities for such statistics, a statistical agency must maintain contact witha broad spectrum of users in the business sector, academia, state and local

governments, and elsewhere.
Principle 2: Credibility Among Data Users
A federal statistical agency must have credibility based on a
relationship of mutual respect and trust with those who use its
data and information.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
5It is essential that a statistical agency strive to maintain credibility for
itself and for its data. Few data users are in a position to verify the com-
pleteness and accuracy of statistical information; they must rely on an
agencyÕs reputation as a credible source of accurate and useful statistics.
To have credibility, an agency must be and must be perceived to be free
of political interference and policy advocacy. Also important for credibility
is that an agency follow such practices as wide dissemination of data, open-

ness about the data provided, commitment to quality and professional
practice, and fair treatment of data providers.
Principle 3: Trust Among Data Providers
A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutual
respect and trust with respondents who provide data and with all
data subjects whose information it obtains.Data providers must be able to rely on the word of a statistical agency
when they are asked to provide information about themselves. An agency
earns the trust of its data providers by ensuring appropriate confidentiality

of responses. Maintaining confidentiality, in particular, precludes the use of
individually identifiable information for any administrative, regulatory, or
law enforcement purpose.Trust of respondents is achieved by respecting their privacy. Such
respect requires that an agency minimize the time and effort of respondents
to provide information and fairly inform respondents of the intended uses

of their information. Trust of respondents is also achieved by successfully
conveying to them the relevance of the data being collected for important
public purposes. Respondents must be convinced not only that the data

they provide will be kept confidential, but also that these data are intended
for effective, beneficial public use.
PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
The effective operation of a federal statistical agency must begin with
two related elements: a clearly defined and well-accepted mission together
with a strong position of independence. With these prerequisites, effective
operation involves a wide range of practices: continual development of more

useful data, openness about sources and limitations of the data provided,
wide dissemination of data, cooperation with data users, fair treatment of
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
data providers, commitment to quality and professional standards of prac-
tice, an active research program, professional advancement of staff, and
coordination and cooperation with other statistical agencies.
Practice 1: A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
An agencyÕs mission should include responsibility for all elements of
its programs for providing statistical informationÑdetermining sources of

data, measurement methods, efficient methods of data collection and
processing, and appropriate methods of analysisÑand ensuring the public

availability not only of the data, but also of documentation of the methods
used to obtain the data and their quality. The mission should include the
responsibility for assessing information needs and priorities and waysto meet those needs, which could include the establishment of a data col-lection program or the modification or discontinuance of an existing
program.Practice 2: A Strong Position of Independence
A widely acknowledged position of independence is necessary for a
statistical agency to have credibility and to carry out its function to provide

an unhindered flow of useful, high-quality information for the public,

decision makers, analysts, and program planners inside and outside govern-
ment. Without the credibility that comes from a strong degree of indepen-
dence, users may lose trust in the accuracy and objectivity of the agencyÕs

data, and data providers may become less willing to cooperate with agency
requests.In essence, a statistical agency must be distinct from those parts of the
department carrying out law enforcement and policy-making activities. It

must be impartial and avoid even the appearance that its collection, analysis,
and reporting processes might be manipulated for political purposes or that

individually identifiable data might be turned over for administrative, regu-
latory, or law enforcement purposes.
The circumstances of different agencies may govern the form that
independence takes. In some cases, the legislation that establishes the agency

may specify that the agency head be professionally qualified, be appointed
by the president and confirmed by the Senate, serve for a specific term not
coincident with that of the administration, and have direct access to the
secretary of the department in which the agency is located. Legislation may
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
7also specify that the statistical agency have its own appropriation and
budget. These organizational requirements allow a statistical agency to
achieve a strong position of independence and credibility, but they are
neither necessary nor sufficient.
Other characteristics related to independence are that the statistical
agency have:
¥authority for professional decisions over the scope, content, and
frequency of data compiled, analyzed, or published. Most statistical agencies
have such broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, departmental

requirements, OMB review, and congressional mandates.
¥authority for selection and promotion of professional, technical, and
operational staff.
¥recognition by policy officials outside the statistical agency of the
agencyÕs authority to release statistical information without prior clearance.
¥authority to ensure that information technology systems for data
processing and analysis securely maintain the integrity and confidentiality
of data and reliably support timely and accurate production of key statistics.
¥authority for statistical agency heads and qualified staff to speakabout the agencyÕs statistics before Congress, with congressional staff, and
before public bodies.¥adherence to predetermined schedules in the public release of im-
portant statistical indicators to prevent even the appearance of manipula-
tion of release dates for political purposes.
¥maintenance of a clear distinction between statistical information
and policy interpretations of such information by the president, the secre-
tary of the department, or others in the executive branch.
¥dissemination policies that foster regular, frequent release of major
findings from an agencyÕs statistical programs to the public via the media,
the Internet, and other means.
Practice 3: Continual Development of More Useful Data
Statistical agencies must continually look to improve their data systems
to provide information that is accurate, timely, and relevant for changing
public policy needs. They must also continually seek to improve the effi-
ciency of their programs for collecting, analyzing, and disseminating statis-
tical information.Ways for an agency to achieve these goals include:
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
¥seeking opportunities to combine data from multiple surveys or to
integrate data from surveys with data from administrative records, with
appropriate safeguards for confidentiality. When separate data sets are
collected and analyzed in such a manner that they may be used together,

the value of the resulting information and the efficiency of obtaining it may
be greatly enhanced.¥sharing technical information and ideas with other statisticalagencies. Such sharing can stimulate the development of innovative data
collection, analysis, and dissemination methods that improve the accuracy
and timeliness of information and the efficiency of data operations.¥establishing a balanced data collection program to provide relevant
information for different types of data needs. Such a program could include
one-time surveys on special topics, repeated surveys of cross-sections of the

population that provide regularly updated statistics, and longitudinal
surveys that track people, firms, and institutions over time and make it
possible to analyze the causes and effects of changes in their circumstances.
Practice 4: Openness About Sources and
Limitations of the Data Provided
A statistical agency should be open about its data and their strengths
and limitations, taking as much care to understand and explain how its

statistics may fall short of accuracy as it does to produce accurate data in the
first place. Data releases from a statistical program should be accompanied
by a full description of the purpose of the program, the methods and

assumptions used for data collection, processing, and reporting, what is
known (and not known) about the quality and relevance of the data, appro-
priate methods for analysis that take account of variability and other sources

of error in the data, and the results of research on the methods and data.
When problems are found in a previously released statistic that could
affect its use, an agency should issue a correction promptly and publicly. An

agency should be proactive in seeking ways to alert known and likely users
of the data about the nature of the problem and the appropriate corrective
action.Practice 5: Wide Dissemination of Data
A statistical agency should strive for the widest possible dissemination
of the data it compiles. Data dissemination should be timely and public.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
9Also, measures should be taken to ensure that data are preserved and acces-
sible to the public for use in future years.
Elements of an effective dissemination program include:
¥an established publications policy that describes, for a data collectionprogram, the types of reports and other data releases to be made available,
the audience to be served, and the frequency of release.
¥a variety of avenues for data dissemination, chosen to reach as broad
a public as reasonably possible. Channels of dissemination include, but are
not limited to, an agencyÕs Internet web site, government depository libraries,

conference exhibits and programs, newsletters and journals, e-mail address
lists, and the media for regular communication of major findings.
¥release of data in a variety of formats (e.g., printed reports, various
kinds of computer-readable data files with careful, complete documenta-
tion), so that the information can be accessed by users with varying skills
and needs for data retrieval and analysis.
¥procedures for release of information that preclude actual or per-
ceived political interference. In particular, the timing of the public release
of data should be the responsibility of the statistical agency. As noted earlier,

adherence to predetermined release schedules for important indicators
serves to prevent even the appearance of manipulation of release dates for
political purposes.¥policies for the preservation of data that guide what data to retain
and how they are to be archived for future secondary analysis.
Practice 6: Cooperation with Data Users
A statistical agency should consult with a broad spectrum of users of its
data in order to make its products more useful. It should:
¥seek advice on data concepts, statistical methods, and data products
from data users as well as from other professional and technical subject-
matter and methodological experts, using a variety of formal and informalmeans of communication that are appropriate to the types of input sought.
¥seek advice on its statistical programs and priorities from external
groups, including those with relevant subject-matter and technical expertise.
¥endeavor to provide wide access to data while maintaining appro-
priate safeguards for the confidentiality of individual responses.
¥provide equal access to data to all users.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Practice 7: Fair Treatment of Data Providers
To maintain credibility and a relationship of respect and trust with
data subjects and other data providers, a statistical agency must observe fair

information practices. Such practices include:
¥policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of data,
whether collected directly or obtained from administrative record sources,
and to inform data providers of the manner and level of protection.
¥policies and procedures to inform data providers of the purposes of
data collection and the anticipated uses of the information, whether theirparticipation is mandatory or voluntary, and, if voluntary, using appropriate
informed consent procedures to obtain their information.
¥respecting the privacy of respondents by minimizing the contribu-
tion of time and effort asked of them, consistent with the purposes of the
data collection activity.
¥recognizing the value of respondentsÕ participation in data collec-
tion programs by accurately representing the statistical information they
provide and by making it widely available.
¥seeking, to the extent practicable, the advice of respondents, as well
as others, in planning the scope of the agencyÕs statistical programs, design-
ing its data collection procedures, and determining its data products.
Practice 8: Commitment to Quality and
Professional Standards of Practice
A statistical agency should:¥use modern statistical theory and sound statistical practice in all
technical work.¥develop strong staff expertise in the disciplines relevant to its
mission, in the theory and practice of statistics, and in data collection,
processing, analysis, and dissemination techniques.¥develop an understanding of the validity and accuracy of its data
and convey the resulting measures of quality to users in ways that are com-
prehensible to nonexperts.¥undertake ongoing quality assurance programs to improve data
quality and to improve the processes of compiling, editing, and analyzing data.
¥develop a strong and continuous relationship with appropriate profes-
sional organizations in the fields of statistics and relevant subject-matter areas.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
11¥follow good practice, in reports and other data releases, in docu-
menting concepts, definitions, data collection methodologies, and measures
of uncertainty, and in discussing possible sources of error.
Practice 9: An Active Research Program
An effective statistical agency should have a research program that is
integral to its activities. Because smaller agencies may not be able to afford
as extensive a research program as larger agencies, ways should be sought to
foster sharing of research results and methods among agencies. Agencies

can also augment their staff resources for research by obtaining the services
of experts not on the agencyÕs staff through consulting or other arrange-
ments as appropriate.The research program of a statistical agency should include:
¥research on the substantive issues for which the data were compiled.
Such research should be conducted not only to provide useful objective
analytical results, but also as a means to identify potential improvements to
the content of the data, suggest improvements in the design and operation

of the data collection, and provide fuller understanding of the limitations
of the data.¥research to evaluate and improve statistical methods, in particular
the identification and creation of new statistical measures and the develop-
ment of improved methods for analyzing errors in data that are due not
only to sampling variability, but also to other sources. Research should also

be conducted on ways to reduce the time and effort requested of
respondents and to improve the timeliness, accuracy, and efficiency of data
collection, analysis, and dissemination procedures.
¥research to understand how the agencyÕs information is used, in
order to make the data more relevant to policy concerns and more useful
for policy research and decision making.
Practice 10: Professional Advancement of Staff
A statistical agencyÕs professional staff should be committed to the high-
est standards of quality work and professional practice. They should also be
committed to the highest standards of professional ethics with regard to

maintaining the agencyÕs credibility as an objective, independent source of
accurate and useful information obtained through fair information practices.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
To achieve a high-caliber staff, a statistical agency must recruit and
retain qualified statisticians, analysts in fields relevant to its mission,
methodologists who specialize in data collection and analysis, and other
staff with skills that are needed for its efficient and effective operation. An

agencyÕs personnel policies should encourage staff to maintain and extend
their technical capabilities through appropriate professional and develop-
mental activities, such as attendance at professional meetings, participation

in relevant training programs, and rotation of assignments. An agency
should also seek opportunities to reinforce the commitment of its staff to
ethical standards of practice.
Practice 11: Coordination and Cooperation with
Other Statistical Agencies
A statistical agency must seek opportunities to cooperate with other
statistical agencies to enhance the value of its own information and that of

other agencies in the federal statistical system. Although agencies differ intheir subject-matter focus, there is overlap in their missions and a common
interest in serving the public need for credible, high-quality statistics

gathered as efficiently as possible.
When possible and appropriate, federal statistical agencies should
cooperate not only with each other, but also with state and local statistical

agencies in the provision of data for subnational areas. Federal statistical agen-
cies should also cooperate with foreign and international statistical agencies
to exchange information on both data and methods and to develop appro-

priate common classifications and procedures to promote international
comparability of information.Such cooperative activities as integrating data compiled by different
statistical agencies invariably require effort to overcome differences in
agency missions and operations. But the rewards are data more relevant to
policy concerns and a stronger statistical system as a whole. For these

reasons, statistical agencies must act as partners to one another, not only in
the development of data, but also for the entire panoply of statistical
activities, including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical

tools, professional practice, dissemination modes, means to protect the con-
fidentiality of responses, and ways to advance the effective use of statistical
information.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13This section comments on most of the topics in the principles andpractices; the comments are offered to explain, illustrate, or further define
the statement of principle in Part I.
DEFINITION OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
A federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal government
whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.
A statistical agency may be labeled a bureau, center, division, or office
or similar title, so long as it is recognized as a distinct entity. Statistical

agencies have been established for several reasons: (1) to develop new infor-
mation for an area of public concern (e.g., the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
the National Center for Health Statistics); (2) to conduct large statistical

collection and dissemination operations specified by law (e.g., the U.S.
Census Bureau); (3) to compile and analyze statistics from sets of adminis-
trative records for policy purposes and public use (e.g., the Statistics of

Income Division in the Internal Revenue Service); and (4) to develop broad
and consistent estimates from a variety of statistical and administrative
sources in accordance with a prespecified conceptual framework (e.g., the

Bureau of Economic Analysis in the U.S. Department of Commerce). Once
Part II
Commentary
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
established, many statistical agencies engage in all of these functions tovarying degrees.
This definition of a federal statistical agency does not include manystatistical activities of the federal government because they are not per-

formed by distinct units, or because they do not result in the dissemination
of statistics to othersÑfor example, statistics compiled by the U.S. Postal
Service to set rates or by the U.S. Department of Defense to test weapons
(see National Research Council, 1998b, 2002b, 2003b, on statistics and
testing for defense acquisition). Nor does it include agencies whose primary
functions are the conduct or support of problem-oriented research,

although their research may be based on information gathered by statistical
means, and they may also sponsor important surveys, as do, for example,
the National Institutes of Health, the Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality, and other agencies in the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.Finally, this definition of a statistical agency does not usually include
agencies whose primary function is policy analysis and planning (e.g., the
Office of Tax Analysis in the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation in the U.S. Depart-

ment of Health and Human Services). Such agencies may collect and
analyze statistical information, and statistical agencies, in turn, may perform
some policy-related analysis (e.g., produce reports on trends in after-tax

income or child care arrangements of families). However, to maintain
credibility as an objective source of accurate, useful information, statistical
agencies must be separate from units that are involved in developing policy

and assessing policy alternatives.The work of federal statistical agencies is coordinated through the
Interagency Council on Statistical Policy (ICSP), created by the U.S. Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) in the 1980s and authorized in statute
in the 1995 reauthorization of the Paperwork Reduction Act. The ICSP is
chaired by OMB and currently includes representation from 10 principal

statistical agencies and from the statistical units in the Environmental
Protection Agency, the Social Security Administration, the National Sci-
ence Foundation, and the Internal Revenue Service (see Box 1).
Throughout the federal government, OMB recognizes more than 70
units and agencies that are not statistical agencies but that have annual
budgets of $500,000 or more for statistical activities (U.S. Office of

Management and Budget, 2004c:4-7). The principles for federal statistical
agencies presented here should apply to other federal agencies that carry
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
15out statistical activities, and they may find many of the detailed practicespertinent as well. Similarly, the principles and practices may be relevant to
statistical units in state and local government agencies, and international
audiences may also find them useful.ESTABLISHMENT OF A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
One of the most important reasons for establishing a statistical agencyis to provide information that will allow for an informed citizenry. A
democracy depends on an informed electorate. A citizen has a right to

information that comes from a trustworthy, credible source and is relevant,
accurate, and timely. Timely information of high quality is also critical to
BOX 1
Federal Agencies Represented on the Interagency
Council on Statistical Policy as of 2005
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 
ChairBureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), U.S. Department of Commerce
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), U.S. Department of JusticeBureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), U.S. Department of LaborBureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS), U.S. Department of
TransportationCensus Bureau, U.S. Department of CommerceEconomic Research Service (ERS), U.S. Department of Agriculture

Energy Information Administration (EIA), U.S. Department of Energy
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), U.S. Department of
AgricultureNational Center for Education Statistics (NCES), U.S. Departmentof EducationNational Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), U.S. Department ofHealth and Human ServicesOffice of Environmental Information, Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA)
Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics, Social Security
Administration (SSA)Science Resources Statistics Division, National Science Foundation(NSF)Statistics of Income Division (SOI), Internal Revenue Service, U.S.Department of the Treasury
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
policy analysts and decision makers in both the public and private sectors.
(For more information on the purposes of official statistics, see the Funda-
mental Principles of Official Statistics of the United Nations Statistical
Commission in Appendix A; see also United Nations Economic Commis-

sion for Europe, 2003; United Nations Statistical Commission, 2003.)
Federal statistical agencies serve the key functions of providing a broad
array of information to the public and policy makers and of ensuring the
necessary quality and credibility of the data.
Commercial, nonprofit, and academic organizations in the private
sector also provide useful statistical information, including data they collect

themselves and data they acquire from government agencies and other data
sources to which they add value. However, because the benefits of statistical
information are shared widely throughout society and because it is often

difficult to collect payments for these benefits, private markets are not likely
to provide all of the data that are needed for public and private decision
making or to make data as widely available as needed for important public

purposes. Government statistical agencies are established to ensure that a
broad range of information is publicly available. (See National Research
Council, 1999b, for a discussion of the governmental role in providing

public goods, or near public goods, such as research and data.)
The United States government collected and published statistics long
before any distinct federal statistical agency was formed (see Duncan and

Shelton, 1978; Norwood, 1995). The U.S. Constitution mandated the
conduct of a decennial census of population beginning in 1790, and thecensus enumeration was originally conducted by U.S. marshals as one of

their many duties. Legislation providing for the compilation of statistics on
agriculture, education, and income was enacted by Congress in the 1860s.
The Bureau of Labor (forerunner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics) was

established by law in 1884 as a separate agency with a general mandate to
respond to widespread public demand for information on the conditions ofindustrial workers. The Census Bureau was established as a permanent agency

in 1902 to conduct the decennial census and related statistical activities.
Many federal statistical agencies that can trace their roots back to the
19th or early 20th century, such as the National Center for Education

Statistics and the National Center for Health Statistics, were organized in
their current form following World War II. Several relatively new agencies
have since been established, including the Energy Information Administra-

tion, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and, most recently (in 1991), the
Bureau of Transportation Statistics. In every case, the agency itself, in
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
17consultation with users of its information, has major responsibility for
determining its specific statistical programs and for setting priorities.
Initially, many of these agencies also had responsibilities for certain policy
analysis functions for their department heads. More recently, policy analysis

has generally been located in separate units that are not themselves con-
sidered to be statistical agencies, a separation that helps establish and
maintain the credibility of statistical agencies as providers of data and

analyses that are not designed for particular policy alternatives.
A statistical agency has at least two roles: (1) provider of the statistical
information and analysis needed to inform policy making and program

assessment by its own department and (2) source of national statistics for
the public in its area of concern. It is sometimes difficult to keep these two
roles distinct on policy-relevant statistics. An effective statistical agency,
nevertheless, will frequently play a creative, not just reactive, role in the
development of data needed for policy analysis. Sometimes federal statisti-
cal agencies play additional roles, such as monitor and consultant on statis-

tical matters to other units within the same department (see e.g., National
Research Council, 1985a) and collector of data on a reimbursable basis for
other agencies.There is no set rule or guideline for when it is appropriate to establish a
separate federal statistical agency, carry on statistical activities within the
operating units of departments and independent agencies, or contract for
statistical services from existing federal statistical agencies or other organi-
zations. Establishment of a federal statistical agency should be considered
when one or more of the following conditions prevails:
1¥There is a need for information on an ongoing basis beyond the
capacity of existing operating units, possibly involving other departments

and agencies. Such needs may require coordinating data from various
sources, initiating new data collection programs to fill gaps, or developing
regularly updated time series of estimates.¥There is a need, as a matter of credibility, to ensure that major data
series are independent of policy makersÕ control.
1National Research Council (2001b:Ch.6) cited a number of these reasons in recom-
mending the establishment or identification of a statistical unit in the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services to be assigned responsibility and authority for carrying out
statistical functions and data collection for social welfare programs and the populations they

serve; see also National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2004).
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
¥There is a need to establish the functional separation of statistical
data that are collected for statistical purposes from identifiable data that
may be used for administrative, regulatory, or law enforcement uses. Such
separation, recommended by the Privacy Protection Study Commission

(1977), bolsters a culture and practice of respect for privacy and protection
of confidentiality. Functional separation is easier to maintain when the
statistical data are compiled by a unit that is separate from operating units.

The Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of
2002 (CIPSEA) extended legal confidentiality protection to every statistical
data collection by a federal agency, whether a statistical agency or other

type of agency (see Appendix B). Nonetheless, functional separation of
statistical data from other kinds of data is important because it makes
promises of confidentiality protection more credible.
¥There is a need to emphasize the principles and practices of an
effective statistical agency, for example, professional practice, openness
about the data provided, and wide dissemination of data.
¥There is a need to encourage research and development of a broad
range of statistics in a particular area of public interest or of government
activity or responsibility.
¥There is a need to consolidate compilation, analysis, and dissemina-
tion of statistics in one unit to encourage high-quality performance,eliminate duplication, and streamline operations.
PRINCIPLES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Principle 1: A federal statistical agency must be in a position toprovide information relevant to issues of public policy.
A statistical agency supplies information not only for the use ofmanagers and policy makers in the executive branch and for legislative
designers and overseers in Congress, but also for all those who require sta-

tistical information on public issues, whether the information is needed forpurposes of production, trade, consumption, or participation in civic affairs.
Just as a free enterprise economic system depends on the availability of
economic information to all participants, a democratic political system
depends onÑand has a fundamental duty to provideÑwide access to
information on education, health, transportation, the economy, the

environment, criminal justice, and other social concerns.
Federal statistical agencies are responsible for providing statistics on
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
19conditions in a variety of areas. The resulting information is used both
inside and outside the government not only to delineate problems and
sometimes to suggest courses of action, but also to evaluate the results of
government activity or lack of activity. The statistics provide much of the

basis on which the government itself is judged. This role places a heavy
responsibility on federal statistical agencies for impartiality and objectivity.
In order to provide information that is relevant to public issues,
statistical agencies need to reach out to users of the data. Federal statistical
agencies usually are in touch with the primary users in their own depart-
ments. Considerable energy and initiative are required to open avenues of

communication more broadly to other current and potential users,
including analysts and policy makers in other federal departments, stateand local government agencies, academic researchers, private-sector organi-

zations, organized constituent groups, the media, and Congress. Advisory
committees are recommended as a means to obtain the views of users, as
well as people with relevant technical expertise (see, e.g., National Research
Council, 1993a). Many agencies have traditionally had such committees to
advise themÑexamples include the American Statistical AssociationÕs Com-
mittee on Energy for the Energy Information Administration, the Board of

Scientific Counselors for the National Center for Health Statistics, and the
Census Advisory Committee of Professional Associations for the Census
Bureau. The Federal Economic Statistics Advisory Committee (FESAC),
chartered in November 1999, provides substantive and technical advice to
three agenciesÑthe Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, and the Census BureauÑthereby providing an important cross-
cutting perspective on major economic statistics programs (Bureau of La-
bor Statistics, 2005a).
One frequently recommended method for alerting statistical agencies
to emerging statistical information needs is for the agencyÕs own staff to
engage in analysis of its data (Martin, 1981; Norwood, 1975; Triplett,
1991). For example, relevant analysis may use the agencyÕs data to examine

correlates of key social or economic phenomena or to study the statistical
error properties of the data. Such in-house analysis can lead to improve-
ments in the quality of the statistics, to identification of new needs, to a
reordering of priorities, and to closer cooperation and mutual understand-
ing with policy analysis units. In its work for a policy analysis unit, a statis-
tical agency describes conditions and possibly measures progress toward

some previously identified goal, but it refrains from making policy recom-
mendations. The distinction between statistical analysis and policy analysis
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
is not always clear, and a statistical agency will need to consider carefully
the extent of policy-related activities that are appropriate for it to undertake.
Principle 2: A federal statistical agency must have credibility based
on a relationship of mutual respect and trust with those who use its
data and information.
Users of a statistical agencyÕs data must be able to trust that the data
were collected and analyzed in an objective, impartial manner and that they
are as reliable as the agency can make them. An agency should make every

effort to provide accurate and credible statistics that will permit policy
debates to be concerned about policy, not about the credibility of the data.
Credibility is enhanced when an agency fully informs users of the strengths
and weaknesses of the data, makes data available widely, and consults with
users about priorities for data collection and analysis.Principle 3: A federal statistical agency must have a relationship of
mutual respect and trust with respondents who provide data and
all data subjects whose information it obtains.The statistics programs of the federal government rely in large part on
information supplied by individuals and by organizations outside the federal

government, such as state and local governments, businesses, and other
organizations. Some of this information is required by law or regulation
(such as employersÕ wage reports), some of it is related to administration of

government programs (such as information provided by benefit recipients),
but much of it is obtained through the voluntary cooperation of respon-
dents in statistical surveys. Even when response is mandatory, the coopera-

tion of respondents reduces costs and likely promotes accuracy (see National
Research Council, 1995b, 2004e). Important elements in encouraging such
cooperation are that respondents believe that the data requested are impor-

tant and legitimate for the government to collect, that they are being
collected in an impartial, competent manner, and that the confidentiality
of their responses will be protected.
In brief, trust in a statistical agency must be maintained. The agency
must not be perceived as being swayed by political considerations. It must
be perceived as working in the national interest, not the interest of a par-

ticular administration, and as taking a long view, balancing new data needs
against the need for consistency with past data (Ryten, 1990). Respondent
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
21trust also depends on providing respondents with realistic promises of
confidentiality that the agency can reasonably expect to honor and then
scrupulously honoring those promises. Finally, respondent trust depends
on adopting practices that respect personal privacy, such as taking steps to

minimize the intrusiveness of questions and the time and effort required to
participate in a survey.
PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Practice 1: A Clearly Defined and Well-Accepted Mission
A clear understanding of the mission of an agency, the scope of its
statistical programs, and its authority and responsibilities is basic to

planning and evaluating its programs and to maintaining credibility and
independence from political control (National Research Council, 1986,
1997b). Some agency missions are clearly spelled out in legislation; other

agencies have only very general legislative authority. On occasion, very
specific requirements may be set by legislation or regulation.
Agencies should communicate their mission clearly to others. The use
of the Internet is one means to publicize an agencyÕs mission to a broad
audience and to provide related information, including enabling legislation,
the scope of the agencyÕs statistical program, confidentiality provisions,

operating procedures, and data quality guidelines. An agencyÕs mission
should focus on the compilation, evaluation, analysis, and dissemination of
statistical information. In addition, considerable and formal attention must

be paid to setting statistical priorities (National Research Council, 1976).
Advice from outside groups should be sought on the agencyÕs statistical
program, on setting statistical priorities, on the statistical methods used,
and on data products. Such advice may be sought in a variety of formal and
informal ways, but it should be obtained from data users and providers as
well as professional or technical experts in the subject-matter area and in
statistical methods and procedures. A strong research program in the
agencyÕs subject-matter field can assist in setting priorities and identifying
ways to improve an agencyÕs statistical programs (Triplett, 1991).
Practice 2: A Strong Position of Independence
A statistical agency must be able to provide credible information that
may be used to evaluate the program and policies of its own department or
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
the government as a whole. More broadly, a statistical agency must be a
trustworthy source of objective, reliable information for decision makers,
analysts, and others inside and outside the government who want to use
statistics to understand present conditions, draw comparisons with the past,

and help guide plans for the future. For these purposes, a strong position of
independence for a statistical agency is essential. (See the Fundamental Prin-
ciples of Official Statistics of the United Nations Statistical Commission in

Appendix A.)Statistical agency independence must be exercised in a broader frame-
work. Legislative authority usually gives ultimate responsibility to the

department rather than the statistical agency head. In addition, an agency
is subject to the normal budgetary processes and to various coordinating
and review functions of OMB, as well as the legislative mandates, over-

sight, and informal guidance of Congress.
Within this broader framework, a statistical agency must work to main-
tain its credibility as an impartial purveyor of information. In the long run,

the effectiveness of an agency depends on its maintaining a reputation for
impartiality; thus, an agency must be continually alert to possible infringe-
ments on its credibility and be prepared to argue strenuously against such

infringements.Independence of an agency head can be strengthened by the headÕs
being appointed for a fixed term by the president, with approval by the

Senate, as is the case with the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the National
Center for Education Statistics. The heads of the Bureau of Justice Statistics,
the Census Bureau, and the Energy Information Administration are presi-

dential appointees, but their terms are not fixed and usually end with a
change of administration. In the case of a fixed term, it is desirable that it
not coincide with the presidential term so that incumbents need not end

their leadership with changes of administration and professional consider-
ations may more easily predominate over political aims in the appointment
process.It is also desirable that a statistical agency head have direct access to the
secretary of the department or the head of the independent agency in which
the statistical agency is located. Such access allows the head to inform new

secretaries about the appropriate role of a statistical agency and present the
case for new statistical initiatives to the secretary directly. Among the agency
heads with presidential appointments, such direct access currently is pro-

vided by legislation only for the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
It is desirable for a statistical agency to have its own funding appropria-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
23tion from Congress and not be dependent on allocations from budgets of
other agencies that may be subject to reallocation.
These organizational aspectsÑappointment of the agency head by the
president with approval by the Senate for a fixed term not coincident with

that of the administration, direct access to the secretary of the agencyÕs
department, and separate budgetary authorityÑare neither necessary nor
sufficient for a strong position of independence for a statistical agency, but

they facilitate such independence.2Control over personnel actions, especially the selection and appoint-
ment of qualified professional staff, including senior executive career staff,

is another aspect of independence. Agency staff reporting directly to the
agency head should have formal education and deep experience in the sub-
stantive, methodological, operational, or management issues facing the

agency as appropriate for their positions. In addition, professional qualifi-
cations are of the utmost importance for statistical agency heads, whether
the profession is that of statistician or the subject-matter field of the statis-

tical agency (National Research Council, 1997b). Relevant professional
associations can be a source of valuable input on suitable candidates.
The authority to ensure that information technology systems fulfill the
specialized needs of the statistical agency is also an aspect of independence.A statistical agency must be able to vouch for the integrity, confidentiality,
and impartiality of the information collected and maintained under its

authority so that it retains the trust of its data providers and data users.
Such trust is fostered when a statistical agency has control over its informa-
tion technology resources, and there is no opportunity or perception that

policy, program, or regulatory agencies could gain access to records of
individual respondents. A statistical agency also needs control over its
information technology resources to support timely and accurate release of

official statistics, which are often produced under stringent deadlines.
Authority to decide the scope and specific content of the data collectedor compiled is yet another important element of independence. Most
2Legislation and administrative actions have removed some of these organizational fea-
tures for some statistical agencies. (For example, legislation signed on November 30, 2004, as

part of reorganizing the U.S. Department of Transportation, changed the head of the Bureau
of Transportation Statistics (BTS) from a presidential appointee to a career position and
specified that the BTS director is to report to the administrator of the new Research and

Innovative Technology Administration, not to the secretary.)
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
statistical agencies have broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints,
departmental interests, OMB review, and congressional mandates. In
addition, the courts sometimes become involved in interpreting laws and
regulations that affect statistical agencies, as in a number of issues concern-ing data confidentiality and Freedom of Information Act requests and in
the issue of the use of sampling in the population census. Congress
frequently specifies particular data that it wishes to be collected (e.g., by the

National Agricultural Statistics Service in the U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, the National Center for Health Statistics in the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services) and, in the case of the decennial census,
requires an opportunity to review the proposed questions before the forms
are printed. The OMB Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, under
the Paperwork Reduction Act (and under the preceding Federal Reports

Act), has the responsibility for designating a single data collection instru-
ment for information wanted by two or more agencies. It also has the
responsibility under the same act for reviewing all questionnaires and other
instruments for the collection of data from 10 or more respondents.
The budgetary constraints on statistical agencies and OMB review of
data collections are ongoing; the other pressures depend, in part at least, on

the relations between a statistical agency and those who have supervisory or
oversight functions. Agencies need to develop skills in communicating to
oversight groups the need for statistical series and credibility in assessing
the costs of statistical work. In turn, although it is standard practice for the
secretary of a department or the head of an independent agency to have
ultimate responsibility for all matters within the department or agency, the

head of a statistical agency, for credibility, should be allowed full authority
in professional and technical matters. For example, decisions to revise the
methodology for calculating the consumer price index (CPI) or the gross

domestic product (GDP) have been and are properly made by the relevant
statistical agency heads.Other aspects of independence that underscore a statistical agencyÕs
credibility are important as well. Authority to release statistical information
and accompanying materials (including press releases) without prior clear-
ance by department policy officials is important so that there is no

opportunity for or perception of political manipulation of any of the infor-mation. Authority for the statistical agency head and qualified staff to speak
about the agencyÕs statistics before Congress, with congressional staff, and

before public bodies is also important to bolster the agencyÕs standing.
When a statistical agency releases information publicly, a clear distinc-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
25tion should be made between the statistical information and any policy
interpretations of such. Not even the appearance of manipulation for
political purposes should be allowed. This is one reason that statistical
agencies are required by OMB statistical policy directive number 3 to adhere

to predetermined schedules for the public release of key economic indica-
tors and take steps to ensure that no person outside the agency can gain
access to such indicators before the official release time (see U.S. Office of

Management and Budget, 1985). Predetermined schedules for the public
release of other important social and economic indicators can also con-
tribute to independence. When an agency modifies a customary release

schedule for statistical purposes, it should announce and explain the changeas far in advance as possible.Practice 3: Continual Development of More Useful Data
Federal statistical agencies cannot be static. To provide information of
continued relevance for public and policy use, they must continually
anticipate data needs for future policy considerations and look for ways to
develop data systems that can serve broad purposes. To improve the quality

and timeliness of their information, they must keep abreast of method-
ological and technological advances and be prepared to implement new
procedures in a timely manner. They must also continually seek ways to

make their operations more efficient. Preparing for the future requires that
agencies reevaluate existing data series, plan new data series as required, and
be innovative and open in their consideration of ways to improve their

programs. Because of the decentralized nature of the federal statistical
system, innovation often requires cross-agency collaboration. Innovation
also implies a willingness to implement different kinds of data collection

efforts to answer different needs.
Integration of Data Sources
One way to increase the usefulness of survey data is to integrate them
with data from other surveys or with data from administrative records, such

as social program records. Such integration typically requires that several
agencies work together.
For example, in the area of health care provider statistics, a study by a
panel of the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) concluded that
no single survey was likely ever to meet all the criteria, address all the tech-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
nical problems, or meet all usersÕ needs for data. In order to provide
adequate information on the availability, financing, and quality of health
care, a coordinated and integrated system of data collection activities
involving several organizational entities was required (National Research

Council and Institute of Medicine, 1992).
Similarly, a CNSTAT study on retirement income statistics concluded
that some of the information that is essential for analysis of savings and
retirement decisions and the effect of medical care use and expenditures on
retirement income security is most efficiently and accurately obtained from
existing administrative records (National Research Council, 1997a). To be

useful for estimation, this information (e.g., Social Security earnings
histories, Medicare and Medicaid benefits) must be linked to individual
data that are available from such panel surveys as the Health and Retire-

ment Study sponsored by the National Institute on Aging, the National
Longitudinal Surveys of Labor Market Experience sponsored by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, and the Census BureauÕs Survey of Program Dynamics

and Survey of Income and Program Participation. Similarly, linkage of
employer survey data with administrative records could provide enhanced
analysis and modeling capability at low marginal cost. In both instances,

careful attention must be paid to the means by which the confidentiality of
the linked data can be protected while allowing access for research use.
Sharing of Microdata
Another way to improve data quality and develop new kinds of infor-
mation is for statistical agencies that collect similar information to share
microdata records. For example, the sharing of business data would make it
possible to evaluate reporting errors and the completeness of coverage of

business firms in different surveys. Such sharing would also make it possible
to develop more useful and accurate statistics on the nationÕs economy while
decreasing the reporting burden on business data providers. The Confiden-

tial Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA),
subtitle B, for the first time in the nationÕs history authorizes the sharing of
business data among the three principal statistical agencies that produce

the nationÕs key economic statisticsÑthe Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the U.S. Census Bureau.
June 2003 saw the first formal proposal for data sharing under CIPSEA,which involved matching data from BEAÕs international investment surveys
with data from the Census BureauÕs Survey of Industrial Research and De-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
27velopment conducted for the National Science Foundation. The results
helped BEA improve its survey sample frames and enabled the Census Bu-
reau to identify companies that were not previously known to engage in
research and development activities (U.S. Office of Management and Bud-
get, 2004c:44-45).Longitudinal Data
The need to understand temporal changes in important social or
economic events may call for the development of longitudinal surveys that

track people, institutions, or firms over time. Developing longitudinal data
(and general purpose cross-sectional data, as well) usually requires much
coordination with policy research agencies, other statistical agencies, and

academic researchers. Longitudinal data generally require more sophisti-
cated methods for collection and analysis than data from repeated or one-
time cross-sectional surveys. In addition, considerable time may be needed

to produce useful data products for analyzing transitions and other dynamic
characteristics of longitudinal samples (although production of useful cross-
sectional products from longitudinal surveys need not take long). Yet data

from longitudinal surveys are potentially very usefulÑsometimes they are
the only means to answer important policy questions (see, e.g., National
Research Council, 1997a, on data needs to inform retirement income
policy, and National Research Council, 2001b, on data needs to evaluate
welfare reform in an era of transition).
Historically, because statistical agencies are oriented toward the mission
of their particular department, the longitudinal surveys they developed (and
cross-sectional data activities as well) typically focused on subject matter
and population groups (or other entities) that the department serves. For

example, separate data sets are available on health characteristics of infants
and children (and other age groups), educational characteristics for chil-
dren and teenagers, and work force characteristics for adults. Yet surveys

that follow individuals across such key transitions as from early childhood
to school and from school to the labor force are important to consider
(National Research Council, 1998a; National Research Council and Insti-

tute of Medicine, 2004). Examples of surveys that are designed for analysis
of some kinds of transitions include the Early Childhood LongitudinalStudy (ECLS), sponsored by the National Center for Education Statistics
in collaboration with other agencies, and the National Longitudinal Surveys
of  Youth (NLSY79, NLSY97), sponsored by the Bureau of Labor Statis-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
tics. The ECLS includes two cohorts of children, one of kindergartners in
1998 who will be followed through twelfth grade and another of babies
born in 2001 who will be followed through first grade (National Center for
Education Statistics, 
2005). The NLSY includes two cohorts of young
people, one of people aged 14-22 in 1979, who are being interviewed every
other year, and the other of people aged 12-17 in 1997, who are being
interviewed annually (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2005b).
Operational Methods
Another area in which it is important for statistical agencies to be
innovative concerns the methods used for data collection, processing,
estimation, analysis, and dissemination. Agencies need to investigate new

or modified methods that have the potential to improve the accuracy and
timeliness of their data and the efficiency of their operations. Careful evalu-
ation of new methods is required to assess their benefits and costs in

comparison with current methods and to determine effective implementa-
tion strategies, including the development of methods for bridging timeseries before and after a change in procedures.
For example, experience with the use of computer-assisted interview-
ing techniques, which many agencies have adopted for data collection, has
identified benefits. It has also identified challenges for the timely provision

of data and documentation that require continued research to develop
solutions that maximize the gains from these techniques (see National
Research Council, 2003e).Similarly, agencies need to carefully evaluate their growing use of the
Internet, which has become a standard vehicle for data dissemination and is
increasingly being used for data collection. Internet dissemination facili-

tates the timely availability of data to a broad audience and provides a
valuable tool for users to learn of related data sets from other agencies.
However, it poses challenges in several areas, such as how best to provide
information on data quality and appropriate use of the data to an audience
that spans a wide range of analytical skills and understanding. Internet data
collection poses challenges in such areas as sample design, questionnaire

design, and protecting data confidentiality. It also requires careful evaluation
of the effects on the quality of responses in comparison with traditional
data collection modes (telephone, mail, personal interview).
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
29Practice 4: Openness About Sources and
Limitations of the Data Provided
An important means to instill credibility and trust among data users
and data providers is for an agency to operate in an open manner with
regard to the sources and the limitations of its data. Openness requires that
an agency provide a full description of its data with acknowledgment of any

uncertainty and a description of the methods used and assumptions made.
Agencies should provide to users reliable indications of the kinds and
amounts of statistical error to which the data are subject (see Brackstone,

1999; Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology, 2001a; see also
PresidentÕs Commission on Federal Statistics, 1971). Some statistical
agencies have developed detailed quality profiles for some of their major

series, such as those developed for the American Housing Survey
(Chakrabarty, 1996), the Residential Energy Consumption Survey (Energy
Information Administration, 1996), the Schools and Staffing Survey
(Kalton et al., 2000), and the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(U.S. Census Bureau, 1998). Earlier, the Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology (1978c) developed a quality profile for employment as
measured in the Current Population Survey. These profiles have proved
helpful to experienced users and agency personnel responsible for the design
and operation of major surveys and data series (see National Research

Council, 1993a).Openness about data limitations requires much more than providing
estimates of sampling error. In addition to a discussion of aspects that

statisticians recognize as nonsampling errors, such as coverage errors,
nonresponse, measurement errors, and processing errors, a description of
the concepts used and how they relate to the major uses of the data is

desirable. Descriptions of the shortcomings of and problems with the data
should be provided in sufficient detail to permit the user to take them into
account in the analysis and interpretation of the data.
Openness means that a statistical agency should describe how decisions
on methods and procedures were made for a data collection program. It is
important to be open about research conducted on methods and data and

other factors that were weighed in a decision.
Openness also means when mistakes are discovered after a statistic is
released, the agency has an obligation to issue a correction publicly and in a
timely manner. It should not only use the same dissemination vehicles to
announce corrections that it used to release the original statistic, but also
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
use additional vehicles, as appropriate, to alert the widest possible audience
of current and potential users.
In summary, agencies should make an effort to provide information on
the quality, limitations, and appropriate use of their data that is as frank

and complete as possible. Such information, which is sometimes termed
Òmetadata,Ó should be made available in ways that are easy for users to
access and understand, recognizing that users differ in their level of under-

standing of statistical data (see National Research Council, 1993a, 1997b).
Agencies need to work to educate users that all data contain some uncer-
tainty and error, which does not mean that the data are wrong but that they

must be used with care.
The Information Quality Act of 2000 (see Appendix B) stimulated all
federal agencies to develop written guidelines for maintaining and docu-

menting the quality of their information programs and activities. Using a
framework developed collaboratively by the members of the Interagency
Council on Statistical Policy, individual statistical agencies have developed

guidelines for their own data collection programs, which are available on
the Internet (see Appendix B).
Practice 5: Wide Dissemination of Data
A statistical agency must have vigorous and well-planned dissemination
programs to get information into the hands of users who need it on atimely basis. Planning should be undertaken from the viewpoint that the
public has contributed the data elements, has paid for the data collection
and processing, and should in return have the information accessible in
ways that make it as useful as possible to the largest number of users.A good dissemination program provides data to users in forms that are
suited to their needs. Data release may take the form of regularly updated
time series, cross-tabulations of aggregate characteristics of respondents,
and analytical reports that are made available in printed publications, on

computer-readable media (e.g., CD-ROM), and on the Internet. (See
Appendix C for a number of federal statistical agency web sites, which are
accessible from a single source: http://www.fedstats.gov.)
Yet another form of dissemination involves access to microdata files,
which make it possible to conduct in-depth research in ways that are not
possible with aggregate data. Public-use microdata files may be developed

for general release. Such files contain data for individual respondents that
have been processed to protect confidentiality by deleting, aggregating, or
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
31modifying any information that might permit individual identification.Alternatively, an agency may provide a facility on the Internet to allow
users to aggregate individual microdata to suit their purposes, with safe-
guards so that the data cannot be retabulated in ways that could identify

individual respondents. Another alternative is to grant a license to
researchers to analyze restricted microdata (that is, data that have not been
processed for general release) at their own sites by agreeing to follow strict

procedures for protecting confidentiality and accepting liability for penalties
if confidentiality is breached. A third alternative is to allow researchers to
analyze restricted microdata at secure sites maintained by a statistical agency,

such as one of the Census BureauÕs Research Data Centers located at several
universities and research organizations around the country or the National
Center for Health StatisticsÕ Research Data Center at its headquarters (see

Doyle et al., 2001). Agencies should consider all forms of dissemination inorder to gain the most use of their data consistent with protecting the
confidentiality of responses.
The stunning improvements over the past two decades in computing
speed, power, and storage capacity, the growing availability of information
from a wide range of public and private sources on the Internet, and the

increasing richness of statistical agency data collections have increased the
risks that individually identifiable information can be obtained (seeNational Research Council, 2003d:Ch.5). Statistical agencies must be vigi-
lant in their efforts to protect against the increased threats to disclosure
from their summary data and microdata products while honoring their
obligation to be proactive in seeking ways to provide data to users. When

statistical data are not disseminated in useful forms, there is a loss to the
public, not only of wasted taxpayer dollars but also of research findings
that could have informed public policy and served other important soci-

etal purposes.A good dissemination program for statistical data uses a variety of
channels to inform the broadest possible audience of potential users about
available data products and how to obtain them. Such channels may include
providing direct access to data on the Internet, depositing data products in
libraries, establishing a network of data centers (such as the Census BureauÕs

state data centers), holding exhibits and making presentations at con-
ferences, and maintaining lists of individuals and organizations to notify of
new data. Agencies should also arrange for archiving of data with the

National Archives and Records Administration and other data archives, as
appropriate, so that data are available for historical research in future years.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
An effective dissemination program provides not only the data, but
also information about the strengths and weaknesses of the data in ways
that can be comprehended by diverse audiences. Information about the
limitations of the data should be included in every form of data release,

whether in a printed report, on a computer-readable data file, or on the
Internet.On occasion, the objective of presenting the most accurate data possible
may require more time than is consistent with the needs of users for the
information. The tension between frequency and promptness of release on
one hand and accuracy on the other should be explicitly considered. When

concerns for timeliness prompt the release of preliminary estimates (as in
some economic indicators), consideration should be given to the frequency
of revisions and the mode of presentation of revised figures from the point

of view of the users as well as the issuers of the data. Agencies that release
preliminary estimates must educate the public about differences among
preliminary, revised, and final estimates.
Practice 6: Cooperation with Data Users
Users of federal statistical data span a broad spectrum of interests and
needs. They include policy makers, planners, administrators, and researchers
in federal agencies, state and local governments, the business sector, and

academia. They also include activists, citizens, students, and media repre-
sentatives. An effective statistical agency endeavors to learn about its data
users and to obtain input from them on the agencyÕs statistical programs.
The needs of users can be explored by forming advisory committees,
holding focus groups, analyzing requests and Internet activity, or undertak-
ing formal surveys of users. The task requires continual alertness to the

changing composition and needs of users and the existence of potentialusers. An agency should cooperate with professional associations, institutes,
universities, and scholars in the relevant fields to determine the needs of the

research community and obtain their insight on potential uses. An agencyshould also work with relevant associations and other organizations to
determine the needs of business and industry for its data.
Within the limitations of its confidentiality procedures as noted above,
an agency should seek to provide maximum access to its data, including
making the data available to external researchers for secondary analysis

(National Research Council, 1985b). Having data accessible for a wide
range of analyses increases the return on the investment in data collection
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
33and provides support for an agencyÕs program. Once statistical data are
made public, they may be used in numerous ways not originally envisaged.An agency should attempt to monitor the major uses of its data as part ofits efforts to keep abreast of user needs. In 2002, OMB introduced require-

ments for performance assessment of federal agencies: for statisticalagencies, the requirements emphasize assessment of how well the agency
understands and serves its users (see Appendix B).
Researchers and other users of data frequently request data from statis-
tical agencies for specific purposes. The agency should have procedures in
place for referring users to professionals within the agency who can com-

prehend the userÕs purposes and needs and who have a thorough knowledge
of the agencyÕs data. Statistical agencies should view these services as a part
of their dissemination activities.Ensuring equal access requires avoiding release of data to selected indi-
viduals, organizations, or news media in advance of other users. Agenciesthat prepare special tabulations of their data on request for external groups

must be alert to the proposed uses. If the data are to be used in court cases,
administrative proceedings, or collective bargaining negotiations, it is wise
to have a known policy ensuring that all sides may receive the special tabu-

lations, regardless of which side requested them or paid the cost of the
tabulation.Practice 7: Fair Treatment of Data Providers
Clear policies and effective procedures for protecting data confidenti-
ality, respecting the privacy of respondents, and, more broadly, protecting
the rights of human research participants are critical to maintaining the
quality and comprehensiveness of the data that federal statistical agencies

provide to policy makers and the public. Part of the challenge for statistical
agencies is to develop effective means of communicating not only the
agencyÕs protection procedures and policies, but also the importance of the

data being collected for the public good.Protecting ConfidentialityData providers must believe that the data they give to a statistical
agency will not be used by the agency to harm them. For statistical data

collection programs, protecting the confidentiality of individual responses
is considered essential to encourage high response rates and accuracy of
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
response. (For reviews of research on the relationship of concerns about
confidentiality protection to response rates, see National Research Council,
2004e:Ch.4; Nie et al., in press.) Furthermore, if participants have been
assured of confidentiality, then under federal policy for the protection of

human subjects, disclosure of identifiable information about them would
violate the principle of respect for persons even if the information is not
sensitive and would not result in any social, economic, legal, or other harm

(National Research Council, 2003d:Ch.5).
Historically, some agencies had legislative mandates supporting
promises of confidentiality (e.g., for the U.S. Census Bureau, Title 13 of

the U.S. Code, first enacted in 1929); other agencies (e.g., the Bureau of
Labor Statistics) relied on strong statements of policy, legal precedents in
court cases, or custom (see Gates, 2000; Norwood, 1995). The latter

agencies risked having their policies overturned by judicial interpretations
of legislation or executive decisions that might have required the agency to
disclose identifiable data collected under a pledge of confidentiality (for an
example involving the Energy Information Administration, see National
Research Council, 1993b:185-186).To give additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agencies
had pursued for decades, OMB issued a Federal Statistical Confidentiality
Order on June 27, 1997. This order assured respondents who provided
statistical information to specified agencies that their responses would be

held in confidence and would not be used against them in any government
action, Òunless otherwise compelled by lawÓ (U.S. Office of Management
and Budget, 1997).
In 2002, Congress passed the E-Government Act of 2002, which was
signed into law on December 17. Title V, the Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), subtitle A, provides a
statutory basis for protecting the confidentiality of all federal data collected
for statistical purposes under a confidentiality pledge, including but notlimited to data collected by statistical agencies (see Appendix B). Subtitle A

places strict limits on the disclosure of individually identified information
collected with a pledge of confidentiality: such disclosure to persons other
than the employees or agents of the agency collecting the data can occur

only with the informed consent of the respondent and the authorization of
the agency head and only when the disclosure is not prohibited by any
other law (e.g., Title 13). It also provides penalties for employees or agents

who knowingly or willfully disclose statistical information (up to 5 years in
prison, up to $250,000 in fines, or both).Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
35Although confidentiality protection for statistical data is now on a
much firmer legal footing across the federal government than prior to
CIPSEA, there is an exception for some data from the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES) that could have an adverse effect on survey
response. The USA Patriot Act of 2001, Section 508, amended the National
Center for Education Statistics Act of 1994 by allowing the U.S. Attorney
General (or an assistant attorney general) to apply to a court to obtain any
Òreports, records, and information (including individually identifiable
information) in the possessionÓ of NCES that are considered relevant to an
authorized investigation or prosecution of domestic or international terror-

ism. Section 508 also removed the penalties for NCES employees who
furnish individual records under this section.
Statistical agencies continually strive to avoid inadvertent disclosure of
confidential information in disseminating data. Recently, the widespread
dissemination of statistical data via the Internet has heightened attention
by agencies to ensuring that effective safeguards to protect confidential in-
formation are in place. Risks are increased when data for small groups are
tabulated, when the same data are tabulated in a variety of ways, or when
public-use microdata files (samples of records for unidentified individuals

or units) are released with highly detailed content. Longitudinal surveys,
for example, particularly newer ones, typically have richly detailed content
for multiple domains (e.g., health, education, labor force participation) or

multiple respondents (e.g., parents, students, teachers) or both. Risks may
also be increased when surveys include linked administrative data or collect
biomarkers from blood samples or other physiological measures (National

Research Council, 2001a).Because of the disclosure risks associated with detailed tabulations and
rich public-use microdata files, there is always a tension between the desire

to safeguard confidentiality and the desire to provide public access to data.
This dilemma is an important one to federal statistical agencies, and it has
stimulated ongoing efforts to develop new statistical and administrative

procedures to safeguard confidentiality while permitting more extensive
access. An effective federal statistical agency will exercise judgment in
determining which of these procedures are best suited to its requirements

to serve data users while protecting confidentiality. (Several Committee on
National StatisticsÕ study panels have discussed these issues and alternative
procedures for providing data access while maintaining confidentiality pro-

tection; see National Research Council, 1993b, 2000, 2003d.)
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Respecting Privacy
To promote trust and encourage accurate response, it is important that
statistical agencies respect the privacy of respondents. When data providers

are asked to participate in a survey, they should be told whether the survey
is mandatory or voluntary, how the data will be used, and who will have
access to the data. In the case of voluntary surveys, information on these

matters is necessary in order for data providers to give their informed
consent to participate.
Respondents invest time and effort in replying to surveys. The amount
of effort or burden varies considerably from survey to survey, depending on
such factors as the complexity of the information that is requested.
Statistical agencies should attempt to minimize such effort, to the extent
possible, by using concepts and definitions that fit respondentsÕ common
understanding; by simplifying questionnaires; by allowing alternative
modes of response (e.g., via the Internet) when appropriate; and by using

administrative records or other data sources if they are sufficiently com-
plete and accurate to provide some or all of the needed information. In
surveys of businesses or other institutions, agencies should seek innovative

ways to obtain information from the institutionÕs records and minimize the
need for respondents to reprocess and reclassify information. It is also the
responsibility of agencies to use qualified, well-trained interviewers.
Respondents should be informed of the likely duration of a survey inter-
view and, if the survey involves more than one interview, how many times
they will be contacted over the life of the survey. This information is par-

ticularly important when respondents are asked to cooperate in extensive
interviews, search for records, or participate in longitudinal surveys.
Ways in which participation in surveys can be made easier for respon-
dents and result in more accurate data can be explored by such means as
focus group discussions or surveys. Many agencies apply the principles of
cognitive psychology to questionnaire design, not only to make the resulting

data more accurate, but also to make the time and effort of respondents
more efficient (National Research Council, 1984). Some agencies thank
respondents for their cooperation by providing them with brief summaries
of the information after the survey is compiled.
Increasing privacy concerns may contribute to observed declines in
survey response rates. In a time when individuals are inundated with

requests for information from public and private sources, when there are
documented instances of identity theft and other abuses of confidentialPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
37information on the Internet, and when individual information is being
used for terrorism-related investigatory or law enforcement purposes, it
may not be surprising that individuals decline to respond to censuses and
surveys, even when the questions appear non-invasive and the data are col-

lected for statistical purposes under a pledge of confidentiality.
The E-Government Act of 2002 requires agencies to develop privacy
impact assessments (PIAs) whenever Ò. . . initiating a new collection of

information . . . in an identifiable form . . . .Ó (see Appendix B; see also U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, 2003). The purpose of a privacy impact
assessment is to ensure that there is no collection, storage, access, use, or

dissemination of identifiable information that is not both needed andpermitted. In response, statistical agencies have begun conducting and
releasing PIAs for statistical programs (see, e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, 2003),
and, in the process, rethinking how to respect individual privacy in order to
maintain trust with data providers.
Statistical agencies should devote resources to understanding the pri-
vacy and confidentiality concerns of individuals (and organizations). They
should also devote resources to devising effective strategies for communi-
cating privacy and confidentiality policies and practices to respondents.

Such strategies appear to be more necessaryÑand more challengingÑthan
ever before.
Finally, a reason that respondents reply to statistical surveys is that they
believe that their answers will be useful to the government or to society
generally. Statistical agencies should respect this contribution by compiling
the data and making them accessible to users in convenient forms. A

statistical agency has an obligation to publish statistical information from
the data it has collected unless it finds the results invalid.
Protecting Human Research Participants
Collecting data from individuals as part of a research study or a
statistical information program is a form of research involving human
participants, for which the federal government has developed regulations,
principles, and best practices over a period of 50 years (National Research

Council, 2003d). The pertinent regulations, which have been adopted by
ten departments and seven agencies, are known as the ÒCommon RuleÓ
(Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations
, section 46). The Common Rule regu-
lations require that researchers protect the privacy of human participants
and maintain the confidentiality of data collected from them, minimize the
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
risks to participants from the data collection and analysis, select partici-
pants equitably with regard to the benefits and risks of the research, and
seek informed consent from participants. Under the regulations, most
federally funded research involving human participants must be reviewed

by an independent institutional review board (IRB) to determine that the
design meets the ethical requirements for protection. (See Office for Hu-
man Research Protections [2005] for information about the Common Rule

and procedures for the certification of IRBs by the Office for Human Re-
search Protections in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.)
Data collections of federal statistical agencies are subject to IRB review
within some departments. The Census Bureau, citing Title 13, has main-
tained an exemption from IRB review for its data collection programs un-
der section 46.101(b.3), which permits exemption if Òfederal statute(s)

require(s) without exception that the confidentiality of the personally
identifiable information will be maintained throughout the research and
thereafter.Ó
Whether or not a statistical agency is subject to formal IRB review, it
should strive to incorporate the spirit of the Common Rule regulations in
the design and operation of its data collection programs. An agency that is

required to obtain IRB approval for data collection should work proactively
with the IRB to determine how best to apply the regulations in ways that
do not unnecessarily inhibit response. For example, signed written consent

is not necessary for mail surveys and is hardly ever necessary for telephone
surveys of the general population: such documentation does not provide
any added protection to the respondent, and it is likely to reduce participa-

tion. As noted above, an effective statistical agency will seek waysÑsuch as
sending an advance letterÑto furnish information to potential respondents
that will help them make an informed decision about whether to partici-
pate. Such information should include the planned uses of the data and the
benefits to individuals and the public.Practice 8: Commitment to Quality and
Professional Standards of Practice
The best guarantee of high-quality data is a strong professional staff
that includes experts in the subject-matter fields covered by the agencyÕs
program, experts in statistical methods and techniques, and experts in data
collection, processing, and other operations. A major function of an agencyÕs
managers is to strike a balance among these groups and promote working
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
39relationships that make the agencyÕs program as productive as possible, with
each group of experts contributing to the work of the others.
An effective statistical agency devotes resources to developing, imple-
menting, and inculcating standards for data quality and professional

practice. Although a long-standing culture of data quality contributes to
professional practice, an agency should also seek to develop and document
standards through an explicit process. The Information Quality Act of 2000

requires agencies to develop and publicize quality guidelines of a fairly
general nature (see Appendix B).
3 In addition, it is in an agencyÕs interest to
develop detailed guidelines for use by its staff, contractors, and even out-

side researchers. The existence of explicit standards and guidelines, regularly
reviewed and updated, facilitates training of new in-house staff and
contractorsÕ staffs.
An effective statistical agency keeps up to date on developments in
theory and practice that may be relevant to its program, such as new tech-
niques for imputing missing data (see, for example, National Research

Council, 2004e:App. F). An effective agency is also alert to changes in the
economy or in society that may call for changes in the concepts or methodsused in particular data sets (see, for example, National Research Council,

1995a, on concepts of poverty, and National Research Council, 2002a, on
cost-of-living concepts). Often the need for change conflicts with the need
for comparability with past data series, and this issue can easily dominate
consideration of proposals for change. Agencies have the responsibility to
manage this conflict by initiating more relevant data series or revising exist-
ing series to improve quality while providing information to compare old

and new series, such as was done when the Bureau of Labor Statistics revised
the treatment of owner-occupied housing in the consumer price index.
To ensure the quality of its data collection programs and reports, an
effective statistical agency has mechanisms and processes for obtaining both
inside and outside review of such aspects as the soundness of the data
collection and estimation methods and the completeness of the documen-
tation of the methods used and the error properties of the data. At a
program or agency-wide level, mechanisms for outside review include stand-
ing advisory committees of technical experts and periodic assessments by
3See also data quality guidelines of statistical agencies in other countries, includingCanada (Statistical Reference Centre, 2005), and Great Britain (Office for National Statis-

tics, 2005).Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
ad hoc committees (see, e.g., National Research Council, 1985a, 1986,
1993a, 1997b, 2003c, 2004c, 2004d). For individual publications and re-
ports, formal processes are needed that incorporate review by agency tech-
nical experts and, as appropriate, by technical experts in other agencies and

outside the government. (See Appendix B for a description of recent OMB
guidelines for peer review of scientific information.)
Practice 9: An Active Research Program
Substantive Research and Analysis
There are strong arguments for a statistical agency to have staff whose
responsibility is to conduct objective substantive analyses of the data that
the agency compiles, such as analyses that assess trends over time or compare
population groups:
¥Agency analysts are in a position to understand the need for and
purposes of the data and know how the statistics will be used. Such infor-
mation must be available to the agency and understood thoroughly if the

survey design is to produce the data required.
¥Those involved in analysis can best articulate the concepts that
should form the basic framework of a statistical series. Agency analysts are

well situated to understand and transmit the views of external users and
researchers; at the same time, close working relationships between analysts
and data producers are needed for the translation of the conceptual frame-

work into the design and operation of the survey.
¥Agency analysts have access to the complete microdata and so are in
a better position than analysts outside the agency to understand and
describe the limitations of the data for analysis purposes and to iden-tify errors or shortcomings in the data that can lead to subsequentimprovements.
¥Substantive research by analysts on an agencyÕs staff will have
credibility because of the agencyÕs commitment to openness about the data
provided and maintaining independence from political control.
¥Substantive research by analysts on an agencyÕs staff can assist in
formulating the agencyÕs data program, suggesting changes in priorities,
concepts, and needs for new data or discontinuance of outmoded or little-
used series.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
41As with descriptive analyses provided by the agency, substantive
analyses must be designed to be relevant to policy but not take positions on
policy options or be designed with any particular policy agenda in mind.
These issues are discussed in Martin (1981), Norwood (1975), and Triplett

(1991).Research on Methodology and Operations
For statistical agencies to be innovative in methods for data collection,
analysis, and dissemination, research on methodology and operational pro-

cedures must be ongoing. Methodological research may be directed toward
improving survey design, measuring error and, when possible, reducing it
from such sources as nonresponse and reporting errors, reducing the time

and effort asked of respondents, developing new and improved summary
measures and estimation techniques, and developing innovative statistical
methods for confidentiality protection. Research on operational procedures

may be directed toward facilitating data collection in the field, improving
the efficiency and reproducibility of data capture and processing, and
enhancing the usability of Internet-based data dissemination systems.
Much of current practice in statistical agencies was developed through
research they conducted or obtained from other agencies. Federal statistical
agencies, frequently in partnership with academic researchers, pioneered

the applications of statistical probability sampling, the national economic
accounts, input-output models, and other analytic methods. The U.S.
Census Bureau pioneered the use of computers for processing the census,

and research on data collection, processing, and dissemination operations
continues to lead to creative uses of automated procedures and equipment
in these areas. Several federal statistical agencies sponsor research using

academic principles of cognitive psychology to improve the design of
questionnaires, the clarity of data presentation, and the ease of use of
electronic data collection and dissemination tools such as the Internet. The

history of the statistical agencies has shown repeatedly that methodological
and operations research can lead to large productivity gains in statistical
activities at relatively low cost.
An effective statistical agency actively partners with the academic
community for methodological research. It also seeks out academic and
industry expertise for improving data collection, processing, and dissemina-

tion operations. For example, a statistical agency can learn techniques and
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
best practices for improving software development processes from computer
scientists (see National Research Council, 2003e, 2004d).
Research on Policy Uses
Much more needs to be known about how statistics are actually used
in the policy-making process, both inside and outside the government.

Research about how the information produced by a statistical agency is
used in practice can contribute to future improvements in design, concepts,
and format of data products. For example, public-use files of statistical

microdata were developed in response to the growing analytic needs of
government and academic researchers.
Gaining an understanding of the variety of uses and users of an agencyÕs
data is only a first step. More in-depth research on the policy uses of an
agencyÕs information might, for example, explore the use of data in
microsimulation or other economic models, or go further to examine how

the information from such models and other sources is used in decision-
making (see National Research Council, 1991a, 1991b, 1997a, 2001b, 2003a).
Practice 10: Professional Advancement of Staff
An effective federal statistical agency has personnel policies that
encourage the development and retention of a strong professional staff who
are committed to the highest standards of quality work. There are several
key elements of such a policy:¥The required levels of technical and professional qualifications for
positions in the agency are identified, and the agency adheres to these

requirements in recruitment and professional development of staff. Posi-
tion requirements take account of the different kinds of technical and other
skills, such as supervisory skills, that are necessary for an agency to have a

full range of qualified staff, including not only statisticians, but also experts
in relevant subject-matter areas, data collection, processing, dissemination
processes, and management of complex, technical operations.¥Continuing technical education and training of staff, appropriate to
the needs of their positions, is provided by sponsoring in-house training
programs and providing opportunities for external education and training.
¥Professional activities, such as publication in refereed journals and
presentations at conferences, are encouraged and recognized, including
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
43presentations of technical work in progress with appropriate disclaimers.
Participation in relevant statistical and other scientific associations is
encouraged to promote interactions with academic researchers and other

data users. Such participation is also a mechanism for openness about the

data provided.
¥Interaction with other professionals is increased through technical
advisory committees, supervision of contract research and research consult-

ants, fellowship programs of visiting researchers, exchange of staff with
relevant statistical, policy, or research organizations, and opportunities for
new assignments within the agency.
¥Accomplishment is rewarded by appropriate recognition and by
affording opportunity for further professional development. The prestige
and credibility of a statistical agency is enhanced by the professional

visibility of its staff, which may include establishing high-level non-
management positions for highly qualified technical experts.An effective statistical agency considers carefully the costs and
benefitsÑmonetary and nonmonetaryÑof using contractor organizations,
not only for data collection as most agencies do, but also to supplement in-
house staff in other areas.
4 Outsourcing of functions can have benefits,
such as providing experts in areas in which the agency is unlikely to be able

to attract highly qualified in-house staff (e.g., some information technology
functions), enabling an agency to handle an increase in its workload that is
expected to be temporary or that requires specialized skills, and allowing an
agency to learn from best industry practices. However, outsourcing can also

have costs, including that agency staff become primarily contract managers
and less qualified as technical experts and leaders in their fields. An effec-tive statistical agency maintains and develops a sufficiently large number of

in-house staff, including mathematical statisticians, who are qualified to
analyze the agencyÕs data and to plan, design, carry out, and evaluate its
core operations so that the agency maintains the integrity of its data and its

credibility in planning and fulfilling its mission. Statistical agencies should
also maintain and develop staff with the expertise necessary for effective
management of contractor resources.
4Only the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, and the National Agricultural
Statistics Service maintain their own interviewing staff.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
An effective statistical agency has policies and practices to instill the
highest possible commitment to professional ethics among its staff, as well
as procedures for monitoring contractor compliance with ethical standards.
When an agency comes under pressure to act against its principlesÑfor

example, if it is asked to disclose confidential information for an enforce-
ment purpose or to support an inaccurate interpretation of its dataÑit
must be able to rely on its staff to resist such actions as contrary to the

ethical principles of their profession. An effective agency refers its staff to
such statements of professional practice as the guidelines published by the
American Statistical Association (2005) and the International Statistical

Institute (2005), as well as to the agencyÕs own statements about protection
of confidentiality, respect for privacy, standards for data quality, and similar
matters. It endeavors in other ways to ensure that its staff are fully cogni-

zant of the ethics that must guide their actions in order for the agency to
maintain its credibility as a source of objective, reliable information for use
by all.Practice 11: Coordination and Cooperation with
Other Statistical Agencies
The U.S. federal statistical system consists of many agencies in differ-ent departments, each with its own mission. Nonetheless, statistical agencies

do not and should not conduct their activities in isolation. An effective
statistical agency actively explores ways to work with other agencies to meet
current information needs, for example, by seeking ways to integrate the

designs of existing data systems to provide new or more useful data than a
single system can provide. An effective agency is also alert for occasions
when it can provide technical assistance to other agenciesÑincluding not

only other statistical agencies, but also program agencies in its depart-
mentÑas well as occasions when it can receive such assistance in turn.
Efforts to standardize concepts and definitions, such as those for industries
and occupations, further contribute to effective coordination of statistical
agency endeavors, as does the development of broad macro models, such as
the system of national accounts (see, e.g., National Research Council,

2004a). Initiatives for sharing data among statistical agencies (including
individual data and address lists when permitted by law and when sharing
does not violate confidentiality promises) can be helpful for such purposes

as achieving greater efficiency in drawing samples, evaluating completeness
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
45of population coverage, and reducing duplication among statistical pro-
grams, as well as reducing respondent burden.
The responsibility for coordinating statistical work in the federal
government is specifically assigned to the Office of Information and Regu-

latory Affairs (OIRA) in the OMB by the Paperwork Reduction Act (previ-
ously, by the Federal Reports Act and the Budget and Accounting Proce-
dures Act). The Statistical and Science Policy Office in OIRA, often

working with the assistance of interagency committees, reviews concepts of
interest to more than one agency; issues standard classification systems (of
industries, metropolitan areas, etc.) and oversees their periodic revision;

consults with other parts of OMB on statistical budgets; and, by reviewing
the statistical program of the government as a whole, identifies gaps in
statistical data, programs that may be duplicative, and areas in which inter-

agency cooperation might lead to greater efficiency and added utility of
data. The Statistical and Science Policy Office also is responsible for coordi-
nating U.S. participation in international statistical activities.5The Statistical and Science Policy Office encourages the use of admin-
istrative data for statistical purposes, when feasible, and works to establish
common goals and norms on major statistical issues such as confidentiality.

It sponsors and heads the interagency Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology (FCSM), which issues guidelines and recommendations on
statistical issues common to a number of agencies (see Federal Committee

on Statistical Methodology, 1978a-2004; see also http://www.fcsm.gov). It
encourages the Committee on National Statistics at the National Academies
to serve as an independent adviser and reviewer of federal statistical activi-

ties. The 1995 reauthorization of the Paperwork Reduction Act created a
statutory basis for the Interagency Council on Statistical Policy (ICSP),
formalizing an arrangement whereby statistical agency heads participate

with OMB in activities to coordinate federal statistical activities. (See Box 1
for a list of agencies represented on the ICSP.)
There are many forms of interagency cooperation and coordination.
Some efforts are multilateral, some bilateral. Many result from common
interests in specific subject areas, such as economic statistics, statistics on
5The Statistical and Science Policy Office, previously the Statistical Policy Office, was
renamed to reflect added responsibilities with respect to the Information Quality Act stan-
dards and guidelines, OMBÕs guidance on peer review planning and implementation, and

evaluations of science underlying proposed regulatory actions.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
people with disabilities, or statistics on children or the elderly. (See U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, 2004c:Ch.3, for a description of several
interagency collaborative efforts, such as joint support for research that
fosters new and innovative approaches to surveys, expansion and improve-

ment of FedStats
 coverage and features, and development of the American
Community Survey.)
A common type of bilateral arrangement is the agreement of a program
agency to provide administrative data to a statistical agency to be used as a
sampling frame, a source of classification information, or a summary
compilation to check (and possibly revise) preliminary sample results. The

Bureau of Labor Statistics, for example, benchmarks its monthly establish-
ment employment reports to data supplied by state employment security
agencies. Such practices improve statistical estimates, reduce costs, and

eliminate duplicate requests for information from the same respondents. In
other cases, federal statistical agencies engage in cooperative data collection
with state counterparts to let one collection system satisfy the needs of

both. A number of such joint systems have been developed, notably by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the National Agricultural Statistics Service, the
National Center for Education Statistics, and the National Center for
Health Statistics.
Another example of a joint arrangement is the case in which one statis-tical agency contracts with another to conduct a survey, compile special

tabulations, or develop models. Such arrangements make use of the special
skills of the supplying agency and facilitate use of common concepts andmethods. The Census Bureau conducts many surveys for other agencies, as

do the National Center for Health Statistics and the National Agricultural
Statistics Service (see U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 2004c:App. A).
The major federal statistics agencies are also concerned with inter-
national comparability of statistics. Under the leadership of OMBÕs
Statistical and Science Policy Office, they contribute to the deliberations of
the United Nations Statistical Commission, the Organization for Economic

Co-operation and Development, and other international organizations;
participate in the development of international standard classifications and
systems; and support educational activities that promote improved statistics

in developing countries. Statistical agencies also learn from and contribute
to the work of established statistical agencies in other countries in suchareas as survey methodology, record linkage, confidentiality protection

techniques, and data quality standards. Several statistical agencies run
educational programs for government statisticians in developing countries.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART II: COMMENTARY
47Some statistical agencies have long-term cooperative relationships with
international groups, for example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics with the
International Labor Organization, the National Agricultural Statistics
Service with the Food and Agriculture Organization, and the National
Center for Health Statistics with the World Health Organization.
To be of most value, the efforts of statistical agencies to cooperate as
partners with one another should involve the full range of their activities,

including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical tools,
dissemination modes, and disclosure limitation techniques. Such efforts
should also extend to policies and professional practices so that agencies

can respond effectively and with a coordinated voice to such government-
wide initiatives as data quality guidelines, privacy impact assessments,
performance rating criteria, institutional review board requirements, and

others.Finally, coordination efforts should encompass the development of
data, especially for emerging policy issues (National Research Council,

1999a). In some cases, it may be not only more efficient, but also produc-
tive of needed new data for agencies to fully integrate the designs of existingdata systems, such as when one survey provides the sampling frame for a

related survey. In other instances, cooperative efforts may identify ways for
agencies to improve their individual data systems so that they are more
useful for a wide range of purposes. Two of the more effective continuing cooperative efforts in this regard
have been the Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics and
the Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics. The former

was established in the mid-1980s by the National Institute on Aging, in
cooperation with the National Center for Health Statistics and the Census
Bureau. The forumÕs goals include coordinating the development and use
of statistical databases among federal agencies, identifying information gapsand data inconsistencies, and encouraging cross-national research and data
collection for the aging population. The forum was reorganized in 1998 to

include six new member agencies, and the reconfigured forum decided at
its first meeting in March 1999 to focus on developing a periodic indicators
chart book, which was first published the following year (the latest publica-

tion is Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics, 2004).
The Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics was
formalized in a 1994 executive order to foster coordination and collabora-

tion in the collection and reporting of federal data on children and families.
It includes many relevant statistical and program agencies. Its reports (e.g.,
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics, 2003, 2004)
describe the condition of AmericaÕs children, including changing popula-
tion and family characteristics, the environment in which children are
living, and indicators of well-being in the areas of economic security, health,

behavior, social environment, and education.
No single agency, whether a statistical or program agency, could have
produced the forum reports alone. Working together in this way, federal

statistical agencies contribute to presenting data in a form that is more
relevant to policy concerns and to a stronger statistical system overall.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49References
American Statistical Association (2005). 
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice.
 Alexandria,VA: American Statistical Association. Available: http://www.amstat.org/profession/
index.cfm?fuseaction=main [Accessed March 2005].
Brackstone, Gordon (1999). Managing data quality in a statistical agency. 
Survey Methodol-
ogy
 25(2):139-149.Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005a). 
Federal Economic Statistics Advisory Committee.
 Washing-ton, DC: U.S. Department of Labor. Available: http://www.bls.gov/bls/fesac.htm [Ac-
cessed March 2005].
_______(2005b). National Longitudinal Surveys
. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of La-
bor.  Available: http://bls.gov/nls/home.htm [Accessed March 2005].
Chakrabarty, Rameswar, assisted by Georgina Torres (1996). 
The American Housing SurveyÑ
A Quality Profile
. (Current Housing Reports, H121/95-1. Office of Policy Develop-
ment and Research, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and U.S.
Census Bureau.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Doyle, Pat, Julia I. Lane, Jules J.M. Theeuwes, and Laura V. Zayatz, eds. (2001).
Confidentiality, Disclosure, and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for
Statistical Agencies.
 Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.
Duncan, Joseph W., and William C. Shelton (1978). 
Revolution in United States Government
Statistics, 1926-1976. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of
Federal Statistical Policy and Standards.
Energy Information Administration (1996). 
Residential Energy Consumption Survey Quality
Profile. (Prepared by Thomas B. Jabine.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology (1978a). 
Report on Statistics for Allocation of
Funds. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 1, NTIS PB86-211521/AS.) Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Commerce.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
_______(1978b). Report on Statistical Disclosure and Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques
. (Statis-
tical Policy Working Paper 2, NTIS PB86-211539/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce.
_______(1978c). An Error Profile: Employment as Measured by the Current Population Survey
.(Statistical Policy Working Paper 3, NTIS PB86-214269/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S.

Department of Commerce._______(1978d). Glossary of Nonsampling Error Terms: An Illustration of a Semantic Problem
in Statistics
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 4, NTIS PB86-211547/AS.) Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
_______(1980a). Report on Exact and Statistical Matching Techniques
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 5, NTIS PB86-215829/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Commerce.
_______(1980b). Report on Statistical Uses of Administrative Records
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 6, NTIS PB86-214285/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Commerce.
_______(1982a). An Interagency Review of Time-Series Revision Policies
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 7, NTIS PB86-232451/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1982b). Statistical Interagency Agreements
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 8, NTIS
PB86-230570/AS.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1983a). Contracting for Surveys
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 9, NTIS PB83-
233148.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1983b). Approaches to Developing Questionnaires
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper
10, NTIS PB84-105055.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1984a). A Review of Industry Coding Systems
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 11,
NTIS PB84-135276.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1984b). The Role of Telephone Data Collection in Federal Statistics
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 12, NTIS PB85-105971.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1986). Federal Longitudinal Surveys
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 13, NTIS
PB86-139730.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1987). Workshop on Statistical Uses of Microcomputers in Federal Agencies
. (Statistical
Policy Working Paper 14, NTIS PB87-166393.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
_______(1988). Quality in Establishment Surveys
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 15, NTIS
PB88-232921.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1990a). A Comparative Study of Reporting Units in Selected Employer Data Systems
.(Statistical Policy Working Paper 16, NTIS PB90-205238.) Washington, DC: U.S.

Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1990b). Surv
ey Coverage
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 17, NTIS PB90-
205246.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1990c). Data Editing in Federal Statistical Agencies
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper
18, NTIS PB90-205253.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1990d). Computer Assisted Survey Information
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper
19, NTIS PB90-205261.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES51_______(1991). Seminar on Quality of Federal Data
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 20,
NTIS PB91-142414.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1993). Indirect Estimators in Federal Programs
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 21,
NTIS PB93-209294.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1994). Report on Statistical Disclosure Limitation Methodology
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 22, NTIS PB94-165305.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1995a). Seminar on New Directions in Statistical Methodology
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 23, NTIS PB95-182978.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1995b). Electronic Dissemination of Statistical Data
. (Statistical Policy Working
Paper 24, NTIS PB96-121629.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and
Budget._______(1996). Data Editing Workshop and Exposition
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 25,
NTIS PB97-104624.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1997). Seminar on Statistical Methodology in the Public Service
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 26, NTIS PB97-162580.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1998). Training for the Future: Addressing TomorrowÕs Survey Tasks
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 27, NTIS PB99-102576.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1999a). Seminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 28, NTIS PB99-132029.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(1999b). Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference,
Conference Papers
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 29, NTIS PB99-166795.)
Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(1999c). 1999 Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference:
Complete Proceedings
. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 30, NTIS PB2000-105886.)
Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(2001a). Measuring and Reporting Sources of Error in Surveys.
 (Statistical Policy Work-
ing Paper 31, NTIS PB2001-104329.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management

and Budget.
_______(2001b). Seminar on Integrating Federal Statistical Information and Processes
. (Statis-
tical Policy Working Paper 32, NTIS PB2001-104626.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office

of Management and Budget.
_______(2001c). Seminar on the Funding Opportunity in Survey Research
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 33, NTIS PB2001-108851.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Manage-
ment and Budget.
_______(2001d). Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference
. (Statistical
Policy Working Paper 34, NTIS PB2002-100103.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
_______(2002). Seminar on Challenges to the Federal Statistical System in Fostering Access to
Statistics. (Statistical Policy Working Paper 35.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
_______(2003a). Seminar on the Funding Opportunity in Survey Research
. (Statistical Policy
Working Paper 36.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(2003b). Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research Conference
. (Statistical
Policy Working Paper 37.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
_______(2004). Summary Report of the FCSM-GSS Workshop on Web-Based Data Collection.
(Statistical Policy Working Paper 38.) Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Management
and Budget.
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics (2004). 
Older Americans: Key Indica-
tors of Well-Being, 2004
. Available: http://www.agingstats.gov [Accessed January 2005]).
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics (2003). 
AmericaÕs Children: Key
National Indicators of Well-Being, 2003
. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office. Available: http://www.childstats.gov [Accessed January 2005].
_______(2004). AmericaÕs Children in Brief: Key National Indicators of Well-Being, 2004.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Available: http://www.childstats.gov
[Accessed January 2005].
Gates, Gerald W. (2000). Confidentiality. Pp. 80-83 in Margo J. Anderson (ed.), 
Encyclopedia
of the U.S. Census. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
International Statistical Institute (2005). 
International Statistical Institute Home Page
.Voorburg, The Netherlands: International Statistical Institute. Available: http://
www.cbs.nl/isi/ [Accessed March 2005].
Kalton, Graham, Marianne Winglee, Sheila Krawchuk, and Daniel Levine (2000). 
QualityProfile for SASS Rounds 1-3: 1987-1995, Aspects of the Quality of Data in the Schools and
Staffing Surveys (SASS)
. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education National
Center for Education Statistics.
Martin, Margaret E. (1981). Statistical practice in bureaucracies. 
Journal of the American
Statistical Association 76(373):1-8.National Center for Education Statistics (2005). 
Early Childhood Longitudinal Study
. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. Available: http://nces.ed.gov/ecls/ [Ac-
cessed March 2005].
National Research Council (1976). 
Setting Statistical Priorities. 
Report of the Panel on Meth-
odology for Statistical Priorities of the Committee on National Statistics, Commission
on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Assembly of Mathematical and Physi-

cal Sciences. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1984). Cognitive Aspects of Survey Methodology: Building a Bridge Between Dis-
ciplines. Report of the Advanced Research Seminar on Cognitive Aspects of Survey
Methodology,
 Thomas B. Jabine, Miron L. Straf, Judith M. Tanur, and Roger
Tourangeau, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1985a). Immigration Statistics: A Story of Neglect
. Panel on Immigration Statistics,
Daniel B. Levine, Kenneth Hill, and Robert Warren, eds. Committee on National
Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1985b). Sharing Research Data
. Stephen E. Fienberg, Margaret E. Martin, and
Miron L. Straf, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES53_______(1986). Creating a Center for Education Statistics: A Time for Action
. Panel to Evalu-
ate the National Center for Education Statistics, Daniel B. Levine, ed. Committee on

National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1991a). Improving Information for Social Policy Decisions: The Uses of Micro-
simulation Modeling, Volume I: Review and Recommendations
. Panel to Evaluate
Microsimulation Models for Social Welfare Programs, Constance F. Citro and Eric A.
Hanushek, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and

Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1991b). Improving Information for Social Policy Decisions: The Uses of Micro-
simulation Modeling, Volume II: Technical Papers
. Panel to Evaluate Microsimulation
Models for Social Welfare Programs, Constance F. Citro and Eric A. Hanushek, eds.
Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1992). Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
. Margaret E. Martin
and Miron L. Straf, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1993a). The Future of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
. Panel to
Evaluate the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Constance F. Citro and
Graham Kalton, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1993b). Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Govern-
ment Statistics
. Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, George T. Duncan, Thomas
B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission
on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy
Pre
ss._______(1995a). Measuring PovertyÑA New Approach.
 Panel on Poverty and Family
Assistance, Constance F. Citro and Robert T. Michael, eds. Committee on National
Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1995b). Modernizing the U.S. Census
. Panel on Census Requirements in the Year
2000 and Beyond. Barry Edmonston and Charles Schultze, eds. Committee on

National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1997a). Assessing Policies for Retirement Income: Needs for Data, Research, and Models
.Panel on Retirement Income Modeling, Constance F. Citro and Eric A. Hanushek, eds.
Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1997b). The Bureau of Transportation Statistics: Priorities for the Future
. Panel on
Statistical Programs and Practices of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Constance
F. Citro and Janet L. Norwood, eds. Committee on National Statistics and Transporta-
tion Research Board. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1998a). Longitudinal Surveys of Children
. Committee on National Statistics and
Board on Children, Youth, and Families, Kirsten K. West, Robert M. Hauser, and Terri

M. Scanlan, eds., Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academy Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
_______(1998b). Statistics, Testing, and Defense Acquisition: New Approaches and Method-
ological Improvements
. Panel on Statistical Methods for Testing and Evaluating Defense
Systems, Michael L. Cohen, John E. Rolph, and Duane L. Steffey, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1999a). Health Performance Measurement in the Public Sector: Principles and Policies
for Implementing an Information Network
. Panel on Performance Measures and Data for
Public Health Performance Partnership Grants, Edward B. Perrin, Jane S. Durch, and
Susan M. Skillman, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(1999b). Sowing Seeds of Change: Informing Public Policy in the Economic Research
Service of USDA. Panel to Study the Research Program of the Economic Research
Service, John F. Geweke, James T. Bonnen, Andrew A. White, and Jeffrey J. Koshel,
eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences

and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(2000). Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a Workshop
.Christopher Mackie and Norman Bradburn, eds. Committee on National Statistics,

Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
_______(2001a). Cells and Surveys: Should Biological Measures Be Included in Social Science
Research?
 Caleb E. Finch, James W. Vaupel, and Kevin Kinsella, eds. Committee on
Population, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(2001b). Evaluating Welfare Reform in an Era of Transition.
 Panel on Data and
Methods for Measuring the Effects of Changes in Social Welfare Programs, Robert A.
Moffitt and Michele Ver Ploeg, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy
Pres
s._______(2001c). Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Second Edition
.Margaret E. Martin, Miron L. Straf, and Constance F. Citro, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(2002a). At What Price?: Conceptualizing and Measuring Cost-of-Living and Price
Indexes
. Panel on Conceptual, Measurement, and Other Statistical Issues in Developing
Cost-of-Living Indexes, Charles Schultze and Christopher Mackie, eds. Committee on

National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
_______(2002b). Reliability Issues for DoD Systems: Report of a Workshop
. Francisco Samaniego
and Michael L. Cohen, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2003a). Estimating Eligibility and Participation for the WIC Program: Final Report.
Panel to Evaluate the USDAÕs Methodology for Estimating Eligibility and Participation
for the WIC Program, Michele Ver Ploeg and David M. Betson, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES55_______(2003b). Innovations in Software Engineering for Defense Systems.
 Oversight Com-
mittee for the Workshop on Statistical Methods in Software Engineering for Defense

Systems, Siddhartha R. Dalal, Jesse H. Poore, and Michael L. Cohen, eds. Committee
on National Statistics and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2003c). Measuring Personal Travel and Goods Movement: A Review of the Bureau of
Transportation StatisticsÕ SurveysÑSpecial Report 277
. Committee to Review the Bureau
of Transportation StatisticsÕ Survey Programs. Committee on National Statistics and

Transportation Research Board. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2003d). Protecting Participants and Facilitating Social and Behavioral Sciences
Research
. Panel on Institutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Science Research,
Constance F. Citro, Daniel R. Ilgen, and Cora B. Marrett, eds. Committee on National
Statistics and Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.
_______(2003e). Survey Automation: Report and Workshop Proceedings. 
Oversight Committee
for the Workshop on Survey Automation, Daniel L. Cork, Michael L. Cohen, Robert
Groves, and William Kalsbeek, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press.
_______(2004a). Beyond the Market: Designing Nonmarket Accounts for the United States
.Panel to Study the Design of Nonmarket Accounts, Katharine G. Abraham and
Christopher Mackie, eds. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2004b). Eliminating Health Disparities: Measurement and Data Needs.
 Panel onDHHS Collection of Race and Ethnic Data, Michele Ver Ploeg and Edward Perrin,
eds. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and

Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2004c). Measuring Research and Development Expenditures in the U.S. Economy.
Panel on Research and Development Statistics at the National Science Foundation,
Lawrence D. Brown, Thomas J. Plewes, and Marisa A. Gerstein, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Wash-
ington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2004d). Reengineering the 2010 Census: Risks and Challenges
. Panel on Research on
Future Census Methods, Daniel L. Cork, Michael L. Cohen, and Benjamin F. King,
eds. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and

Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______(2004e). The 2000 Census: Counting Under Adversity
. Panel to Review the 2000
Census, Constance F. Citro, Daniel L. Cork, and Janet L. Norwood, eds. Committee

on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (1992). 
Toward a National Health Care
Survey: A Data System for the 21st Century
. Panel on the National Health Care Survey,
Gooloo S. Wunderlich, ed. Committee on National Statistics and Division of Health
Care Services. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
_______(2004). ChildrenÕs Health, The NationÕs Wealth: Assessing and Improving ChildrenÕs
Health. Committee on Evaluation of ChildrenÕs Health, Board on Children, Youth, and
Families, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.
Nie, Norman, Kenneth Prewitt, D. Sunshine Hillygus, and H. Pals (in press). 
Taking a Census
Under Adversity
. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Norwood, Janet L. (1975). Should those who produce statistics analyze them? How far should
analysis go? An American view. 
Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute,
Proceedings of the 40th Session
 46:420-432._______(1995). Organizing to Count: Change in the Federal Statistical System
. Washington,
DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Office for Human Research Protections (2005). 
Office for Human Research Protections Home
Page. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Available:
http://hhs.gov/ohrp/ [Accessed March 2005].
Office for National Statistics (2005). 
National Statistics Online
. London, England: Office for
National Statistics. Available: http://www.statistics.gov.uk/ [Accessed March 2005].
PresidentÕs Commission on Federal Statistics (1971). 
Federal Statistics. Volume I
. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977). 
Personal Privacy in an Information Society
.Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Ryten, Jacob (1990). Statistical organization criteria for inter-country comparisons and their
application to Canada. Journal of Official Statistics
 6(3):319-332.Statistical Reference Centre (2005). 
Statistics Canada
. Ottawa: Statistical Reference Centre.
Available: http://www.statcan.ca/ [Accessed March 2005].
Triplett, Jack (1991). The federal statistical systemÕs response to emerging data needs. 
Journal
of Economic and Social Measurement
 17(3, 4):155-201.United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (2003). ECE-World Bank Seminar on
the Application of the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics, April 28-29, Almaty,
Kazakhstan.United Nations Statistical Commission (1994). 
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 9. New
York: United Nations Statistical Commission.
_______(2003). Implementation of the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics. Report of
the Secretary-General. 
New York: United Nations Statistical Commission.
United Nations Statistical Commission and Economic Commission for Europe (1991).
Resolution on fundamental principles of official statistics in the Economic Commission
for Europe (draft). 
Report of the Thirty-Ninth Plenary Session
, June 17-21.
U.S. Census Bureau (1998). 
Survey of Income and Program Participation Quality Profile 1998
,Third Edition. (Prepared by Westat, Graham Kalton, project director.) Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. Also available: http://www.bls.census.gov/sipp/
workpapr/230.pdf [Accessed January 2005].
_______(2003). U.S. Census Bureau Data Stewardship/Privacy Impact AssessmentÑ
Demographic Surveys Program.
 Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
U.S. General Accounting Office (1995). 
Statistical Agencies: Adherence to Guidelines and
Coordination of Budgets
. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES57U.S. Office of Management and Budget (1985). Statistical policy directive on compilation,
release, and evaluation of principal federal economic indicators. Federal Register
50(186):932-934._______(1997). Order providing for the confidentiality of statistical information. 
Federal
Register 62(124):35044-35050._______(2003). OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the E-
Government Act of 2002. Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and
Agencies from Joshua B. Bolten, Director. Washington, DC.  Available: http://

www.whitehouse.gov/
omb/memoranda/m03-22.html [Accessed January 2005].
_______(2004a). Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2005, Analytical
Perspectives.
 Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
_______(2004b). Issuance of OMBÕs ÒFinal Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review.Ó
Memorandum from Joshua B. Bolten, Director, for heads of departments and agencies.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget (December 16).
_______(2004c). Statistical Programs of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2005
.Statistical and Science Policy Office, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing

Office.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59APPENDIX
 AFundamental Principles of
Official Statistics of the United Nations
Statistical Commission[Excerpted from the report of the Statistical Commission on its Special
Session, held in New York 11-15 April 1994.  Official Records of the Eco-
nomic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 9.]
Action taken by the Commission59.  The Commission adopted the fundamental principles of official statis-
tics as set out in ECE decision C (47), but incorporating a revised pre-
amble.  The preamble and principles, as adopted, are set out below:
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS
The Statistical Commission,Bearing in mind that official statistical information is an essential basis
for development in the economic, demographic, social and environ-
mental fields and for mutual knowledge and trade among the States
and peoples of the world,Bearing in mind that the essential trust of the public in official statisti-
cal information depends to a large extent on respect for the fundamen-

tal values and principles which are the basis of any society which seeks
to understand itself and to respect the rights of its members,
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Bearing in mind that the quality of official statistics, and thus the qual-
ity of the information available to the Government, the economy and
the public depends largely on the cooperation of citizens, enterprises,
and other respondents in providing appropriate and reliable data

needed for necessary statistical compilations and on the cooperation
between users and producers of statistics in order to meet usersÕ needs,
Recalling the efforts of governmental and non-governmental organiza-
tions active in statistics to establish standards and concepts to allow
comparisons among countries,Recalling also the International Statistical Institute Declaration of Pro-
fessional Ethics,
Having expressed the opinion that resolution C (47), adopted by the
Economic Commission for Europe on 15 April 1992, is of universal
significance,Noting that, at its eighth session, held at Bangkok in November 1993,
the Working Group of Statistical Experts, assigned by the Committee
on Statistics of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific to examine the Fundamental Principles, had agreed in principle
to the ECE version and had emphasized that those principles were
applicable to all nations,Noting also that, at its eighth session, held at Addis Ababa in March
1994, the Joint Conference of African Planners, Statisticians and De-
mographers, considered that the Fundamental Principles of Official

Statistics are of universal significance,
Adopts the present principles of official statistics:
1.  Official statistics provide an indispensable element in the informa-
tion system of a democratic society, serving the Government, the

economy and the public with data about the economic, demographic,social and environmental situation.  To this end, official statistics that
meet the test of practical utility are to be compiled and made available

on an impartial basis by official statistical agencies to honour citizensÕ
entitlement to public information.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
612.  To retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need to
decide according to strictly professional considerations, including sci-
entific principles and professional ethics, on the methods and proce-
dures for the collection, processing, storage and presentation of statis-

tical data.3.  To facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical agen-
cies are to present information according to scientific standards on the
sources, methods and procedures of the statistics.
4.  The statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous inter-
pretation and misuse of statistics.
5.  Data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of sources,
be they statistical surveys or administrative records.  Statistical agencies
are to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs and

the burden on respondents.
6.  Individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical compi-
lation, whether they refer to natural or legal persons, are to be strictly
confidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.
7.  The laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical sys-
tems operate are to be made public.
8.  Coordination among statistical agencies within countries is essen-
tial to achieve consistency and efficiency in the statistical system.
9.  The use by statistical agencies in each country of international con-
cepts, classifications and methods promotes the consistency and effi-
ciency of statistical systems at all official levels.10.  Bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes to
the improvement of systems of official statistics in all countries.
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62APPENDIX
 BRelevant Legislation and Guidelines
Adopted Since 2001
This appendix summarizes relevant congressional legislation and U.S.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) guidance since publication of
the second edition of Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
(National Research Council, 2001c). It covers the Confidential Informa-
tion Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA); Section 208 of the
E-Government Act, which requires Privacy Impact Assessments for federal

data collections; the Information Quality Act of 2000; OMB guidance on
peer review; and OMB provisions for rating the performance of federal
programs using the Program Assessment Rating Tool (PART).
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION PROTECTION AND
STATISTICAL EFFICIENCY ACT
The Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act
was passed as Title V of the E-Government Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-347).

Enactment of CIPSEA culminated more than 30 years of efforts to stan-
dardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for statistical

purposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing of individu-

ally identifiable business information among three statistical agencies for
efficiency and quality improvement.
Title V has two subtitles. Subtitle A, Confidential Information Protec-
tion, strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statistical

data collections of the U.S. government. For all data furnished by indi-
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
63viduals or organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentiality forexclusively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be used only
for statistical purposes and will not be disclosed in identifiable form toanyone not authorized by the title. It makes knowing and willful disclosure

of confidential statistical data a class E felony with fines up to $250,000and imprisonment for up to 5 years.
Subtitle A pertains not only to surveys, but also to collections by a
federal agency for statistical purposes from administrative records (e.g., state
government agency records). Data covered under subtitle A are not subject
to release under a Freedom of Information Act request. Guidance from

OMB, which is charged to oversee and coordinate the implementation of
CIPSEA, is under development. It is intended to cover such topics as the
steps that agencies must take to protect confidential information; wording

of confidentiality pledges in materials that are provided to respondents;
steps that agencies must take to distinguish any data or information theycollect for nonstatistical purposes and to provide proper notice to the public

of such data; and ways in which agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) may
be designated to use individually identifiable information for analysis andother statistical purposes and be held legally responsible for protecting the

confidentiality of that information.Subtitle B of CIPSEA, Statistical Efficiency, permits the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the
Census Bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statistical
purposes. The intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden on
businesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economic

statistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differences among
sampling frames, business classifications, and business reporting; and
increase understanding of the U.S. economy and improve the accuracy of

key national indicators, such as the national income and product accounts.
SECTION 208, E-GOVERNMENT ACT
Section 208 of the E-Government Act of 2002 requires federal agencies
to conduct a privacy impact assessment (PIA) whenever the agency develops

or obtains information technology that handles individually identifiableinformation or whenever the agency initiates a new collection of individu-
ally identifiable information. The PIA is to be made publicly available and

cover such topics as what information is being collected and why, with
whom the information will be shared, what provisions will be made for
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
informed consent regarding data sharing, and how the information will be
secured. Typically, PIAs cover not only privacy issues, but also confidentiality,
integrity, and availability issues (see, e.g., U.S. Census Bureau, 2003). OMB
is required to issue guidance for development of PIAs, which was done in a

memorandum from the OMB director to the heads of executive agencies
and departments on September 26, 2003 (U.S. Office of Management and
Budget, 2003).INFORMATION QUALITY ACT OF 2000
The Information Quality Act (IQA), two sentences in an appropria-
tions bill for fiscal 2001 (P.L. 106-554, section 515a), requires federal agen-
cies to develop predissemination procedures that will ensure the quality of

information they disseminate and to develop an administrative mechanism
whereby affected parties can request that agencies correct low-quality infor-
mation. The act directs OMB to issue guidelines Òensuring and maximizing

the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information . . . dissemi-
nated by Federal agencies.Ó
OMB published proposed governmentwide IQA guidelines in the
Federal Register
 on June 28, 2001 (66 
Federal Register
 34489) and finalguidelines (with a request for further comments on certain points) on
September 28, 2001 (66 Federal Register
 49718). OMB later republished
the guidelines (after incorporating changes pursuant to public comments)on February 22, 2002 (67 
Federal Register
 8452-8460; see also http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/iqg_ 2002.pdf [January 2005]).
In June 2002, 13 statistical agencies issued a Federal Register
 notice (67Federal Register 
38467-38470, June 4) outlining a common approach to
the development and provision of guidelines for ensuring and maximizing

the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of disseminated information.
The notice directed people to the web sites of each agency for more infor-
mation and to learn how to comment on draft guidelines. Each agency

then finalized its own guidelines (see, for example, http://www.census.gov/
qdocs/www/quality_guidelines.htm [January 2005]).
OMB GUIDANCE ON PEER REVIEW
Under the authority of the Information Quality Act, OMB issued a
draft Peer Review Bulletin for public comment on September 15, 2003. It
issued a Revised Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review on April 15,
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
652004, which incorporated comments from agencies, the National Academies,
and others. The Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review was
issued on December 16, 2004; it requires federal agencies to conduct a peer
review of Òinfluential scientific informationÓ before the information is
released to the public. ÒInfluential scientific informationÓ is defined as
Òscientific information the agency reasonably can determine will have or
does have a clear and substantial impact on important public policies or

private sector decisionsÓ (U.S. Office of Management and Budget,
2004b:10). The bulletin grants agencies discretion to select the type of peer
review process for a particular information product. The bulletin excludes
from the guidelines Òroutine statistical information released by federal
statistical agencies (e.g., periodic demographic and economic statistics) andthe analysis of these data to compute standard indicators and trends (e.g.,

unemployment and poverty rates)Ó (U.S. Office of Management and
Budget, 2004b:40).PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT RATING TOOL
The Office of Management and Budget began a major initiative in
2002 to develop a tool for assessing the performance of federal agencies andprograms that would identify effective and ineffective programs and provide
information that could be used in making budgetary decisions. The tool is

the Performance Assessment Rating Tool (PART), which is a questionnaire
that has sets of questions or measures on program design and purpose,
program goals, agency management of programs, and results that agencies

can report with accuracy and consistency. (There are several versions of
PART for use by different kinds of programs, such as research and develop-
ment programs, competitive grant programs, or direct federal programs.)

Answers to the questions in each section produce a numeric score for that
section from 0 to 100; the section scores are then combined to achieve an
overall qualitative rating: Effective, Moderately Effective, Adequate, or
Ineffective (for more information, see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/
part/2004_faq.html [January 2005]).
The statistical agencies and units on the Interagency Council on Statis-
tical Policy collaborated to develop an initial set of common performance
standards for use in completing PART and in developing strategic plans
required by the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 (GPRA).
The agencies agreed on two general areas of focusÑproduct quality and
program performanceÑand on three dimensions of each focus area. For
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
product quality, the dimensions are relevance, accuracy, and timeliness; for
program performance, the dimensions are cost, dissemination, and mission
achievement. Example indicators were developed for each dimension, such
as measures of customer satisfaction as an indicator of mission achievement

(see U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 2004a:41-46).
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67Executive Office of the President
Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Economic Statistics (ESBR): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/esbr.html
Social Statistics (SSBR): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/ssbr.html
Office of Management and Budget (OMB): www.whitehouse.gov/
OMBFederal Committee on Statistical Methodology: www.fcsm.gov
Federal Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, Federal Statistics:
www.fedstats.gov
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics:
www.agingstats.gov
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics:
www.childstats.gov
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC): www.cpsc.gov

Department of Agriculture (USDA): www.usda.gov
Agricultural Research Service (ARS): www.ars.usda.gov
Note: This list is adapted from a listing in U.S. Office of Management and Budget
(2004c) and includes federal statistical agencies, as well as other federal agencies that produce

statistical information.APPENDIX
 CSelected Federal Statistical World Wide
Web Sites, January 2005
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Economic Research Service (ERS): www.ers.usda.gov
Food and Nutrition Service (FNS): www.fns.usda.gov
Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS): www.fas.usda.gov
Forest Service (FS): www.fs.fed.us
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS): www.usda.gov/nass
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS): www.nrcs.usda.gov
Department of Commerce: www.doc.gov
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA): www.bea.gov
Census Bureau: www.census.gov

Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA): www.esa.doc.gov
International Trade Administration (ITA): www.ita.doc.gov
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS): www.nmfs.noaa.gov
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA):
www.noaa.gov
Department of Defense: www.dod.gov
Army Corps of Engineers (CORPS): www.usace.army.mil
Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC): www.dmdc.osd.mil

Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (DIOR):
www.dior.whs.mil
Department of Education: www.ed.gov
Institute of Education Sciences (IES):www. ed.gov/about/offices/list/ies
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES): www.nces.ed.gov
Department of Energy: www.doe.gov
Energy Information Administration (EIA): www.eia.doe.gov
Office of Environment, Safety and Health (EH): www.eh.doe.gov
Department of Health and Human Services: www.dhhs.gov
Administration for Children and Families (ACF): www.acf.hhs.gov
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ):
www.ahrq.gov
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR):
www.atsdr.cdc.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): www.cdc.gov
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
69Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS):
www.cms.hhs.gov
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA):
www.hrsa.gov
Indian Health Service (IHS): www.ihs.gov
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS): www.cdc.gov/nchs
National Institute on Aging (NIA): www.nia.nih.gov
National Institutes of Health (NIH): www.nih.gov
Office of Population Affairs (OPA): www.opa.osophs.dhhs.gov
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE):
www.aspe.hhs.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA): www.samhsa.gov
Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov
Office of Immigration Statistics (OIS):
www.uscis.gov/graphics/shared/aboutus/statistics
Transportation Security Administration (TSA): www.tsa.gov
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP): www.cbp.gov
Department of Housing and Urban Development: www.hud.gov
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and
Research (PD&R): www.huduser.org
Department of the Interior: www.doi.gov
Bureau of Reclamation: www.usbr.gov
Minerals Management Service (MMS): www.mms.gov
National Park Service (NPS): www.nps.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS): www.fws.gov
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS): www.usgs.gov
Department of Justice: www.usdoj.gov
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS): www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
Bureau of Prisons (BoP): www.bop.gov
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA): www.usdoj.gov/dea
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI): www.fbi.gov
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Department of Labor: www.dol.gov
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS): www.bls.gov
Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA):
www.dol.gov/ebsa
Employment and Training Administration (ETA): www.doleta.gov
Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA): www.msha.gov
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA):
www.osha.gov
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy (OASP): www.dol.gov/asp
Department of State: www.state.gov
Agency for International Development (AID): www.usaid.gov
Department of Transportation: www.dot.gov
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS): www.bts.gov
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): www.faa.gov
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA): www.fhwa.dot.gov
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA): www.fra.dot.gov
Federal Transit Administration (FTA): www.fta.dot.gov
Maritime Administration (MARAD): www.marad.dot.gov
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA):
www.nhtsa.dot.gov/
Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA):
www.rita.dot.gov
Department of the Treasury: www.ustreas.gov
Internal Revenue Service (IRS): www.irs.gov
Statistics of Income Division (SOI): www.irs.gov/taxstats
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA): www.va.gov/vetdata/
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): www.epa.gov
Office of Environmental Information  (OEI): www.epa.gov/oei
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): www.fema.gov
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA): www.nasa.gov
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
71National Science Foundation: www.nsf.gov
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE):
www.nsf.gov/dir/index.isp?org=SBE
Science Resources Statistics Division (SRS): www.nsf.gov/statistics
Small Business Administration (SBA): www.sba.gov/advo/research
Social Security Administration (SSA): www.socialsecurity.gov
Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics: www.socialsecurity.gov/
policyINDEX OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL SITES LISTED
Administration for Children and FamiliesÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Agency for Healthcare Research and QualityÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Agency for International DevelopmentÑsee Department of State
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease RegistryÑsee Department of
Health and Human Services
Agricultural Research ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Army Corps of EngineersÑsee Department of Defense

Bureau of Economic AnalysisÑsee Department of Commerce
Bureau of Justice StatisticsÑsee Department of Justice
Bureau of Labor StatisticsÑsee Department of Labor
Bureau of PrisonsÑsee Department of Justice
Bureau of ReclamationÑsee Department of the Interior
Bureau of Transportation StatisticsÑsee Department of Transportation
Census BureauÑsee Department of Commerce
Centers for Disease Control and PreventionÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid ServicesÑsee Department of Health
and Human Services
Consumer Product Safety CommissionÑsee Consumer Product Safety
CommissionDefense Manpower Data CenterÑsee Department of Defense
Directorate for Information Operations and ReportsÑsee Department of
DefensePrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic SciencesÑsee National
Science Foundation
Drug Enforcement AdministrationÑsee Department of Justice
Economic Research ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Economic Statistics Briefing RoomÑsee Executive Office of the
President, Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Economics and Statistics AdministrationÑsee Department of Commerce
Employee Benefits Security AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Employment and Training AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Energy Information AdministrationÑsee Department of Energy
Environmental Protection AgencyÑsee Environmental Protection
AgencyFederal Aviation AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Bureau of InvestigationÑsee Department of Justice
Federal Committee on Statistical MethodologyÑsee Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Emergency Management AgencyÑsee Federal Emergency
Management AgencyFederal Highway AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, Federal StatisticsÑsee
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related StatisticsÑsee Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family StatisticsÑsee Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget
Federal Railroad AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Federal Statistics Briefing RoomsÑsee Executive Office of the President
Federal Transit AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Food and Nutrition ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Foreign Agricultural ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Forest ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Health Resources and Services AdministrationÑsee Department of
Health and Human Services
Indian Health ServiceÑsee Department of Health and Human Services
Institute of Education SciencesÑsee Department of Education
Internal Revenue ServiceÑsee Department of the Treasury
International Trade AdministrationÑsee Department of Commerce
Maritime AdministrationÑsee Department of Transportation
Mine Safety and Health AdministrationÑsee Department of Labor
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
73Minerals Management ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationÑsee National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
National Agricultural Statistics ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
National Center for Education StatisticsÑsee Department of Education
National Center for Health StatisticsÑsee Department of Health and
Human Services
National Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationÑsee Department of
Transportation
National Institute on AgingÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesNational Institutes of HealthÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesNational Marine Fisheries ServiceÑsee Department of Commerce
National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationÑsee Department of
Commerce
National Park ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
National Science FoundationÑsee National Science Foundation
Natural Resources Conservation ServiceÑsee Department of Agriculture
Occupational Safety and Health AdministrationÑsee Department of
LaborOffice of Environmental InformationÑsee Environmental Protection
AgencyOffice of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and EvaluationÑsee
Department of Health and Human Services
Office of the Assistant Secretary for PolicyÑsee Department of Labor
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and ResearchÑ
see Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Environment, Safety and HealthÑsee Department of Energy
Office of Immigration StatisticsÑsee Department of Homeland Security
Office of Management and BudgetÑsee Executive Office of the President
Office of Population AffairsÑsee Department of Health and Human
ServicesOffice of Research, Evaluation, and StatisticsÑsee Social Security
AdministrationResearch and Innovative Technology AdministrationÑsee Department of
Transportation
Science Resources Statistics DivisionÑsee National Science Foundation,
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR A FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCY
Small Business AdministrationÑsee Small Business Administration
Social Security AdministrationÑsee Social Security Administration
Social Statistics Briefing RoomÑsee Executive Office of the President,
Federal Statistics Briefing Rooms
Statistics of Income DivisionÑsee Department of the Treasury
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services AdministrationÑsee
Department of Health and Human Services
Transportation Security AdministrationÑsee Department of Homeland
SecurityU.S. Customs and Border ProtectionÑsee Department of Homeland
SecurityU.S. Fish and Wildlife ServiceÑsee Department of the Interior
U.S. Geological SurveyÑsee Department of the Interior
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) was established in 1972
to improve the statistical methods and information on which public policy

decisions are based. The committee carries out studies, workshops, and
other activities to foster better measures and fuller understanding of the
economy, the environment, public health, crime, education, immigration,

poverty, welfare, and other public policy issues. It also evaluates ongoing
statistical programs and tracks the statistical policy and coordinating
activities of the federal government, serving a unique role at the intersection

of statistics and public policy. The committeeÕs work is supported by a
consortium of federal agencies through a National Science Foundation
grant.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency: Third EditionCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.