DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11286Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology Advances138 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09605-8 | DOI 10.17226/11286Committee on Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Forecasts and Reviews;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSiTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.
www.nap.eduCommittee on Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Forecasts and ReviewsDivision on Engineering and Physical Sciences
GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS               500 Fifth Street, N.W.               Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council,whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, andthe Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences
and with regard for appropriate balance.This is a report of work supported by Contract HHM402-04-C-0015 between the Defense Intelligence Agency and the NationalAcademy of Sciences. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of theauthor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09605-7Limited copies of this report are available from:Additional copies are available from:
Division on Engineering and PhysicalThe National Academies Press
Sciences, Room 940500 Fifth Street, N.W.
National Research CouncilLockbox 285
500 Fifth Street, N.W.Washington, DC 20055

Washington, DC 20001(800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313
(202) 334-3118(in the Washington metropolitan area)
Internet, http://www.nap.eduCopyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in
scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it t
oadvise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academyof Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a
parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy

of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, andrecognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of eminent
members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute
acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to thefederal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V.

Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad commu-nity of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operatingagency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to thegovernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies

and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the Nationa
lResearch Council.www.national-academies.orgAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCYTECHNOLOGY FORECASTS AND REVIEWSRUTH A. DAVID, Chair, ANSER, Inc., Arlington, VirginiaSTEVEN R.J. BRUECK, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque
STEPHEN W. DREW, Science Partners, LLC, Summit, New Jersey

ALAN H. EPSTEIN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CambridgeROBERT A. FUHRMAN, Lockheed Corporation (retired), Pebble Beach, CaliforniaSHARON C. GLOTZER, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

CHRISTOPHER C. GREEN, Wayne State University, Detroit, MichiganDIANE E. GRIFFIN, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MarylandJ. JEROME HOLTON, Defense Group, Inc., Alexandria, Virginia
MICHAEL R. LADISCH, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IndianaDARRELL D.E. LONG, University of California, Santa Cruz
FREDERICK R. LOPEZ, Raytheon Company, Goleta, California
RICHARD M. OSGOOD, JR., Columbia University, New York
STEWART D. PERSONICK, Private Consultant, Bernardsville, New JerseyALTON D. ROMIG, JR., Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico
S. SHANKAR SASTRY, University of California, Berkeley
JAMES B. SMITH, Raytheon Company, Tucson, ArizonaCAMILLO J. TAYLOR, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
DIANNE S. WILEY, The Boeing Company, Arlington, VirginiaStaffMICHAEL A. CLARKE, Lead Board DirectorDANIEL E.J. TALMAGE, JR., Study Director
CARTER W. FORD, Research AssociateLANITA R. JONES, Senior Program AssistantAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The development and writing of this report presented considerable challenges in terms of both thestudy schedule and the need to avoid conveying sensitive U.S. vulnerabilities to potential adversaries.Meeting both challenges has been difficult for the study committee and staff, but every effort was madeto respond to the stated need of the Technology Warning Division of the Defense Intelligence Agency
(DIA) for maximum openness.I wish to express my appreciation to the members of the committee for their contributions to thepreparation of this report. The committee is also grateful to the staff of the Technology Warning
Division of the DIA for its sponsorship and active participation throughout the study.The committee greatly appreciates the support and assistance of National Research Council staffmembers Michael Clarke, Daniel Talmage, LaNita Jones, and Carter Ford in the production of this report.Ruth A. David, ChairCommittee on Defense Intelligence AgencyTechnology Forecasts and ReviewsAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiAcknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives andtechnical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs ReportReview Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical commentsthat will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberativeprocess. We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:Bishnu Atal (NAS, NAE), AT&T Laboratories (retired),Randy Katz (NAE), University of California, Berkeley,
Leslie Kenne, LK Associates,Joshua Lederberg (NAS, IOM), The Rockefeller University,John Lyons (NAE), U.S. Army Research Laboratory (retired),
Louis Marquet, Consultant,S. Thomas Picraux, Arizona State University, andEugene Sevin (NAE), Consultant.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions,they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the
report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Robert Hermann, Global TechnologyPartners. Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that anindependent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this reportrests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1TECHNOLOGY WARNING: MOTIVATION AND CHALLENGE9
Introduction, 9
Study Origin, 10Globalization Is Reshaping the Technology Playing Field, 11Commercialization Is Changing the Tempo of Technological Innovation, 12
The Technology Warning Challenge, 15Limitations of This Study, 18References, 182COMMITTEE METHODOLOGY20
Key Features of the Methodology, 20
Foundation of the Methodology, 21Identify, 22Assess, 25Accessibility, 25Maturity, 25Consequence, 26Prioritize, 26Task, 26Using the Methodology in This Report, 27
Reference, 27ContentsAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xCONTENTS3CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY28
Maintaining Information Superiority in the Face of Globalization and Commercialization, 29Trusted Software, 30Trusted Hardware and Foundries, 31
Supercomputing, 31Ubiquitous Sensing, Computing, and Communications Systems, 32Fusion of Computing and Communications with Other Novel Technologies, 32Potential Observables That May Indicate Emerging Threats, 32Basic Ways to Degrade or Neutralize Information Superiority, 34Exploitation, 35
Corruption, 35Disruption, 35Destruction, 36
Analogies in Non-Warfighting Scenarios, 36Committee Focus: Communications and Sensing Systems, 36Potential Pathways for Disruption, Denial, or Degradation of Communicationsand Sensing Capabilities, 37Identification and Assessment Steps of the Committee Methodology, 38System/Network Attacks, 38
Sensor Attacks, 40Summary, 42References, 434FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE45
Introduction, 45
Airpower in Urban Warfare, 46Challenges to U.S. Airpower, 47Offensive Techniques That May Be Employed by an Adversary, 48
Defensive Techniques That May Be Employed by an Adversary, 49Committee Focus: Systems That Can Degrade U.S. Airpower, 50Man-Portable Air Defense Systems, 50
Milli to Micro Air Vehicles and Missiles, 51Identification and Assessment Steps of Committee Methodology, 53Increased Range and/or Reduced Signature, 53
Enhanced Guidance, Navigation, and/or Targeting, 53Enhanced Lethality, 53Counter-BLUE, 53Summary, 60References, 605COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE62
Introduction, 62Key Features of Foreign Urban Warfare, 62
Committee Focus: Capability to Discriminate Between Enemy Combatants andNoncombatants, 63Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiIdentification and Assessment Steps of the Committee Methodology, 64Misdirected Target Designation, 64Sensor Spoofing, 64Hiding of Targets, 66Inexpensive Supply of Raw Materials for Camouflage, 71Summary, 71References, 716BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES73
Introduction, 73Watching People Think, 74Scientific Methods That May Predict Behaviors, 74Committee Focus: Challenges to Communications Superiority, 75Covert Communications via DNA, 76Covert Communications via Bacteriorhodopsin, 77Committee Focus: Challenges to Battle Readiness, 78Noroviruses, 79Avian Influenza, 79Synthesis of Decoys, 80Summary, 81References, 827FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS83
Collaboration with External Scientific and Technical Communities, 83Indicators Relating to Globalization and Commercialization, 84
Need for Disciplined Methodology, 85Conclusion, 85APPENDIXESABiographical Sketches of Committee Members89
BPresentations to the Committee97

CBackground Material for Chapter 199
DBackground Material for Chapter 3103
EBackground Material for Chapter 6114
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiFIGURESFigure 1-1Shares of total world R&D, 2003, 12
Figure 1-2U.S. R&D funding by source, 1953
Ð2003, 14Figure 2-1Concepts constituting the basic framework for U.S. military capability as defined by
Joint Vision 2020, 22Figure 5-1TransScreen, power holographic projection creates the illusion of life-size,
holographic images, 67Figure 5-2Example of a projected three-dimensional image that appears to be floating above the
hand, 67Figure 5-3Life-size hologram, 68
Figure E-1Spatial and temporal resolution capabilities of different neuroimaging modalities, 118
TABLESTable 1-1The Changing Nature of Defense Technology, 13
Table 1-2The Nature of Innovation Is Changing, 13
Table 1-3Challenges Identified for the National Nanotechnology Initiative, 17
Table 3-1Potential Observables and Sources of Information on Potential Threats to
Communications Capabilities, 33Table 3-2Examples of Sensor Modalities and Their Potential Utility, 41
Figures, Tables, Boxes, and Charts
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURES, TABLES, BOXES, AND CHARTSxiiiBOXESBox ES-1Statement of Task, 2
Box ES-2Report Statement of Task, 2

Box ES-3Proposed Methodology for Technology Warning, 4
Box 1-1Candidate Technologies Likely to Impact National Security by the 2015 Time Frame,
Identified by a Panel of Experts, 16Box 2-1Relevant Definitions from Joint Vision 2020 Serving as Foundation for Assessment
Methodology, 23Box 2-2Proposed Methodology for Technology Warning, 24
CHARTSChart 2-1Example of Technology Assessment Chart, 24
Chart 3-1Technology Assessment: Electromagnetic Pulse Generators, 38
Chart 3-2Technology Assessment: Electromagnetic Pulse Generators, 39

Chart 3-3Technology Assessment: Radio-Frequency Jammers, 39
Chart 3-4Technology Assessment: Modular Network Nodes, 39
Chart 3-5Technology Assessment: Malicious Code, 40

Chart 3-6Capability Identification: Sensor Jamming, 41
Chart 3-7Capability Identification: Camouflage, 43
Chart 3-8Capability Identification: Sensor Spoofing, 43
Chart 4-1Technology Assessment: Jet Engines, 54
Chart 4-2Technology Assessment: Storable Liquid Propellant and Micro Rocket Engines, 54

Chart 4-3Technology Assessment. Higher-Performance Small Rocket Engines, 55
Chart 4-4Technology Assessment: Nanoscale Surface Machining, 55
Chart 4-5Technology Assessment: Electronically Tuned Surface Coatings, 55

Chart 4-6Technology Assessment: Negative Index of Refraction Materials, 55
Chart 4-7Technology Assessment: Low-Cost, Uncooled, Low-Noise Infrared Detector
Arrays, 56Chart 4-8Technology Assessment: Narrowband, Tunable Frequency Agile, Imaging Infrared
Optical Filters, 56Chart 4-9Technology Assessment: High-Accuracy Microelectromechanical Systems Gyros and
Accelerometers, 56Chart 4-10Technology Assessment: Automated, Ad Hoc, Cellular Phone/Computer Systems, 57
Chart 4-11Technology Assessment: High-Speed Processor Chips and Mega-Flash Memories, 57

Chart 4-12Technology Assessment: Large Geographic and Economic Web Databases, 57
Chart 4-13Technology Assessment: Increased Energy Density or Slow-Burning Energetic
Materials, 57Chart 4-14Technology Assessment: High-Power, Low-Cost Microwave Radio-Frequency Chips
and Arrays, 58Chart 4-15Technology Assessment: Very Low Cost Radio-Frequency Proximity Fuses, 58
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivFIGURES, TABLES, BOXES, AND CHARTSChart 4-16Technology Assessment: Increased-Speed Digital Signal Processor and Processor
Chips, 58Chart 4-17Technology Assessment: Very High Pulse Power Systems, 58
Chart 4-18Technology Assessment: Bioagents, 59

Chart 4-19Technology Assessment: Tactical Nuclear Electromagnetic Pulse, 59
Chart 4-20Technology Assessment: Very Low Cost, Compact Near-Infrared Images, 59
Chart 4-21Technology Assessment: Wireless Technology, Frequency Modulation Techniques,
Global Positioning System Crypto Capture, 59Chart 4-22Technology Assessment: Multistatic Systems, 60
Chart 4-23Technology Assessment: Strong Commercial Encryption for Personal Digital
Assistants and Cellular Phones, 60Chart 5-1Technology Assessment: Tunable Lasers, 65
Chart 5-2Technology Assessment: False Radio-Frequency Identification Signals, 65
Chart 5-3Technology Assessment: Projection of Realistic-Looking Real-Time Optical or
Infrared Images, 68Chart 5-4Technology Assessment: Adaptive Materials, 69
Chart 5-5Technology Assessment: Bacteriorhodopsin, 70
Chart 5-6Technology Assessment: Transgenic Crops, 71
Chart 6-1Technology Assessment: Exploitation of DNA Databases for Covert
Communications, 77Chart 6-2Technology Assessment: Bacteriorhodopsin for Holographic Messaging and
Development of Advanced Holographic Technologies, 79Chart 6-3Technology Assessment: Development and Distribution of Norovirus Organisms, 80

Chart 6-4Technology Assessment: Development and Distribution of Avian Influenza
Organisms, 80Chart 6-5Technology Assessment: Development and Distribution of Organisms as Decoys, 81
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvAcronyms
ASICapplication-specific integrated circuit
BOLDblood-oxygen-level dependent
C4ISRcommand, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissanceC&Ccomputing and communications

CMOScomplementary metal-oxide semiconductor
COTScommercial off-the-shelf
DARPADefense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DIADefense Intelligence Agency
DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid

DODDepartment of Defense
ECMelectronic countermeasures
EEGelectroencephalography
EMPelectromagnetic pulse
EMUextravehicular mobility unit

EPROMelectron paramagnetic resonance oxygen mapping
ERPevent-related potential
FCSFuture Combat Systems
FLIRforward-looking infrared
fMRIfunctional magnetic resonance imaging
GDPgross domestic product
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviACRONYMSGOTSgovernment off-the-shelf
GPSGlobal Positioning System
ICintelligence community
IFFidentification friend or foe
IPInternet Protocol
IRinfrared

ISRintelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
LEDlight emitting diode

MANPADSman-portable air defense system
MAVmicro air vehicle

MD-5message-digest algorithm
MEGmagnetoencephalography
MEMSmicroelectromechanical systems

MRImagnetic resonance imaging
NICNational Intelligence Council
NIRSnear-infrared spectroscopic imaging
NRCNational Research Council
NSFNational Science Foundation
OECDOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
R&Dresearch and development
RCSradar cross section
RFradio frequency

RFIDradio-frequency identification
RPGrocket-propelled grenade
S&Tscience and technology
SARsynthetic aperture radar
SHAsecure hash algorithm

SQUIDsuperconducting quantum interference device
TWIThe Welding Institute, Ltd.

UAVunmanned aerial vehicle
UCAVunmanned combat air vehicle

UVultraviolet
VTOLvertical takeoff and landing

WMDweapons of mass destruction
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11Executive Summary
The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) requested that the National Research Council (NRC)establish the Committee on Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Forecasts and Reviews to conduct
meetings with the intelligence community (IC) in order to develop study topics relating to technologywarning (see Box ES-1 for the overall statement of task for this effort).The committee was asked to produce a report, based on its discussions with the intelligence commu-nity, that discusses capabilities upon which U.S. warfighters are dependent and to identify the potentialfor adversaries to threaten those capabilities through the exploitation of evolving technologies (seeBoxES-2 for the report statement of task).
It is the intent of both the DIA Technology Warning Division as sponsor and the National ResearchCouncil that this first report, which is limited in scope, will establish the foundation for a long-termcollaborative relationship to support the examination of technology warning issues. It is expected that
such examination will be useful not only for the DIA but also for other members of the intelligencecommunity who might need such analyses. It is intended that the current ad hoc committee be disbandedsubsequent to the publication of this report and that a standing committee be formed to work with the IC
to keep abreast of issues relating to technology warning and to develop specific statements of task forindependent ad hoc committees of the NRC to perform.SCOPE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE STUDYU.S. military strength is built on a foundation of technological superiority that grew from a positionof global leadership in relevant technologies and innovative capabilities. That leadership position is nolonger assured. The synergistic forces of globalization and commercialization of science and technologyare providing current and future adversaries with access to advanced technologies as well as the expertise
needed to exploit those technologies.The ability of the U.S. intelligence apparatus to warn of evolving technologies that, in the hands ofadversaries, may threaten U.S. military preeminence is vital to the ability of the nations leadership tomake good decisions. The genesis of this report was the recognition by the DIA Technology WarningAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESBOX ES-1Statement of TaskThe National Research Council (NRC) will:¥Establish an ad hoc committee to provide technology analyses, both near and far term, to
assist the agency to develop timelines, methodologies, and strategies for the application of
identified technologies of interest to the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) under develop-
ment within the United States and its allies and to bring to the agencyÕs attention potentially
useful technologies that DIA may not be aware of that might be of value for adaptation and
consideration.¥Review information provided from government sources on technologies under development
by other nations abroad and provide estimates on when these technologies may become
mature to the point they could pose a threat to U.S. forces.¥Meet with the agency to discuss technology developments here and abroad of interest to DIA
and to develop potential study topics and task statements for in-depth assessment of specific
technical areas.¥Provide one or two short reports during the course of the first year on subjects developed in
the course of meetings and as requested by the agency and approved by the NRC.BOX ES-2Report Statement of TaskFor the first report, the National Research Council Committee on Defense Intelligence AgencyTechnology Forecasts and Reviews will:¥Develop, examine and review from unclassified sources evolving technologies that will be
critical to successful U.S. warfighting capabilities.¥Postulate methods for potential adversaries of the United States to disrupt these technologies
and discuss indicators for the intelligence community to investigate to determine if RED force
elements are attempting to achieve this disruptive capability (this discussion should be generally
unclassified with specific sensitive or classified information, limited to SECRET, placed in an
appendix).¥Curtail its investigation to technologies consistent with the committee charter from the Defense
Intelligence Agency Threat Analysis section (i.e., to exclude weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and areas of chemical/biological warfare not of specific interest to the sponsor).¥Identify and recommend specific technology areas to be pursued in greater depth, both in
specificity and classification, in future reports requested by DIA.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3Division, which sponsored the study, of the need to tap into new sources of information and expertisethat exist in the nongovernmental scientific and technical communities.Various lists exist that identify high-impact technologies projected to advance rapidly in the comingyears. Virtually every such list contains some permutation of information technologies, biotechnologies,
and nanotechnologies. From those lists it is relatively easy to identify a number of evolving technologieslikely to impact national security. It is more difficult to identify those specific technologies that arepotential game-changers in the hands of enemies of the United States, and even harder to envision
potential innovations that may derive from the integration of multidisciplinary technologies to yielddisruptive capabilities. These are the tasks levied on the technology warning community.Owing to the studys time constraints, the technologies selected for inclusion in this report representa sampling derived from the collective experience of committee members rather than from a compre-hensive survey. The committee made no effort to rationalize its selection from among the broad array ofevolving technologies of potential interest.Therefore, rather than creating yet another list of potentially important technologies for the tech-nology warning community to track, the committee chose to establish a framework that would enableongoing identification, assessment, and prioritization of emerging technologies in terms of their potential
impact on U.S. military capabilities. It is hoped that the methodology presented as a prototype in thisreport will provide the foundation for the ongoing collaborative relationship envisioned by the DIATechnology Warning Division.Chapter 1 describes the challenges confronting the technology warning community, focusing on theimpact of globalization and commercialization of the technology marketplace.Chapter 2 outlines the methodology proposed by the committee. This methodology is tested in
subsequent chapters. To provide focus, the committees approach was anchored by the followingquestion: What capabilities does the United States have that, if threatened, impact U.S. military pre-eminence? Subsequent steps in the methodology identify and assess emerging technologies and/orintegrated capabilities that, in the hands of U.S. adversaries, could be used to defeat that U.S. militarycapability. The basic methodology is summarized Box ES-3.Chapters 3 through 6 describe high-level U.S. military capabilities and potential threats to thosecapabilities. The focus of Chapter 3 is information superiority, which is identified in Joint Vision 2020as a vital enabling capability (JCS, 2000). In Chapter 3, the committee identifies a number of genericvulnerabilities of information-technology-enabled systems and applications (including, in principle,
those that might be used by BLUE (denoting U.S. military) forces to endeavor to maintain informationsuperiority). These generic vulnerabilities could be attacked via evolving technologies and methodologiesthat, in most cases, are increasingly available to U.S. adversaries in the form of low-cost, commercial
commodity products.The committee focused specifically on potential pathways for disruption, denial, or degradation ofcommunications and sensing capabilities. It considered system and/or network attacks as well as sensor
attacks. The committee also identified, for each technology identified, potential observables that thetechnology warning community could use to analyze the intentions and/or capabilities of U.S. adversariesto employ these technologies and methodologies. Additional background information relating to Chapter 3 is

provided in Appendix D.Chapter 4 discusses air superiority, which underpins several of the Joint Vision 2020 operationalconcepts, with a focus on potential challenges in urban warfare. Future threats to U.S. airpower in urban
warfare owe much to two factorsthe trend toward globalization in aerospace and electronics, coupledwith what has been observed to be the best way to defeat U.S. airpower: that is, not necessarily the head-to-head, platform-to-platform approach of the Cold War, but rather the exploitation of asymmetries.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESBOX ES-3Proposed Methodology for Technology WarningFoundationJoint Vision 2020a Operational Concepts and Information Superiority¥FocusWhat capabilities does the United States have that, if threatened, impact U.S.military preeminence?¥IdentifyWhat are the evolving technologies that, in the hands of U.S. adversaries,might be used to threaten an important U.S. military capability?What are the observables that may indicate adversarial adoption or exploitationof such technologies?¥AssessAccessibility: How difficult would it be for an adversary to exploit the technology?Maturity: How much is known about an adversaryÕs intentions to exploit thetechnology?Consequence: What is the impact on U.S. military capability should the tech-nology be employed by an adversary?¥PrioritizeIdentify: What are the relative resources to be applied to each emerging tech-nology to support the technology warning process?¥TaskEstablish and assign intelligence-information-collection requirements.aSOURCE: JCS (2000).One pillar of U.S. airpower in the past has been the capabilities of its major platforms. These sophisti-cated platforms now require investments of tens of billions of dollars spread over decadesinvestmentlevels that few foes can match. However, the life of the advanced technology in these platforms can now
be less than the development cycle. Small, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) offer a counter to largeplatforms; although they are much less capable than large platforms at the moment, they can have muchshorter and less costly development cycles. These factors contribute to the proliferation of such vehicles
around the world, especially at the smaller sizes (Munson, 1996).The committee describes a variety of technologies that may enable adversaries to diminish theadvantage currently held by U.S. airpower. The technologies are described in terms of the system
characteristics that they would provide. The characteristics considered include increased range and/orreduced signature; enhanced guidance, navigation, and/or targeting; enhanced lethality; and other tech-niques that directly counter U.S. capabilities.Chapter 5 discusses challenges relating to the needed ability to discriminate between friends, foes,and neutrals, as well as among various targetskey capabilities for precision engagementand againAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5focuses on the urban warfare environment. The committee addresses new technology developments thatmight assist enemy combatants by allowing their identity and that of innocent noncombatants to beintermixed. Appropriate spoofing or other types of misidentification could cause the warfighter to
engage a group of noncombatants, thus causing political and/or psychological damage to U.S. forces.The committee notes that U.S. leadership can no longer be assumed for a number of the technologiesdiscussed in Chapter 5. Japan, for example, is extremely strong in many areas of nanotechnology and inoptical and electronic devices. China is, in many cases (such as photonics), the country with the best
combination of high-technology manufacturing and design, and its expertise is increasingly employedby many high-technology U.S. firms. Europe has excellent research capabilities in the areas of semi-conductor materials and devices; these can be and have been translated into start-up corporations.As a result of this shift to offshore commercial vendors, important indicators of technologicaldevelopments are likely to appear in open source literature, including commercial Internet sites, and atindustrial fairs, particularly in Asia and Europe. Monitoring of key corporations is important. However,
in many cases small or obscure start-ups are also of vital importance (suggesting that the tracking ofventure capital may offer yet another set of relevant observables). In certain cases, the observation ofcritical manufacturing items (raw materials and/or equipment) may be useful.Chapter 6 describes a number of prospective capabilities related to biotechnology and focuses onpotential challenges to battle readiness and communications superiority. Biotechnological capabilitiesare rapidly expanding and becoming more and more readily available to scientists throughout the world.
Emerging biotechnologies that may enable functional brain imaging, covert communications, the spreadof disabling infections, and sensor spoofing are likely to affect the conduct of military operations and thestatus of national security in the future, as highlighted in Chapter 6.The neuroimaging techniques of electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG),
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and near-infrared spectroscopic imaging (NIRS) providedirect measurement of brain function. The technology underlying these modalities is advancing rapidly
and will allow a multitude of measurements. This technology may in the future provide a better under-standing of behavior, performance, readiness, and stress that is relevant to troop readiness, the under-standing of cultural differences in motivation, and prisoner interrogation.There are many opportunities on the horizon for biology to play a role in covert communications.These include protein cube holography and bacteriorhodopsin solid-state devices for storing high-density information, and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences as a medium for hiding covert

messages.Although infectious diseases are a continuing concern, offer opportunities for a wide range ofgenetic modifications, and could be deployed in many different ways, they are not a primary focus of
this report. Lastly, the current emphasis on weapons of mass destruction has led to the development ofsophisticated sensors that, when activated, trigger responses that can be costly in time and can limittroop responses. A release of materials that trigger the sensors while not being actual threats is one way
of decreasing battle readiness in U.S. troops. The area of application of biotechnology to militarypurposes is currently wide ranging and will expand very rapidly over the next decade.Chapter 7 provides general recommendations to the Defense Intelligence Agency TechnologyWarning Division that stem from the evolving nature of the global science and technology environment.The chapter also offers suggestions relating to the envisioned ongoing collaboration with the NRC. Thecommittees findings and recommendations are summarized below.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESSUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONSNeed for New Collaboration and EngagementFinding 1: There is a multitude of evolving technologies for which advances are being driven by the
nongovernmental, global, scientific and technical communities.The information technology, biotechnology, microtechnology, and nanotechnology families willincreasingly provide foundational building blocks for militarily relevant capabilities for RED (adver-sary) and BLUE (U.S.) forces alike. The fact that significant advances in these technologies will be
driven largely by commercial demandon a global scaleversus military-specific investment suggeststhe need for the technology warning community to establish a sustained relationship with the non-governmental scientific and technical community in order to bolster its understanding and anticipation
of technology trends.Recommendation 1: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, together
with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning, shouldestablish an ongoing collaborative relationship with the scientific and technical communities in theindustrial and academic sectors.The committee believes that the National Academies, through the National Research Council,provide both a window into these communities and an appropriate institutional mechanism that could
assist in this endeavor.Need for New IndicatorsFinding 2: New intelligence indicators are likely to be needed to provide technology warning for
the diverse spectrum of evolving technologies that are being driven by commercial forces in the
global marketplace.Traditionally, the United States has assumed that it leads the world in science and technology. Thisperspective leads the technology warning community to look for indications that external actors aretrying to catch up, or to exploit known technologies in new ways. Projected future trends suggest that
it should no longer be automatically assumed that the United States will lead in all relevant technologies.
This revised perspective imposes a new burden on the technology warning community, generating theneed for it to search in different places and in different ways to be able to warn against technologicalsurprise.Recommendation 2: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, in collabo-
ration with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning,
should establish, maintain, and systematically analyze a comprehensive array of indicators pertain-ing to globalization and commercialization of science and technology to complement and focusintelligence collection and analysis.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7The committee believes that the observables identified in this report provide a useful baseline.However, it acknowledges that the first step in a more disciplined approach in technology warningshould be to decompose the broad trends into potential observables more systematically and then toevaluate the utility and applicability of analytic techniques for technology warning already in use in
Open Source Intelligence analysis. The committee also acknowledges that since not all relevant advanceswill stem from the global commercial open source environment, such an approach should complementbut not supplant other collection techniques.Need for Framework MethodologyFinding 3: The landscape of potentially important evolving technologies is both vast and diverse. A
disciplined approach is thus needed to facilitate optimal allocation of the limited resources availableto the technology warning community.While it is relatively easy to create lists of technologies that will have military significance in thecoming years, it is harder to identify those specific technologies that are potential game-changers in the
hands of U.S. adversaries. The committee reviewed a diverse array of lists of technologieseachprioritized from a different perspective. Some lists focus on potential disruptive technologies that
could have catastrophic consequences in the hands of adversaries, while others focus on technologies
with significant commercial potential that may erode this nations technological edge. The committeebelieves that the technology warning community would benefit from a disciplined approach to theidentification and prioritization of the evolving technologies that may threaten U.S. military
preeminence.Recommendation 3: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, in collabo-
ration with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning,should adopt a capabilities-based framework within which to identify and assess potential technology-
based threats.The committee believes that a capabilities-based methodology enables a systematic approach totechnology warning while reducing the tendency to focus only on advances in discrete technologies. The
methodology presented as a prototype in this report was derived from the operational concepts andenablers described in Joint Vision 2020. It is offered as a starting point; the committee acknowledgesthat additional refinement is needed.In ConclusionThe technology warning community, which plays a vital role in advising military leadership, isfacing unprecedented challenges. BLUE force strategies are increasingly dependent upon technology-enabled capabilities assembled from building block technologies in which U.S. technological leadership
is no longer assured. Foreign governments and nonstate actors are gaining access to the same buildingblock technologiesoften via the commercial marketplace. The committee applauds the TechnologyWarning Divisions recognition that unprecedented challenges require new approaches and commendsthe efforts already underway.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESREFERENCESJCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff). 2000. Joint Vision 2020. Director for Strategic Plans and Policy, J5, Strategy Division. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. June.Munson, Kenneth, ed. 1996. Janes Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Targets. Janes Information Group, Coulsdon, Surrey,United Kingdom.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING991Technology Warning: Motivation and Challenge
INTRODUCTIONIn the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and Operation Iraqi Freedom, theU.S. populace is increasingly aware of the challenge of intelligence gathering, analysis, and forecasting.Those involved with such activities, working for the most part anonymously, are performing a service
that is critical to the continuance of this nationÕs freedom. Recent events clearly illustrate the need fortimely and accurate intelligence to aid tactical and operational planning for military operations as wellas to support planning efforts related to homeland security. In this report, the committee focuses on the
strategic issue of technology warning as it relates to military operations. Because U.S. military strengthis built on a foundation of technological superiority, the ability of the U.S. intelligence apparatus to warnof evolving technologies that, in the hands of adversaries, may threaten U.S. military capabilities is vital
to the ability of the nationÕs leadership to make informed decisions.During the Cold War, the Soviet Union and its satellite nations were a central focus of the intelligencecommunity (IC). That era seems in retrospect to have been a much simpler time with respect to the
development and application of technology to national security missions. The possibility of technologicalsurprise was always present, as evidenced by the Soviet UnionÕs launch of Sputnik in 1957, but step
functions in enemy warfighter capabilities were often anticipated in time to take countering steps.That is not to say there were not enormous technological advances during the post-World War II era.Significant developments during the past 50 years that had direct implications for national securityincluded stealth technology, improvement in target identification, precision weaponry, the information
technology revolution, and the birth of the Internet. Even though the ongoing information revolution isdriven primarily by the commercial marketplace and is global in scope, the U.S. military has to datesuccessfully maintained a technological edge over its adversaries.Rather than dealing with the relatively monolithic threat posed by the former Soviet Union, theUnited States now confronts a future of potential threats from many nation-states, as well as threats fromextra- and transnational entities whose identities and allegiances are diffuse and complexÑand whose
technological prowess is enabled by globalization. These threats have also broadened in scope fromconventional military threats to those also endangering civilian populations and economic targets.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESThe effect on the intelligence community has been dramatic. Not only must it deal with the com-plexity and diversity of these new threats, but it also must deal with a dynamic global environment interms of technology development and exploitation. U.S. technological leadership cannot be assumed inthe future.STUDY ORIGINIn full recognition of the reality that U.S. technological leadership can no longer be assumed, in thefall of 2003 the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) requested a series of meetings with NationalResearch Council (NRC) staff members in the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences to
determine if a relationship was possible that would provide access not only to members of the NationalAcademies and the nonmember technical community but also to the research community throughout thenationÕs universities and laboratories. The objective of the DIA was not intelligence gathering per se,but rather the development of a new source of information on burgeoning technologies and theirpotential for Òtechnology surprise,Ó with attendant military ramifications. In particular, the TechnologyWarning Division of the DIA recognized the potential value of ongoing engagement with the nationÕstechnical communities in fulfilling its responsibility to Òprovide the earliest possible warning of techno-logical developments that could undermine U.S. military preeminenceÓ (DIA, 2004).
There were many issues to be overcome in order to establish the viable relationship that the DIAsought. The first concern of NRC staff members was security. It was assumed at the outset that much ofthe activity would necessarily be conducted at high levels of classification. The National Academiesthrough the National Research Council can perform classified work and often does, but it is always the
NRCÕs objective to serve the public while conducting the work of the Academies, and excessiveclassification can interfere with the openness sought. To the surprise of the committee chair and staff, ameeting with the director of the DIA shortly after formation of the committee dispelled the notion that
the committeeÕs work would necessarily be classified. While some activities of the committee might beclassified, the director wanted the majority of the effort unclassified so as to facilitate sharing andcollaboration between the intelligence community and the scientific and technical communities.Upon receipt of a contract, the current 1-year ad hoc committeeÑthe Committee on DefenseIntelligence Agency Technology Forecasts and ReviewsÑwas formed to conduct meetings with theintelligence community to study issues relating to technology warning. The committee was tasked to
produce a report that discusses capabilities upon which U.S. warfighters are dependent and to identifythe potential for adversaries to threaten those capabilities through the exploitation of evolving tech-nologies. Technologies to be considered were to include not only those emerging from research
establishments, but also potential adversarial capabilities that could arise from innovative integration orthe application of existing technologies.It was recognized from the outset that the present report would be somewhat general in nature withrespect to the depth and breadth of technical analyses. It was the objective of both the DIA and the NRCthat this first report would establish the foundation for a long-term relationship to support the examina-tion of technology warning issues, not only for the DIA but also for other members of the intelligence
community who might need such analyses. It is intended that the current ad hoc committee be disbandedsubsequent to the publication of this report and that a standing committee be formed to work with the ICto keep abreast of issues relating to technology warning and to develop specific statements of task for
independent ad hoc committees of the NRC to perform.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING11GLOBALIZATION IS RESHAPING THE TECHNOLOGY PLAYING FIELDA recent report by the National Intelligence Council (NIC) observed: ÒWe see globalizationÑgrowing interconnectedness reflected in the expanded flows of information, technology, capital, goods,
services, and people throughout the worldÑas an overarching Ômega-trend,Õ a force so ubiquitous that
it will substantially shape all the other major trends in the world of 2020Ó (NIC, 2004). While globaliza-
tion has been underway for several decades, its intensity and pervasiveness have now greatly increased
in magnitude and pace; the technology playing field is undergoing a massive change. Technologyresearch and development (R&D), historically dominated by the United States, is increasingly dis-tributed throughout the world. While the United States continued to lead the world in R&D spending in
2002, according to data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),1other nationsÕ shares are changing dramatically as they seek to boost economic performance and enhance
global competitiveness. Figure 1-1 illustrates the relative shares of R&D spending in 2002 (AAAS,
2004a).While the United States continues to dominate other nations of the world in terms of total R&Dspending, comparisons of R&D spending as a ratio of gross domestic product (GDP) provide a different
picture. The United States lags Japan in total R&D as a percentage of GDP (2.67 percent versus 3.12percent in 2002) as well as in business R&D (1.87 percent versus 2.32 percent in 2002). Between 1995and 2002, China doubled its spending on R&D when calculated as a percentage of GDP (1.2 percent in
2002). During that same period, Israel increased its spending from 2.74 percent to 4.72 percent of GDP,a ratio higher than that of any other OECD nation. Many countries have set long-term, stable targets forincreasing R&D spending, with Austria aiming for 2.5 percent of GDP by 2006, Germany targeting 3
percent by 2010, and the United Kingdom targeting 2.5 percent by 2014. Canada has set a goal of beingamong the top five investors in R&D among OECD countries, and Korea has committed to doubling itsR&D investment between 2003 and 2007 (OECD, 2004b). These trends are indicative not only of the
growing importance that nations are placing on R&D but also of prospective challenges to U.S. techno-logical leadership. The long-term commitment of other countries to basic high-technology researchfunding is particularly significant.Additional indicators may be derived from the increasingly global distribution of science andengineering talent as nations increase the capacity and quality of their higher-education systems andentice their citizenry to stay home or to return from studies abroad to serve growing national economies
and research enterprises. In 1999, 13 nations (United Kingdom, Finland, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan,Norway, Canada, Sweden, Netherlands, Germany, Ireland, France, Spain) outranked the United Statesin the ratio of first university degrees in the natural sciences and engineering to the 24-year-old popula-
tion, while in 1975 the United States ranked third (NSB, 2003).Forces relating to globalization inevitably led U.S. corporations to outsource R&D in order to takeadvantage of the distributed expertise, but also to help gain entry to foreign markets. In particular, U.S.
companies are leveraging research capabilities in countries such as Israel, Sweden, India, and Taiwan(Bromley, 2004). Some U.S. companies take advantage of foreign research establishments, such as theMotorola collaboration with the Hong Kong Science and Technology Parks Corporation.2 Others
establish their own research facilities, such as the Microsoft Research laboratories in Beijing, China;1The OECD nations are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and United States.2See, for example, http://www.hkstp.org/english/university/university.html. Last accessed on February 11, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESFIGURE 1-1 Shares of total world R&D, 2003 (as adapted from ÒMain Science and Technology Indicators:Volume 2004 Issue 2; Principaux indicateurs de la science et de la technologie: Volume 2004-2,Ó © OECD,
2004). SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from AAAS (2004a). ©AAAS, 2005.US38%Japan15%Germany7%France5%U.K.4%Other EU10%Korea3%All other OECD4%China9%Other non-OECD members5%Source: OECD, Main Science and Technology Indicators,
2004. 2003 data or latest year available.

**- calculated using purchasing power parities.

JAN. '05© 2005 AAAS
*World = OECD members 
plus Argentina, China,
Romania, Israel, Russia,

Singapore, Slovenia, Taiwan
Total World* R&D =
U.S. $764 billion**
Shares of Total World* R&D, 2003
Bangalore, India; and Cambridge, United Kingdom (Microsoft, 2002). Based on such trends, it is clearthat multinational corporations in high-technology commercial sectors will be less and less able toconfine technological advances to any one nation.COMMERCIALIZATION IS CHANGING THE TEMPO OFTECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONMany have observed the growing importance of commercial technologies to the defense establish-ment. Harvard University Professor Ashton Carter contrasted the defense technologies of the Cold Warera with those of the future, as shown in Table 1-1.A variety of factors are driving this changing nature of defense technology. The U.S. defenseestablishment recognized many years ago the benefits of Òdual-useÓ technologies, and it provided
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING13TABLE 1-1The Changing Nature of Defense Technology
Cold WarFutureDefense TechnologyDefense Technology
Originates in defense technology baseOriginates in commercial technology basethat is embedded in defense companiesthat is embedded in commercially driven companiesresiding in the United Statesthat are globalfor which defense is main driver.for which defense is niche player.SOURCE: Excerpted from Carter et al. (2000).3Dual-use technologies have both military utility and sufficient commercial potential to support a viable industrial base; see,for example, http://www.dtic.mil/dust/faq.htm. Last accessed on February 11, 2005.funding to stimulate the development of such technologies.3 In other areas, such as information tech-
nologies, significant drivers stem from the commercial marketplace, which, as discussed above, isincreasingly global. The fact is that defense capabilities are increasingly dependent on innovationsdeveloped by commercial companies for the commercial market in many sectors, including telecommu-
nications, aerospace, microelectronics, data processing, cryptography, special materials, biotechnology,and propulsion (DSB, 1999).What this shift means is that the U.S. defense establishment is no longer in the driverÕs seat withregard to militarily relevant technological innovation. While U.S. technological advances in areas suchas stealth technologies and satellite imagery once afforded multidecade military advantage, the rapidpace of technological innovation driven by the global commercial marketplace is shifting the advantage
to those who rapidly adopt, exploit, and integrate evolving technologies. While defense-specific invest-ments will continue to spawn important technological advances, U.S. technological superiority is nolonger assured. Small, research-seeded start-ups are of special importance in the generation of high-
technology ideas and products.A recent report published by the Council on Competitiveness observes the acceleration of tech-nological innovation as measured by market penetration. ÒIt took the automobile 100 years to penetrate50% of the global market. It took the telephone 75 years and electricity took 50 years. By comparison,the rise of cell phones, for example, has been nothing less than meteoricÑfaster than the personalcomputerÑfaster than the InternetÓ (COC, 2004). The report further observes that the nature of
innovation is changing, as postulated in Table 1-2.TABLE 1-2The Nature of Innovation Is Changing
FromTo
InventionInnovation
Linear innovation modelDynamic innovation mode
Build to forecasted demandSense and respond to demand

IndependentInterdependent
Single disciplineMultiple discipline
Product functionsValue to customer

Local R&D teamsGlobalized 24x7 R&D teams
SOURCE: COC (2004). Reprinted with permission from the Council on Competitiveness.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESFIGURE 1-2 U.S. R&D funding by source, 1953Ð2003 (expenditures in billions of constant 2003 dollars). Databased on National Science FoundationÕs Division of Science Resources Statistics. Available online at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/pubseri.cfm?TopID=8&SubID=6&SeriID=4. SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from
AAAS (2004b). ©AAAS, 2004.Further indication that private-sector investment is driving technological innovation is provided inFigure 1-2, which shows the relative contributions to R&D funding by the U.S. government and theprivate sector from 1953 through 2003. Note that private-sector investment increased sharply during the
1990s, while government funding remained relatively flat. While private-sector spending was at leastpartially driven by the boom in information technologies, the ratio between government and privateinvestments remains indicative of the trend toward technology commercialization. The profit motive
and the associated availability of large amounts of investment capital result in the rapid commercializa-tion of new technologies that are perceived by investors to address unmet market needs. This leads to,among other things, a very short interval between the first appearance of an advanced-technology-
enabled operational capability and the time when it is a low-cost, widely available commodity. Flat-panel displays are a recent example; cellular phones are another.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING15Looking to the future, the information revolution continues to fuel the synergistic trends of global-ization and commercialization of technologies. As observed in a recent NIC report, Òa nationÕs level oftechnological achievement generally will be defined in terms of its investment in integrating andapplying the new, globally available technologies
Ñwhether the technologies are acquired through acountryÕs own basic research or from technology leadersÓ (NIC, 2004). Thus, while patterns and trends
in R&D investments provide useful indicators of the distributed research talent, the globalization ofmanufacturing facilities may indicate an equally important trend in distributing systems integration
expertise.THE TECHNOLOGY WARNING CHALLENGEIt is relatively easy to create a list of technologies that will have military significance in the comingyears. It is far more difficult to identify those specific technologies that are potential Ògame-changersÓ in
the hands of the nationÕs enemies. And it is even more difficult to envision potential adversariesÕinnovations that derive from multidisciplinary technology integration to yield disruptive capabilities.Yet this is the task levied on the Òtechnology warningÓ organizations of the intelligence community.
The technology warning challenge is further complicated by the fact that adversaries are not necessarilybound by the legal, moral, and ethical standards that govern the U.S. development and application ofscience and technology. This is particularly true in some areas of biological and genetic research. ÒAsdeoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) manipulation becomes technologically and commercially viable, it hassignificant implications for both commercial and military uses that may not be pursued with equal fervorby all societies,Ó as noted by Brown (2003). It is arguably easier to be ÒsurprisedÓ by an adversary whois willing to employ technology-based capabilities that this nation would not consider using.A number of sources provide lists of technologies prioritized from different perspectives. Some listsfocus on potential ÒdisruptiveÓ technologies that could have catastrophic consequences in the hands of
U.S. adversaries, while others focus on technologies with significant commercial potential that coulderode the U.S. technological edge. Three families of technologies that appear in some form on virtuallyevery list are information technology, biotechnology, and nanotechnology. The technology warning
challenge, however, is to characterize more specifically the applications of these technologies that mayjeopardize U.S. military advantage.The 2004 Strategic Planning Guidance calls for the U.S. military to better prepare for a wide rangeof challenges, including Òirregular, catastrophic and disruptive threats.Ó Potentially disruptive technolo-
gies include Òbreakthroughs in sensors, information technology, biotechnology, miniaturization on themolecular level, and cyber operationsÑcapabilities so spectacular they would quickly give an adversaryan edgeÓ (Sherman, 2005). The threat of surprise due to disruptive technology, while not seen as a near-
term threat, is viewed as one to which the United States is most vulnerableÑat least in part owing to thenationÕs heavy reliance on technology-based military capabilities.A 2001 study sponsored by the Central Intelligence Agency enlisted an external panel of expertsthat identified three tiers of technologies likely to impact national security by the 2015 time frame (OTIIA, 2001). Candidate technologies included those shown in Box 1-1. The definitions used by the panel
are provided in Appendix C. The first-tier technologies, those most likely in the panelÕs view to have thegreatest impact, include gene therapy, wireless communications, image understanding, cloned or tailoredorganisms, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and nanotechnology. Second-tier technologies,
those seen as dependent upon particularly vigorous innovation, include optical communications,regenerative medicine, efficient software development, sensor webs, and advanced materials. The panelconcluded that third-tier technologies are likely to remain just below the threshold of steady adoptionAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESBOX 1-1Candidate Technologies Likely to Impact National Security by the2015 Time Frame, Identified by a Panel of ExpertsFirst Tier: High-Impact Technologies¥Gene Therapy

¥Wireless Communications

¥Image Understanding

¥Cloned or Tailored Organisms

¥MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS)

¥Nanotechnology
Second Tier Technologies¥Optical Communications

¥Regenerative Medicine

¥Efficient Software Development

¥Sensor Webs

¥Advanced Materials
Third Tier: Below-Threshold Technologies¥Hypersonic/Supersonic Aircraft

¥Next-Generation Space Shuttle System

¥Alternative Energy

¥Distributed Energy

¥New-Generation Nuclear Power Plants

¥Fuel Cells
Other Technologies Considered¥Brain-Machine Interfaces

¥ÒSmartÓ Materials (organic and inorganic)

¥Distributed-Grid-Based Processing Systems

¥Performance-Enhancing Drugs

¥Multilingual Voice Recognition

¥Molecular Electronics

¥Ubiquitous Water Generation

¥High-Power Lasers

¥Directed Energy (Microwave)
NOTE: See definitions of these technologies in Appendix C of this report.SOURCE: OTI IA (2001).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING17absent unforeseen market potential or government assistance; technologies in this category includehypersonic military and supersonic commercial aircraft, next-generation space shuttle system, alternativeenergy, distributed energy, new-generation nuclear power plants, and fuel cells (OTI IA, 2001).A recent National Academy of Engineering report (NAE, 2004) identifies a list of ÒbreakthroughÓtechnologies and/or applications that engineers will be expected to contend with by 2020. The listincludes biotechnology, nanotechnology, materials science and photonics, information and communica-tions technology, the information explosion, and logistics (NAE, 2004). Advances in nanotechnology
will be driven at least in part through government investment in the U.S. National NanotechnologyInitiative, which budgeted nearly $1 billion in research and funding for fiscal year 2004. Strategicchallenges identified for the National Nanotechnology Initiative are shown in Table 1-3.Yet another perspective is provided by a Web-based survey conducted by R&D Magazine in which
readers were asked to choose five technologies that are expected to see rapid growth and high invest-ments in 2005 (Studt, 2005). According to the survey, the top three technologies are fuel cells,
nanotechnology, and antibioterrorism devices. More than 225 readers responded to the survey; in aseparate question, nearly 60 percent of the respondents revealed that they had some involvement in thetechnologies that they selected (Studt, 2005).While derived from disparate sources, these lists of important technologies (as well as other listsshown to the committee) bear remarkable similarities in terms of the underlying technological founda-tions. So rather than creating yet another list of potentially important technologies for the technology
warning community to track, the committee chose to establish a framework that would lend itself to theongoing identification and prioritization of technologies in terms of their potential impact on the U.S.militaryÕs operational capabilities. The committeeÕs framework and methodology are discussed inChapter 2 of this report. Chapters 3 through 6 contain the committeeÕs initial assessments within specifictechnology areas, and Chapter 7 provides general recommendations and suggestions for the path ahead.TABLE 1-3Challenges Identified for the National Nanotechnology Initiative
Time FrameStrategic Challenge
Nano-now¥Pigments in paints¥Cutting tools and wear-resistant coatings¥Pharmaceuticals and drugs¥Nanoscale particles and thin films in electronic devices¥Jewelry, optical, and semiconductor wafer polishingNano-2007¥Biosensors, transducers, and detectors¥Functional designer fluids¥Propellants, nozzles, and valves¥Flame-retardant additives¥Drug delivery, biomagnetic separation, and wound healingNano-2012¥Nano-optical, nanoelectronics, and nanopower sources¥High-end flexible displays¥Nano-bio materials as artificial organs¥NEMS-based devices¥Faster switches and ultra-sensitive sensorsNOTE: NEMS, nanoelectromechanical systems.SOURCE: NAE (2004).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESLIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDYAlthough a 1-year contract was established to support the work of this ad hoc committee, only three2-day meetings were convened. This schedule provided limited time for committee members to develop
a common understanding of the DIA Technology Warning DivisionÕs needs as well as to discern whatthe division already knows with respect to technologies of potential interest. Thus, this report containssome ÒtutorialÓ information, as well as commentary, relating more specifically to the technology warn-ing challenge.In addition, due to the limited time available for analysis, committee members tended to addresstechnologies with which they were personally familiar rather than attempting to rationalize selections
from among the broad array of technologies of potential interest. This report therefore focuses on a fewspecific technologies and applications rather than attempting to provide a ÒcompleteÓ or prioritized list
of important evolving technologies.Furthermore, the Technology Warning Division asked that the committee specifically excludetechnologies relating to adversarial threats posed by weapons of mass destruction, since that topic isoutside the divisionÕs scope of responsibilities. It was acknowledged that such issues may be the subjectof future studies, but in this report the coverage is, as requested, only notional.It is the committeeÕs intent that this report provide the framework and basis for an ongoing collabo-rative relationship between the intelligence communityÕs technology warning community and theNational Research Council. Committee members are, however, mindful of the caution expressed by theUnited States Commission on National Security/21st Century, which concluded that ÒU.S. intelligencewill face more challenging adversaries, and even excellent intelligence will not prevent all surprisesÓ(USCNS, 1999).REFERENCESAAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science). 2004a. U.S. Leads World in R&D Spending, China Moves to3rd Place. Guide to R&D Funding DataÑInternational Comparisons. Available online at http://www.aaas.org/spp/rd/guiintl.htm. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.AAAS. 2004b. Guide to R&D Funding DataÑTotal U.S. R&D (1953-2003). Available online at http://www.aaas.org/spp/rd/guitotal.htm. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.Bromley, D.A. 2004. Technology policy. Technology in Society 26(2/3):455-468.Brown, Michael E., ed. 2003. Grave New World: Security Challenges in the 21st Century. Georgetown University Press,Washington, D.C. ISBN 0-87840-142-3.Carter, Ashton B., with Marcel Lettre and Shane Smith. 2000. Keeping the technological edge, pp. 127-162 in Keeping theEdge: Managing Defense for the Future. Ashton B. Carter and John P. White, eds. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. ISBN
0-9705414-0-6.COC (Council on Competitiveness). 2004. 21st Century Innovation Working Group. Innovation: The New Reality for Na-tional Prosperity: 21st Century Innovation Working Group Recommendations, Version 2.1. December 15. Available
online at http://www.compete.org/docs/pdf/NII_21st_Century_Innovation%20Report.pdf. Last accessed on April 8, 2005.DIA (Defense Intelligence Agency). 2004. Fact Sheets on Intelligence Agency Components. Washington, D.C.DSB (Defense Science Board). 1999. Final Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Globalization and Security.Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, Washington, D.C. Available online at http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/globalization.pdf. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.Microsoft Corporation. 2002. Meeting of the Minds: Microsoft Research Asia Conference Spurs Collaboration AmongRegionÕs Researchers. Beijing, China. Available online at http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/features/2002/oct02/10-17msrasia.asp. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.NAE (National Academy of Engineering). 2004. The Engineer of 2020: Vision of Engineering in the New Century. TheNational Academies Press, Washington, D.C.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY WARNING19NIC (National Intelligence Council). 2004. Mapping the Global Future. Government Printing Office, Pittsburgh, Pa. ISBN0-16-073-218-2.NSB (National Science Board). 2003. The Science and Engineering WorkforceÑRealizing AmericaÕs Potential. Availableonline at http://www.nsf.gov/nsb/documents/2003/nsb0369/nsb0369.pdf. Last accessed February 7, 2004.OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2004a. Main Science and Technology Indicators: Vol.2004, Issue 2; Principaux indicateurs de la science et de la technologie: Vol. 2004-2.OECD. 2004b. OECD Countries Spend More on Research and Development, Face New Challenges. Available online at http://www.oecd.org/document/2/0,2340,en_2649_201185_34100162_1_1_1_1,00.html. Last accessed on February 7, 2005.OTI IA (Office of Transnational Issues, Intelligence Analysis). 2001. Global Technology Scenarios Through 2015: AmericaÕsGame to Lose. OTI-IA 2001-083. CIA Analytic Report. November.Sherman, Jason. 2005. More cuts to major weapons programs could be on the way in 2005 QDR. Inside the Air Force 16(1):16-17.Studt, Tim. 2005. R&DÕs hot technologies for 2005. Reed Business Information. Available online at http://www.rdmag.com/ShowPR.aspx?PUBCODE=014&ACCT=1400000100&ISSUE=0412&RELTYPE=PR&ORIGRELTYPE=CVS&PRODCODE=
00000000&PRODLETT=BZ. Last accessed on February 7, 2005.USCNS (United States Commission on National Security/21st Century). 1999. New World Coming: American Security in the21st Century, Major Themes and Implications: Phase I Report on the Emerging Global Security Environment for the First
Quarter of the 21st Century, Washington, D.C. Available online at http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/nssg/Reports/NWC.pdf.Last accessed on April 8, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES202Committee MethodologyWith the context and scope of its assignment established, the committee turned its attention todefining a robust methodology for technology warning that would be suitable for the diverse inquiries
likely to stem from ongoing engagement between a standing committee of the National ResearchCouncil (NRC) and the intelligence communityÕs (ICÕs) technology warning components. The proposedmethodology is described in this chapter and tested through application in subsequent chapters.KEY FEATURES OF THE METHODOLOGYA robust methodology for technical inquiry should have four key features. First, to be accepted, itmust be presented in a lexicon and structure appropriate for the userÕs cultureÑin this case, for theculture in which the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) Technology Warning Division (the sponsor of
this study) operates. Any communication of findings, conclusions, or recommendations offered by thecommittee must be expressed accordingly. The division makes use of weather-forecasting terminology(Futures, Watch, Warning, Alert)1 in the issuance of technology assessments, making the overall warning
message regarding all products readily interpretable by any reader. The committee adopted and adaptedthe DIAÕs vocabulary to characterize the relative statusÑand recommended actionÑfor each technology.The second key feature is that, to be relevant, the study methodology must be tied in a fundamentalway to top-level Department of Defense (DOD) strategies. For example, the committee reviewed JointVision 2020 (JCS, 2000) to validate its selection of the technology topics addressed in this report. Infuture studies, to facilitate integration into the larger body of intelligence materials, the committee
proposes that technology selections be derived through a more disciplined, RED team2 review of top-
1The definitions used by the DIA for these terms are as follows: FuturesÑCreate a technology roadmap and forecast;identify potential observables to aid in the tracking of technological advances. Technology WatchÑMonitor global communi-cations and publications for breakthroughs and integrations. Technology WarningÑPositive observables indicate that a proto-type has been achieved. Technology AlertÑAn adversary has been identified and operational capability is known to exist.2ÒREDÓ is used in this report to denote the adversary or an adversarial perspective (e.g., ÒRED teamÓ).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE METHODOLOGY21level strategy documents (e.g., Joint Vision 2020) with an eye to identifying technologies that could beused to deny a BLUE3 capability deemed critical to U.S. military success.
The third key feature is that, to maintain focus and ensure timeliness, the study methodology mustyield assessments built on a solid understanding of the technical feasibility of potential technology-
based threats. This requirement leads to a capability-based approach for investigating and categorizingcandidate technologies. Furthermore, the technical peer review process to which all NRC reports aresubjected provides additional assurance of the technical quality of committee assessments.Lastly, to be enduring, the methodology should accommodate evolving realities of science andtechnology (S&T) leadership, driven by the synergistic trends of globalization and commercializationdescribed in Chapter 1. Traditionally, the United States has assumed that it leads the world in S&T. This
perspective leads the technology warning community to look for indications that external actors aretrying to Òcatch up,Ó or to exploit known technologies in new ways. Projected trends suggest that it
should no longer automatically be assumed that the United States will lead technological advances in all
relevant technologies. This reality imposes a new burden on the technology warning community, gener-ating the need for it to search in different places and in different ways for the information needed to warnagainst technology surprise.FOUNDATION OF THE METHODOLOGYThe committee believes that the Technology Warning Division can most effectively prioritize itslimited resources by utilizing a capabilities-based approach with respect to assessing technologies. Thelandscape of potentially important emerging technologies is both vast and diverse. Ideally, the division
should assess whether a given technology has the potential to pose a viable threat prior to commission-ing in-depth analyses. Since the division is keenly interested in when specific technologies may matureto the point that they pose a threat to U.S. forces, a functional decomposition from an adversarial, or
RED, perspective is most useful. The methodology defined by the committee begins with the followingfocus question: What capabilities does the United States have that, if threatened, impact U.S. militarypreeminence?In general, U.S. capabilities could be threatened either through direct denial of or disruption ofBLUE capabilities or via RED capabilities that negate or significantly diminish the value of BLUEcapabilities (e.g., improvised explosive devices (IEDs) being employed by insurgent forces in Iraq).Joint Vision 2020 was used to define the basic framework for U.S. military capabilities deemed vitalto sustained success (JCS, 2000). The overarching focus of this vision is Full Spectrum DominanceÑachieved through the interdependent application of four operational concepts (Dominant Maneuver,
Precision Engagement, Focused Logistics, and Full Dimensional Protection) and enabled through Infor-mation Superiority, as illustrated in Figure 2-1 (JCS, 2000). The committee selected the four operationalconcepts, together with Information Superiority, as the foundation for its assessment methodology. Joint
Vision 2020 provides the definitions presented in Box 2-1.The committee also noted the importance of technology warning with respect to the ÒInnovationÓcomponent of Joint Vision 2020 shown in Figure 2-1, since Òleaders must assess the efficacy of newideas, the potential drawbacks to new concepts, the capabilities of potential adversaries, the costs versusbenefits of new technologies, and the organizational implications of new capabilitiesÓ (JCS, 2000).
From this foundation the committee then identifies specific capabilities in accordance with the3ÒBLUEÓ is used in this report to denote U.S. military forces.
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESpreviously defined focus questionÑWhat capabilities does the United States have that, if threatened,impact U.S. military preeminence?While the U.S. military has devoted significant time to the definition of vital capabilities in align-ment with Joint Vision 2020, the committee made no effort in this first report to synchronize itsderivations or definitions, or to provide a complete decomposition of the operational concepts and
enablers into their underlying capabilities. Rather, committee members selected a few evolving tech-nologies and assessed the potential for those technologies to threaten important U.S. capabilities. Giventhat the committeeÕs proposed basic methodology is adopted, future studies will analyze more compre-hensively the threats to a taxonomy of U.S. military capabilities that derives from the operationalconcepts envisioned by Joint Vision 2020. The basic methodology developed by the committee issummarized in Box 2-2 and is described in greater detail in subsequent sections.IDENTIFYThe next step of the proposed assessment methodology is performed from the RED perspective. Thecentral question here is as follows: What are the evolving technologies that, in the hands of U.S.adversaries, might be used to threaten an important U.S. military capability? A corollary question is,What technologies, if rapidly exploited by the U.S. military, are likely to yield sustained technologicalsuperiority? However, this issue was addressed only peripherally, given the divisionÕs focus on tech-nology warning.Having identified a technology of potential interest, the next challenge becomes the derivation ofÒindicatorsÓ or 
ÒobservablesÓ that may suggest adversarial adoption or exploitation of that technology.
FIGURE 2-1 Concepts constituting the basic framework for U.S. military capability as defined by Joint Vision2020. (See Box 2-1.) SOURCE: JCS (2000).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE METHODOLOGY23BOX 2-1Relevant Definitions from Joint Vision 2020 Serving asFoundation for Assessment MethodologyInformation Superiority is the capability to collect, process, and disseminate an uninter-
rupted flow of information while exploiting or denying an adversaryÕs ability to do the
same. Information superiority is achieved in a noncombat situation or one in which there
are no clearly defined adversaries when friendly forces have the information necessary to
achieve operational objectives.Dominant Maneuver is the ability of joint forces to gain positional advantage with deci-
sive speed and overwhelming operational tempo in the achievement of assigned military
tasks. Widely dispersed joint air, land, sea, amphibious, special operations and space
forces, capable of scaling and massing force or forces and the effects of fires as required
for either combat or noncombat operations, will secure advantage across the range of
military operations through the application of information, deception, engagement, mobility
and counter-mobility capabilities.Focused Logistics is the ability to provide the joint force the right personnel, equipment,
and supplies in the right place, at the right time, and in the right quantity, across the full
range of military operations. This will be made possible through a real-time, web-based
information system providing total asset visibility as part of a common relevant operational

picture, effectively linking the operator and logistician across Services and support agencies.Precision Engagement is the ability of joint forces to locate, surveil, discern, and track
objectives or targets; select, organize, and use the correct systems; generate desired
effects; assess results; and reengage with decisive speed and overwhelming operational
tempo as required, throughout the full range of military operations.Full Dimensional Protection is the ability of the joint force to protect its personnel and
other assets required to decisively execute assigned tasks. Full dimensional protection is
achieved through the tailored selection and application of multilayered active and passive
measures, within the domains of air, land, sea, space, and information across the range
of military operations with an acceptable level of risk.SOURCE: JCS (2000).Although targeted intelligence-collection methods remain important, in this report the committee fo-cuses on observables that may be derived from open source analysisÑleveraging the effects of theinformation revolution and acknowledging that the twin forces of globalization and commercializationprovide new sources of relevant information. At the same time, however, the committee recognizes the
difficulty of discerning when technological advances portend emerging threats rather than societalbenefits.A sample chartÑChart 2-1Ñexemplifies how each technology is assessed.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESBOX 2-2Proposed Methodology for Technology WarningFoundationJoint Vision 2020a Operational Concepts and Information Superiority¥FocusWhat capabilities does the United States have that, if threatened, impact U.S.military preeminence?¥IdentifyWhat are the evolving technologies that, in the hands of U.S. adversaries,might be used to threaten an important U.S. military capability?What are the observables that may indicate adversarial adoption or exploitationof such technologies?¥AssessAccessibility: How difficult would it be for an adversary to exploit the technology?Maturity: How much is known about an adversaryÕs intentions to exploit thetechnology?Consequence: What is the impact on U.S. military capability should the tech-nology be employed by an adversary?¥PrioritizeIdentify: What are the relative resources to be applied to each emerging tech-nology to support the technology warning process?¥TaskEstablish and assign intelligence-information-collection requirements.aSOURCE: JCS (2000).TechnologyObservablesBrief description of technologyBrief description of observables.
AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1, 2, or 3Technology Futures
Technology WatchTechnology Warning
Technology AlertShort characterization.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE METHODOLOGY25ASSESSThe committeeÕs assessment methodology involves characterization of a technology in terms ofthree variables: Accessibility, Maturity, and Consequence. Priorities for more detailed analyses may
derive from any individual variable or any combination of the three.AccessibilityThe Accessibility variable focuses on the question, How difficult would it be for an adversary toexploit the technology? It addresses the ability of an adversary to gain access to and exploit a given
technology. This assessment is divided into three levels:¥Level 1. The technology is available through the Internet, being a commercial off-the-shelf item;
low sophistication is required to exploit it.¥Level 2. The technology would require a small investment (hundreds of dollars to a few hundredthousand dollars) in facilities and/or expertise.¥Level 3. The technology would require a major investment (millions to billions of dollars) infacilities and/or expertise.In general, Level 1 technologies are those driven by the global commercial technology environment;they are available for exploitation by a diverse range of potential adversaries. Level 3 technologies, bycontrast, are typically accessible only to state-based actors. The indicators likely to be of value in
determining an adversaryÕs actual access to a given technology vary by level as well as by the type oftechnology.MaturityThe Maturity variable focuses on the question, How much is known about an adversaryÕs intentionsto exploit the technology? It integrates what is known about an adversaryÕs actions, together with anevaluation of the state of play with respect to the technology of interest. At the highest level, calledTechnology Alert, an adversary has been identified and an operational capability has been observed. At
the lowest level, Technology Futures, the potential for a technology-based threat has been identified, butno positive indicators have been observed. The Maturity assessment is divided into four categories: thefirst two (the lower levels) suggest further actions for the technology warning community; the other two
indicate the need for immediate attention by military leadership:¥Futures. Create a technology roadmap and forecast; identify potential observables to aid in thetracking of technological advances.¥Technology Watch. Monitor (global) communications and publications for breakthroughs andintegrations.¥Technology Warning. Positive observables indicate that a prototype has been achieved.¥Technology Alert. An adversary has been identified and operational capability is known to exist.Given the potential for disruptive advances through technological breakthroughs or innovativeintegration, as well as the difficulty of identifying and tracking meaningful indicators, any particulartechnology is unlikely to progress sequentially through the various categories of Maturity listed above.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESAs indicated at the beginning of this chapter, the committee adopted and adapted the DIAÕs termi-nology in defining these categories. The definitions are likely to evolve as the process matures. Thecommittee sees significant value in this basic approach, however, since it divorces the challenge oftechnology warning from the discrete time lines associated with Òprediction,Ó which are almost invariably
inaccurate.ConsequenceCharacterization of a technology in terms of the Consequence variable involves addressing thequestion, What is the impact on military capability should the technology be employed by an adversary?It involves assessing the impact of the postulated RED technology on the capability of BLUE forces.This impact can range from denial or negation of a critical capability to the less-consequential level ofannoyance or nuisance. A corollary assessment may be made as to the locus of impactÑthat is, whetherthe technology affects a single person, as in the case of an assassination, or creates a circumstance ofmass casualty and attendant mass chaos.PRIORITIZEThe objective of the prioritization step of the methodology is to respond to the question, What arethe relative resources to be applied to each emerging technology to support the technology warningprocess? This step is intended to harmonize the distinct nodes of observed capability, demonstratedintent, resources available, and the inherent cost of inaction. Prioritization is key to the technology
warning methodology, since the Technology Warning Division lacks the resources to fully analyzeevery conceivable evolving technology. It is equally important to recognize that prioritization is anintegral part of each methodology parameter. The prioritization of individual parameters is based on the
levels of change detection and potential impact. By prioritizing the parameter, the division can focussubsequent analyses over a smaller subset of an assigned change detection domain. Priority assignmentis essential to enable the focusing of more sophisticated information-gathering tools and analytic tech-
niques on the areas of highest potential concern.The prioritization methodology lends itself to any number of commercially available tools andtechniques designed for assistance in establishing and maintaining a logical and consistent focus as well
as the flexibility to react to the dynamics of technology change and country-of-interest variability.During the prioritization process, it will be important to establish measures of performance to allowcritical analysis as well as change management in order to improve the overall process. The end result of
the prioritization process is to provide for actionable awareness with which to influence analysis andtasking, the last of the methodology parameters.The committee envisions that prioritization would be accomplished in close consultation with thetechnology warning community. It made no attempt to further develop the prioritization process in thisreport.TASKThe Technology Warning Division will inevitably have unmet needs for additional information and/or intelligence relating to the prioritized list of evolving technologies. Although some needs may be metthrough division-chartered research, others will require the assistance of the broader intelligencecommunity.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE METHODOLOGY27The task stepÑEstablish and assign intelligence-information-collection requirementsÑinvolvesthe dissemination of collection requirements to other IC components and subordinate agencies. Suchrequirements must provide sufficient specificity to enable interpretation by collectors who are notnecessarily literate in the specific technology. The requirements may include general instructions for
accomplishing the mission. It is envisioned that some of the observables postulated in the Identify stepof the methodology will provide a useful basis for such tasking.The results from collection efforts will be integrated back into the assessment step in order to refine,reprocess, and update the divisionÕs understanding of a given technology. This analysis may stimulatethe issuance of a new report to the divisionÕs customers to inform them of changes in the assessedmaturity of that technology.USING THE METHODOLOGY IN THIS REPORTTo test the robustness of the proposed technology warning methodology, the committee applied it inorder to assess four key areas in this initial report. It should be noted that this initial exercise wasnecessarily circumscribed by the domain expertise represented in the committee members and by the
shortness of time for broader outreach to the technical community at large. Furthermore, since themethodology emerged in parallel with the committeeÕs technology assessments, the approaches takenwere not entirely consistent.The foundation provided by Joint Vision 2020 and augmented by the military and professionalbackgrounds of committee members was used to select the following four key capabilities to assess:¥Information superiority (Chapter 3),¥Air superiority (Chapter 4),¥Discrimination between friends/foes/neutrals (Chapter 5), and¥Battle readiness and communications superiority (Chapter 6).Chapters 3 through 6 each address the ÒIdentifyÓ activity with examples of evolving technologies
that may threaten the capability and potential indicators that such technology development is underway.The ÒAssessÓ activity then examines opportunity and motivation for adversarial technology develop-
ment and/or employment, posits change detection relative to the indicators, and assesses likely impact.
Preliminary characterizations of accessibility, maturity, and consequence are provided for most evolvingtechnologies, although the level of specificity is variable.Subsequent steps (i.e., ÒPrioritizeÓ and 
ÒTaskÓ) of the proposed methodology require customerinputs and actions and are left to future study efforts.REFERENCEJCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff). 2000. Joint Vision 2020. Director for Strategic Plans and Policy, J5, Strategy Division. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. June.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES283Challenges to Information SuperiorityThe importance of accurate, timely information in warfare is self-evident. The enormous advantagethat superior access to such information can provide to adversaries on either side of a conflict has been
recognized by warfighters for thousands of years. The Art of War by Sun Tzu says the following (Giles,
1910):All warfare is based on deception.Attack him where he is unprepared, appear where you are not expected.
Fighting with a large army under your command is nowise different from fighting with a small one: it ismerely a question of instituting signs and signals.The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon which enables it to strike and destroy itsvictim.Though the enemy is stronger in numbers, we may prevent him from fighting. Scheme so as to discoverhis plans and the likelihood of their success.Hence the experienced soldier, once in motion, is never bewildered; once he has broken camp, he isnever at a loss.Hence the saying: If you know the enemy and know yourself, your victory will not stand in doubt; if youknow Heaven and know Earth, you may make your victory complete.The vision of 21st century warfighting strategy, as articulated at the highest levels of U.S. militaryleadership, is critically dependent on the ability of BLUE forces to obtain and rapidly act on a highly
accurate, detailed, and timely picture of the battlespace, and to deny RED forces the ability to do so. InJoint Vision 2020, ÒInformation SuperiorityÓ is identified as a key enabler that cuts across all four of theAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY29envisioned operational concepts (JCS, 2000). That is, achieving information superiority enables BLUEforces to outmaneuver RED forces (the Dominant Maneuver operational concept); to concentrate BLUEforces quickly and accurately on selected RED targets (Precision Engagement); to react opportunisti-cally to attack newly discovered, prospective RED targets; and to rapidly repurpose resources (Focused
Logistics) to protect BLUE forces from attacks by RED forces (Full Dimensional Protection).Conversely, if an adversary can penetrate, infiltrate, contaminate, and/or neutralize the BLUEcommunications systems, computing systems, and/or the information that they contain, it can inflict
serious damage on the BLUE force. This damage can range up to and including the defeat of the BLUEforce that otherwise would have prevailed. Furthermore, the vulnerability of the BLUE force to signifi-cant reductions in its ability to operate effectivelyÑas a result of disruptions in its ability to communi-cate and access information securely and in a timely mannerÑincreases as the BLUE force implementsnew or significantly modified concepts of operation that increasingly depend on information superiority.MAINTAINING INFORMATION SUPERIORITY IN THE FACE OF GLOBALIZATIONAND COMMERCIALIZATIONThe information technology revolution is on par with the Industrial Revolution in terms of bringingin new and disruptive technologies that drive societal change through their ubiquity and pervasiveness.Since computing and communications go hand in hand, this confluence of technologies is often referred
to as C&C.1A current C&C vision would almost certainly include sensors (i.e., computing, communications,and sensors) because many existing and emerging commercial and military applications are critically
dependent for their success and value on the availability of sensors that generate information needed forsituational awareness. See, for example, the recent coverage in the popular press and in investmentpublications regarding the many applications of networked radio frequency identification (RFID) tags.The Industrial Revolution began in the United Kingdom and Germany and gradually spread to therest of the world. In contrast, the C&C revolution has taken root throughout vast areas of the world, anda number of the newest technologies of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s are commodity technologies of
today. Examples that quickly come to mind are high-performance personal computers, personal digitalassistants, two-way pagers, video-camera-enabled cellular telephones, virtual-reality-based multiplayergames, and high-bandwidth networking. The vast majority of these devices and systems were developed
in the United States initially, under sponsorship of the Department of Defense (DOD) (largely theDefense Advanced Research Projects Agency [DARPA]). They then were sponsored through cross-agency Presidential Initiatives on High Performance Computing and Communications (now having
become the National Coordination Office for Information Technology Research and Development).It is not difficult to see that a variety of benefits resulted from the strategy of using national securityÒsurprise preventionÓ priorities to seed and then nurture the C&C engine of economic productivity and
growth in the late 1990s and early 21st century. The benefits include the following:¥The level of current superiority in U.S. military systems incorporating information technology,¥A very high societal return on investment (i.e., well beyond the domain of defense applications), and¥A vibrant commercial sector, which can deliver systems to the DOD as commercial off-the-shelf(COTS) products (and integrations thereof); these are much less expensive than traditional, one-1See, for example, www.smartcomputing.com/editorial/dictionary/detail.asp?guid=&searchtype=1&DicID=16593&RefType=Encyclopedia. Last accessed on April 1, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESof-a-kind government off-the-shelf (GOTS) systems that had previously been the norm in DODprocurements of platforms and systems.As a result of these successes, this strategy has been studied by several foreign governments and isbeing emulated by the European Union nations and by Singapore, China, and other nations. Additionally,while the virtues of COTS over GOTS products are indisputable and numerous, a by-product of theÒseeding and nurturingÓ strategy to date has been the acceleration of the commoditization of C&C
technologies.A national response to these developments to date could fall into one of two categories:1.An added emphasis on a classification regimen to protect the newest advances in C&C and a
return to a more traditional model of development favored in earlier generations of DOD procure-ment of platforms and systems. (It is unlikely that such a strategy would succeed in slowing down
the commercial emergence significantly, if at all, of many of the enabling technologies overwhich the DOD might wish to keep control.)2.A recognition that, while the constituent technologies comprising C&C have been commoditized,
their integration into complex, secure, useful, usable, survivable systems that benefit the DODcan indeed be a competitive advantage if the nation maintains sufficient leadership in the relevantsystems integration skills.Other nations as well have recognized the advantages of a strong research enterprise. A number aredevoting increasing fractions of their national resources to basic and early applied research in many
emerging areas, while the United States is at best maintaining a steady level of funding for its researchagenda (although the amount of funding is still quite large in absolute, inflation-adjusted dollars) (Rocoet al., 1999; Chan et al., 2004). The end result is that the United States can be assured of neither the first
and the best technology results nor a first moverÕs advantage in applying COTS to military systems.This situation compounds the difficulties faced by the technology warning community. That is, notbeing in a leadership position in creating and applying the technology makes it much harder to know
what to look for and more difficult to understand the implications of the complex array of thingsobserved.With this background, Chapter 3 focuses on providing the beginnings of a roadmap to help thetechnology warning community identify, analyze, and prioritize developments in the internationalexploitation of C&C technologies in several key areas. These areas are trusted software; trusted hard-ware and foundries; supercomputing; ubiquitous sensing, computing, and communications systems; and
the fusion of C&C with other novel technologies.Trusted SoftwareSoftware today plays the role of a universal system. The key to achieving the marriage of Ònew- andold-economyÓ technologies is the development of new software-based technologies for the integration
of complex systems. The competitor who is more adept at designing, implementing, and operating large,complex, software-based systems will be at a distinct advantage in 21st-century operations that areincreasingly dependent on information superiority. These systems of course need to be secure and
trustworthy (i.e., they need to do what is expected and only what is expected).One often hears a somewhat-undeserved comment about the state of current software development(particularly in the context of large, software-based systems): that is, current software is just poorAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY31enough to slow down the impressive gains made to date in computer hardwareÑpoor enough to keepthe performance improvement of systems modest. There are numerous examples of cost overrunscaused by failed projects involving software-based system development (especially embedded software)in procurements. These examples include the Crusader artillery system, the Comanche helicopter, the
Space-Based Infrared System-High satellite, the F/A-22 airplane, the Future Combat System, andunmanned combat aerial vehicles (the Joint Unmanned Combat Aerial System). This phenomenon is notexclusively a management problem.Competent program managers with experience in large, software-based system development are inshort supply and high demand. Their needed multidisciplinary skills are largely honed through on-the-project experience, and they are subject to the natural selection processes of a competitive business
environment. They cannot be easily ÒclonedÓ through educational programs.
With the growth of large software-development centers in India, Israel, and Eastern Europe, thetechnology warning community should be carefully tracking the work on techniques for the develop-
ment of trusted software systems, especially trusted embedded software systems. New techniques forthe metamodeling of embedded systems, aspect-based programming, and model-based integration ofembedded systems should be closely monitored.A related point is the need for new methods for the development of trusted software for civilianinfrastructures. The huge market created by the expanding use of wireless embedded systems in physicalinfrastructures, and the associated commercial requirements for the trustworthiness of those systems,
afford the possibility of generating a cyber infrastructure that is secure and trustedÑand availableworldwide to allies and adversaries alike.Trusted Hardware and FoundriesBLUE force technological superiority relies on the development and manufacturing of trusted and,it is hoped, tamperproof hardware components. Therefore, it is important to pay attention to trends insemiconductor manufacturing to determine the relative maturity and directions of U.S. and foreignsemiconductor fabrication facilities. To date, the United States remains the world leader in processor
fabrication and in the production of application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). However, emergingfoundries in South Korea, Taiwan, and China are poised to take a leading market share in semiconductors.Additionally, technology trends point to the emergence of a number of interesting new nano-technologies and materials that will be used alongside complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) technologies and methods. While CMOS is the dominant electronics technology of today,alternativesÑnanotubes (e.g., carbon and silicon), molecular electronics, quantum dots, and othersÑare rapidly being developed. Eventually they are likely to complement and perhaps even supplantCMOS as the electronics benchmark. It will be important to monitor, with a worldwide perspective, thedevelopment of these electronics technologies (DSB, 2005).SupercomputingThe greatest supercomputing threat today does not come from fourth-generation computers butrather from the use of grid computing involving the concept of Ònetworks of workstationsÓ to connect
commodity personal computers (PCs).2 Such grid computing is already being used by the Search for
2See, for example, http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/ and http://webs.cs.berkeley.edu. Last accessed on April 26, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESExtraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Institute to conduct signal analysis of multiband extraterrestrialsignals, by astronomers for basic exploration of cosmic background radiation, and for climate modeling.Superiority in this area is achieved through advanced models for distributed programming and infra-structures for supporting high-performance scientific computing. High-performance scientific computing
is an important dual-use technology with diverse applications, including cryptology, signal processingand climatic modeling, geological event detection, and intracellular and intercellular interaction model-ing (so-called systems biology). The network of workstations is a commodity entity, but the distributed
software is the key element of differentiation.Ubiquitous Sensing, Computing, and Communications SystemsWith the convergence of computing and communications technologies, there is now an emergenceof sensor webs of smart dust, networks of cameras, networks of unmanned ÒXÓ vehicles (UXVs),
networks of microsatellites, and other networked embedded systems. The sensing, computing, andcommunications hardware that goes into these systems is commodity. However, the exploitation ofdistributed sensor networks for applications ranging from civilian infrastructure to intelligence-gathering
activities in a secure and trusted fashion is once again conditioned on the use of superior techniques forembedded software development for networked embedded systems. Thus, from a technology warningperspective, the investment in systems building for secure cyber infrastructures and other networked
embedded systems is an important arena for identification, assessment, and prioritization. More detailedinformation on ubiquitous sensing, computing, and communications systems is provided in Appendix Din this report.Fusion of Computing and Communications with Other Novel TechnologiesC&C has been the paradigm-shifting information-technology-based engine of change over the past30 years. All indications are that in the future it will, for many applications of great importance to theDOD, be leveraged via a fusion of C&C with biotechnologies, information technologies, and nano-
technologies in such a way that the best of the potential capabilities of nano- and biotechnologies areharvested on a C&C substrate. An example of how C&C technologies in ubiquitous sensing andcommunications systems can be combined with other technologies addressed in this report is the use of
video-enabled disposable cellular phones in microair vehicles to provide networked monitoring andsurveillance.3 Another example is the use of C&C technologies with DNA computing methods to
produce synthetic biological systems.4POTENTIAL OBSERVABLES THAT MAY INDICATE EMERGING THREATSMany of the technologies that pose potential threats to the communications capabilities of BLUEforces are readily available in the global marketplace. Thus, it is possible to postulate a variety of otherobservables that may be of value. Table 3-1 summarizes potential observables and potential sources of
information for each. For example, the areas that foreign graduate students choose to study may be anindicator of the desire of a foreign government to develop capabilities in that area. In retrospect, it is3For additional information, see, for example, http://robotics.eecs.berkeley.edu/bear/. Last accessed on April 1, 2005.4See, for example, information on the Biobricks project at http://parts.mit.edu/. Last accessed on April 20, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY33TABLE 3-1Potential Observables and Sources of Information on Potential Threats to
Communications CapabilitiesObservablesPotential Source
aMovement of graduateNational Science Foundation Science and Engineering Indicators
students betweenhttp://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind04/c0/c0s1.htm
countries and fieldsNational Science Foundation Survey of Graduate Students and Postdoctorates in
Science and Engineeringhttp://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/sgss/Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Education and Skillshttp://www.oecd.org/topic/0,2686,en_2649_33925_1_1_1_1_37455,00.htmlImport and export ofU.S. Government Export Portal
critical technology itemshttp://www.export.gov/tradestatistics.html
(volume, type, etc.)Business travel to andTravel Industry Association of America
from the United Stateshttp://www.tia.org/default.asp

from select countriescorrelated to export ofcertain technologiesRelevant publicationsOECD Work on Patent Statistics
and patents from selecthttp://www.oecd.org/document/10/0,2340,en_2649_34451_1901066_1_1_1_1,00.html

foreign countriesU.S. patents andU.S. Patent and Trademark Office (Patent Statistics Available for Viewing)
publicationshttp://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/index.html
Workforce migrationOECD Science and Technology Working Papers
and mobilityhttp://www.oecd.org/findDocument/0,2350,en_2649_33703_1_119684_1_1_1,00.html
Labor productivity trendsOECD Productivity Statistics
http://www.oecd.org/topicstatsportal/0,2647,en_2825_30453906_1_1_1_1_1,00.htmlGlobal diffusion ofOECD Information and Communication Technologies
information technologieshttp://www.oecd.org/topic/0,2686,en_2649_37409_1_1_1_1_37409,00.html
Foreign industrialOECD Measuring Industrial Performance
performancehttp://www.oecd.org/document/15/0,2340,en_2649_34445_1895503_1_1_1_1,00.html
aAll sites were last accessed on April 1, 2005.clear that Middle Eastern interest in studying certain areas of engineering, particularly nuclear engineer-ing, was an indicator of a desire to develop a nuclear capability.Another indicator of emerging or existing capability is the return of foreign expatriates to theircountry of origin. In many cases their return could simply evidence a desire for wealth in a rapidlygrowing market and would be considered a natural by-product of the global economy. However, the
return of foreign expatriates could also indicate that desired information had been obtained in the UnitedStates and could now be put to use by foreign entities.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESAnother indicator that should be watched is an increased interest in low-power electronics. Suchinterest could be indicative of developments in the areas of sensors and sensor networks. Similarly, anincreased interest in low-power radio-frequency communication may be indicative of developments insensor networks. Since much of the expertise for sensor networks is the same as that for mobile
telephone networks, this behavior may also simply be a natural outgrowth of the increasingly ubiquitoustelecommunications environment. The committee believes that it nonetheless bears attention.Advances in cryptography and computer security often appear in the open literature. Increasingly,these advances are the work of foreign researchers. Recently a French researcher broke SHA (securehash algorithm)-0 (replaced by SHA-1 in 1994), and Chinese researchers have broken message-digestalgorithm 5 (MD-5) (Randall and Szydio, 2004; Wang et al., 2004). Israeli researchers have successfully
attacked a 40-round version of SHA-1. SHA-1 is the foundation of many security protocols. The NationalInstitute of Standards and Technology believes that SHA-1 remains secure, but has decided to phase itout in favor of hash functions that it believes are stronger, such as SHA-256 and SHA-512 (NIST, 2002).It is difficult to gauge the strength of government efforts in cryptography and computer securitysince the results are unlikely to be published in the open literature. The analysis of such activities islikely to have to rely more on targeted intelligence collection. A possible indicator is that of hiring
patterns of foreign intelligence agencies. The hiring of mathematicians and computer scientists could bea strong indicator that such agencies are developing a capability in cryptography or computer andcommunications security.An indicator that is often missed is silence. During World War II, leading nuclear physicistsprevailed on their colleagues and scholarly journals to refrain from publishing their results. This wasinterpreted correctly by the Soviets to signify that work of consequence was occurring, since it was very
unlikely that the leading physicists of the day would simply stop publishing. If it was noticed that foreignresearchers who had been publishing in, say, cryptography suddenly stopped or switched areas, it would bea strong indicator that increased attention should be paid to activities in that area by that government.Areas of industrial investment can also be indicators. Anecdotal discussions indicate that Cisco nowconsiders Huawei Technologies, based in Shenzhen, China, to be its greatest competitor. According toa recent news article (The Economist, 2005), Huawei, ChinaÕs leading telecommunications equipmentmanufacturer, now ranks 8th among wireline-equipment suppliers, up from 18th last year (Cisco ranksfirst). Former PeopleÕs Liberation Army (PLA) officer Ren Zengfei heads Huawei Technologies. Huaweiis of particular interest because approximately 40 percent of its employees are in research and develop-
ment, which contrasts sharply with current commercial practice in the United States.5Earlier in this chapter it was observed that silence may also be a useful observable. With that idea inmind, some of the areas identified in Table 3-1 (e.g., publications and patents) should be monitored for
abrupt pattern changes. A cautionary note with respect to the observables postulated above is that thecommittee made no assessment regarding policy or other issues that may limit such analysis. Further-more, the committee acknowledges that many of the observables that it identified may be routinely
analyzed by the technology warning community.BASIC WAYS TO DEGRADE OR NEUTRALIZE INFORMATION SUPERIORITYAn adversary could impact BLUE force information superiority in a number of ways, includingexploitation, corruption, disruption, or destruction of U.S. information systems. Virtually any component5See, for example, http://company.monster.com/huaweihk/. Last accessed on February 11, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY35of the information environment is a potential targetÑthat is, the aggregate of individuals, organizations,and systems that collect, process, and disseminate information, including the information itself (JCS,2000). In this section, the committee provides a Òtutorial-levelÓ overview of several of the more
commonly used methods of attack.ExploitationIf an adversary gains access to protected information, the system has been exploited. Interceptingbattle plans and moving assets out of harmÕs way are perhaps the most classic examples of battlefieldinformation exploitation. Most commonly, exploitation is associated with voice or data transmission
among forces or between forces and command authorities. In the modern battle environment, however,other information can be exploited. Intercepting the communications between a sensor and the nextpoint in the communications stream, or between a weapon and its launch platform, are examples of
modern exploitation. Intercepting a wireless or wired signal, ÒbuggingÓ a node or facility in the system,
or emplacing a human agent are all methods of information exploitation.Encryption is perhaps the most effective way to prevent the loss of information through signalinterception. ÒBuggingÓ may be prevented (or detected) by the application of suitable scanning tech-
nology, but doing so may be expensive and tedious. The Òspy,Ó especially an insider threat, may be themost difficult to counter. History is replete with stories from classical times to the present of spies
upsetting even the best-laid battle plans.CorruptionIf an adversary gains access to the information environment and is able to alter information, thatinformation has been corrupted. Means of corrupting information are manyÑranging from Òspoofing,Ówhich means changing the content of information collected and transmitted, to deception, which issimply creating bad information. Being able to flip 1Õs and 0Õs in a data stream so that a weapon hits awrong target is an example of spoofing. Passing on false information so that a wrong target is attacked
constitutes deception.The level of maturity of technology required to spoof electronic information is relatively advanced,probably beyond the inherent capability of an insurgent but well within the capability of a state actor.
However, insurgents with sufficient money could buy the technology and the capability to use it on theblack market or from some less-than-scrupulous state actors. One must have the means to intercept,alter, and then retransmit information, or one must be able to compromise a sensor or to compromise
data-processing or data-transmitting hardware. Deception, especially involving human sources, isnotoriously easy.Using encryption to ensure the integrity of data that are transmitted is a well-known technique thatshould be implemented. It is extremely difficult for even a peer adversary to alter the contents of anencrypted data stream in an undetectable fashion. It is much easier to alter the data at the source beforeit is encrypted (e.g., altering the values returned by a sensor).DisruptionPreventing the movement of information constitutes a disruption. The jamming of a signal, eitherwired or wireless, is an example; the flooding of communications channels with extraneous messagescould also disrupt the movement of useful information; cutting a communications link is anotherAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESexample. The destruction of a single node on a system may disrupt the functioning of the system,although it would not destroy the system itself. For example, blowing up a communications tower orshooting down an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) could be disruptive of the entire system withoutdestroying it.State actors, whether through indigenous or purchased capability, are the adversaries most likely toacquire weapons to jam U.S. systems. In the early days of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Iraq attempted touse purchased Global Positioning System (GPS) jammers to interfere with GPS precision-guided muni-
tions of the United States (Trimble, 2003).DestructionTaking down an entire information system for an extended period of time effectively constitutes thedestruction of that system. The most extreme example would be through the use of an electro-magnetic
pulse (EMP) system (Foster et al., 2004). Potential adversaries have no doubt watched U.S. methodologyin Iraq and elsewhere and realize that such a strike might gravely damage this nationÕs ability to wagewarfare.Only a major state actor would be capable of such a strike today over an entire theater. However,lesser state actors and insurgents might, with a lucky hit, be able to destroy a major command center andsignificantly interfere with the U.S. ability to conduct operations. One major threat from a nuclear-
capable, lesser state actor would be to detonate a weapon at high altitude; the resulting EMP might welldestroy the electronics in ground assets as well as nearby space assets. If the attacker were so fortunateas to ÒpumpÓ the Van Allen belts, the number of space assets at risk would rise dramatically (Foster et
al., 2004).Analogies in Non-Warfighting ScenariosThe BLUE forceÕs increasing dependence on information superiority has related analogies in non-warfighting scenarios. New and emerging information technologies and their associated applications are
recognized as being the engine of productivity growth in developed countries. Conversely, the disrup-tion of widely used services and applications that employ information technologies can have widespreadand major consequences. For example, disrupting the capabilities of average U.S. citizens to send and
receive e-mail, to make and receive cellular telephone calls, and/or to access Web sites causes a majordisruption in their abilities to do their jobs effectively and to conduct their personal business effectively.This is the case today even though e-mail, cellular telephones, and the World Wide Web were not used
by average citizens only 15 years ago. Businesses and individuals will become increasingly dependenton applications of information technology that employ sensors (GPS receivers, RFID tags, and so on).Given that dependence, even perceived disruption (e.g., spoofing) could diminish usersÕ confidence in
the underlying information networks and, in effect, degrade the services that the networks wouldotherwise deliver.COMMITTEE FOCUS: COMMUNICATIONS AND SENSING SYSTEMSJoint Vision 2020 acknowledges the transitory nature of information superiority as well as the factthat it alone does not guarantee victory (JCS, 2000). Rather, information superiority serves as anessential enabler for the operational concepts. In general terms, a distributed BLUE force needs thefollowing:Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY37¥To know where it is (information about the locations of relevant BLUE forces);¥To know where the adversary is (information about the locations of relevant RED forces andRED systems, which will often be obtained from distributed, networked BLUE sensors);¥To decide where it wants to be at specific times in the future;¥To know how to safely get where it wants to be (using networked BLUE sensors to detect threats);¥To know what to do when it gets there;¥To respond to emerging opportunities and threats (which will often be detected by networkedBLUE sensors); and¥To be able to do so more quickly and more effectively than the adversary.The ability to communicate over distance with low latency relies on superb communications andrapid, controlled accessibility to relevant information, which are core capabilities of any modern fight-ing force (MITRE, 2004). Such capabilities become increasingly important as the military moves
toward implementation of the operational concepts articulated in Joint Vision 2020. The recognition ofthe importance of these capabilities has led to programs such as the Joint Tactical Radio System, whichseeks to rationalize the disparate communications systems of the armed forces under a standard,
interoperable architecture. The importance of such efforts is underscored in programs such as the FutureCombat System, which relies on excellent communications and the superb (but controlled) accessibilityof relevant information in order to achieve unprecedented situational awareness, coordination, and
reaction times. If the abilities of the soldiers and other systems to communicate reliably and/or to accessdependable information are substantially disrupted, the effectiveness of the forces that rely on informa-tion superiority to accomplish their missions will be substantially reduced.Potential Pathways for Disruption, Denial, or Degradation ofCommunications and Sensing CapabilitiesAs a result of the highly distributed nature of communications systems, the interdependenciesinherent to network architectures, and the fact that BLUE forces increasingly rely on commercially
available technologies, innumerable vulnerabilities exist (many of them are well documented in openliterature). Below, the committee summarizes some potential pathways that could impact the nationÕsability to maintain information superiority. These pathways include the following:¥Causing physical damage to wireless handheld appliances and using embedded wireless sub-systems to destroy or degrade the ability of BLUE forces to communicate (e.g., using EMP
generators to destroy electronic components or to cause significant changes in stored data);¥Jamming of communications capabilities (e.g., using strong radio signals to overload the wirelessreceivers in wireless systems and subsystems);¥Performing a denial-of-service attack on communications capabilities by overloading networkswith bogus communications (e.g., injecting packets into a network to cause congestion, prevent-ing BLUE force packets from reaching their destinations);¥Performing a denial-of-service attack by revoking the access privileges of legitimate users andsystems (e.g., by attacking the authentication databases, making it impossible for legitimatesoldiers to authenticate themselves to systems that they wish to access);¥Disrupting network servers so the information that they contain is not accessible to legitimateusers of those servers (e.g., by overloading the servers with bogus requests for information, as ina distributed denial-of-service attack on a commercial Web server);Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES¥Accessing information that should not be available to the party accessing it (e.g., using a spy withaccess privileges to obtain informationÑa form of ÒinsiderÓ attack);
¥Breaking cryptographic systems to read encrypted messages in transit, to read encrypted storedfiles, or to obtain passwords and cryptographic keys;¥Spoofing sensorsÑthat is, causing false readings, resulting in misinformation that causes theBLUE forces to misinterpret situations in which accurate situational information is critical (e.g.,causing a sensor to mistakenly identify noncombatants as RED forces);¥Evading sensor detection (stealth) by employing technologies that mask the physical attributesthat are being sensed (e.g., clothing that employs a combination of insulation and surface coolingto evade detection by infrared sensors); and¥Jamming sensorsÑthat is, employing ÒsignalsÓ that overload sensors and/or prevent sensors
from discriminating between ÒnoiseÓ and signals of significance (e.g., attempting to overload or
damage acoustic sensors with inexpensive, high-power acoustic noise generators).IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT STEPS OF THECOMMITTEE METHODOLOGYA variety of technologies and tactics may be employed to degrade the information superiority ofBLUE forces. Several techniques were discussed in the previous section. Here the committee identifies
a few specific technologies and postulates observables that may suggest adversarial intent to developsuch capabilities. Two broad categories are considered: system/network attacks and sensor attacks.System/Network AttacksElectromagnetic Pulse GeneratorsThe combination of a sufficiently high energy electromagnetic pulse (EMP) generator with a suit-able antenna could be used by an adversary to achieve a disruptive capability (see Charts 3-1 and 3-2).TechnologyObservablesElectromagnetic Pulse(EMP) Generators:Non-nuclear, transportable generators ofelectromagnetic pulses that are sufficientlypowerful (and rich in high-frequency content)to be used to damage electronic componentsor to induce data changes in electronic
memories within BLUE force handheld
appliances and/or embedded systems.Research and development activities relatedto high-energy EMP generators (which haveno apparent commercial purpose, other thanfor testing equipment for EMP vulnerabilityor, perhaps, for certain types of precisionwelding processes).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchDestroy electronic
components or degradestored data.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY39Radio-Frequency JammersLow-cost radio-frequency jammers may be procured commercially or assembled from commerciallyavailable subsystems and components (see Chart 3-3).Modular Network NodesThe basic capability of modular network nodes can be readily obtained by using commerciallyavailable local area networking products, perhaps with some modifications of the associated softwareplus the associated capability to obtain the necessary passwords and/or encryption keys (see Chart 3-4).TechnologyObservablesEMP GeneratorsCovert or overt research and developmentactivities to develop adaptations of
commercial off-the-shelf electronic
components that operate at higher voltages,or that employ higher band-gap materials
(i.e., so that the adversary can disable BLUE
force equipment, without disabling RED forceequipment).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WatchAsymmetric advantage to
adversary.TechnologyObservablesRadio-Frequency (RF) Jammers: Low-cost,transportable, high-power RF jammersemploying adaptive antennas to achieve
directional (pointing) capabilities that enable
them to direct more of their total power on
their targets.Emerging commercial capabilities.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningDisrupt information flow.
TechnologyObservablesModular network nodes:  Low-cost, smallnodes (modules) that can generate bogus
traffic that can be used to overload networks
(once the necessary network accesspasswords and/or encryption keys have beenobtained).Emerging commercial products used inwireless local area networking applications.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1 for basic capability;
difficulty is in gaining access.WatchDisruption of
communications.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESMalicious CodeSmall groups of talented computer scientists can produce potent malicious code. The insertion ofundetectable malicious code into well-protected military systems may require access to the systems by
persons with system administration privileges. However, this could also be accomplished by adversariesemployed by software-development organizations that develop the software used by BLUE forces. Theactivation of the malicious code by an adversary during an actual operation would probably require the
adversary to employ BLUE force insiders with sufficient access privileges (see Chart 3-5).Sensor AttacksSensor attacks can generally be classified into jamming (overloading the sensory input to degradethe sensor system either temporarily or permanently), signature reduction (camouflage), and spoofing
(injecting false signals into the sensor stream either at the sensor or at the network or computation orcommunication level). While any of these tactics can be effective in specific instances, there is a generalhierarchy of impact. While jamming can deny the BLUE forces the use of their sensors, it leaves no
doubt that the RED forces are making an assault on the sensor suite, and tracing the source of thejamming leaves RED forces vulnerable to counterattack. Signature-reduction strategies degrade situ-ational awareness without providing an obvious indication of enemy presence or providing any directions
for response. Spoofing can degrade BLUE force capabilities by diverting resources into unproductivedirections.BLUE forces exploit a diverse and expanding spectrum of sensor modalities, as illustrated in Table 3-2.Additional related information is provided in Appendix D in this report. It should be noted, however,that the information in this report is not comprehensive in terms of either modalities or their potentialapplications.TechnologyObservablesMalicious code (e.g., executable softwarehidden within an application loaded onto aBLUE system) that lies dormant and can beactivated by a trigger that is injected by theactions of an insider. The activation of thismalicious code causes essential servers andessential communications networking assets(e.g., routers) to become unusable or toperform incorrectly.Covert projects employing computerscientists to develop undetectable maliciouscode, and the associated methods forinserting it into BLUE systems; virus, worm,etc., attacks, conducted as experiments totest different types of malicious code (e.g.,how long does it take to be detected? Howfast does it spread among the target systemsin a network of systems?); persons employedby adversaries, with computer system
expertise who have infiltrated BLUE
organizations and attempted to gain
significant access privileges via job
assignments.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1 for basic capability;
difficulty is in gaining access.WatchCould enable exploitation,
corruption, or disruption of
information environment.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY41TABLE 3-2Examples of Sensor Modalities and Their Potential Utility
Sensor ModalityIllustrative Applications
Terahertz sensorsPotential ability to see through walls and under clothes.
Infrared spectrumEnabling operations in dark and nighttime environments.
Visual spectrumOptical imaging.

Acoustic and seismic sensorsIdentification of certain classes of targets and target bearing.
Image/spectroscopySpatial/spectral resolution of a target.
Chemical sensorsDetection of presence of chemical agents (e.g. nerve agents).

Ionizing radiationDetection of presence of radiological/nuclear materials.
NOTE: See Appendix D in this report for additional information on sensor modalities.Sensor attacks are typically targeted to specific sensor modalities. Here the committee has notprovided a complete assessment, instead discussing only general approaches that may threaten BLUEsensor suites, together with potential observables. A discussion of a few specific technologies is pro-vided in subsequent chapters (e.g., see the subsection entitled ÒSensor SpoofingÓ in Chapter 5).
JammingIn general, sensors are designed to detect weak signals and to filter out extraneous signals withoutdegrading the signals of interest. In most cases, radio-frequency (RF), terahertz (THz), infrared (IR)radiation, optical, ultraviolet (UV), acoustic, chemical, and biological detectors can be readily over-
whelmed by the deliberate introduction of large levels of artificial signals into the theater of operations.Undoubtedly the best defense is redundancyÑof sensors and of sensing modalities. Reliance on a singlesensor of a single observable is an inherently risky strategy that allows an adversary to exploit a single
set of vulnerabilities. Hardening of single sensors is usually expensive and most often degrades thesensitivity and/or selectivity of the sensor. Distribution of wide-area networked sensors operating acrossa range of modalities provides an inherent immunity (see Chart 3-6).CapabilityPotential ObservablesSensor jammingIn some cases, such as infraredcountermeasures for heat-seeking missiles,there are national programs to developappropriate sources and packaging. Clearly,these need to be monitored. More difficult to
detect are strategies that employ low-
technology sources, e.g., acoustic
generators, to confuse appropriate sensors.
On the state level, both the jamming sources
and the hardening of each stateÕs ownsensor suite provide potential observables.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESCamouflageSignature reduction is a time-honored military tradition. One specific area of great importance is thereduction of infrared signaturesÑattempting to reduce the benefit of IR sensors to BLUE forces. Thereis a long history of signal manipulation and reduction by using advanced coatings (e.g., stealth), improvedthermal isolation, and so on. Recently, there has been much activity reported in the open scientificliterature in the related fields of photonic crystals, plasmonics, and metamaterials. While the goals are
many and span the range from fundamental optical interactions with matter, to improved telecommuni-cations and signal processing systems, to quasi-optical interconnects in next-generation integratedcircuits, all of these areas have a potential impact on infrared signatures and sensing (see Chart 3-7).SpoofingThere are as many possible targets for the use of spoofing as there are sensors. One category ofincreasing importance is chemical and biological sensors. Ground forces are significantly hampered byprotective gear to defend them against these threats. Thus, RED forces gain significant leverage if
BLUE forces must defend against a threat that does not exist while RED forces can operate unencum-bered (see Chart 3-8).SUMMARYIn Joint Vision 2020, Information Superiority is identified as a key enabler that cuts across all fourof the envisioned operational concepts (JCS, 2000). In the future, the United States can be assuredneither of being the first to have access to all of the best information technologies nor of having a firstmoverÕs advantage in applying COTS products to military systems. As a result, it is much harder toknow what to look for and much more difficult to recognize the implications of the complex array ofachievements in information technology and undertakings in development and applications that will bepossible to observe.The committee identified a number of generic vulnerabilities of information-technology-enabledsystems and applications (including, in principle, those that might be used by BLUE forces to endeavorto maintain information superiority). These vulnerabilities could be attacked via emerging technologies
and capabilities that, in most cases, are increasingly available to U.S. adversaries in the form of low-cost, commercial commodity products. The emerging technologies and capabilities that might attackthese vulnerabilities include (but are not limited to) the following:¥Causing physical damage to wireless handheld appliances and embedded wireless subsystems;¥Jamming of communications capabilities;¥Performing a denial-of-service attack on communications capabilities by overloading networkswith bogus communications;¥Performing a denial-of-service attack by revoking the access privileges of legitimate users andsystems;¥Spoofing sensors (i.e., causing false readings that result in the dissemination of misinformation);¥Evading sensor detection (stealth) by employing technologies that mask the physical attributesthat are being sensed; and¥Jamming sensors (i.e., employing ÒsignalsÓ that overload sensors and/or prevent sensors from
discriminating between ÒnoiseÓ and signals of significance).
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHALLENGES TO INFORMATION SUPERIORITY43The committee also identified for each of the emerging technologies or capabilities listed above,potential indicators that the technology warning community could employ to attempt to determine theactual intentions and/or capabilities of U.S. adversaries to employ these technologies and methodologies.REFERENCESChan, Felix, Dora Marinova, and Michael McAleer. 2004. Trends and volatilities in foreign patents registered in the USA.Applied Economics 36(6):585-592.DSB (Defense Science Board). 2005. Task Force on High Performance Microchip Supply. Office of the Under Secretary ofDefense, Washington, D.C. February. Available online at http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2005-02-HPMS_Report_Final.pdf. Last accessed on April 12, 2005.The Economist. 2005. See Huawei run. March 5-11 issue. pp. 60-61.CapabilityPotential ObservablesCamouflage (signature reduction)This is an active area in the open literature,
with many papers being presented atinternational scientific meetings and
published in the archival literature. It is
important to monitor this activity and to seek
to apply developments to BLUE systems to
better understand the capabilities of thesenewly emerging capabilities. The usual
phenomenon of active research groups going
silent is a potential indicator of state activity.
Monitoring the commercial development ofthese technologies will be especiallyimportant because of the strong efforts in
Europe and Asia-Pacific.CapabilityPotential ObservablesSensor spoofingparticularly relating tochemical and biological agents.Development of simulants for toxic agents.
Testing against commercial sensors. This is
again a very active area of investigation, with
much of the literature open and available.
Just as for low-observable research, it will beimportant to monitor not just research
directed specifically at sensor spoofing, butmore generally at improved sensors forchemical/biological agents for homelanddefense, and for commercial as well asmilitary applications.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESFoster, John S., Earl Gjelde, William R. Graham, Robert J. Hermann, Henry ÒHankÓ M. Kluepfel, Richard L. Lawson, Gordon
K. Soper, Lowell L. Wood, Jr., and Joan B. Woodard. 2004. Report of the Commission to Assess the Threat to the United
States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack. Available online at http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/con-gress/2004_r/04-07-22emp.pdf. Last accessed on April 1, 2005.Giles, Lionel, translator. 1910. Sun Tzu on the Art of War, The Oldest Military Treatise in the World. Translated from theChinese. Available online at http://www.chinapage.com/sunzi-e.html. Last accessed on February 4, 2005.JCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff). 2000. Joint Vision 2020. Director for Strategic Plans and Policy, J5; Strategy Division. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.MITRE Corporation. 2004. Horizontal Integration: Broader Access Models for Realizing Information Dominance. MITRECorporation, McLean, Va. Available online at http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/dod/jason/classpol.pdf. Last accessed onApril 1, 2005.NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology). 2002. Announcing the Secure Hash Standard. Available online athttp://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips180-2/fips180-2.pdf. Last accessed on April 1, 2005.Randall, James, and Michael Szydio. 2004. Collisions for SHA0, MD5, HAVAL, MD4, and RIPEMD, but SHA1 Still Secure.August 31. RSA Laboratories. Available online at http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/node.asp?id=2738. Last accessedon April 1, 2005.Roco, M.C., R.S. Williams, and P. Alivisatos, eds. 1999. Nanotechnology Research Directions, IWGN Workshop Report.September. Available online at http://www.wtec.org/loyola/nano/IWGN.Research.Directions/. Last accessed on April 1,2005.Trimble, Stephen. 2003. In Iraq, GPS is surviving jamming threat, Pentagon says. Aviation Week. March 25. Available onlineat http://www.aviationnow.com/avnow/news/channel_aerospacedaily_story.jsp?id=news/gps.xml. Last accessedon April 1, 2005.Wang, Xiaoyun, Dengguo Feng, Xuejia Lai, and Hongbo Yu. 2004. Collisions for Hash Functions MD4, MD5, HAVAL-128and RIPEMD. Revised on August 17, 2004. Available online at http://eprint.iacr.org/2004/199.pdf. Last accessed onApril 1, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE45454Future Threats to U.S. Airpower in Urban Warfare
INTRODUCTIONFor the past 50 years, the United States has enjoyed air dominance in all of its conflicts. No U.S.warfighter died from attack by an enemy aircraft during that time. In addition, in several recent conflicts,U.S. aircraft have been consistently able to penetrate hostile airspace, attack targets with unprecedented
accuracy, and return to base with few or no losses. What technologies have led to this unprecedentedsuccess, and how much longer will the United States continue to enjoy these advantages? The answersto these questions form the basis for new research to maintain current U.S. advantages and a search for
new technologies to allow it to stay a step ahead of developments elsewhere.Several technologies have been responsible for this U.S. supremacy. The first that merits discussionis radar stealth. In the 1970s it became obvious that, through the use of special coatings and aircraft
shape management, the radar cross section (RCS) of an aircraft could be reduced enormously, therebyenabling operations within hostile airspace with relative protection from gun-laying and missile-trackingradars. Aircraft such as the B-2 and the F-117 were developed employing these technologies. Their
success has been spectacular.Getting to a target undetected, however, is only half the challenge. Once there, an aircraft mustidentify the target and destroy it. Technologies for precision all-weather target strike were developed
that reduced target-miss distance to just a few feet. Probably most important to this achievement werethe invention and deployment of the Global Positioning System (GPS) for positioning and munitionguidance, laser target designation, and enhanced aircraft avionics systems.Underlying all of these aspects of U.S. air dominance is the infrastructure that supports themÑaninfrastructure that is difficult for others to replicate owing to the resources required. Besides the qualityof the aircraft themselves and the highly trained aircrews who fly them, the primary enabler is the tanker
fleet that allows long-range strike to anywhere in the world from the United States. This capability isbest exemplified by the 30-hour missions flown by the B-2 in recent conflicts. Even forward-basedaircraft need tanker support to reach many targets or to loiter before being called in.While U.S. air dominance is unlikely to be jeopardized by symmetric means, particularly in the nearterm, technology trends in commercialization and globalization suggest that new types of threats may beAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESon the horizon. The United States has long since lost the lead in the manufacture of electronics (thetechnology of which is driven by worldwide commercial and consumer concerns rather than by aero-space, as was the case in the 1950s and 1960s). Now, the United States is also no longer dominant in themanufacture of commercial aircraft in terms of either manufacturing or technology. In addition to
competition from foreign producers, U.S.-ÒproducedÓ aircraft are assembled from parts largely made
overseas. Even U.S.-ÒmadeÓ subsystems and assemblies are increasingly assembled from parts engi-
neered and produced in areas where costs are lower, such as China, India, and the former Eastern bloc.
Large U.S. aerospace and electronics companies have set up research organizations in these regions foreconomic reasons. This offshore sourcing is having the effect of building up research, development, andmanufacturing capability in other countries in aerospace and related fields.One pillar of U.S. airpower in the past has been the capabilities of its major platforms. Thesesophisticated platforms now require investments of tens of billions of dollars spread over decades,investment levels that few foes can match. However, the life of the advanced technology in these
platforms can now be less than the development cycle. Small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) offer acounter to large platformsÑwhile much less capable than the large platforms at present, they can havemuch shorter and less costly development cycles. These factors contribute to the proliferation of such
vehicles around the world, especially at the smaller sizes (Munson, 1996).The new technologies delineated above combined with the globalization of the aerospace andelectronics businesses imply that current U.S. aerospace supremacy will face new classes of challenges
from new adversariesÑa few of which are described below.Obviously, negating radar stealth must be high on the list of technologies for RED forces to pursue.The antidote to this nationÕs stealth advantage takes two formsÑdirect and indirect. To negate U.S.radar stealth advantages directly requires the development of radars with different and improved charac-teristics. For example, the power of the radar can be increased to illuminate even small RCS targets.Changes in frequencies and radar-emanation management can also help. On an indirect basis, other
sensors could be perfected that can precisely track aircraft, such as improved infrared (IR) or opticalsensors. All of these require a high degree of sophistication to invent, but they can be sold to and usedby relatively unsophisticated buyers with hostile intentions.The difficulty of GPS interference has been the subject of great conjecture. Suffice to say that REDforces could profit enormously if the system could be shut down or biased in such a way as to interferewith weapons accuracy.Other ways to interfere with or reduce the advantages of U.S. airpower include the use of electro-magnetic pulse (EMP) radiation to shut down onboard targeting systems, the spoofing of targetingsystems, the burying or hardening of high-value targets, population shielding (urban targets), the use of
laser absorption material, and many more.The scope of this report does not allow delving into all of these possibilities. Thus, to make the taskmanageable, the complex challenge of successfully attacking urban targets is discussed as an example of
one mission scenario. This scenario was selected in part because the committee believes that it representsa current as well as an enduring challenge, with particular relevance to the global war on terrorism.AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFAREIn general, the current use of U.S. airpower in urban warfare can be grouped into the following fourbroad categories that underpin the operational concepts delineated in Joint Vision 2020 (the concepts areDominant Maneuver, Precision Engagement, Focused Logistics, and Full Dimensional Protection) (JCS,2000):Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE47¥Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR);¥Transport of personnel and material;¥Strike (the destruction of pre-identified targets); and¥Close air support (strike in close cooperation with and in support of troops on the ground).The urban environment is the arena in which U.S. airpower is currently the least effective anddecisive. Masking from urban clutter can be severe, greatly reducing the field of view and utility of most
airborne sensor systems. Transport is restricted to rotary-wing or vertical-takeoff-and-landing (VTOL)aircraft, since landing areas are small and such vehicles are under severe threat at low altitude fromsmall arms, rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs), and so on. Strike and close air support with precision
munitions can be effective when ground troops identify targets, but the effects of current weapons canbe on a larger scale than is desirable (e.g., destruction of buildings rather than rooms) and differ littlefrom those of precision artillery.Historically, ISR, transport, strike, and close air support have been executed by manned, fixed-wingand rotary aircraft, to and from which information flows through other aircraft or space assets (which arenot discussed further in this chapter). The definition and nature of airpower are changing, however.
Within the past decade, UAVs such as the Global Hawk and Predator have taken over some ISRmissions. UAV strike missions that have been demonstrated in combat with existing aircraft and experi-mental unmanned combat air vehicles (UCAVs) designed specifically for strike are now flying (the X-
45 and X-47). While unmanned, these UAVs of the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy, respectively, are aslarge as manned aircraft. As part of its Future Combat System (FCS), the U.S. Army plans to adoptrelatively large, automated, fixed- and rotary-wing vehicles as well (Gabbert, 2004). However, the U.S.
Army and U.S. Marine Corps also plan to field much smaller aerial vehiclesÑdown to a few inches inwingspanÑwhich can be carried and deployed by individual soldiers (Tousley, 2004). Indeed, a motiva-tion for these so-called micro air vehicles (MAVs) is urban warfare, in which bird- or even insect-sized
vehicles could be of use for surveillance and reconnaissance in the cluttered urban environment, evenwithin buildings.The committee believes that the ability of RED forces to field large forces of MAVs developed withcommercial off-the-shelf (COTS) products represents a significant threat to U.S. air dominanceÑparticularly in the area of surveillance and reconnaissance in urban environments. Given trends in theglobal commercial marketplace, future adversaries will have low-cost options that could negate the
advantage held by todayÕs BLUE forces.Assessments of future threats to U.S. airpower must take into consideration the full range of futureairpowerÑincluding U.S. and adversary air assets ranging from large, manned platforms at medium andhigh altitudes, to low-flying rotary aircraft, to MAVs flying among and inside buildings. In the follow-ing sections, the committee discusses some challenges to U.S. airpower, describing the high-levelcharacteristics of RED systems that could constrain or defeat this power and technology developments
that may enable such systems.CHALLENGES TO U.S. AIRPOWERA major objective of U.S. airpower is to enable access to the battlefield for U.S. ground, sea, and airforces while denying that access to an adversary. Such access forms a foundation upon which U.S.
military plans are constructed and has been achieved with little serious challenge for the past fivedecades. The advantages of this access are readily apparent to the worldÕs military organizations, andantiaccess strategies and tactics are a major focus of military planners. Evolving and disruptive tech-Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESnologies, used with innovative tactics, may offer the potential to challenge and disrupt U.S. airpower ascurrently envisioned.An adversary can potentially challenge, reduce, or even negate the impact of U.S. airpower in manyways. These approaches can be characterized as either offensive or defensive:¥OffensiveÑThreaten, disable, or destroy aircraft (manned or unmanned);ÑDisrupt targeting (jam GPS, compromise Òidentification friend-or-foeÓ [IFF], regulate proximity
of restricted facilities); andÑDisrupt information flow (jam communications, disrupt asset management within network-centric operations, disrupt sensors, and so on).¥DefensiveÑDisperse forces geographically, andÑHide (camouflage, spoof, bury or harden structures, disrupt sensors).Offensive Techniques That May Be Employed by an AdversaryThreatening, damaging, or destroying aircraft are obviously effective techniques for constrainingU.S. airpower. These can be manifested as traditional air-to-air threats (fighters and air-to-air missiles),traditional surface-to-air threats (guns and ground-to-air missiles), and high-technology worries yet tobe seen on the battlefield (such as electromagnetic pulse [EMP] weapons, lasers, stealth aircraft detection,
and chemical and biological threats to the aircraft). While to an adversary, threatening a U.S. aircraftmay not be as satisfying as destroying it, a threat can be effective in denying the access that U.S. forcesneed. The results of such threats may be (1) to force vulnerable U.S. assets (such as tankers or ISR
aircraft) back from the battlefront, (2) to force attack aircraft up to altitudes at which they are lesseffective, (3) to funnel aircraft into specific corridors, (4) to constrain or prevent aerial resupply, and(5)to constrain the types of aircraft that the United States is willing to employ to those of which it has

very few (such as stealthy and electronic countermeasures [ECM] aircraft). These outcomes can allserve to reduce the effectiveness of U.S. airpower to a significant degree, given an imposing threat.Another technique for countering U.S. airpower is to disrupt targeting (deny Precision Engage-ment). In this case, while the United States has located a target, the opponent has taken action to reducethe ability or willingness of the United States to destroy it. Increasingly, facilities are deeply buried toreduce their vulnerability to conventional weapons (this also makes them more difficult to locate or
identify precisely). A related approach is to position a facility so that geographic masking combinedwith the kinematics of missile and bomb dynamics frustrates weapons trajectories. The previous twocases are examples of reducing the U.S. ability to destroy a target.Often as effective, and much cheaper than reducing the ability of the United States to destroy a
target, is positioning a target so as to reduce U.S. willingness to destroy it. This includes target place-
ment within, under, or near such civilian structures as schools, hospitals, marketplaces, and houses of
worship (an approach well suited to urban environments). These are passive, low-technology approachesto frustrating U.S. targeting. Active approaches are possible as well. They might include foiling of thesystems that the United States uses to identify its forces on the battlefield (so-called IFF and BLUE force
tracking technologies). Compromising or spoofing these systems can permit a foe to masquerade as U.S.forces or to introduce uncertainty and fear of friendly fire. Even more active techniques involve thejamming of precision-guided weapons GPS and electro-optical navigation guidance systems. SuchAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE49active techniques require sophisticated knowledge of precision-guided weapons technologies, can besensitive to counter-countermeasures, and so are of most value when used with tactical surprise.Defensive Techniques That May Be Employed by an AdversaryAirpower is most effective when the adversary masses its forces. Historically, it is least effectivewhen the enemy disperses. Operation Strangle in World War II (again in Korea) and Rolling Thunder in
Vietnam are historical examples in which interdiction has been shown to be ineffective when the enemydisperses its forces. Likewise, during the air war over Serbia, when the Serbs dispersed their tanks anddid not move them, U.S. airpower was relatively ineffective against their armor. Many will argue that
tank killing was not a primary mission, but in fact an enemy dispersed creates a situation that reducesairpowerÕs effectiveness. Similarly, in the current operations in Iraq, the ability of the enemy to remaindispersed, but to be able to mass in time and at a place to achieve limited tactical advantage has proven
to be a unique challenge for the U.S. military, despite tactical superiority.If this historical trend continues, there is every reason to assume that future adversaries will migrateaway from force-on-force situations whenever possible, because whenever they mass, they become
vulnerable. The unique challenge for airpower in the future is to become effective against an adversarythat disperses, in order to be able to provide the intelligence regarding enemy positions and intent beforethe enemy masses at the tactical level. For the future enemy, the challenge will be to acquire tech-
nologies that allow it to remain hidden, communicate at will with dispersed forces, then form at the timeand place of its choosing.While dispersion is a tactic as old as warfare, advanced technology can enhance an adversaryÕscapability to disperse, remain hidden, and coalesce when the time is right. Technologies that aid disper-sion include the following:¥Secure communications. Secure communications, especially low-cost military or commercial imple-mentations, enable rapid force dispersal and constitution. There are many aspects to communica-tions security, including security of the waveform (spread spectrum, temporal compression, and
so on), security of the information (encryption), and security of fixed infrastructure. As commer-cial and consumer users become more concerned with communications security, commerciallyavailable strong encryption and the incorporation of such encryption into low-cost cellular phones,
walkie-talkies, and personal digital assistants will enhance an adversaryÕs dispersal capabilities.¥Low-cost, portable stealth technologies. These technologies would enhance a dispersed foeÕsability to hide assets such as vehicles. Specifically, the development of lightweight, flexible
multispectral (light/radio frequency [RF]) Òcamouflage nettingÓ would reduce the effectiveness
of many advanced U.S. airborne and spaceborne sensors.¥Advanced, low-cost multispectral decoys. These decoys would reduce the effectiveness of manyadvanced U.S. airborne and spaceborne sensors, require the expenditure of additional (and perhapsexpensive) munitions, and mislead the United States as to the effectiveness of its activities.Traditional air superiority combined with precision munitions (Precision Engagement) has given theUnited States the capability to destroy almost any target that it can locate. Thus, hiding from U.S. forcesis an attractive counter for adversaries to use. Hiding can take many forms, such as traditional camou-
flage (netting, hiding under foliage, and so on), burying or submerging targets, or actively disruptingsensors (RF or optical jamming). Notwithstanding its sophisticated sensors, the United States has yet todemonstrate on the battlefield that hard problems such as tanks under trees and decoy discriminationAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCEShave been solved. Nevertheless, as the sophistication of U.S. sensors increases, so must the art of hiding:camouflage must be multispectral; burying must account for infrared (IR) perturbations; and acoustic,magnetic, and electromagnetic signatures must be reduced.COMMITTEE FOCUS: SYSTEMS THAT CAN DEGRADE U.S. AIRPOWERThe system-level performance criteria of a new technology determine how and to what degree it canchallenge U.S. airpower. These system-level parameters can then be devolved into specific engineeringrequirements that new technologies must meet in order to be effective. Clearly, this can be a very largeset. Here the committee chooses to list a few specific examples of particular relevance to urban warfare:¥Increased effectiveness of man-portable air defense systems (MANPADSs);¥User-friendly, smart weapons;¥Acoustic/RF mines;¥Shrinking of the systems listed above in size and/or cost;¥Micro systems with the effectiveness of large ones; and¥Exploitation of commonly available devices.Two illustrative examples are presented below. The first example, involving man-portable airdefense systems, illustrates the evolution of an existing threat class. The second example, involvingmicro air vehicles and missiles, illustrates the emergence of a new class of threats.Man-Portable Air Defense SystemsMANPADSs are antiaircraft missiles small enough to be carried and launched by one or two people.These are currently a major threat to low-altitude aircraft. The nature of the threat ranges from short-range, low-accuracy rocket-propelled grenades to sophisticated guided weapons with cooled, multibandsensors and ranges of several kilometers. The importance of the threat stems from MANPADSsÕrelatively low cost (and so, ready availability and proliferation), lack of prelaunch warning cues (such asradar illumination), and the low level of training and logistics support required. The effectiveness of a particular missile design is a strong function of the performance of its seeker
and vehicle kinematics. Here, ÒseekerÓ refers to the combination of the sensor and guidance system. The
seeker performance determines the target acquisition range, the aspect of the target that can be attacked,the resistance of the missile to countermeasures, and target closure accuracy. The vehicle dynamics set
the missile range and maneuver performance.Technology trends are already making such missile systems easier to support, deploy, hide, and use.Improved system characteristics such as those described below may further increase the effectiveness of
MANPADSs, and thus the seriousness of their threat.Increased Range and/or Reduced Signature¥Increasing range. Improving this characteristic would increase the threat footprint; threaten mid-and high-altitude aircraft, including ISR assets; and increase the slant range so that, for example,
transports that stay within an airport perimeter would be at risk from remote launch sites.¥Low-optical-emission propulsion. Many aircraft missile countermeasure systems use the opticalemission from the missile launch to queue the defense. Thus, no signature, no warning, noAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE51defense. Extending the definition of reduced optical emission to include smoke helps to mask thelaunch location and thus increase the tactical utility of the missile.Enhanced Guidance, Navigation, and/or Targeting¥Multimode seekers. This improved technology would reduce or eliminate the effectiveness ofcountermeasures or permit non-line-of-sight launches. In addition to multiple optical bands (an
approach currently popular), this might include acoustic or RF cues to allow a missile launchagainst a target not in sight from the launch position. With sufficient range and RF seekerperformance, large radar and battle management aircraft can be placed under threat.¥Increased accuracy guidance. The warhead size of a man-portable missile is of the order of akilogram. Thus, it must detonate very close to a critical location to be effective. Increasedguidance accuracy, along with any necessary increase in maneuverability, will improve the
lethality of these small missiles, especially against large aircraft.Enhanced Lethality¥Autonomous launch. With sufficiently capable sensors, automated decision making, and harden-ing, these small missiles can act as aerial mines, threatening any aircraft that flies within range.
Remote queuing could increase the effectiveness of such systems.¥Expanded mission capability. By integrating relatively simple GPS guidance, laser capability forprecise geolocation, and data link capability, an adversary could transform a MANPADS from a
surface-to-air weapon into one that can also perform precision engagement missions in theground-to-ground role in a wide variety of mission areas.The interaction among the system characteristics described above is a complex topic beyond thescope of this discussion. Simply put, some of these factors are synergistic, some antagonistic, but theyare all quite technologically challenging. Realizing such a system is even more challenging when cost is
introduced as a prime consideration. Many weapons owe their effectiveness not to their performance orcapabilities but rather to their ubiquitousness. An advanced MANPADS threat is a combination involv-ing cost and performance.An advanced threat with a potential impact similar to, or more serious than, that of the advancedMANPADS discussed above would be the non-nuclear electromagnetic pulse generator, as discussed inChapter 3. The urban environment in particular is rich in opportunities to conceal such weapons.Milli to Micro Air Vehicles and MissilesMilli to micro air vehicles and missiles1 are generally defined as aerospace systems massing a few
kilograms or less. The confluence of microelectronics, GPS, and microelectromechanical systems(MEMS) now make it feasible to engineer very small UAVs and missiles, the capabilities of which will
evolve as the enabling technologies advance. The U.S. Army and the Defense Advanced Research1Micro UAVs were defined by DARPA to be less than 6 inches in any dimension, but now the Army has been using the termfor 12 to 18 inch vehicles. DARPA has been trying to define ÒnanoÓ as under 2 inches (insect size), despite opposition. The
committee believes that practical working definitions are as follows: micro = bird sized; nano = insect sized; milli = larger
than the largest bird but smaller than a Piper Cub.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESProjects Agency (DARPA) have been sponsoring work on many small air vehicles, and there is consid-erable interest around the world on size classes down to a few inches, so-called micro UAVs (Davis etal., 1996; Grasmeyer and Keennon, 2001).The United States anticipates using very small UAVs for reconnaissance and surveillance. In urbanwarfare, perch-and-stare applications are receiving attention. Of course, these capabilities are of use toa foe as well. Such capabilities may be particularly advantageous to an adversary who cannot overcomelarge U.S. aircraft at medium and high altitudes.Advantages for small vehicles include very low cost, covertness, maneuverability in a complexurban environment, and freedom from extensive logistics requirements. Conceptually, these smallvehicles can be armed and thus be employed as antipersonnel and anti-emitter weaponsÑin effect,three-dimensional mines. Vehicles at this size add a new dimension to the concept of air superiority andmay be especially applicable in an urban environment.Small vehicles need not be short-ranged. Eleven-pound aircraft powered by model-airplane engineshave flown the Atlantic, navigating to a precise landfall with GPS (Wicks, 2004). Attempts are nowunderway by amateurs to fly the Pacific. Hundred-pound intercontinental ballistic missiles have beendesigned (Francis, 1999). Both aircraft and missiles of these sizes have inherently low signatures and so
will be difficult to locate and track. These ranges imply that U.S. logistics and staging areas can be putat risk. The payloads of these small vehicles are concomitantly small, a few pounds, but are sufficient torepresent a significant threat if carrying chemical, biological, or radiological payloads. Given sufficient
precision, even conventionally armed attacks on rear areas may have more than nuisance or politicalvalue. These factors combine to create a potential RED force capability that could diminish the advantageprovided by U.S. airpower. In particular, counters to these weapons may consume disproportionate U.S.
resources compared to those expended by the attackers.The micro air and space vehicles are enabled by several emerging technologies, the evolution ofwhich will pace the vehiclesÕ utility as weapons systems. Several examples, again grouped by the
system-level capabilities enabled, are described below.Increased Range and/or Reduced Signature¥Quiet, efficient micro air-breathing propulsion systems. Such systems include very small pistonand gas turbine engines with fuel economy approaching that of larger engines; they range in
power from a few kilowatts down to the watt level.¥Micro bipropellant liquid rocket engines. These engines use storable propellants with fueleconomy and power density of the best large engines; their sizes range from a hundred pounds
down to pounds.Enhanced Guidance, Navigation, and/or Targeting¥Micro guidance and navigation systems. These systems consist of capable, chip-sized GPSreceivers, MEMS gyros and accelerometers, and low-power processors.¥Large geographic databases. Such databases provide precise, GPS-compatible maps of largeregions of the world, including habitation and economic data, for non-time-critical targetinginformation.¥Micro digital storage devices to hold large databases. These devices are sufficiently compactthat large, target databases can be deployed with the micro vehicles.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE53¥Integrated GPS communications systems. These systems are for timely updates keyed to geo-graphic databases.All of the enablers listed above exist now at various levels of performance. Their continued devel-opment and integration could yield extremely capable micro flight vehicles, well suited to mounting alow-cost challenge to aspects of U.S. air dominance, especially in an urban environment.IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT STEPS OF COMMITTEE METHODOLOGYThe preceding discussion focuses on the system level. Here the committee considers individualtechnologies, which, if realized and integrated into a system, can result in significant challenges to U.S.airpower. The technologies are again grouped according to the system-level capabilities enabled (increasedrange and/or reduced signature; enhanced guidance, navigation, and/or targeting; and enhanced lethality);
in addition to the previously described categories, a Òcounter-BLUEÓ category has been added.
Given the time available for this task, the examples presented reflect the expertise and experience ofthe committee members rather than representing the result of a systematic, comprehensive study. In
each case the committee identifies the technology and the capability that it may enable, and postulatesopen source indications and motivators for domestic or foreign researchers to work in this direction.Increased Range and/or Reduced SignatureThe signature of a vehicleÕs propulsion system is a major contributor to the overall vulnerability ofthe vehicle. The propulsion system and its fuel make up 40 to 90 percent of the initial mass of powered-flight vehicles, while the payload is usually only 10 to 20 percent (even less for launch vehicles, at 1 to2 percent). Thus, small changes in the performance or characteristics of the propulsion system can have
a large impact on the payload, range, maneuverability, or vulnerability of an aircraft or missile. Techno-logical advances considered here (see Charts 4-1 through 4-6) include propulsion systems as well asother techniques that could extend the range or reduce the signature of air vehicles.Enhanced Guidance, Navigation, and/or TargetingThe technologies described in this subsection (see Charts 4-7 through 4-12), which are likely toemerge in the global commercial marketplace, provide improved performance for guidance and naviga-tion or targeting systems.Enhanced LethalityThe evolving technologies described in Charts 4-13 through 4-19 may serve to enhance the lethalityof RED force capabilities.Counter-BLUEThe technologies described in Charts 4-20 through 4-23 could be used to negate the BLUE forceadvantage.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesStorable liquid propellant, micro rocketenginesMicroelectromechanical system researchpapers in the United States (London et al.,
2001), Europe (Miotti et al., 2004), Asia
(Takahashi, 2004); Missile Defense
Agency-sponsored work in the UnitedStates for kinetic kill vehicles.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WarningNegate man-portable air
defense system(MANPADS) launchwarning; extend MANPADSrange; antisatellite
interceptors; micro
intercontinental ballistic
missile or launch vehicles.TechnologyObservablesJet engines:  Very small (1 to 50 lb thrust),low-cost jet engines.Small turbojet engines of appropriate sizenow sold internationally for the hobby
market (Wilkinson, 2003) (see also
www.wren-turbines.com/specifi.htm; lastaccessed on April 8, 2005); a DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agencyproject to improve the performance of suchsmall engines by a factor of 4 (see also
www.darpa.mil/baa/baa04-12mod8.htm; last
accessed on April 8, 2005); a robust
research community in the United States,
Europe, and Asia (Gerendas and Pfister,2000).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningNegate man-portable air
defense system(MANPADS) launch
warning; greatly extend
MANPADS range; extendunmanned aerial vehiclerange (to thousands of
kilometers) and speed.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE55TechnologyObservablesHigher-performance small rocketenginesNew players entering business motivated byX Prize, perceived commercial
opportunities, micro satellite enthusiasm.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WatchSmall intercontinental
ballistic missiles and space
launchers.TechnologyObservablesNanoscale surface machiningThermophotovoltaics, university research(Sai et al., 2003).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchOptical/IR stealth.
TechnologyObservablesElectronically tuned surface coatingsCancelled university programs in electro-optics, smart paper development (Lu et al.,
2001; see also
www.eink.com/technology/index.htm; last
accessed on April 8, 2005).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningOptical/infrared stealth.
TechnologyObservablesNegative index of refraction materialsUniversity engagement of the technology(Wiltshire, 2001; Shelby et al., 2001).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchImproved infrared, optical,
and radio-frequency stealth.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesHigh-accuracy microelectromechanicalsystems gyros and accelerometersAutomotive market, military investments.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WarningVery long range small
unmanned aerial vehicles,missiles, and launchvehicles.TechnologyObservablesNarrowband, tunable frequency agile,imaging infrared optical filtersMicroelectromechanical system, commercialand weapons of mass destruction sensors,
(example, monochrometer).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningImproved capability,
countermeasure robust
man-portable air defense
systems.TechnologyObservablesLow-cost, uncooled, low-noise infrared(IR) detector arrays (especially mid-waveinfrared (MWIR) and long-wave infrared
(LWIR))Automotive market, Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency programs,
microelectromechanical system bolometers
(see also www.xenics.com/Products/
Lwir.php); last accessed on April 8, 2005), 
nano machining.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningImproved capability and
range in man-portable airdefense systems.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE57TechnologyObservablesAutomated, ad hoc, cellularphone/computer systemsCommercial integration of cellular phonesand computers, Web-based distributedcomputing.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1AlertRemote queuing/targeting
for man-portable air defensesystems and mines; large,
informal sensor and/or
computer arrays for
antistealth.TechnologyObservablesHigh-speed processor chips and mega-flash memoriesSecurity violations among algorithm-developer institutions.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningTargeting and/or
discrimination algorithms.TechnologyObservablesLarge geographic and economicWeb databasesEconomics, disaster management (see alsohttp://www.nytimes.com/pages/world/worldspecial4;
last accessed on April 8, 2005), Global PositioningSystem receivers in cellular phones.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1WarningLow-cost targeting of U.S. assets.
TechnologyObservablesIncreased energy density or slow-burning energetic materialsNew Defense Advanced Research ProjectsAgency program; warheads for small
unmanned aerial vehicles, foreign research
(Talawar et al., 2005).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchExtend man-portable air
defense systems range;
increase lethality.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesVery high pulse power systems (also seeChapter 3 in this report)U.S. vulnerability and dependence onmicroelectronics, Soviet legacy.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningNon-nuclear
electromagnetic pulse.TechnologyObservablesHigh-power, low-cost microwave radio-frequency (RF) chips and arraysSecurity violations among identified state-of-the-art RF chip manufacturers; export ofthis technology as embedded in Future
Combat Systems.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WarningFrequency agility command
detonation devices; antifuse
system.TechnologyObservablesVery low cost radio-frequency proximityfusesCommercial radar detectors, U.S. ArmyResearch Laboratory demonstrations(Caito, 2004).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningAerial mines; smart
improvised explosivedevice.TechnologyObservablesIncreased-speed digital signal processorand processor chipsU.S. success with antifuse systems,improved-capability video games.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WarningAntifuse systems.
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE59TechnologyObservablesBioagents (which attack aviation lubricants,fuels, transparencies, or composites)Foreign military use of nonoptimalelastomers, fuel additives, literature onbioenvironmental cleanup.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2Futures/WatchNeutralization of U.S.
aviation.TechnologyObservablesTactical nuclear electromagnetic pulseForeign experimentation with nucleardevices; export of high-speed video games
with gigahertz-speed processors; atomic
research laboratory security violations and
missing material (hardware, software,
plans), U.S. government concerns on
domestic infrastructure vulnerability.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceUnknownUnknownDisabling of aircraft while in
flight or on the ground;
disabling of most of U.S.
military.TechnologyObservablesVery low cost, compact near-infraredimagesAutomotive market.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WatchInexpensive, pen-sized laser
illuminator warningreceivers, trackers.TechnologyObservablesWireless technology, frequencymodulation techniques, Global
Positioning System (GPS) crypto captureThe maturing of commercial wirelesstechnologies and power sources focused in
the 11/2 gigahertz range (available today).Attempts to capture GPS element with
crypto gear along with attempts to imitate
dynamics of the GPS satellite constellation.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceJamming:  Level 1
Spoofing:  Level 3AlertWatchImproved, low-cost GPSjammers and spoofers.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesMultistatic systemsForeign military demand.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WarningMitigate current radio-
frequency stealth
technologies.TechnologyObservablesStrong commercial encryption forpersonal digital assistants and cellular
phonesGlobal commercial marketplace.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WarningForce dispersion.
SUMMARYFuture threats to U.S. airpower in urban warfare owe much to two factorsÑthe trend towardglobalization in aerospace and electronics, coupled with what has been observed to be the best way to
defeat U.S. airpower: that is, not necessarily the head-to-head, platform-to-platform approach of theCold War, but rather the exploitation of asymmetries.This chapter discusses in broad terms the threats posed by advanced MANPADSs and milli to microair vehicles and missiles, considering system-level characteristics such as increased range and reducedsignature; enhanced guidance, navigation, and/or targeting; and enhanced lethality. For each area,technologies that may enable such RED force capabilities are identified and assessed. Finally, several
technologies that may enable RED forces to counter BLUE forcesÑeither directly or indirectlyÑareidentified and assessed.Although U.S. air dominance is unlikely to be jeopardized in the near term by symmetric means, thecommittee believes that global technology trends suggest new types of threats that may be on thehorizon.REFERENCESPublishedDavis, W.R., B.B. Kosicki, D.M. Boroson, and D.F. Kostishack. 1996. Micro air vehicles for optical surveillance. LincolnLaboratory Journal 19(2):197-213.Francis, R. 1999. A System Study of Very Small Launch Vehicles. MasterÕs Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Gerendas, M., and R. Pfister. 2000. Development of a Very Small Aero-Engine. Paper presented at ASME Turbo Expo,Munich, Germany.Grasmeyer, Joel M., and Matthew T. Keennon. 2001. Development of the Black Widow Micro Air Vehicle. Reston, Va.:American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Available online at http://www.aerovironment.com/area-aircraft/
prod-serv/bwidpap.pdf. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE THREATS TO U.S. AIRPOWER IN URBAN WARFARE61JCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff). 2000. Joint Vision 2020. Director for Strategic Plans and Policy, J5. Strategy Division. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. JuneLondon, A.P., A.H. Epstein, and J.L. Kerrebrock. 2001. A high pressure bipropellant microrocket engine. Journal of Propul-sion and Power 17(4):780-787.Lu, Yunfeng, Yi Yang, Alan Sellinger, Mengcheng Lu, Jinman Huang, Hongyou Fan, Raid Haddad, Gabriel Lopez, Alan R.Burns, Darryl Y. Sasaki, John Shelnutt, and C. Jeffrey Brinker. 2001. Self-assembly of mesoscopically ordered chromaticpolydiacetylene/silica nanocomposites. Nature 410(6831):913-917.Miotti, P., M. Tajmar, C. Guraya, F. Perennes, B. Marmiroli, A. Soldati, M. Campolo, C. Kappenstein, R. Brahmi, and M.Lang. 2004. Bi-propellant Micro-Rocket Engine. Paper presented at CANEUS 2004-Conference on Micro-Nano-Tech-nologies, Monterey, Calif.Munson, Kenneth, ed. 1996. JaneÕs Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Targets. JaneÕs Information Group, Coulsdon, Surrey,United Kingdom.Sai, Hitoshi, Yoshiaki Kanamori, and Hiroo Yugami. 2003. Selective Emitters for Thermophotovoltaic Generation by Meansof Metallic Surface Microstructures. Power MEMS 2003. Kyoto, Japan.Shelby, R.A., D.R. Smith, and S. Schultz. 2001. Experimental verification of a negative index of refraction. Science292(5514):77-79.Takahashi, Koji. 2004. Micro Thruster For Miniaturized Space SystemsÑNeed and Perspective. Power MEMS. Kyoto, Japan.Talawar, M.B., C.N. Divekar, P.S. Makashir, and S.N. Asthana. 2005. Tetrakis-(4-amino-1,2,4-triazole) copper perchlorate: Anovel ballistic modifier for composite propellants. Journal of Propulsion and Power 21(1):186-189.Wicks, Frank. 2004. A model mission. Mechanical Engineering 126(12):44-46.
Wilkinson, T. 2003. SIMJETÕS 1200 turbojet on test. Simply Excellent: pp. 18-21. Available online at http://www.simjet.com/Simjet1200.pdf. Last accessed on February 8, 2005.Wiltshire, M.C.K. 2001. Bending light the wrong way. Science 292(5514):60-61.UnpublishedCaito, Steve. 2004. Full Spectrum Active Protection Close in Layered Shield. Presentation to the Board on Army Science andTechnology, June 8.Gabbert, LTC Jeff, Product Manager, Medium Altitude Endurance UAV Systems. 2004. Army UAV Systems Overview.Presentation to the Board on Army Science and Technology, December 17.Tousley, Brad. 2004. Update for MAV ACTD and OAV2 for the BAST. Presentation to the Board on Army Science andTechnology, December 17.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES625Combatant Identification in Urban Warfare
INTRODUCTIONThis chapter addresses new technology developments that might assist enemy combatants by allow-ing their identity and that of innocent noncombatants to be intermixed. Appropriate ÒspoofingÓ or othertypes of misidentification could cause the warfighter to engage a group of noncombatants, thus causing
political and/or psychological damage to U.S. forces.The type of combat situationÑurban warfareÑaddressed here is a scenario in which the UnitedStates is increasingly engaged. This chapter describes potential techniques for sensor spoofing and for
hiding RED forces, as well as some enabling technologies.The enemy engaging in this type of warfare is often technologically nimble but unable to afford oreven consider large weapons systems. Commercial technology of superior quality and capability that
may be readily available from non-U.S. suppliers is a likely source of components for adversarysystems. The synergistic trends of globalization and commercialization of science and technology arecreating an environment in which U.S. forces may unexpectedly find themselves vulnerable. One
example of offshore technology strength is the infrared (IR) laser-diode technology, which is effectivein IR-thermal source spoofing. This technology was initially developed in the United States and is nowmanufactured and sold commercially in Switzerland.1KEY FEATURES OF FOREIGN URBAN WARFAREModern urban warfare has been described extensively in connection with many wars over the past50 to 75 years. Instances of such warfare include German/Soviet combat in Stalingrad, U.S. combat inSomalia and Iraq, and Russian combat in Chechnya (Beevor, 1998; Bowden, 1999). This type of combat
has several distinct characteristics, including the following:1For more information, see, for example, http://www.alpeslasers.ch/. Last accessed on April 1, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE63¥Complex Òterrain.Ó Heavy combat in cities and large towns generates a chaotic artificial terrain.The lack of a clear line of combat as well as the presence of dust and smoke can make identifica-tion of combatants difficult or impossible. Combatants can easily remain hidden until detailedsearches, lasting many days, are completed.¥Short line of sight. Urban combat occurs in an environment of extremely short lines of sight.
Intense firefights between neighboring rooms in a housing unit, for example, are characterized byshort range and a common element of surprise. Reaction time is very short, and positive identifi-
cation may be possible only ex post facto.¥Intermixing of noncombatants (noncombatants) and combatants. When population densities are
high, it is impossible to rule out the presence of significant numbers of noncombatants. In many
cases these people are the most vulnerable of the former population, since it is hardest for them toleave the combat zone quickly. This situation makes it difficult for troops to engage enemy troopswithout fear of incurring casualties among noncombatants.¥Need for precision delivery of weapons. Because of the short distances, complex terrain, and
mixing of targets, urban combat requires the ability to deliver ordnance with precision so thatcollateral damage is minimized. This capability is compromised if noncombatant or RED team
identification is spoofed.COMMITTEE FOCUS: CAPABILITY TO DISCRIMINATE BETWEEN ENEMYCOMBATANTS AND NONCOMBATANTSOne form of misidentification relates to the issue of fratricide, which in itself is very challenging andhas been addressed in other studies. A report from the Office of Technology Assessment entitled WhoGoes There: Friend or Foe? discusses the Persian Gulf War and the problem of fratricide. During that
conflict, 24 percent of U.S. combat fatalities were due to friendly fire (U.S. Congress, OTA, 1993).
There is an optimal level of antifratricide measures beyond which more stringent measures could lead toincreased losses from enemy fire owing to slow reaction times. The four pillars of fratricide preventionare doctrine, training, rules of engagement, and technology, as viewed from a BLUE force perspective
(Armstrong, 1999). While related to the topic at hand, the avoidance of fratricide is not the central focusof the committee in this chapter; its focus instead is on the capability of discriminating between enemycombatants and noncombatants.Rules of engagement from a RED force perspective include causing confusion, hiding among thenoncombatant population in areas not necessarily designated as combat zones, jamming electronicdevices, and moving so that prior reconnaissance or mapping by the BLUE force is of limited utility.
When cast in the context of urban warfare, the scenarios become even more complex, if only becausenoncombatants must also be positively identified to avoid harming them.The techniques for the identification of noncombatants in combat areas are stressed to the limit inurban warfare, principally because of the short timescale of combat and the possibility that largenumbers of noncombatants might be present. Spoofing of sensors, including both visual and electronicimaging systems, compromises the BLUE forceÕs ability to carry out precision engagements and mayendanger noncombatants. Recent examples of urban combat have included the use of noncombatants asshields by enemy combatants. Finally, ground-to-ground combat even under the best of circumstances isprone to error; the fratricide rate during Desert Storm was 69 percent attributable to ground-to-ground
combat (U.S. Congress, OTA, 1993). Urban environments further exacerbate the challenge relating tothe discrimination of combatant forces.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESIDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT STEPS OF THECOMMITTEE METHODOLOGYThis section considers potential implications of emerging technologies that may be exploited by theenemy to degrade BLUE force capabilities relating to identification of friend or foe (IFF) and, morespecifically, to discrimination between enemy combatants and noncombatants. Enemy combatants mayleverage technological advances available in the global marketplace to develop methods of causing false
identification of noncombatant parties as combatants. This situation could lead to the BLUE forceÕsinflicting of casualties among the noncombatants and thus cause serious psychological damage to theBLUE forces and/or divert attention from the central BLUE force combat mission. Such events inevitably
lead to political damage to the United States as well. Below, the committee describes three techniquesthat may be employed by RED forces to degrade the ability of BLUE forces to discriminate enemytargets.Misdirected Target DesignationBLUE forces wish to engage only RED forces and related enemy targets. Currently, laser-designationtechnology is used to enable the precision guidance of weapons. RED forcesÕ acquisition of inexpensive
commercial laser systems, misleading designation and hence misleading weapons guidance parameters,
could lead to the misdirection of munitions onto politically or psychologically sensitive targets. Suchtechnology is accessible to RED forces in the form of rapidly advancing, low-cost, diode-laser tech-nology. The state-of-the-art small, compact, diode-driven solid-state lasers are currently in the hands of
overseas manufacturers that in many cases are the dominant manufacturer of these systems. Thesesystems can be used to misdirect weapons, either by blinding the weapon or by retargeting it, so as tocause substantial noncombatant casualties.An important technology in target designation is the use of wavelength tuning to prevent detectionof the designating laser system. This can be an effective technique, since narrowband filters decrease thedetection wavelength ÒbandwidthÓ and hence prevent out-of-band spoofing. At present there are a
number of low-cost IR laser devices, which can be made wavelength agile (tunable). At the other end ofthe spectrum, an example of high-cost and advanced IR laser technology is the Òquantum cascadeÓ laser,
which emits throughout the near and medium infrared.Sensor SpoofingAnother method of IFF sensor spoofing by RED forces relies on the BLUE forcesÕ use of sensor
technology to identify military targets and to distinguish these from related civilian or noncombatantentities. For example, if an IR sensor has sufficient resolution or can use a feature such as spectral
signature to discriminate among targets, it can be used as a reliable method for IFF. One example, whichdoes use spectral-sensitive signatures, is an active forward-looking infrared (FLIR) system. As describedbelow, these same technologies may be used by RED forces to spoof BLUE force sensors.Tunable LasersThe National Research Council report entitled Opportunities in Biotechnology for Future ArmyApplications further analyzes the possibilities for RED force spoofing of BLUE force identification
measures. As stated in that report, ÒBecause humans, tanks, and other military structures have a signifi-cantly different reflectivity than plants and trees, the enemy can easily identify military targets withAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE65inexpensive infrared lasers with wavelength-scanning capabilityÓ (NRC, 2001). If, on the other hand,
the RED force were to possess such tunable lasers, it could rapidly mimic the key spectral ingredients invarious targets and use this knowledge to spoof civilian targets in a way that could cause them to beerroneously identified as bona fide RED targets. For military structures, because a small fraction of the
Òtarget would be observable because of its distinctive spectral properties it may be possible to developpaints with terahertz and infrared reflectivity identical to trees or grass, possibly using geneticallyengineered plant protein as the active mediumÓ (NRC, 2001). See Chart 5-1.
False Radio Frequency Identification SignalsRadio-frequency (RF) sensors are also vulnerable to spoofing. Radio-frequency identification(RFID) is a technology that uses various RF bands to probe a transponder carried by BLUE forces or afriendly noncombatant. The transponder then responds to this probe, using either onboard (battery)
energy or power from the interrogating beam to cause a coded reply, which can be read by the interro-gator. The market for this technology is expanding rapidly, because RFID is useful for a wide variety ofcommercial applications such as merchandise identification, automatic toll payment, animal identifica-
tion and tracking, and so on. Since the heart of the technology is microchips and advanced microwavedevices, it can be expected to advance further in sophistication and availability over the next decade.For the same reasons that RFID will continue to develop, Òfalse tagÓ methods will also grow in
capability. These methods could enable RED forces to ÒmasqueradeÓ as friendly forces, thus diminishing
BLUE forcesÕ confidence in RFID. See Chart 5-2.
TechnologyObservablesTunable lasersThese lasers were invented and developedin the United States, but they are now
manufactured overseas. They are an
extremely powerful source for placing anintense infrared signal at the position of thepointed laser beam. This laser is now
readily available overseas, and suppliers
are accessible via the Internet.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1WarningSpoofing of BLUE sensors
by changing/determining
key spectral components in
targets.TechnologyObservablesFalse radio-frequency identification
(RFID) signalsThere are a number of suppliers of RFIDtechnology. Detailed information is availableat a Web site of the U.S. Department ofEnergyÕs Pacific Northwest Laboratory.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1WarningDiminished trust in BLUE
RFID.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESProjection of Realistic-Looking Real-Time Optical or Infrared ImagesRealistic-looking false-image projection will grow with the increasing availability of low-costlasers and holographic images. In urban warfare, reaction time is very short, and the sudden appearance
of any image may immediately elicit a responseÑfor example, a programmed false image could provokefiring at an inappropriate target. The ingredients for this technology are powerful personal computers,advanced lasers, and real-time holographic media. All of these are advancing rapidly, owing in large
part to demands from the commercial marketplace.While the examples provided below may seem farfetched for a warfare environment, the committeebelieves that there is some value in tracking such emerging technologies, since they may spawn RED
force tactics that could be difficult to counter. It should be noted that the committee did not have time toseparate Òmarketing hypeÓ from actual capabilities in the examples below.
Figure 5-1 shows the result of a system in which a Òmicroscopic pattern of particles [is] suspendedin a transparent medium that simultaneously diffracts, reflects and transmits all wavelengths of light.Through this proprietary process the TransScreen displays a projected image as well as allows you to seebeyond the image floating in space.Ó2Figure 5-2 illustrates HoloMirror technology that:generate[s] the illusion of a hologram by projecting specially created video images that are projected andfocused to a point in space in front of the kiosk. Even though the projection source is within the kiosk

housing, the image appears out in front of the display. In pictures below you will see hands pointing at or
near the projected image. To the person viewing the HoloMirror they are really seeing their hand passing
through the object or they are seeing the 3D image hovering above or below their hand. It is impossible

to show the true 3D effect here in photographs. But these pictures will give you a bit of an idea of what

happens when you experience a HoloMirror in person. Laser Magic offers two types of HoloMirror 3D
Volumetric Projectors.3Figure 5-3 illustrates a life-size hologram. According to the manufacturerÕs Web site:There is nothing like the magic of a real hologram. ItÕs like a window into another world. View it fromone angle and a crystal clear 3D image is clearly visible. Step to the side and the image disappears
without a trace. As you walk back and forth in front of a hologram, the image moves and you can see
around it as if it were really there.4Projection of a programmed false image could provoke BLUE forces to fire on an inappropriatetarget. The committee has considered scenarios in which such capabilities may become more accessible
to RED forces as materials suitable for projecting and showing the images are commercialized andadapted in consumer and fashion marketing. See Chart 5-3.Hiding of TargetsAnother potential method of inducing erroneous noncombatant targeting stems from the followingfact, as discussed in the National Research Council (NRC) report Opportunities in Biotechnology forFuture Army Applications:2See http://www.laser-magic.com/transscreen.html. Last accessed on April 25, 2005.3See http://www.laser-magic.com/HoloMirror_Pictures.html. Last accessed on April 25, 2005.4See http://www.laser-magic.com/holograms.html. Last accessed on April 25, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE67FIGURE 5-2 Example of a projected three-dimensional image that appears to be floating above the hand.SOURCE: Reprinted with permission. © by Laser Magic Productions.FIGURE 5-1 TransScreen, power holographic projection creates the illusion of life-size, holographic images.SOURCE: Reprinted with permission. © by Laser Magic Productions.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESFIGURE 5-3 Life-size hologram. SOURCE: Reprinted with permission. © by Laser Magic Productions.TechnologyObservablesProjection of realistic-looking, real-timeoptical or infrared imagesRock concerts; entertainment industry(markets that may drive technologicaladvances in holographic imagery).AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchSpoofing visual sensors.
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE69Biological systems can also be mimicked for the next generation of soldier camouflage uniforms. One[example of this approach] uses mimicking of the mechanical chromatic effects that birds and fruits use.
The exquisite color patterns on the feathers of birds are the result of the intricate structural pattern of
each feather that enables it to diffract light. This phenomenon, mechanical chromatophores, is also
exhibited by some varieties of fruits. Another natural phenomenon that might be valuable for camou-
flage is the biochromatic behavior of some reptiles. The chameleon, for example, can change color and
patterns in accordance with the environment. Camouflage with this property would automatically change
to blend with the environment, such as snow-covered terrain, desert sand, dense and light vegetation,
daylight and darkness (NRC, 2001).Prominent research centers in the United States and elsewhere are working on adaptive materialsÑin particular, exploiting polymers, biomimetic structures, and nanotechnology. Both the DefenseAdvanced Research Projects Agency and the U.S. Army support research in this area, advances in which
could eventually lead to capabilities that enable RED force hiding.5,6 
Acquisition of such technology byRED forces would enable them to spoof BLUE forces by camouflaging their appearance and makingthemselves harder to detect. See Chart 5-4.New types of stealth could become available in the form of coatings that consist of microwave-absorbing paint (see Chart 5-5), or interactive displays of the type described above. BLUE forcedevelopment of an intelligent surface coating that is readily apparent for night vision, or, conversely,
that neutralizes night vision in a manner that could redirect ordnance, could become a RED forceadvantage if the technology is redirected to spoof night vision. Advances in IR-absorbing coatings(proteins), temperature-noncombatant materials, and heat-emitting coatings could enable such capabilities.The availability of IR-absorbing coatings may be a near-term possibility. Commercial developmentof a coating used to weld textile fabrics is based on this principle. Clearweld¨, a process patented by TheTechnologyObservablesAdaptive materialsLiterature reports of wearable displaysintegrated into common clothing and electronic
ink are available on the Internet. At least one
Web site reports that a wearable display is
under development in Japan and is described
as optical camouflage.aAccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchCamouflage automatically changes
to blend with the environment.
5For additional information see, for example, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyÕs Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies,http://web.mit.edu/isn/. Last accessed on April 25, 2005.6For additional information see, for example, http://www.darpa.mil/dso/thrust/matdev/matdev.htm. Last accessed onApril 25, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesBacteriorhodopsin (and other infrared-absorbing coatings)Biocatalogs and Web sites for textilemanufactures.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3WatchNew types of stealth to enable
RED forces to hide from BLUEforce sensors.7For more information, see, for example, www.twi.co.uk/j32k and www.gentexcorp.com. Last accessed on February 11,2005.Welding Institute, Ltd., is being commercialized by Gentex Corporation.7 Commercially available
lasers and a colorless IR-absorbing medium, used in place of a carbon black absorber, enables clearplastics to be welded. The IR-absorbing medium is printed or painted onto one surface of the joint,encompassed into the bulk plastic, or produced in the form of a film that can be inserted into the joint.
The medium absorbs IR laser light, allowing an almost invisible weld to be produced between materialsthat are required to be clear or have a predetermined color.The NRC (2001) report also discusses biological methods that may be employed by RED forces toevade detection:Biological means might also be useful for avoiding radar detection. Some biomolecules have long beenknown to be strong microwave absorbers. For example, bacteriorhodopsin has strong microwave absorp-
tivity (3 GHz to 40 GHz). Scientists are investigating the use of chemically, and possibly genetically,
modified bacteriorhodopsin protein as the active medium in microwave-absorbing paint for both tanks
and planes. The absorption mechanism appears to be associated with the motion of monovalent and
divalent metal cations within channels, e.g., Mg(II), Ca(II). If this theory is correct, proteins could be
engineered to have precise microwave absorption bands and then fine tuned for anticipated threats in a
given theater of operation. Microtubules, which are also excellent microwave absorbers, may be even
better microwave absorbers and more easily fine tuned. Because much of the research in this area is
classified, the committee was not able to make recommendations in this area (NRC, 2001).Is a protein with the appropriate optical and physical properties a possibility in the near future?According to the NRC (2001):From 1975 to 1995, scientists in the former Soviet Union participated in a government-sponsored pro-gram to leapfrog the West in computer technology by exploring protein-based bioelectronics. Many of
the anticipated applications were military and may therefore be important to the U.S. Army, but details
remain classified. One of the best-known accomplishments of the Soviet project was the development of
biochrome, a real-time photochromic and holographic film based on chemically modified polymer films
containing bacteriorhodopsin (Vsevolodov and Poltoratskii, 1985; Bunkin et al., 1981). The published
photochromic and holographic properties of bacteriorhodopsin stimulated the international research that
continues today. The protein bacteriorhodopsin is representative of the potential that proteins may have
for future Army applications (NRC, 2001).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMBATANT IDENTIFICATION IN URBAN WARFARE71INEXPENSIVE SUPPLY OF RAW MATERIALS FOR CAMOUFLAGEAn impediment to RED or BLUE forcesÕ implementation of technology such as that described
above is the availability of materials in sufficient quantities to be useful. To overcome this barrier,
agricultural biotechnology might be used for the large-scale production of some new materials. Forexample, Òthe protein from soybeans can be refined and sold for only pennies per pound of protein,substantially less than the cost of manufacturing equivalent synthetic polymersÓ (NRC, 2001). In addi-
tion, Ògenetically engineered crops (transgenic crops) could potentially deliver recombinant proteinsdirectly with the food or feed products in which they are foundÓ (NRC, 2001). When it is considered
further that such crops could be cultivated in caves (Òunderground agricultureÓ), the production, usingrelatively low technology, of some types of materials that have the capability of obfuscating the identi-fication of noncombatants or a RED force is a remote possibility. See Chart 5-6.SUMMARYThe committee notes that U.S. leadership in research or manufacturing can no longer be assumed ina number of the technologies discussed in this chapter. Japan, for example, is extremely strong in manyareas of nanotechnology and in optical and electronic devices. China is, in many cases (such asphotonics), the country with the best combination of high-technology manufacturing and design, and
Chinese capabilities are increasingly employed by many high-technology U.S. firms. Europe hasexcellent research capabilities in the areas of semiconductor materials and devices; these can be andhave been translated into start-up corporations.As a result of this shift to offshore commercial vendors, important indicators are likely to appear inopen source literature, including commercial Internet sites, and at industrial fairs particularly in Asiaand Europe. The monitoring of key corporations is important. However, in many cases small or obscure
start-ups are also of vital importance (suggesting that the tracking of venture capital may offer yetanother set of relevant observables). In certain cases, the observation of critical manufacturing items(raw materials and/or equipment) may be useful, since the global marketplace, together with Internet-
accessible Òdirections,Ó is empowering friend and foe alike.
REFERENCESArmstrong, Steven E. 1999. Fratricide: Fact or Fiction? Naval War College, Newport, R.I. Available online at http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA370683. Last accessed on February 9, 2005.Beevor, Antony. 1998. Stalingrad. Viking, New York, N.Y.Bowden, Mark. 1999. Black Hawk Down: A Story of Modern War. Atlantic Monthly Press, New York, N.Y.TechnologyObservablesTransgenic cropsSeed companies.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1WatchAbility to grow materials
and/or toxins.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESBunkin, F.V., A.B. Druzhko, B.I. Mitsner, A.M. Prokhorov, V.V. Savranskii, T.B. Shevchenko, N.W. Tkachenko, and N.N.Vsevolodov. 1981. Diffraction efficiency of bacteriorhodopsin and its analogs. Soviet Technical Physics Letters
7:630-631.NRC (National Research Council). 2001. Opportunities in Biotechnology for Future Army Applications. National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.U.S. Congress, OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1993. Who Goes There: Friend or Foe? OTA-ISC-537. U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. Available online at http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/ota/Ota_1/DATA/1993/9351.PDF. Last accessed on February 9, 2005.Vsevolodov, N.N., and V.A. Poltoratskii. 1985. Holograms in biochrome, a biological photochromic material. Soviet PhysicsTechnical Letters 30:1235.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES73736Biotechnology Trends Relevant to Warfare Initiatives
INTRODUCTIONDevelopments in biological and biochemical technologies relevant to modern warfare are advancingrapidly. Technology contributions come from scientists working in academic, military, and industrialenvironments in many countries. Information from academic laboratories is usually published in open
source literature, but advances made both by military research laboratories doing biomedical researchand by biotechnology companies are likely to be tightly held secrets or proprietary. Therefore, for theUnited States to maintain superiority requires being prepared for new developments through constant
vigilance, research, and information gathering.Modern techniques allow easy manipulation of the genetic information carried by viruses, bacteria,parasites, cells, and organisms. One obvious area in which biological research is relevant to the health of
warfighters is the development of pathogens that are engineered to be resistant to current antibiotics orvaccines, to be more virulent, or to be more easily transmitted. This area of biological warfare, whichhas been examined by a number of other committees, is excluded from the tasks of this committee at the
request of the Technology Warning Division and is not included in this report.Beyond biological warfare, however, there are many ways in which biological techniques can beused to alter the mental or physical readiness of troops for battle, to confound current methods for
detecting biological or chemical agents in the field, or to divert the energies of troops to tasks that arecounterproductive; or, such techniques can be used as means for developing bio-inspired approaches forcommunication. This chapter highlights examples of some of these technologies and assesses their
states of development. The approach taken here involves first postulating new BLUE force capabilitiesthat leverage this burgeoning research field and then evaluating potential RED force applications ofrelated technologies.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESWatching People ThinkI have two children and love them very much. But my love to see God was stronger than my love for mychildren, and IÕm sure that God will take care of them if (sic) I become a martyr. . . . IÕm proud to be the
first (sic) female martyr.Reem Saleh Riyashi,Seventh female Islamic Fundamentalist suicide bomber,January 14, 2004The fact that a woman took part for the first time in a Hamas operation marks a significant evolution ...
women are like the reserve armyÑwhen there is a necessity, we use them. Today we needed her because
there are a lot of problems for a man to reach out to Israelis in the West Bank and Gaza.Sheik Ahmed Yassin,Founder, Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas),January 14, 2004Washington Post Foreign ServiceM. Moore, JerusalemUntil now, it has been impossible to understand scientifically how persons can behave in ways thatWestern political, psychological, and psychiatric criteria define as pathological. This inability to under-stand motivation has caused U.S. military planning and response strategy to be focused on preemptively,
post hoc punishment and on attempts to educate through ineffective traditional propaganda and occa-sional Òactive measures.ÓThe reason for the confounding nature of the problem and for the failure of this nation to stem itsgrowth relate directly to the simple fact that traditional Western models of behavior cast such actions aspsychopathological. It is likely that these actions, rather than being pathological in the contexts in whichthey reside, are the actions of rational thought and of educational processes that U.S. leadership has not
defined, and that they will escalate until and unless the United States can Òwatch these people think.ÓScientific Methods That May Predict BehaviorsPhysicians and psychologists are now using a new set of technologies for analyzing brain function.Initial data have been collected and analyzed in three parallel research streams which support the
contention that the U.S. research community is now poised to change the paradigm of dealing withbehavioral phenomena in subjective Western practice.The technologies of structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional MRI (fMRI),magnetoencephalography (MEG), and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) are being newly applied toreal-time brain imaging. During the brain scans, the subjects of the experiments observe, throughvirtual-reality technology, images, sounds, and voice commands, and they also see written text. Online
proprietary software ensures in real time that the appropriate (hypothesized from past extensive behavioralresearch) part of the brain cortex (e.g., the occipital sensory visual and auditory centers) is engaging theÒmessageÓ presented. Pre- and post-identification of activation levels (blood-oxygen-level-dependent,
fMRI and MEG) from cognitive processing (e.g., prefrontal cortex), emotional uploading to that processAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES75(e.g., from the limbic systemÕs amygdala and para-hippocampal nuclei), and the effects of rationalbehavior (pre-instructed commands to the subjects) are collected and analyzed.Next-generation experiments will extend this work to a clearer understanding of how the follow-ingÑ(1) cultural affects of personality, fashioned especially in fundamentalist ashrams and Islamic
fundamentalist schools for preteenagers; (2) ideographic, tonal, and symbolic languages (e.g., Farsi,Hindi, Mandarin, and Thai) versus linear and lexical (e.g., English and German) languages; and (3)con-
structs of written materialsÑengage differently the brains of different individuals. The research is
objective and repeatable. It is independent of preassigned values of any cultural disposition or orientation.The neurophysiology of thought is being studied now in experiments that demonstrate the active braincenters that subtend language differences, emotional experience (moral repugnance, fear, anger, disgust,
sadness, and pleasure), and value-based religious and personal experience.Brain imaging is an area of active research; while discernible progress has been achieved, its fullpotential is as yet unknown. Brain-imaging technologies may provide a better understanding of behavior,
performance, readiness, and stress that is relevant to troop readiness, understanding of cultural differ-ences in motivation, and prisoner motivation. Additional, related information is provided in AppendixE,
which also includes more specific descriptions of how such advances could be used by BLUE forces.COMMITTEE FOCUS: CHALLENGES TO COMMUNICATIONS SUPERIORITYCommunications superiority plays a dominant role in the effectiveness of BLUE force operations.This capability relies on sophisticated technologies and flexible networking of the knowledge generatedthrough such technologies. Today U.S. forces Òown the C4ISR [command, control, communications,
computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance] information network,Ó although the directchallenges described in Chapter 3 are on the horizon.The covert transmission of information between forces is essential to effective timing and control ofactions (both offensive and defensive). Achieving RED force command, control, and communications(including intelligence gathering, surveillance, and reconnaissance) among its independent, dispersedunits could support effective guerilla engagement of traditional forces. Such communications might
involve the transmission and receipt of short messages (e.g., commands that trigger prearranged events,coordination for precision fire, or relocation of operations) or more complex messages (e.g., thoseestablishing strategies, complex timing, tiered responses, or detailed changes in operations). A frame-
work to achieve effective, inexpensive, yet reliable communication between RED force units underthese conditions must be easily accessible, undetected by BLUE forces, and sufficiently robust to carryall of the required information in a manner that can be validated. Hiding simple to complex packets of
information in easily accessible physical form or in widely accessible databases could support the basicrequirements. Integrating such seemingly innocuous databases with traditional mail that is physicallyhanded off, or with a global, instantaneous, free-access communications system could generate the
capability for RED force C4ISR across dispersed, independent units.The transmission of encrypted messages across the Internet is commonplace, but it provides nocover of invisibility to its users. Hiding information within seemingly innocuous transmissions
(steganography) could further veil the information. A successfully hidden message may be overlookedas a part of something else, whether that is the physical package of the information (such as microdots)or the complexity of the message medium itself (such as hidden information in digital images). For
example, steganography can be used for the legitimate validation of image authenticity. The Content IDForum and the Digital Content Association of Japan have created digital watermarks, equivalent to shortAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESmessages, to prevent piracy.1 The information density of such watermarks allows a single letter of
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchanges) text to be fixed across three pixels,2generating enough capacity to carry a small message hidden in the noise of the image signal. However,
as document size increases, the induced noise will degrade the quality of the image to the point of
becoming detectable.Covert Communications via DNAOne inexpensive and reliable way to transmit more complex information might be to hide data ormessages in the sequences of DNA or in the databases describing the sequences of DNA (or in the
sequences and structural data of proteins) that are so prevalent in the scientific literature. While digitalsystems are binary in nature, the information content of a DNA database is coded in a base-foursequence represented by the letters A, T, C, and G. (In a physical sense, the actual structure and
sequences of DNA that hold a potential data density are more than 1 million gigabits per square inch,compared with a typical PC hard drive of approximately 7 gigabits per square inch.3) Recent publica-tions have projected this approach to the construction of actual DNA containing hidden messages.
Typically, data describing functional DNA in the scientific literature contain large stretches of se-quences that are not intimately related to the function of the gene. The capacity of the human genomedatabase to hold steganographic data without exceeding the normal noise-to-signal ratio is enormous.Researchers Clelland and Bancroft developed a simple physical methodology to encode and recoversecret DNA messages embedded in the 3 million-fold excess of normal human DNA.4 However, there
is potentially a much more rapid and simpler way of transmitting the hidden information than physically
moving constructed DNA as samples or microdots. Simply encrypting a message into the base-fourlanguage of DNA (IBM has developed a language for storing information in DNA sequence data5)might be sufficient to hide messages between RED force teams. Such coded information might seem
perfectly normal in the context of daily scientific discussions on the Internet. (See Chart 6-1.) Thesemessages could be transmitted and received quickly, but they would rely on the appearance of scientificvalidity to remain undetected.More secure transmission of information could be achieved by embedding the encrypted messageinto the redundant or apparently superfluous regions of a database describing an actual genome (the1For more information, see, for example, http://www.cidf.org/japanese/english/docs/gen/cidf-gen-en-38.pdf. Last accessedon February 11, 2005.2For more information, see, for example, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steganography#Steganographic_techniques. Lastaccessed on February 11, 2005.3For more information, see, for example, http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2004/10/26/02313/946. Last accessed on February11, 2005.4For more information, see, for example, http://inka.mssm.edu/~bancroft/papers/NATURE.pdf. Last accessed on February11, 2005. Clelland and Bancroft have won a patent for DNA steganographic authentication. Applied DNA Sciences (LosAngeles) is actively pursuing DNA-based authentication of a wide range of materials and has been the subject of recent press
coverage. Application of the steganographic potential of DNA (in the form of DNA microdots or packets of DNA transmittedthrough conventional methods) increases the potential to hide the medium of delivery while further hiding the message oridentifier within the DNA itself. Encryption of the base-four lexicon is a logical extension of this approach, but may not be
necessary in practical application. Such a physical or database-representation medium for covert message transmission iscapable of holding information ranging from single words to very large documents.5For more information, see, for example, http://www.bio-itworld.com/news/090904_report6001.html. Last accessed onFebruary 11, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES77TechnologyObservablesExploitation of DNA databases for covertcommunicationsRegistration for access to Web site residentDNA or protein structure databases is easy
to obtain but can be tracked. Most such
databases can be copied but not modified
by the user (limiting their usefulness for
transmitting messages to the provision of
the legitimate database with its well-known
signal-to-noise ratio). Comparison of the
signal-to-noise ratio of candidate messagesto the authentic database might indicate thepresence of hidden data. Open literature
Web sites that do not require registration
and allow some manipulation of the data
could be candidate mailboxes. The
convergence of (1) Internet discussion of
DNA databases that are small enough to
afford short upload and download
characteristics and (2) unlikely participants
might suggest steganography.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 1WarningThreaten BLUE
communications superiority.ÒnoiseÓ regions among the ÒsignalÓ regions of legitimate scientific interest). Typical noise-to-signalratios in such data could effectively hide large amounts of information. This approach might be ex-panded to include the data sets for three-dimensional structures of proteins to hide the coordinates for a
literal map of a battle theater. To the extent that Internet access (telephone, digital subscriber line, cable,wireless, satellite) is available and reliable, communication between RED force units might approachreal-time capability.Many approaches to encryption and steganographic hiding could be imagined. The potential of thisapproach derives from the large ÒnoiseÓ component of current databases and the ease with which suchdatabases are shared in the global community. As molecular biology defines the noise regions, it may
become easier to identify false or incorrect databases.Covert Communications via BacteriorhodopsinBiomolecular electronics are being applied to the encryption of messages using protein-basedholograms. Much of the work has focused on the use of bacteriorhodopsin, a protein produced by the
salt marsh archaebacteria Halobacterium salinarium found in high-temperature brine pools. This trans-membrane protein is a green, sunlight-driven proton pump that can maintain its structure and function attemperatures as high as 140C (Shen et al., 1993). The native molecule is composed of three proteinchains, each of which has a molecule of retinal bound deep inside. Retinal contains a string of carbonsthat strongly absorb light. When a photon is absorbed, it causes a change in the conformation of theAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESmolecule from a straight form to a bent form that powers the pumping of protons.6 The protein has been
adapted for device application because it can undergo structural changes induced by light once everyfew milliseconds for hundreds of millions of times.As stated in the NRC report Opportunities in Biotechnology for Future Army Applications:Bacteriorhodopsin has excellent holographic properties because of the large change in refractive indexthat occurs following light activation. It converts light into a refractive index change with approximately
65% efficiency. Furthermore, the protein is 10 times smaller than the wavelength of light. This means
that the resolution of the thin film is determined by the diffraction limit of the optical geometry rather
than the graininess of the film. Bacteriorhodopsin can absorb 2 photons simultaneously and therefore can
be used to store information in 3 dimensions by using 2-photon architectures (NRC, 2001).Bacteriorhodopsin can also be genetically engineered to do different tasks and adapted for numerousprotein-based devices (Wise et al., 2002; Hillebrecht et al., 2004). Mutations have been introduced that
enhance its holographic properties, and one of the most successful device applications has been in thedevelopment of holographic and volumetric three-dimensional (3-D) memories. In principle, an optical3-D memory can store roughly three orders of magnitude more information than that on a 2-D optical
disk in the same size enclosure. These protein-based memories have the advantage of the memorymediumÕs being extremely rugged. It can withstand substantial gravitational forces and is unaffected byhigh-intensity electromagnetic radiation and cosmic rays. These memories are also lightweight and
insensitive to moisture. Therefore, protein-based polymer cuvettes would be a suitable memory mediumfor troops to carry with them into harsh environments.Bacteriorhodopsin-based films can also be produced for use in developing pattern-recognitiondevices and large-scale associative memories and associative processors that would allow for the pro-cessing of intelligence and sensor data in visual formats from multiple sources in real time (NRC, 2001).One company offering bacteriorhodopsin for sale for use in Òoptical data processing, optical switches,
Elektrochemische 
Industrie GmbH in Munich. (See Chart 6-2.)The current problem with the use of this technology is that, to be read, such a protein-basedhologram cube (the size of a sugar cube) requires a light source the size of a large suitcase. However, ifthe light sources and instrumentation are shrunk to the size of a personal digital assistant, the cubebecomes practical to be carried and read in the field.COMMITTEE FOCUS: CHALLENGES TO BATTLE READINESSTroops must be ready to respond to threats on short notice as well as to participate in plannedmilitary actions. Disease that incapacitates but does not kill (as opposed to the effects of weapons ofmass destruction) can be disabling and the source of the infection difficult to determine. Particular
vulnerabilities are the foodborne, vectorborne, and zoonotic diseases that could be introduced locallyand for which vaccines, good diagnostics, and treatment are not available. A number of pathogens could beenvisioned for such development. Two that are particularly likely are noroviruses and avian influenza virus.The committee notes that such developments fall outside the realm of acceptable offense from theBLUE perspective. As observed in Chapter 1, however, BLUE forces may well encounter RED forcesthat are willing to employ capabilities that the United States would not consider.6For more information, see, for example, Protein Data Bank, http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/molecules/pdb27_1.html. Lastaccessed on February 11, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES79TechnologyObservablesBacteriorhodopsin for holographicmessaging and development of advanced
holographic technologiesThis technology is likely to come fromadvances in DVD (digital video disc)
technology for movies. The most likely
source would be the commercial sector
(e.g., technology companies such as Apple
Computer and Gentec). Web sites for light
shows, rock bands, pseudomilitary
companies, and special-effects houses
should be monitored.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2WatchThreaten BLUE
communications superiority.NorovirusesParticularly disabling pathogens are viruses in the Norovirus family. Noroviruses (also called
Norwalk-like viruses) are spread through contaminated food or water; they cause acute vomiting,diarrhea, and fever. There are many viruses in this group, so multiple episodes of infection are common.Noroviruses are extremely contagious because of their low infectious dose (<100 viral particles), pro-
longed asymptomatic shedding (up to 2 weeks after recovery), ability to resist chlorination, and stabilityin the environment. Norovirus outbreaks are common in military deployments and were the mostcommon cause of disability among soldiers in Operations Desert Storm and Desert Shield (McCarthy et
al., 2000). A 2002 outbreak among British soldiers and hospital staff in Afghanistan resulted in closureof the field hospital. Eleven people with severe symptoms were evacuated to Germany and England,partly because of the inability to diagnose the disease (MMWR, 2002).Currently, this group of viruses cannot be cultured, so the ability of individuals to purposefullyintroduce infection through contamination of the food or water supply is limited (the only source ofvirus is stool of an infected person). However, this is an area of intense investigation, and the recent
report of the culture of a mouse norovirus may lead the way to the culture of human noroviruses (Wobuset al., 2004). If cultured organisms were available, strains for which immunity is uncommon or does notexist could be chosen for introduction at strategic times and places. The DNA copy of the virus could
then be used to produce specifically altered forms of the virus that could be designed to evade immunity,to have increased virulence, or to deliver genes encoding toxins or other virulence factors. (See Chart 6-3.)Avian InfluenzaAnother pathogen of concern is the family of avian influenza virusesÑboth H5N1 and H7N2 havecaused severe human illness. Influenza virus is spread by the respiratory route, so an introduction ofinfection into a military population might be more difficult than with a foodborne or waterborne virus.However, it could be introduced through infection of local animals such as pigs or chickens. Lack of
immunity in the human population would ensure widespread disease. The major current barrier to theuse of this virus to disable military populations is the lack of human-to-human transmission of currentstrains. (See Chart 6-4.)Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESTechnologyObservablesDevelopment and distribution of norovirus organismsAn indicator is evidence that a laboratory isconducting research aimed at producing arepresentative of this group of viruses inculture. This would include development ofnew lines of cells derived from the
gastrointestinal tract. Development of
mechanisms of stabilizing the virus anddevelopment of vaccines that could be used
to protect the adversary would be an
indicator of deployment.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2/3WarningDebilitation of BLUE forces.
TechnologyObservablesDevelopment and distribution of avianinfluenza organismsIndicators would include construction ofhigh-containment laboratories for work with
virulent strains, reports of laboratory-
acquired infections, or increased use of
primates in containment facilities.
Development of vaccines to protect theadversary would be an importantcomponent of such a research program.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 2/3WatchDebilitation of BLUE forces.
Research that leads to an understanding of the biologic determinants of transmissibility by respiratorysecretions will allow scientists to engineer current virus strains for efficient spread. The technology isalready available and in use for genetically engineering influenza virus.Although many laboratories are working on influenza, relatively few are investigating the determi-nants of transmissibility. Initial work is likely to be with easily manipulated animal model systems (e.g.,mice, ferrets) in which virologic determinants of transmission from one animal to another by therespiratory route can be identified using genetically engineered strains of virus.Synthesis of DecoysA release of infectious agents as weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) is a current major militaryconcern. Several organisms have been developed as WMDs by one country or another. Sophisticatedsensors based on the known antigenic composition and genetic or protein sequence of these organisms
considered to be of highest risk are in current use, and advanced versions are under development. Arelease of compounds or agents that react with these detectors, but are not the actual agents, would be ofAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS RELEVANT TO WARFARE INITIATIVES81no risk to the adversary, but it would precipitate time-consuming responses in U.S. troops. The responsescould include preparing medical units, delaying operations while time- and energy-consuming con-firmatory tests are performed, and causing military personnel to put on protective gear that might impairmobility, comfort, and function. Such mimics would create reticence to enter certain areas. Similar
approaches are applicable to chemical agents.For decoys to be developed, the adversary would need to have knowledge of the methods andidentifiers used by the sensors. For instance, mass spectrometry methods will identify signature peptides
or protein or nucleic acid sequences, and immunologic detectors will identify specific protein antigensin the organism. (See Chart 6-5.)SUMMARYBiotechnology capabilities are rapidly expanding and becoming more and more readily available toscientists throughout the world. Emerging biotechnologies in functional brain imaging, communica-tions, the spread of disabling infections, and sensor spoofing are likely to affect the conduct of militaryoperations and the status of national security in the future. These biotechnologies have been highlighted
in this chapter.The neuroimaging techniques of EEG, MEG, fMRI, and NIRS provide direct measurement of brainfunction. Technology underlying these modalities is advancing rapidly to allow a multitude of measure-
ments. These technologies may provide a better understanding of behavior, performance, readiness, andstress that is relevant to understanding the cultural differences in motivation and prisoner interrogation.There are many opportunities on the horizon for biology to play a role in communications. Theseinclude protein cube holography and bacteriorhodopsin solid-state devices for storing high-densityinformation, and DNA sequences as a medium for hiding covert messages.DNA is currently available, capable of storing and communicating large amounts of hidden infor-mation, in a compact and stable medium as DNA itself or in the signal-to-noise ratio of sequence data.
Work on bacteriorhodopsin has been ongoing for a substantial period, and genetic manipulation of thisremarkable molecule continues to open new opportunities for its use. One of these uses is holography,
but there are also other technologies that are maturing for embedding messages in holograms. Thetechnology for reading holograms is the current limiting factor in exercising this potential.TechnologyObservablesDevelopment and distribution of organisms as decoysOne indicator would be evidence that anadversary had gained knowledge of thespecific technology being used (e.g., stolenor missing data, devices, technical reports).Research on genetic manipulation of
antigenic determinants or key signature
sequences through recombinant technology
would be relevant.AccessibilityMaturityConsequenceLevel 3 (likely dedicatedmilitary laboratories)UnknownSpoofing of weapons of
mass destruction sensors.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESInfectious diseases are a continuing concern. They offer opportunities for a wide range of geneticmodifications and could be deployed in many different ways but were not a primary focus of this report.However, the current emphasis on weapons of mass destruction has led to the development of sophisti-cated sensors that, when activated, trigger responses that can be costly in time and can limit troop
responses. A release of materials that trigger sensors, but are not threats, is one way of decreasing battlereadiness in U.S. troops.The area of application of biotechnology to military purposes is currently wide-ranging. It willexpand very rapidly over the next decade.REFERENCESHillebrecht, J.R., K.J. Wise, J.F. Koscielecki, and R.R. Birge. 2004. Directed evolution of bacteriorhodopsin for deviceapplications. Methods in Enzymology 388:333-347.McCarthy, M., M.K. Estes, and K.C. Hyams. 2000. Norwalk-like virus infection in military forces: Epidemic potential,sporadic disease, and the future direction of prevention and control efforts. Journal of Infectious Diseases 181(SUPP/2):
S387-S391.MMWR (Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report). 2002. Outbreak of acute gastroenteritis associated with Norwalk-likeviruses among British military personnelÑAfghanistan, May 2002. June 7, Vol. 51, No. 22: pp. 477-479. Available
online at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5122a1.htm.NRC (National Research Council). 2001. Opportunities in Biotechnology for Future Army Applications. National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.Shen, Y., C.R. Safinya, and K.S. Liang. 1993. Stabilization of the membrane protein bacteriorhodopsin to 140 degree C intwo-dimensional films. Nature 366(6450):48.Wise, K.J., N.B. Gillespie, J.A. Stuart, M.P. Krebs, and R.R. Birge. 2002. Optimization of bacteriorhodopsin for bioelectronicdevices. Trends in Biotechnology 20(9):387-394.Wobus, C.E., S.M. Karst, L.B. Thackray, K-O. Chang, S.V. Sosnovtsev, G. Belliot, A. Krug, J.M. Mackenzie, K.Y. Green,and H.W. Virgin IV. 2004. Replication of norovirus in cell culture reveals a tropism for dendritic cells and macrophages.
Public Library of Science Biology 2(12):e432.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS83837Findings and RecommendationsThis report identifies some of the major challenges confronting the intelligence technology warningcommunity but makes no attempt to prioritize specific emerging technologies for more detailed analysis.
Instead, the committee describes broad trends, discusses a prototype methodology that may be of valuein focusing future collaborations, and ÒemploysÓ that methodology on a disparate set of evolvingtechnologies that may threaten U.S. military preeminence.COLLABORATION WITH EXTERNAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COMMUNITIESThe committee postulated in Chapter 1 and illustrated in Chapters 3 through 6 that the informationtechnology, biotechnology, microtechnology, and nanotechnology families will increasingly providebuilding blocks of a foundational nature for military-relevant capabilities for RED (adversarial) and
BLUE (U.S. military) forces alike. The fact that significant advances in these technologies will bedriven largely by commercial demandÑon a global scaleÑrather than by military-specific investmentsuggests the need for the technology warning community to engage the nongovernmental scientific and
technical community in order to bolster its understanding and anticipation of technology trends.Finding 1: There is a multitude of evolving technologies for which advances are being driven by the
nongovernmental, global, scientific and technical communities.While globalization has been underway for several decades, its intensity and pervasiveness havegreatly increased in magnitude and pace; the technology playing field is accordingly undergoing massivechange. Technology research and development (R&D), historically dominated by the United States, isincreasingly distributed. Small, research-seeded start-up companies are of special importance in the
generation of high-technology ideas and products. What this means is that the U.S. defense establish-ment is no longer in the driverÕs seat with regard to militarily relevant technological innovation.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESRecommendation 1: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, together
with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning, shouldestablish an ongoing collaborative relationship with the scientific and technical communities in theindustrial and academic sectors.The National Academies, through the National Research Council, provide both a window into thesecommunities and an appropriate institutional mechanism that could assist in this endeavor. This ad hoc
committee, which will be disbanded with the publication of the present report, believes that a standingcommittee could more effectively support the needs of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). Theshort-term effort of this committee was hampered by the lack of time to build a shared understanding of
the Technology Warning DivisionÕs operating environment and to establish the collaborations necessaryto adequately leverage the additional expertise readily accessible via the National Academies throughthe National Research Council. The establishment of a standing committee would help overcome these
impediments and provide the foundation for an ongoing collaborative relationship.INDICATORS RELATING TO GLOBALIZATION AND COMMERCIALIZATIONThe forces of globalization and commercialization that are altering the world in terms of thepotential for Òtechnology surpriseÓ require new approaches to the identification of indicators for
providing technology warning. Throughout this report the committee focused largely on observablesderived from open sources, but other potentially valuable sources exist (e.g., confidential discussionswith industrial and academic researchers that may yield valuable insights for the technology warning
community while protecting proprietary information). Although a diverse array of potential sources isidentified in the preceding chapters, the individual sources were not vetted and the committee did notconduct a disciplined evaluation of the completeness of the array, nor did it make any effort to deconflict
its sources with those already in use by the community.Finding 2: New intelligence indicators are likely to be needed to provide technology warning for
the diverse spectrum of evolving technologies that are being driven by commercial forces in theglobal marketplace.Traditionally, the United States has assumed that it leads the world in science and technology. Thisperspective leads the technology warning community to look for indications that external actors aretrying to Òcatch up,Ó or to exploit known technologies in new ways. Projected future trends suggest that
it should no longer be automatically assumed that the United States will lead in all relevant technologies.This revised perspective imposes a new burden on the technology warning community, generating theneed for it to search in different places and in different ways to be able to warn against technological
surprise.Recommendation 2: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, in collabo-
ration with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning,should establish, maintain, and systematically analyze a comprehensive array of indicators pertainingto globalization and commercialization of science and technology to complement and focus intelli-
gence collection and analysis.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS85The committee believes that the observables identified in this report provide a useful baseline.However, it acknowledges that the first step should be to decompose the broad trends into potentialobservables more systematically and then to evaluate the utility and applicability of techniques alreadyin use in Open Source Intelligence analysis. For example, while patterns and trends in R&D investments
provide useful indicators of the distributed research talent, the globalization of manufacturing facilitiesmay indicate an equally important trend in distributing systems integration expertise. The committeeacknowledges that not all important technological advances will occur in this arena, so long-standing
approaches to detecting covert advances will continue to be important. However, the committee believesthat trends in the global technology marketplace warrant focused strategies.NEED FOR DISCIPLINED METHODOLOGYAs previously observed, the technology warning landscape is both diverse and complexÑparticu-larly given the need to consider not only discrete technologies but also innovative integration andapplication to multidisciplinary system capabilities. The committee believes that a systematic approachis needed to avoid the trap of simply generating more lists of technologies that will have military
significance in the coming years. The committee recognizes, however, that too much rigor couldeffectively create a new set of blinders that could lead to future Òfailures of imagination.ÓFinding 3: The landscape of potentially important evolving technologies is both vast and diverse. A
disciplined approach is thus needed to facilitate optimal allocation of the limited resources availableto the technology warning community.The committee reviewed a diverse array of lists of technologiesÑeach prioritized from a differentperspective. Some lists focus on potential ÒdisruptiveÓ technologies that could have catastrophic conse-
quences in the hands of adversaries, while others focus on technologies with significant commercialpotential that may erode the U.S. technological edge. The committee believes that the technologywarning community would benefit from a disciplined approach to the identification and prioritization of
the evolving technologies that may threaten U.S. military preeminence.Recommendation 3: The Defense Intelligence Agency Technology Warning Division, in collabo-
ration with the related intelligence community components that focus on technology warning,should adopt a capabilities-based framework within which to identify and assess potential technology-
based threats.The committee believes that a capabilities-based methodology enables a systematic approach totechnology warning while reducing the tendency to focus only on advances in discrete technologies. The
methodology presented as a prototype in this report was derived from Joint Vision 2020. It is offered asa starting point; the committee acknowledges that additional refinement is needed.CONCLUSIONThe technology warning community, which plays a vital role in advising military leadership, isfacing unprecedented challenges. BLUE force strategies are increasingly dependent upon technology-Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESenabled capabilities assembled from building-block technologies in which U.S. technological leader-ship is no longer assured. Foreign governments and nonstate actors are gaining access to the samebuilding-block technologiesÑoften via the commercial marketplace. The committee applauds the De-fense Intelligence AgencyÕs recognition that unprecedented challenges require new collaborations andnew approaches, and commends the efforts already underway.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A8989Appendix ABiographical Sketches of Committee Members
Ruth A. David, Chair, is the president and chief executive officer of ANSER, an independent, not-for-
profit, public-service research institution. In November 1999, Dr. David initiated ANSERÕs Homeland
Defense Strategic Thrust to address the growing national concern of multidimensional, asymmetricthreats from rogue nations, substate terrorist groups, and domestic terrorists. In May 2001, the ANSERInstitute of Homeland Security was established to enhance public awareness and education and contribute
to the dialog on a national, state, and local level. From September 1995 to September 1998, Dr. Davidwas deputy director for science and technology at the Central Intelligence Agency. As technical advisorto the director of central intelligence, she was responsible for research, development, and deployment of
technologies in support of all phases of the intelligence process. She represented the CIA on numerousnational committees and advisory bodies, including the National Science and Technology Council andthe Committee on National Security. Previously, Dr. David served in several leadership positions at the
Sandia National Laboratories, where she began her professional career in 1975. Most recently, she wasdirector of advanced information technologies. From 1991 to 1994, Dr. David was director of thedevelopment testing center that developed and operated a broad spectrum of full-scale engineering test
facilities. Dr. David is a member of the Department of Homeland Security Advisory Council, theNational Academy of Engineering (NAE), and the Corporation for the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory,Inc. She is vice chair of the HSAC Senior Advisory Committee of Academia and Policy Research and
serves on the National Security Agency Advisory Board, the National Academy of Engineering Com-mittee on Engineering Education, the American Association for the Advancement of Science Committeeon Scientific Freedom and Responsibility, the Jet Propulsion LaboratoryÕs Technical DivisionÕs Advisory
Board, and the External Advisory Committee for Purdue UniversityÕs Homeland Security Institute.Dr.David is a former adjunct professor at the University of New Mexico and has technical experience
in digital and microprocessor-based system design, digital signal analysis, adaptive signal analysis, and
system integration. Dr. David received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Wichita StateUniversity (1975), an M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University (1976), and aPh.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford University (1981).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESSteven R.J. Brueck is the director of the Center for High Technology Materials (CHTM) and is a
professor of electrical and computer engineering and a professor of physics and astronomy at theUniversity of New Mexico. As CHTM director, he manages research and education at the boundaries oftwo disciplines. The first, optoelectronics, unites optics and electronics and is found in CHTMÕs emphasis
on semiconductor laser sources, optical modulators, detectors, and optical fibers. The second, micro-electronics, applies semiconductor technology to the fabrication of electronic and optoelectronic devicesfor information and control applications. Examples of these unifying themes at work are Si-based
optoelectronics and optoelectronics for Si manufacturing sensors. He is also a former research staffmember of MIT Lincoln Laboratory. He is a member of the American Association for the Advancementof Science, the American Physical Society, and the Materials Research Society, a fellow of the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and a fellow of the Optical Society of America.Stephen W. Drew holds consultancies with a variety of pharmaceutical and biotechnology organiza-
tions. Until 2000, he worked with Merck & Company, Inc., in a series of increasingly responsiblepositions culminating with distinguished senior scientist. He held vice presidential positions of respon-sibility in the Merck Manufacturing Division (MMD) as the vice president of Vaccine Science and
Technology, vice president of Vaccine Operations, and vice president of Technical Operations andEngineering. Prior to joining MMD in 1987, he was the senior director of Biochemical Engineering inthe Merck Research Laboratories (MRL), a department that he started in 1981. Dr. Drew received his
Ph.D. in biochemical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Drew is amember of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE). He has served in several capacities within theNAE and assisted numerous National Research Council committees. He was chair of the advisory
committee to the Engineering Directorate of the National Science Foundation and has launched twocompanies that service the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.Alan H. Epstein received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in aeronautics and astronautics. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering(NAE) and is currently the R.C. Maclaurin Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the director of
the Gas Turbine Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His responsibilities includeteaching and research in aerospace propulsion, fluid mechanics, power production, and microelectro-mechanical systems (MEMS). He has been an active consultant to industry and government for more
than 25 yearsÑhis activities have included gas turbine design and operation, MEMS, system testing andadvanced instrumentation, military infrared systems, and vehicle observable technology. Dr. Epstein isa fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a member of the NRC Army
Science Board and of the DARPA Defense Science Research Council.Robert A. Fuhrman is retired vice chairman of the board, president, and chief operating officer of
Lockheed Corporation, and past chair of the Air Force Science and Technology Board. He has had adistinguished career, having served as LockheedÕs president and chief operating officer and grouppresident for missiles and space, as well as in numerous other positions. Mr. Fuhrman received his B.S.
degree in engineering from the University of Michigan and his M.S. in fluid mechanics and dynamicsfrom the University of Maryland. Mr. Fuhrman serves on numerous boards and is a member of manyprofessional societies. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, an AIAA honorary
fellow, and a former member of the Defense Science Board.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A91Sharon C. Glotzer is an associate professor of chemical engineering, materials science and engineer-
ing, physics, and macromolecular science and engineering at the University of Michigan. She workedpreviously at NIST, where she was co-founder and director of the Center for Theoretical and Computa-tional Materials Science. She is a recipient of a Presidential Early Career Award and the APS Maria
Goeppert-Mayer Award, a Department of Commerce Bronze Medal Award, and an NRC postdoctoralfellowship, and was a Sigma Xi Distinguished Lecturer from 2000 to 2003. She is an active member ofthe APS, AIChe, MRS, ACS, and AAAS; Dr. Glotzer is first vice chair for the Nanoscale Science and
Engineering Forum of the AIChE and vice chair of the Forum on Industrial and Applied Physics of theAPS. Dr. Glotzer has presented well over 100 invited presentations and keynote talks at conferences andnational professional society meetings and has served as a reviewer of NRC reports. She received her
B.S. degree in physics from the University of California, Los Angeles, and her Ph.D. in physics fromBoston University.Christopher C. Green is currently executive director of emergent technologies research at Detroit
Medical Center, Wayne State School of Medicine. He is also a fellow in neuroimaging and an assistantprofessor in the Department of Radiology and the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuro-
sciences. He is chair of the Joint Independent Science Panel Office/Undersecretary of OperationsResearch, Department of the Army, and a member of the Medical Subcommittee, Local EmergencyPlanning Committee, State of Michigan Regional Homeland Defense. He serves on many biotechnology
and medical boards of directors. Immediately prior to his current position, he was executive director forboth Global Emerging Technology Policy (in GMÕs Public Policy Center) and also the chief technologyofficer and executive director of regional science and technology (for GM Asia Pacific Operations). He
managed formulation of corporate policy directives in newly emergent issues of health and safety andindustrial medicine, and numerous occupational medical research programs. His distinguished careerwith the CIA extended from 1969 to 1985 as a senior division analyst with the Office of Scientific and
Weapons Intelligence. In this role he obtained multidisciplinary research and management experience inmedicine, comparative biology, bioengineering, animal and human physiology, endocrinology, and lifesciences. Special areas of management experience included the direction of research of doctoral-level
and physician scientists in the above areas as well as participation as a senior analyst. He continues as anagency consultant. His medical specialty is forensic medicine and toxicology, and his doctoral researchwork in neurophysiology concerned human biochemical functioning of the brain, with a focus on
functional brain imaging and clinical MRI. Dr. Green was an analyst with the Life Sciences Division,Chief of the Biomedical Sciences Branch/LSD, and deputy division chief. He became a senior divisionanalyst with the newly formed Office of Scientific and Weapons Intelligence in 1978. He received his
bachelorÕs degree from Northwestern University in pre-med, his Ph.D. from the University of ColoradoMedical School in neurophysiology, and his M.D. from the Autonomous City University in El Paso,Texas/Monterey, Mexico, with honors. He also holds the National Intelligence Medal.Diane E. Griffin is professor and chair of the Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunologyand director of the Johns Hopkins Malaria Institute at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health. She earned a biology degree from Augustana College in 1962, followed by M.D. (1968) andPh.D. (1970) degrees from Stanford University. She interned at Stanford University Hospital between1968 and 1970, before beginning her career at Johns Hopkins as a postdoctoral fellow in virology and
infectious disease in 1970. After completing her postdoctoral work, she was named an assistant professorof medicine and neurology. Since then, she has held the positions of associate professor, professor, andAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESnow professor and chair. She served as an investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute from1973 to 1979. Dr. GriffinÕs research interest includes alphaviruses and acute encephalitis. She is alsoworking on the effect of measles virus infection, and immune activation in response to infection, onimmune responses in tissue culture and in infected humans at the University Teaching Hospital in
Lusaka, Zambia. In Zambia, she and her colleagues are examining the effect of HIV infection onmeasles and measles virus immunization. Dr. Griffin is the principal investigator on a variety of grantsfrom the National Institutes of Health, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Dana Foundation.
She is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and the Institute of Medicine, is the author or co-author of a number of scholarly papers and articles, is the past president of the American Society forVirology, and is the current president of the Association of Medical School Microbiology Chairs.J. Jerome Holton is the director of Technical Research, Analyses and Communications with Defense
Group, Inc. In this position he is responsible for DGIÕs branding, strategic planning, and positioning in
the government support sector, including the policy, technology, and operations issues for weapons ofmass destruction (WMD) and their effects on civilian infrastructure, first responders, military forces,and tactical operations. He has been involved in defense and energy programs related to the counter-
proliferation of, counterterrorism/domestic preparedness issues for, and the detection, identification,and decontamination of chemical and biological weapons. He has provided advice and counsel to seniordecision makers in the Office of the Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Counterproliferation
and Chemical/Biological Defense, the Chemical Biological Defense Directorate of the Defense ThreatReduction Agency, and the Chemical Biological National Security Program of the Department ofHomeland Security. Dr. Holton has previously served with the National Academies as a member of the
Committee on Alternatives to Anti-Personnel Landmines and as a reviewer for the NRC report ArmyScience and Technology for Homeland Security. He earned his Ph.D. in experimental physics fromDuke University.Michael R. Ladisch is the director of the Laboratory of Renewable Resources, Engineering Department,
and Distinguished Professor of Agricultural and Biological Engineering and Biomedical Engineering at
Purdue University. He earned his B.S. degree from Drexel University and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees fromPurdue University, all in chemical engineering. His areas of expertise are bio-separations, bio-nanotechnology
bioprocess engineering, and bio-energy. His research has resulted in systematic approaches and correla-
tions for scaling up chromatographic purification techniques from the laboratory to process-scalemanufacturing systems. He is currently investigating the scale-down of bio-separations and the rapidprototyping of microfluidic biochips for the rapid detection of pathogenic microorganisms. He is familiar
with biotechnologies and has a broad background in bioscience and bioengineering. His work hasresulted in 150 publications, a textbook on bioseparations, 14 patents (issued and applied for) and over100 presented papers at national professional society meetings, and he has been the recipient of numerous
research and teaching awards. He was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1999 fordeveloping and scaling up new approaches and materials for process chromatography, adsorptivebioseparations, and biocatalysis. He has served as a member of U.S. delegations and advisory panels to
Russia, Thailand, China, and Japan to review the status of biotechnology programs. He has also chairedseveral committees within the National Research Council concerning biotechnology.Darrell D.E. Long is professor of Computer Science at the University of California, Santa Cruz and
director of the Storage Systems Research Center in the Jack Baskin School of Engineering. He has broad
research interests in the area of computing systems, including operating systems, distributed systems,Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A93high-performance storage systems, fault tolerance, performance evaluation, and mobile computing. Hereceived his B.S. degree in computer science from San Diego State University in 1984 and his M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer science and engineering from the University of California, San Diego in
1986 and 1988, respectively. He is a member of the Association for Computing Machinery and of the

Usenix Association, where he serves as the chair of the Scholars Committee, and he is a senior member
of the IEEE Computer Society, for which he has served as chair of the Technical Committee on
Operating Systems, and now serves on the Executive Committee of the Technical Committee on Oper-
ating Systems. He also serves on the National Security Panel and Intelligence Subpanel for Los Alamosand Livermore National Laboratories.Frederick R. Lopez has a 33-year career as an engineer with McDonnell-Douglas Aircraft Companyand Raytheon Company. He is also a retired brigadier general, United States Marine Corps Reserves.Currently, he is the director of engineering for Raytheon Electronic Warfare Systems in Goleta,
California. General Lopez is responsible for the management of all engineering personnel in support ofoperational and support programs in electronic warfare systems and for the implementation of engineer-ing processes and process improvement activities within the engineering discipline. Highlights in his
Marine Corps career include a tour of duty in Vietnam and service as an Infantry Officer with MasterParachutist Qualification, secondary Military Occupational Specialty of Forward Air Controller (FAC).He has held billets as company XO, company commander, battalion XO, battalion CO, FAC, and naval
gunfire team leader, brigade platoon leader, ANGLICO operations officer, regimental operations of-ficer, assistant division commander, commanding general, 4th Marine Division. He served 3years on
active duty and 27 years in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve. General Lopez received a B.S. degree in
mathematics from California State Polytechnic College and his M.S. in computer science from WestCoast University, Orange, California.Richard M. Osgood, Jr., joined Columbia University in 1981 and became Higgins Professor of
Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics in 1988. From 2000 to 2004, he served as associate labora-tory director at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Dr. Osgood was, with Professor Yang, a co-founder of
the Columbia Microelectronics Sciences Laboratories (MSL) and has served as director or co-director ofMSL and the Columbia Radiation Laboratory (CRL). He is a member of the ACS and the MRS and afellow of the IEEE and OSA. He was co-editor of Applied Physics (1983-1995) and associate editor of
the IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics (1981-1988). Dr. Osgood serves as a consultant to numerousresearch institutions and government agencies, including MIT Lincoln Laboratory. He was also on theDARPA Defense Sciences Research Council (Materials Research Council) and the Los Alamos National

Laboratory Visiting Advisory Board (Chemical Sciences and Technology Division). Dr. Osgood hasserved as councilor of the Materials Research Society and as a member of the DOE Basic EnergySciences Advisory Committee. In 1991, Dr. Osgood received the R.W. Wood Award from the Optical
Society of America and was invited to deliver the OIDTA lecture at the Japanese Optical Association.His research interests include integrated optical devices and design, surface physics, and laser sources.He received his B.S. degree from the U.S. Military Academy, his M.S. in physics from Ohio State
University, and his Ph.D. in physics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Stewart D. Personick is a member of the Board of Directors of Optical Communications Products, Inc.,
a member of the U.S. Federal Communications CommissionÕs Technological Advisory Council, and aconsultant to industry in the field of telecommunications and networking. From September 1998 toAugust 2003, he was the E. Warren Colehower Chair and Professor of Telecommunications at DrexelAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESUniversity and the director of DrexelÕs Center for Telecommunications and Information Networking.From 1970 to 1985 he worked as an individual contributor, and as a research manager (Bell Laboratories,TRW, Bellcore), in the field of optical communications technology and applications. Since 1985 he hasfocused his research and management activities on emerging and next-generation telecommunications
systems, technologies, and applications. He was a vice president, in charge of a wide variety of researchand systems engineering efforts, at Bellcore (now Telcordia Technologies) from September 1985 to July1998. He also served as the senior management link from Bellcore and its telecommunications industry
clients to the emerging Internet community. He served as a member, and as chair, of the U.S. FederalNetworking Council Advisory Committee during the critical transition of the NSFnet to the current setof commercial and federally sponsored networks. He holds a B.E.E. (1967) from the City College of
New York/CUNY, and an S.M. (1968) and an Sc.D. (1970) from the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology. He is a fellow of the IEEE (1983), a fellow of the Optical Society of America (1988), and amember of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering (1992). He received the IEEE/OSA John Tyndall
Award in 2000 in recognition of his pioneering contributions to optical fiber communications tech-nologies, systems, and applications.Alton D. Romig, Jr., is currently vice president, Nonproliferation and Assessments, at Sandia NationalLaboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico. His responsibilities include the leadership and managementof the development and engineering activities that provide systems, science, technology, and expertise
in support of national objectives to reduce the threat to the United States from proliferation and use ofweapons of mass destruction. Program areas include remote sensing, proliferation assessment, intelli-gence activities, international security, physical security, and nuclear/chemical/biological nonprolifera-
tion and counterintelligence. Dr. Romig is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and isactive on a number of National Academy of Engineering/National Research Council committees andboards. He is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and TMS
(The Metals, Minerals and Materials Society). Dr. Romig is also a fellow and former president of ASM,International (formerly, American Society for Metals). He also serves on the boards of Atomic WeaponsEstablishment Management Limited, a Lockheed Martin joint venture company in the United Kingdom,
and Technology Ventures Corporation, a Lockheed Martin subsidiary dedicated to technology commercial-ization. 
For his pioneering work in analytical electron microscopy and solid-state diffusion, Dr.Romig
has received several awards, including the Burton Medal (1988), awarded by the Electron Microscopy
Society of America to an Outstanding Young Scientist; the K.F.J. Heinrich Award (1991), given by theMicrobeam Analysis Society to an Outstanding Young Scientist; the ASM Silver Medal for OutstandingMaterials Research (1992); and the Acta Metallurgica International Lectureship (1993-1994). Dr. Romig
has also been named the 2003 ASM-TMS Distinguished Lecturer in Materials and Society. He receivedhis B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in materials science and engineering from Lehigh University in 1975,1977, and 1979, respectively. In 1979, he joined Sandia National Laboratories as a member of the
technical staff, Physical Metallurgy Division. After a variety of management assignments, he wasnamed director, Materials and Process Sciences, in 1992. From 1995 to 1999, he was director ofMicrosystems Science, Technology, and Components. In 1999, he was named chief technology officer
and vice president for Science, Technology, and Partnerships. In that role, he was chief scientific officerfor the Nuclear Weapons program, accountable for SandiaÕs interactions with industry and the Labora-toriesÕ Campus Executive program. In addition, he was responsible for the Laboratory Directed Research
and Development program. He served in this capacity until attaining his present position in 2003.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A95S. Shankar Sastry was chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the
University of California, Berkeley from 2001 to 2004. The previous year, he served as director of theInformation Technology Office at DARPA. From 1996 to 1999, he was the director of the ElectronicsResearch Laboratory at Berkeley, an organized research unit on the Berkeley campus conducting
research in computer sciences and all aspects of electrical engineering. He is currently the NEC Distin-guished Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences and a professor of bioengineering.Dr. Sastry received his Ph.D. degree in 1981 from the University of California, Berkeley. He was on the
faculty of MIT as an assistant professor from 1980 to 1982 and at Harvard University as a chairedGordon McKay professor in 1994. He has held visiting appointments at the Australian National University,Canberra, the University of Rome, Scuola Normale, and the University of Pisa, as well as at the CNRS
laboratory LAAS in Toulouse (poste rouge), as professor invite at Institut National Polytechnique deGrenoble (CNRS laboratory VERIMAG), and as a Vinton Hayes visiting fellow at the Center forIntelligent Control Systems at MIT. His areas of research are embedded and autonomous software,
computer vision, computation in novel substrates such as DNA, nonlinear and adaptive control, robotictelesurgery, control of hybrid systems, embedded systems, sensor networks, and biological motor con-trol. Dr. Sastry has served as associate editor for numerous publications, including IEEE Transactionson Automatic Control, IEEE Control Magazine; IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems; the Journalof Mathematical Systems, Estimation and Control; IMA Journal of Control and Information; the Inter-national Journal of Adaptive Control and Signal Processing; and the Journal of Biomimetic Systemsand Materials. He has coauthored over 300 technical papers and books. Dr. Sastry was elected to theNational Academy of Engineering in 2001 and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2004. Healso received the President of India Gold Medal in 1977, the IBM Faculty Development Award for
1983Ð1985, the NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award in 1985, the Eckman Award of theAmerican Automatic Control Council in 1990, an M.A. (honoris causa) from Harvard University in1994, election as a fellow of the IEEE in 1994, the distinguished Alumnus Award of the Indian Institute
of Technology in 1999, and the David Marr Prize for the best paper at the International Conference inComputer Vision in 1999.James B. Smith is vice president of Precision Engagement at Raytheon. Precision Engagement is a
Raytheon Company strategic business area (SBA) that draws on the capabilities of the entire company.Precision engagement is the ability to locate, discern, and track objectives or targets; to employ the best
systems available to achieve the desired effects; to assess results; and to reengage with decisive speedand overwhelming operational tempo as required. Precision engagement is effects-based engagement,relevant to all types of operations. Prior to his current position, he served as director of Navy C2
programs, Lockheed Martin Mission Systems. He retired from the U.S. Air Force as a brigadier generaland served as commander, Joint War Fighting Center, U.S. Joint Forces Command, Joint TrainingAnalysis and Simulation Center. He was responsible for managing the joint force exercise and training
development program and the modeling, simulation, and deploying of solutions that demonstrated ahigh probability of operational success. A carrier fighter pilot, General Smith logged nearly 4000 flighthours in the F-15 and T-38 and flew combat missions during the Gulf War. He is a graduate of the U.S.
Air Force Academy with a bachelorÕs degree in military history; he holds a masterÕs degree in historyfrom Indiana University.Camillo J. Taylor is currently an associate professor in the Computer and Information Science Depart-
ment of the University of Pennsylvania. His research interests include reconstructing and rerenderingthree-dimensional images from two-dimensional images and vision-guided robotic systems. He hasAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESrefereed many journal publications with the most recent being ÒA Vision-Based Formation ControlFramework.Ó His most recent of the many refereed conference proceedings is ÒCamera TrajectoryEstimation using Inertial Sensor Measurements and Structure from Motion Results.Ó Dr. Taylor receivedhis A.B. degree in electrical computer and systems engineering from Harvard College, his M.S. degree
in computer engineering from Yale University, and his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from YaleUniversity. He is a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and the Associationfor Computing Machinery and has received numerous awards throughout his career.Dianne S. Wiley is a Boeing Technical Fellow for Space Exploration Systems, NASA Systems, Washing-
ton, D.C. She recently left the Missile Defense National Team, where she was responsible for interna-tional coordination of Defense of Deployed Forces, Friends, and Allies. In addition to managing pro-posal strategy and execution for the enterprise, she also serves as the enterprise liaison to the BoeingTechnical Fellowship to facilitate technology maturation and technology transition to the space explora-
tion systems business area. Previously, Dr. Wiley was assigned to the Missile Defense National Team,responsible for international missile defense activities for defense of friends and allies and defense ofU.S. deployed forces. In her prior assignment with the Boeing Phantom Works, she was the program
manager for airframe technology on the NASA Space Launch Initiative Program, overseeing the devel-opment and demonstration of advanced structure and materials technology for next-generation reusablelaunch vehicles. Previously, she was with Northrop Grumman for 20 years where she was manager of
Airframe Technology. In that position, Dr. Wiley was responsible for research and development andtechnology transition in structural design and analysis, materials and processes, and manufacturingtechnology. During this time, she was responsible for transitioning airframe core technologies into three
new business areas (space, biomedicine, and surface ships) to offset declines in traditional business.Before that, she served as a senior technical specialist on the B-2 program. Dr. Wiley was responsiblefor developing and implementing innovative structural solutions to ensure the structural integrity of the
B-2 aircraft. Dr. WileyÕs 25 years of technical experience have involved durability and damage toler-ance, advanced composites (organic and ceramic), high-temperature structures, smart structures, low-observable structures, concurrent engineering, and rapid prototyping. Dr. Wiley holds a Ph.D. in applied
mechanics from UCLA School of Engineering and Applied Science. She attended Defense SystemsManagement College (1996). She is a graduate of the Center for Creative Leadership (1995), LeadershipCalifornia Class of 1998, and the Boeing Leadership Center (2002).Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B9797Appendix BPresentations to the CommitteeMEETING 1, WASHINGTON, D.C., AUGUST 3Ð4, 2004Technology Warning Division DWO-4Steve ThompsonDefense Intelligence AgencyContract VectorsDeems Emmer
Defense Intelligence AgencyALO/UAV Futures Technologies ExperimentEver MoralesDefense Intelligence AgencyIntegration of Technologies into WeaponsGlen SimpersDefense Intelligence AgencyBridging the Science and Technology and Intelligence Communities: Assessing the NationalSecurity Significance of International Science and Technology
Gerald EpsteinThe Center for Strategic and International StudiesAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESMEETING 2, WASHINGTON, D.C., OCTOBER 27Ð28, 2004What Appears to Be ÒHappeningÓ?Dennis Bushnell
NASA Langley Research CenterBiodefense Medical ProductsErik HenchalU.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious DiseasesNTAs and Chemical ThreatsThomas CaoU.S. Army Dugway Proving GroundHow Do I Know I Am SickRobert Armstrong
National Defense UniversityMEETING 3, WASHINGTON, D.C., JANUARY 12Ð13, 2005Indicators and WarningsJohn Gannon
Select Committee on Homeland SecurityThoughts on Information Assurance Threats in a Net-Centric EnvironmentNeal SmithNational Security AgencyNIC Civil Science and Technology PortfolioRich EngleNational Intelligence CouncilScience and Technology IntelligenceCharles Clark
Weapon and Space Systems Intelligence CommitteeAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C9999Appendix CBackground Material for Chapter 1This appendix provides definitions of the 26 key technologies listed in Box 1-1 in Chapter 1 of thisreport. The definitions, arranged here in alphabetical order, are quoted from a 2001 study sponsored by
the Central Intelligence Agency (OTI IA, 2001). In that study, a panel of experts identified three tiers oftechnologies (see Box 1-1 in Chapter 1) likely to impact national security by the 2015 time frame.Advanced Materials: Development of materials, generated at the micro level, that are the building
blocks for stronger, more efficient physical structures of all sizes. These materials are not inherently
mechanical systems (such as MEMS) but are building blocks that can be combined to produce physical
systems of greatly increased physical strength or other highly desirable attributes (e.g., electrical
conductivity).Alternative Energy: Development of energy from a source that can be replenished or that replenishesitself, such as solar and wind energy, and is generally environmentally less harmful than ÔtraditionalÕ
energy sources. This excludes fuel cells and nuclear power. Electrical energyÑonce generatedÑmay be
used in a variety of applications including transportation, manufacturing, or energy weapons applications.Brain-Machine Interfaces: Development of computers with wide-ranging interfaces that will ultimatelyinclude pointing, gesturing, and other forms of communication, allowing substantive human-computer
interactions without the need for physical contact. This will require complex integration of speech
recognition, natural-language processing, speech analysis, knowledge-based reasoning ability, and speech
generation.Cloned or Tailored Organisms: Organisms that are genetically modified to produce repeatable charac-teristics. These may be animals or plants used as source material for medical purposes or food sources.
Productivity associated with plant and livestock production is significantly increased in these products.Directed Energy (Microwave): Development of high-power directed energy systems (excluding lasers)
that allow for the coherent (no diffusion) transmission of energy (at the ÒmegawattÓ level) in the radioAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESfrequency (RF) spectrum. These may be used as weapons or as alternate (nonwire-based) methods ofenergy transmission, including transmission of energy to and from space.Distributed Energy: Development of small-scale, efficient, stationary, energy-generation technologiesthat use a variety of fuels and technologies (natural gas, solar energy, and fuel cells). These generation
systems are distributed in homes, businesses, and workplaces such that existing large conventional
power generation systems are secondary. The resulting energy grid has much higher levels of reliability
and efficiencies because of fewer transmission losses.Distributed-Grid-Based Processing Systems: A type of computing in which different components andobjects comprising an application can be located on different computers connected to a network. It
requires a set of standards that specify how objects communicate with each other. Distributed computa-
tional systems, in combination with multiagent software, can achieve extremely high processing levels.Efficient Software Development: Development of significant enhancements in algorithm designs and
development, testing, and production of software such that the human labor and time required for
developing complex code are greatly reduced and a much more efficient use is made of computer
processing capability.Fuel Cells: Development of efficient, safe, cost-effective hydrogen, natural gas, or other, not yet identi-
fied, fuel cells. These devices would produce electricity through chemical processes. Fuel cells are in
limited use today in a variety of applications, such as automobiles.Gene Therapy: The treatment of disease by either replacing damaged or abnormal genes with normal
ones or providing new genetic instructions to help fight diseases such as cancer.High-Power Lasers: Development of high-power directed energy lasers that allow for the coherent (no
diffusion) transmission of energy (at the ÒmegawattÓ level) in the 
ÒlaserÓ portions (Infrared [IR], near
IR, visual) of the RF spectrum. These may be used as weapons or as alternate (nonwire-based) methods
of energy transmission, including transmission of energy to and from space.Hypersonic/Supersonic Aircraft: Development of propulsion, fuels, and materials to allow for sustained
routine military hypersonic and/or commercial supersonic flight. This would allow transcontinental
movement of personnel, weapons, and equipment in far less time.Image Understanding: This consists of automatic target recognition and machine vision. It involves
achieving rapid and accurate pattern recognition of shapes using machine-processed sensor data, then
using the recognized pattern to identify and track objects. Such systems provide high reliability for
machine (weapon) recognition of shapes and objects and enable the military to identify, assess, and track
targets.Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS): MEMS technology is the integration of mechanical
elements, sensors, actuators, and electronics on a silicon substrate. Current applications include ink jet
printer heads, sensitive pressure and mass sensors, accelerometers for airbag deployment, and MEMS-
based moving mirrors as switches to fiber-optic telecommunications networks. Future devices
could be 
based on polymers, with their raw materials far less expensive and less equipment intensive formanufacturing than current materials. The most promising area for application of polymer MEMS is in
biomedicine.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C101Molecular Electronics (or ÒmoletronicsÓ): Electronic transport through individual molecules. Specu-
lative applications include low-power logic in circuits, simplified high-speed memory, and cellular
automata and neuromolecular networks in computers or other information technology devices.Multilingual Voice Recognition: Development of computer systems that can recognize spoken words
in various languages. Such systems can be distributed so that language no longer becomes a barrier in
human interactions.Nanotechnology: The ability to measure, manipulate, and organize matter on a nanoscale
Ñ1 billionthto 100 billionths of a meter. This will lead to dramatic changes in the way materials, devices, and
systems are understood and create major developments in areas such as computer efficiency, human
organ restoration, and ÒdesignerÓ materials.
New-Generation Nuclear Power Plants: Development of safe, environmentally improved, and cost-
competitive electrical power generation from nuclear processes (fission and possibly fusion).Next-Generation Space Shuttle System: Development of propulsion, fuels, and materials for routine
sustained military and/or commercial travel into space. This may be a fully reusable two-stage-to-orbit
vehicle with Concorde-like flight operations.Optical Communications: Development and use of optical signal generation, amplification, switching,
and transmission of communications data. A complete Òoptical pipeÓ enhances the efficiency (speed andvolume) of communications streams.Performance-Enhancing Drugs: Development of mental and physical performance-enhancing drugs
such that human physical or cognitive ability is increased in a clearly measurable way (more than
10percent) across the entire age spectrum.
Regenerative Medicine (including tissue engineering): Development of procedures to grow human and
animal organs, skin, and cartilage for health-care purposes and for the production of food, clothing, and
many other products. Includes development and manipulation of laboratory-grown molecules, cells,
tissues, or organs to replace or support the function of defective or injured body parts.Sensor Webs: Development of complex arrays and networks of sensors that could be used both in space
for strategic needs and at the lowest echelons for urban warfare. One example would be the deployment
of a large constellation of synthetic aperture radar imaging satellites to provide nearly real-time world-
wide coverage. All information from sensors is relayed to a central uplink, where information is uploaded

into a computer and analyzed.ÒSmartÓ Materials (organic and inorganic): Development of materials that have internal sensing and
adjustment mechanisms such that they can repair themselves if damaged or if structural integrity is
threatened or reduced. Organic materials for control of biological systems (sewage treatment and photo-
synthesis) have self-contained feedback mechanisms to respond to changes in the environment so the
overall process is sustained or improved.Ubiquitous Water Generation: Development of economical, clean, safe, potable water. This water has
been through the flocculation, filtration, disinfection (via chlorine or ozone), and fluoridation processes.
The technology includes developments in desalinization; such techniques may or may not depend on
development of new energy sources.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESWireless Communications: A control system or communications system in which electromagnetic or
acoustic waves transmit a flow of data or a signal through air or space instead of through wire or cable.
In most cases, RF or IR signals are used. Typical wireless equipment used today are wireless local area
networks, global positioning systems, cellular telephones, personal pagers, cordless computer accessories
like IR mice and keyboards, home entertainment remote controls, garage door openers, and two-way
walkie-talkies. Portions of systems with a large geographic influence may continue to use fiber and
cable.REFERENCEOTI IA (Office of Transnational Issues, Intelligence Analysis). 2001. Global Technology Scenarios Through 2015: AmericaÕsGame to Lose. OTI IA 2001-083. CIA Analytic Report. November.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D103103Appendix DBackground Material for Chapter 3COMMUNICATIONSModern communications networks are composed of many links: satellite communication channelsprovide high-bandwidth pathways within and between continents, cable and fiber channels providesecure high-bandwidth channels over long distances, and radio links of various kinds serve to connect
personnel and equipment over short, medium, and long ranges. Each type of link has its own advantagesand disadvantages and is vulnerable to different forms of exploitation and attack. A variety of reportspublished by the National Research Council (NRC) and others discuss these and related topics (NRC,
1991, 1996a,b, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2002).Communications networks using the Internet Protocol (IP) stack form the basis of network-centricwarfare. While IP networks can operate using a heterogeneous set of techniques for moving the data, the
protocols are common to all technologies and present a common set of vulnerabilities that might beexploited by an adversary. Attacks on the protocols themselves, or attacks on the environment based onassumptions made by the protocols, leave them vulnerable to disruption. Attacks on the protocols are
well known and have been described in the literature on networking, as have attacks based on the waythe protocols operate (e.g., denial-of-service attacks).The ability to secure communication channels with encryption is clearly a crucial capability. Withoutthis protection RED forces would be able to intercept or exploit information relayed between variousdivisions of the armed forces, much as the Allied forces were able to intercept Axis radio transmissionsduring World War II. It is already the case that certain types of encryption technology are subject to
stringent export controls under existing laws. However, much of the basic knowledge about crypto-graphic schemes is commonly available in the public domain. Cryptographic research has been describedin the open literature along with the revolution in computing technology that has enabled it.The newest encryption standard, Rijndael, or the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES; FIPS-197)replaces the Data Encryption Standard (DES) that is now regarded as vulnerable (NIST, 2000). It isimportant to note that the government did not develop the data encryption algorithm that will be used for
most data. The technical skills required to implement secure communication schemes are taught inAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESundergraduate computer science courses and so are available in many parts of the world. This impliesthat opposing forces could readily encrypt their own transmissions if they chose to do so. Such encryp-tion can also be expected to be very strong, and difficult or impossible to break using known methods.Programs such as Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) and Gnu Privacy Guard (GnuPG), which can be obtained
over the Internet by anyone, provide essentially unbreakable security if used properly.COMPUTATIONComputational systems are used to process the data gathered by sensor systems and human agentsand to produce information that can be used by decision makers in command centers and on the field. As
the armed forces become increasingly networked and more data become available online, BLUE forceswill rely increasingly on computational systems to sift through the available information to providesituational awareness and to identify patterns. Computational systems are also used to automate difficult
or tedious decision processes. Logistic operations, for example, can be optimized through the use ofautomated planning and scheduling systems.The economies of scale and competitive pressures in the commercial computer sector have produceda situation where processing power has become a commodity. Powerful 32- and 64-bit microprocessorsare produced at low cost both domestically and internationally. One result of this trend is that it hasbecome much simpler for other nations to acquire state-of-the-art computational capabilities. Consider
the fact that the majority of the supercomputers in the Top 500 listing are composed of collections ofstandard microprocessors lashed together with high-performance networks.It will always be the case that the most demanding computational applications such as imageinterpretation, automated language translation, data mining, and so on will fuel the drive for everincreasing processing power. However, the skills and components required to construct powerfulcomputational clusters are now widely available internationally.It is not only access to high-performance computing that is a concern. Increasingly, low-powerelectronics is an area of active research and development that will be especially important in the area ofsensor networks. To provide increased intelligence at the sensor and to reduce the demands on the
network, a significant amount of processing will have to occur at the sensor; such processing power isenabled by low-power electronics.As the price of computing hardware has dropped, the relative importance of software has increased.At this point, some of the most significant technical challenges in implementing the vision of the FutureCombat Systems program center on the issue of developing reliable software systems that can coordi-nate distributed networks of sensors, actuators, and computers into a seamless whole. This task is
complicated by the fact that the systems are expected to work in a dynamic environment in whichelements may be added or removed unexpectedly and communications are not assured. In this regard,research and development being carried out in distributed systems, grid computing, and sensor networks
should be viewed as germane to the military context.The ability to produce and maintain sophisticated software systems relies on the availability ofskilled personnel, programmers, analysts, testers, and others. Here again, it is the case that human
resources are available internationally. China, for example, currently graduates five times more engineersthan does the United States. The Indian city of Bangalore now has more technology jobs than SiliconValley. In the face of current worldwide trends, it is unlikely that BLUE forces will have a significant
advantage in terms of their ability to design, deploy, and operate the computational infrastructurerequired to support information collection and exploitation. The number of trained software engineers isdeclining in the United States but is increasing rapidly in countries in Asia.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D105SENSING AND SENSORSInformation dominance hinges on the ability to collect tactically relevant information in a timelymanner. This information can be derived from a variety of sources. Standoff sensors mounted on
satellite platforms or aircraft provide a relatively noninvasive means of assessing the tactical situation inremote locations. A variety of sensors have been successfully deployed on these platforms, ranging frompassive imaging sensors that can collect measurements in a range of spectral bands to active sensors that
can be used to identify camouflaged vehicles or to produce accurate elevation maps of remote sites. As usefulas these standoff sensors are, they can be confounded by bad weather, limited resolution, and camouflage.Radar systems are also an important component of situational awareness and are commonly used toidentify and localize aircraft and to provide a comprehensive understanding of the airspace in the theaterof operations. Synthetic aperture radar (SAR), for example, has proved useful in a variety of applications.
On the battlefield, useful information can be derived from a variety of sensors, including chemicalsensors, cameras, thermal sensors, and acoustic sensors. It is becoming increasingly attractive to considerdeploying collections of small, low-power computational elements equipped with sensors and wirelesscommunication systems that could provide information about a given area of interest. A compelling
example is the recent development of acoustic sensor arrays for the detection and localization of sourcesof gunfire. Also beginning to become available are inexpensive biological sensors. The development ofDNA microarray chips, for example, promises to provide inexpensive, rapid identification of biological
samples.A large, redundant multiplicity of sensors is typically deployed to ensure the information dominanceon which U.S. forces are now heavily reliantÑranging from space-based sensors to those deployed on
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to smart dust. It is often the case that sensor systems will be deployedin conjunction with communication systems that are used to correlate information obtained in variouslocations or to transmit sensor information to decision makers in command centers or on the field.
Relevant information can also be derived from radio systems that can be used to intercept transmissionsor to pinpoint the location of transmission stations, radar installations, or jammers.Remote SensingRemote sensing is watching and listening to the actions of the enemy from a distance. Examplesinclude radar (watching using electromagnetic waves) and sonar (listening using acoustic waves) andcan be further divided into active and passive categories as discussed below. The basic functionality isto stand off from the action and monitor the battlespace or the environment for telltale signs of enemy
activity. Sensors operate in the range from ultraviolet (UV) to radio frequency (RF) as elucidated below.¥Active sensing involves sending out a probe and monitoring a response. The classic example of
active sensing is radarÑa pulse is transmitted and various modalities of scattered or reflectedenergy are monitored. The information return can be very rich, as in the case of spectroscopicprobing of, for example, molecular species in the infrared (IR) or biological species with a UV
excitation. In optimal circumstances, active sensing provides enhanced sensitivity and/or rangecompared with passive techniques. The disadvantage, of course, is that the enemy can also see theassociated emissions and can, in the worst case, direct fire to destroy the sensing capabilityÑand
possibly its operators.¥Passive sensing relies on detection of natural emissions, such as thermal emissions, muzzle
flashes, rocket or airplane exhaust, and so on. Passive sensing is more likely to be covert; thereAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESare weak or no emissions from the detection apparatus in comparison with active sensing. Thedisadvantage is that the signals are weaker and usually exhibit lower specificity and/or discrimi-nation than that achieved with active sensing. It may be possible to opportunistically take betteradvantage of ambient signals already available in the environment, such as those from television
and radio stations that radiate at high power and at known frequencies. With more sophisticatedsignal-processing techniques, it may be possible to use these sources in much the same way thatactive sensing would be used.Sensor SystemsSynthetic Aperture RadarSynthetic aperture radar (SAR) is an electronic imaging technology that was introduced in the early1950s. Its invention is generally credited to Carl Wiley, a U.S. engineer who was then working at theGoodyear facility in Arizona. SAR involves the collection of a set of microwave pulses transmitted andreceived, from reflection off EarthÕs surface, from an aircraft or a spacecraft as it moves along a flightpath. This collection of received radar echoes forms a phase-history data set, which can be processed bya digital computer into an image of the portion of the ground that is illuminated by the craftÕs radarantenna beam. SAR filled at least two gaps that were inherent in the capabilities of conventional optical
imagers: namely, operation at night and operation in all-weather conditions. With the advent of this typeof radar imaging, the various vehicles on a battlefield (at least the stationary ones) could be located byan aircraft carrying a SAR at any time of day or night, and even in the presence of clouds, smoke,
ordust.
The most significant limitation of the first SAR imagers was that of relatively poor spatial resolu-tion. Early SARs achieved only several meters of resolution, which could allow an image analyst to
delineate large features on EarthÕs surface but would not, for example, allow one to distinguish a tankfrom an ambulance on the battlefield. Fifty years later, state-of-the-art SARs typically produce imagerywith spatial resolution at a level of several inches, so that vehicle identification is now feasible. Several
key developments during the past 20 years have led to this ability of SARs to achieve such a high levelof spatial resolution. These include (1) high-accuracy electronic navigation systems, including theadvent of the Global Positioning System (GPS), that allow an aircraftÕs three-dimensional position to beknown to a relative accuracy on the order of a wavelength (typically centimeters) across a flight path(synthetic aperture) that may be kilometers long; (2) electronics that allow signals of ultrahigh band-width (several gigahertz) to be synthesized and processed; (3) high-speed digital computing electronics
that allow large amounts of raw radar pulse data to be formed via signal-processing techniques intodigital images in real time or near-real time; and (4) the invention of a robust autofocus algorithm, whichis a post-processing methodology that can remove the blurring artifacts in the formed SAR image that
result from the small residual position errors left by the electronic navigation system.Circa 1980, researchers in the SAR arena discovered that another aspect of SAR made it capable ofperforming certain tasks that were not achievable with optical or IR sensors. This discovery was
founded in the fact that SARs are coherent imaging systems, whereas conventional electro-optical andinfrared systems are not. As a coherent imager, a SAR transduces not only the amount of microwaveenergy reflected from EarthÕs surface, but also the phase of the reflected energy at any given position inthe image. The quantity ÒphaseÓ encodes, among other things, information regarding the precise posi-
tion of a radar reflector, e.g., a rock, a piece of dirt, or a blade of grass, that lies within one of theresolution cells (pixels) of the formed SAR image. As a result, any change in the position of a reflectorAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D107can be measured to within a fraction of a wavelength (e.g., several millimeters) by computing the phasedifference as measured by a pair of SAR images taken of the same scene on EarthÕs surface, butseparated in time, typically by hours to days. Known as coherent change detection (CCD), this proce-dure has been a very effective tool for more than a decade now in detecting subtle surface changes,
including vehicle tracks and even human footprints. A second related phase difference technique knownas interferometric SAR terrain mapping (IFSAR), can produce digital terrain elevation maps of EarthÕssurface that are accurate to within inches of elevation when measured on post spacings as small as
1meter.
Current research in SAR involves attempts to have a computer automatically identify the vehiculartargets within a formed SAR image. This set of techniques is commonly known as SAR automatic target
recognition (ATR). In addition, serious research and development efforts are aimed at imaging andidentifying moving vehicular targets, a capability generally referred to as moving-target indicators(MTIs). Finally, interest continues in SARs that can penetrate foliage (FOPEN SAR) and SARs whose
radar transmitter and receiver are not collocated; that is, they are on different platforms (bistatic SAR).SARs will undoubtedly continue to be adapted to meet larger and larger shares of the imaging needs ofboth military and civilian efforts (Jakowatz et al., 1996).1Orbital SensorsOrbital sensors are an important part of the U.S. arsenal. Assets range from low-Earth-orbit togeosynchronous sensing systems, with most of the sensing complement in the low-Earth-orbit category.A wide variety of primarily electromagnetic sensorsÑfrom the infrared to the ultraviolet
Ñare deployed,and the U.S. military is highly dependent on their capabilities. Increasingly, commercial enterprises areproviding similar capabilities, at least in the visible wavelength range, and anyone can now anonymously
order a satellite photograph of his or herÑor yourÑneighborhood at very modest cost. Here as else-where, it will be important to continuously assess a potential enemyÕs access and sophistication and notassume that the military capabilities are far superior, as they have been for so long. Because of thecommercial uses, access to space resources is no longer a state monopoly.It is also important to consider what kinds of images an adversary might buy on the commercialmarketÑfor a modest price, for example, submeter-resolution images can be purchased over theInternetÑand what their value might be for a subpeer state or even a nonstate actor such as a terroristorganization. High-resolution imagery as the domain of only peer adversaries is now a thing of the past,and the impact of this change should be carefully evaluated.UXV-Mounted SensorsAs unmanned vehicles have become more capable and affordable, reliance on them for sensing hasincreased. The obvious advantage is that no human is in harmÕs way and the UAVs, because they aresmall, fast, maneuverable, and low-observable, provide a major advantage. This capability puts apremium on small, low-power-consumption sensor technologies. Just as in the case of satellite-based
sensing systems, these sensors have taken good advantage of the continuing shrinkage of integratedcircuit size, power consumption, and weight, as well as advances in micro- and nanotechnologies thatare increasingly putting more power into smaller systems. A clear issue for the long term is that the1Personal communication from Charles Jakowatz, Sandia National Laboratories, to the committee, January 26, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESUnited States is no longer the dominant research community in these areas. Both the Pacific Rim andEurope are devoting significant resources to research in robotics and in micro- and nanotechnologies.2Geolocation Sensor SystemsGlobal Positioning System. One form of sensing that has become increasingly important is geolocation.The advent of the Global Positioning System (GPS) has made it possible to accurately register the
positions of equipment and personnel to tactical imagery or available maps. This capability makes iteasier to guide BLUE forces in complex and fluid tactical situations. As reliance on this technologygrows, however, the potential for disruption through GPS jamming becomes an increasingly worrisome
possibility.In its current incarnation, the GPS signals broadcast from satellites are relatively weak (eachsatellite radiates 500 watts). This means that it is possible to jam GPS signals with low-power trans-
mitters. The low power of GPS means that it is not available in urban canyons, inside buildings, or undera jungle canopy. With urban warfare becoming increasingly important, alternatives to augment thecapability provided by GPS should be developed. Some solutions such as GPS pseudolites are possible
and could be deployed on aircraft or aerostats or even on rooftops if controlled by BLUE forces.Another issue is that this capability is now widely available commercially. How much does this factdetract from the U.S. battlefield advantage? Why have Europe (France in particular) and China partnered
to provide an alternative to GPS? If the operators refuse to deny availability of Galileo signals to anadversary, what options does the United States have?Inertial Navigation. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-based accelerometers make possibleshort-term inertial navigation that could be used to fill the gaps in information when GPS is notavailable.Commercial GPS Navigation. Commercial GPS-like navigation systems, which use television signals
and are intended for urban environments, will be available in the near term. Some of these systems will
offer a significant increase in bandwidth capability compared with traditional GPS systems, strongersynchronization codes, and much lower operating frequencies that would allow for penetration of urbandwellings.3Ultrawide Band Transduction. Recent work on using ultrawide band (UWB) transducers for preciselocation has appeared in the open literature. The approach involves emplacement of low-power UWB
sources in, say, a building and then using time-of-flight computation to determine precise location.Tidal Forces. There are currently many solutions to tracking objects that move at high speed, such asfixed-wing aircraft, through the use of GPS and/or inertial measurement units (IMUs). Unfortunately,tracking the movement of slower objects remains a problem in situations where GPS is not available.Recent work has focused on the use of variations in the local gravitational field. Simulations havebeen developed using closed-form solutions that analyze these geophysical signals, add appropriate2See, for example, http://www.nano.gov/html/res/IntStratDevRoco.htm. Last accessed on April 8, 2005.3See, for example, http://www.rosum.com/rosum_tv-gps_indoor_location_technology.html. Last accessed on February 11,2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D109noise levels, and then compute a location based on an iterative technique. These simulations are beingused to determine the boundary conditions under which geolocation can be performed and to ascertainthe types of sensing and signal-processing technologies required to implement a fieldable microsystem(Novak et al., 2005).Networked Point SensorsThere is increasing interest in the emergent properties of networked point sensorsÑextending fromlarge systems (e.g., satellite antenna arrays) to small expendable self-contained microsystems or ÒsmartdustÓÑas an approach to sensing with improved performance and often with enhanced robustness.Commercial products such as SmartMeshTM, a low-power wireless mesh sensor network, are already inuse.4 The vulnerabilities of these systems vary considerably, but clearly the network management
aspects are very difficult and are inherently subject to intercept, jamming, and deception strategies.Since most electronics manufacturing occurs outside the continental United States, it is likely thatthe United States will face adversaries with significant sensor networking capabilities soon after thetechnologies are developed. There are no esoteric materials or techniques involved, and, once commit-
ted to silicon, the sensors can be replicated inexpensively in the millions. Since software engineeringexpertise is not confined to the United States, once the algorithms are developed and published in theopen literature it can be expected that they will be implemented both in commercial products and by the
military establishments of U.S. adversaries.Sensor ModalitiesTerahertz SensorsThe terahertz frequency range (once called the submillimeter spectral region) has seen a recentincrease in research activity largely because of the potential ability of terahertz sensors to Òsee throughwalls and under clothes.Ó (Such a capability raises many new issues such as those related to privacy in
a law enforcement context.) The largest issue is the lack of a suitable set of sources of sufficient powerand detectors of sufficient sensitivity. At present much of this work is in the research stage and isavailable primarily to state actors. Understanding of the interaction of terahertz waves with materials,
for example, spectroscopy of complex biomolecules, is at a very primitive stage, with interesting andpossibly important suggestions of an enhanced capability for discrimination of signals, but withouteither a strong theoretical or an extensive experimental foundation.Infrared SpectrumThe infrared is a very information-rich spectral region. The rotational-vibrational spectra of allmolecular species lie in the infrared. Further, the peak of room-temperature blackbody radiation is atabout 10 micrometers in the IR so that all of these species radiatively exchange energy with the
environment. Monitoring this radiation provides a critical sensing modality. Night-vision imagingsensors are sensitive over a range of near-IR wavelengths and enable troops to operate in nighttime anddark environments. These detectors operate by sensing differences in temperature/emissivity from4See, for example, http://www.dust-inc.com. Last accessed on February 10, 2005.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESdifferent surfacesÑwarm people and machines versus cold plants, and so on. Although the advancedsensors of the U.S. military have led to the concept that Òthe U.S. owns the night,Ó the danger is that
these sensors are entering the commercial sector for a variety of legitimate applications and are thusbecoming widely available to friend and foe alike. It will be important to monitor the availability of
night-vision equipment to likely adversaries, both state and nonstate, so as to avoid relying on atechnological superiority that no longer exists.Visible SpectrumThe visible spectrum is the range of the greatest atmospheric transmission and is also the region ofthe spectrum for which sensing equipment is the most advanced and capable. Myriad sensor systemscover this range, and much work has been done in signal processing to extract information from opticalimages. As sensing equipment is increasingly silicon-dominated and networked processing-intensive,
one of the issues to be concerned with is the trustworthiness of the software and hardware, especially asthe sources of both move offshore, often to less politically reliable areas.Acoustic and Seismic SensorsAcoustic and seismic sensors have proven useful in a variety of military applications. These sensorscan serve as simple threshold detectorsÑthat is, to detect signatures that exceed specified limitsÑorthey can be utilized to identify classes of targets. The acoustic signatures of military targets are fairlydiverse, and good performance in identifying them is achievable for time-critical targets. Acoustic
arrays can provide a bearing to target. Even with a limited number of sensors, properly deployed seismicarrays can provide information on direction of travel. The primary role of these sensors is as a forcemultiplier. A major challenge is efficiently and effectively analyzing the vast amounts of data generated
by even a moderate number of sensors.5,6
Imaging/SpectroscopyIncreasing use is being made of spectral imaging of a spatially resolved target. Multispectral imag-ing and hyperspectral imaging, for example, are unquestionably powerful techniques, but they produce
vast quantities of data. One of the major challenges is to synthesize/compile all of the data obtained toprovide actionable information. Another is to decide how much of the data to transmit over availablecommunication lines. The increasing emphasis on local data-processing operations to reduce the load on
the communications links can be either beneficial or harmful to the ability to maintain informationdominance, depending on the situation. The optimal system should be automatically reconfigurable inresponse to external factors that can change rapidly. This major challenge brings up all of the issues of
surety of hardware and software and network reliability discussed above for other sensor modalities.5Frederick T. Mendenhall and Kevin T. Malone, Sandia National Laboratories, personal communication to committeemember Al Romig on December 20, 2004.6For more information, see Ackermann, Mark R. 2004. TALON Local Area Network (LAN) Sensor Systems Report. SandiaReport SAND2004-3423. Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, N.Mex.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D111Chemical SensorsChemical sensors can be classified as remote and point sensors. Remote chemical sensors are basedlargely on spectroscopy, with transitions extending from the near-ultraviolet to the terahertz region. The
infrared spectral region is the most information rich for most molecular species. For many detectionschemes, false-alarm discrimination is a major issue. The battlefield in particular is a chemical-richenvironment, and it is important to be able to distinguish between chemical agents and other species.
Nerve agents, for example, are very large molecules with complex rotational-vibrational spectra withmany overlapping bonds giving a broad resonance. The phosphorus-oxygen stretch at 10 micrometers isan important signature of many nerve agents. Ammonia, which is commonly found in the battlefield
environment, is a small molecule with sharply defined rotation-vibration lines. A high-spectral-resolution, broadly tunable sensor is needed to achieve the necessary discrimination. Many point sensorsoperate by changing conductivity in the presence of chemical agents. Because many things can cause
conductivity to change, adequate discrimination and false alarms are major issues, and it is necessary tohave good controls and redundancy to ensure reliable readings.Ionizing RadiationSensing of ionizing radiation is a very mature activity, reaching back more than one-half century.Unstable nuclei go through a process via beta, alpha, positron, and electron capture or fission decay toattain a stable nucleus. The half-lives for these processes differ by many orders of magnitude, as do thelevels of radiation emitted during these processes. These energy emissions generally interact with
surrounding media and therefore are attenuated as they travel from the emitting source to the detectorsystem. Thus, radiation detection, although possible at large distances in some cases, is normallydescribed as point detection. Often the decay particle can be measured directly, but often it is convenient
to detect and quantify the gamma rays emitted during the processes. Most radiation detection systemsused for search and other fieldwork rely on the detection of gamma rays and neutrons. Most radionuclidescan be identified via detection of their unique gamma-ray signatures (Knoll, 1979).The ability to identify isotopes based on gamma-ray spectra is greatly facilitated by using detectorswith high energy resolution to unambiguously identify the isotope by characteristic emitted energies,which show up as lines at specific energies in an energy spectrum. However, in practice there are trade-
offs. Currently, and for the foreseeable future, the gamma-ray detectors with the best resolution are alsothe most expensive, and they exhibit other characteristics that constrain their use in many field applications.The larger and cheaper detectors exhibit poorer energy resolution. Under some conditions, especially
where measurements can be taken for long periods of time (several minutes to hours) and/or in closeproximity (approximately a meter or less, depending on source strength and detector size), miniaturizeddetectors are required or have a niche. This is because source strength and source shielding often dictate
that less than 1 million gammas per second in 4-pi geometry are available for measurement, andsometimes one to two orders of magnitude less. For small detectors with a frontal area on the order of1to 10 cm
2, this means that at distances greater than 1 meter, 10 or fewer gamma rays may intersect thedetector in a second of measurement time.In many real-world applications, such as at traffic choke points or other points of entry into theUnited States, measurements must be made in only a few seconds in order not to disrupt commerce
unduly. Thus, during such a measurement with small detectors, often the total number of gamma raysstriking the detector may be a few hundred, or less. No matter what the detector type (material), fordetectors of a reasonable thickness, the probability of interaction will be less than unity. In addition,Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESmany gamma rays will not deposit their full energy within the detector volume, but will scatter andescape the detection volume, so that the photon energies and some other energies will have beendetected at less than the full energy peak. Although these scattered gamma rays are useful, they are notspecific to the isotope being measured, but present a rather broad, featureless continuum. Thus, in order
to determine the presence of a specific isotope using its specific full-energy lines, several hundred, ormore, gamma rays must interact with the detector, in addition to those interacting based on radioactiveisotopes always present in the environment (background).The shielding and scattering effects are also energy and material dependent, making the resultingspectrum somewhat complex. Thus, in many applications, larger, rather than smaller, detector volumesare required because of the physics, and there is nothing that can be done to totally overcome this
limitation through the use of different detector types or materials. In practice plastic scintillators are thelargest and cheapest of the usable gamma spectrometers. However, the energy resolution is so poor inthese low-atomic-number organics as to make reasonable isotope identification through normal means
almost impossibleÑi.e., their use as a spectrometer is quite limited.The next general class of detectors in use is inorganic scintillators, such as NaI and CsI detectors.These detectors are more expensive volume-wise than plastic and are usually smaller. However, their
energy resolution and detection sensitivity are significantly better than those of plastic, and they canusually be provided with volume/area such that they are the most typical detector used for fieldedsystems providing isotope identification.Another category of detector is based on a room-temperature semiconductor, such as cadmium-zinc-telluride (CZT), and has an energy resolution typically three- to fourfold better than that of an NaIdetector. This technology is still under development, and spectral-grade detectors are still difficult to
obtain, are quite expensive for the volume obtained, and are variable in detection characteristics fromdetector to detector (quality control). Their main drawback, however, is the small volumes obtainableÑon the order of a few cubic centimeters, at best.A great deal of effort has been expended in the last decade to grow bigger, better crystals, and to useother techniques, such as combining several detector elements into arrays and providing pulse-shapediscrimination, to get better resolution or larger effective sizes. But such technologies are still inade-
quate for most normal field applications. High-purity germanium semiconductor detectors have the bestenergy resolution available for fieldable gamma-ray detection. Their energy resolution is better thanCZT by a factor of 20 to 30 and better than NaI by a factor of 50 to 100. However, they must be
cryogenically cooled to liquid-nitrogen temperatures, thus requiring large dewars or more electricalpower for thermo-mechanical cooling than can typically be supplied by a battery-operated system. Inaddition, the largest sizes are about 1 liter in volumeÑmuch larger than CZT, but still much smaller thanthat available from NaI or plastic. In addition, they are 10 times as expensive as CZT and 20 to 50 timesas expensive as NaI. In all cases, costs vary as a function of volume and detector quality.To overcome the limitations and difficulties associated with spectral unfolding from detectors ofpoorer energy resolution, software processing techniques have been under development. In most cases,these techniques, which can also be used with high-resolution systems, make it possible to provide atleast a primary isotope detection and identification. Using these techniques and detectors it is possible to
separate medical from industrial isotopes and special nuclear material and also to make some determi-nation of the amount of shieldingÑand thus to determine whether a medical isotope of reasonableactivity and little shielding, such as an isotope isolated in the human body, is being used in a legitimate
application, or if a similar source, but orders of magnitude more intense, is being hidden within heavyshielding (one case of a radiological dispersal device). Such a determination is based on the spectralAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D113shape of the measured spectrum, a result of the energy dependence of absorption/scattering on materialspresent as described above.There are circumstances in which the effects of shielding and the requirement to determine specificisotopes of an elemental source would require the use of a high-purity germanium detector. Some low-
level emitters, such as enriched uranium, can be detected passively through other, normally associatedisotopes, such as U-238 or U-232. The gamma rays emitted specifically from U-235 are low in energyand easily shielded, or are so weak in intensity as to be difficult to detect under most field constraints.
Thus, enriched uranium is often detected passively through detection and identification of gamma raysfrom associated isotopes, if present. Otherwise, active interrogation methods can be employed, typicallyusing neutrons or high-energy gamma rays as the interrogating medium, that cause the U-235 in the
sample to fission and thus emit neutrons and other measurable gamma rays. However, such interrogatingsystems tend to be rather large and expensive and present radiation safety issues. In short, severaloptions are currently available for making radioisotopic measurements. The specific system used must
be optimized for the specific situation and associated concept of operations. Ongoing research anddevelopment aims to yield new materials and techniques, which will provide some relief in somescenarios. This development should be encouraged and funded. However, there is much that can be done
by designing appropriate systems with detectors currently available.7,8
REFERENCESJakowatz, Jr., Charles V. et al. 1996. Spotlight-Mode Synthetic Aperture Radar: A Signal Processing Approach. KluwerAcademic Publishers, Boston.Knoll, Glenn F. 1979. Radiation Detection and Measurement. Wiley, New York.NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology). 2000. Report on the Development of the Advanced EncryptionStandard (AES), U.S. Department of Commerce. Available online at http://www.linuxsecurity.com/resource_files/cryptography/r2report.pdf. Last accessed on February 11, 2005.Novak, Jim L., Michael R. Daily, and Steven B. Rohde. 2005. Geophysical Geolocation System. Sandia National Laborato-ries, Albuquerque, N.Mex.NRC (National Research Council). 1991. Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age. National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C.NRC. 1996a. CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Information Society. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.NRC. 1996b. Continued Review of the Tax Systems Modernization of the Internal Revenue Service: Final Report. NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C.NRC. 1997. For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.NRC. 1998. Trust in Cyberspace. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.NRC. 1999. Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
NRC. 2001. Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded Computers. National Acad-emy Press, Washington, D.C.NRC. 2002. Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.7David Waymire, Sandia National Lahoratories, personal communication to the committee on January 14, 2005.8For more information, see Shefelbine, H.C. and D.J. Mitchell. 2002. (U) Detection and Identification of RadioactiveSources. Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, N.Mex.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCES114Appendix EBackground Material for Chapter 6POTENTIAL IMPLICATIONS OF BRAIN IMAGING RESEARCHBehaviors requiring complex integration of several cognitive and motor tasks are core in todayÕstechnological world. As our vision and scientific endeavors grow toward Bunyanesque undertakings,we push the envelope of the cumulative stress normal humans can be expected to absorb. Current
soldier-system monitoring includes occasional measuring of physiological parameters as well as record-ing of performance observables following training and familiarization exercises. These techniques arelittle advanced from clipboard, stopwatch, and fill-in-the-blank subjective rating scales. Although
effective at diagnosing general health and skills in combat maneuvering, hand-to-hand combat, andprecision fire, these modalities are incapable of providing useful information to prevent the onset ofneuropsychiatric conditions before they result in degradation of performance and thus increase the risk
of human error.Recent evidence from operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm and current Iraq operations indi-cates unequivocally that such concerns are more important now than in past conflicts. Their being
accorded greater importance may be due to greater vigilance being paid to field performance under closequarters with better real-time observation, or to a new awareness of the importance of the antecedents topost-traumatic neurosis as a real psychodynamic to an accurate diagnosis, or both. It may also be a
condition of the changes in the way we now ask individuals to perform under stress, with increasedindividualization in both decision making and performance while directly in harmÕs way. The currentenemy and that of the next three decades have an advantage in serving under a sociopolitical-religious
mandate unacceptable and unfamiliar in the West.Finding new ways to elicit, observe, and record behaviors to ensure the continuity of health overlong periods of confinement and isolation is a key research area. In addition, decision-under-stress
reactions are native to each individual, adding complexity to human factors analysis during traditionaltraining schemes as well as to monitoring of mental acuity. Extra design considerations are also requiredto fold in the cumulative effects of very long (1 to 2 years) mission durations in harsh climates where
stress takes a continuous toll, and of less-than-war situations, in which death nonetheless awaits literallyAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E115at every corner, every day. Finally, careful and appropriate attention is needed to psychiatric liability,informed by past experiences, which can at best confound and at worst imperil such missions (Genik etal., 2005, in press).Current and future tools and techniques in brain imaging promise to provide essential additionalinformation to monitor the effectiveness of training as well as mental status. The recent advent offunctional neuroimaging, discussed below, has sparked world interest in the four major noninvasivebrain-monitoring modalities: electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). In this appendix thecommittee explores the current technologies and how in the future they may be engineered and employedfor use for monitoring in simulated (training) and actual pre-mission qualification, especially of the
young officer cadre entering battle under nontraditional and high-threat conditions. The methodologiesare amenable to application in the assessment of mental status and training efficiency, under flexibleconditions and in virtual-reality testing and training scenarios.ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR A NEW BLUE FORCE CAPABILITYHere the committee postulates a new BLUE force capability that enables training and networkedcommunication, as well as interview/interrogation. It envisions a portable modular sensor suite that is:¥Noninvasive,¥Expandable and flexible, and¥Compatible with current systems.Current methods for human-human tactical communication must be informed by new cognitiveresearch. In the next decade, it may be possible (with minimal military-specific operational integration
of the following technologies) to determine with specificity nonverbal communications between andamong soldier systems. The same research will inform a variation of this capability to replace entirelythe current hostile, putatively unethical, and near-valueless physical coercion techniques used to deter-
mine truth and deception in captured RED forces, both enemy soldiers and nonmilitary combatants.Enabling technologies include emergent functional brain neuroimaging methodologies togetherwith data fusion software applied to multisensor, multispectral neurophysiological signals.Potential applications include expanded interpersonal communications via BLUE soldier-systemwearable body and helmet mounts; multi-lead covert and overt polygraphy applications and psychologicalinterview techniques; and detection of intentions, deception, and truth in captured RED combatants.Subsequent sections describe in greater detail the emerging technologies that may enable suchcapabilities.Functional Neuroimaging Technologies and Soldier SystemsHuman brains are constantly occupied with tasks that include unconscious activities such as
regulation of breathing and circulation, and highly cognitive functions such as reading and interpretingtechnical reports. The human brain does not take well to a complete reboot to a known state, andtherefore the measured state of any individual brain is a function of its initial state (genetic makeup) and
the entirety of internal chemical and external biosensory stimulation integrated from birth to the present.To overcome the extensiveness of variation, one can take a picture of the brain in a baseline state andimmediately afterward apply some external stimulus or have the subject perform a simple task and takeAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESa second picture in the activated state. The difference image will reveal what parts of the brain wereactivated to confront the stimulus or perform the task. This is the principle behind functional neuro-imaging. In practice, baseline and activation states are repeated and recorded several times to averageover inherent noise and prove repeatability. Details about how many repetitions are required depend on
the imaging method, or modality used.Electroencephalography is a compendium of measured voltage differences at the scalp obtainedfrom between 10 and 300 probe electrodes. Neuronal activity in gray matter or white matter axonal
transmission of signals, the primary current, induces cascading volume currents in surrounding tissue
and ultimately surface currents on the skin. The electrical diffusion is very fast, and for all practicalpurposes the signals that appear at the scalp are simultaneous with the brain activity. The best spatial
resolution is obtained for cortical primary currents. Deeper subcortical primaries are detectable as wellwith a corresponding decrease in spatial resolution. When used in a functional experiment, the measuredvoltage temporal changes related to a task or stimulus are called event-related potentials (ERPs).Involved in construction of an EEG is the electrode pack, which can be a personalized flexible cap,a set of signal amplifiers, a multichannel few-hundred-hertz digital sampler, and an interface multi-plexer, such as the next-generation serial bus, for presentation to a standard interpretation display,
recording device, or general-purpose onboard computer. When designed to be lightweight and compactusing even current technology, a 64-channel EEG can be easily incorporated into a tanker-trainingmodule, or into the actual tank, APC, Bradley Fighting Vehicle, BCW enclosed FUCHÕs scout vehicle,helicopter trainer or actual cabin, and more. Indeed, an EEG system can be incorporated into advancedextravehicular mobility units (EMUs) and integrated with the standard physiological telemetry fornominal additional weight in the new soldier-system dismounted uniform.Magnetoencephalography measures near-scalp sub-picotesla magnetic field variations due to thetime-dependent primary and volume currents using a cryogenic helmet-mounted array of hundreds ofsuperconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs). MEG is similar in temporal resolution to
EEG. The sensor array is designed to detect currents parallel to the scalp, and MEG excels in distin-guishing these from currents perpendicular to the scalp (predominantly cortical surface currents in graymatter convex folds, or gyral currents).The additional weight of precision electronics and control systems necessary for MEG is hard tojustify if the only benefit is real-time separation of gyral and cortical surface currents, since individualastronaut EEG meshes can be calibrated with a preflight MEG such that the EEG can determine the area
of activation with acceptable accuracy. However, the higher accuracy is justifiable if some of theSQUID measurement, control, and analysis systems can serve as dual-purpose apparatus for otherexperiments.The brain activity measured by EEG and MEG is the result of ionic motion within the centralnervous system. Ionic production, release, and movement consume energy. This energy is supplied bythe conversion of blood-borne oxyhemoglobin to deoxyhemoglobin. Through a complicated chain
reaction called the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) effect, brain activity results in a net increasein the relative concentration of oxyhemoglobin in the local venous structure of the circulatory system.Oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin have different magnetic susceptibilities and different colors, giving rise to
two methods to measure the local hemodynamic response to brain activity.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) works by a simple excitation and relaxation of spin states.When molecules containing hydrogen are placed in a strong static magnetic field, a small but detectable
number of hydrogen protons align their spins along the direction of the external field. An applied radio-frequency (RF) pulse near the proton resonant frequency knocks the spins perpendicular to the field, andthe relaxation back to ground state releases RF energy in a pattern that can be reconstructed to show bothAvoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E117the composition and the distribution of blood, soft tissue, or any other hydrogen-rich material. A seriesof fast scans calibrated to optimize detection of the BOLD signal will show the dynamics of brainfunction under the specific internal or applied conditions; this is known as fMRI, and the major advan-tages of this modality are three-dimensional spatial resolution and complete skull penetration, making it
the only modality to unambiguously detect limbic activations important for determining certain neurop-sychological states. In addition to measuring the BOLD signal at higher precision, future hardwareadvances will allow fine temporal monitoring of neurochemical movement and reactions using ultrafast
spectroscopic analysis techniques in fMRI.Complete commercial clinical MRI scanners weigh as much as an entire communications satelliteand are inappropriate to bolt to a military vehicle or helicopter bulkhead. What is promising, though, is
that many of the bulky or heavy components of commercial scanners are not necessary in the embodi-ments that will be deployed: lightweight skullcap monitors with neural-network software based on theground-heavy MRI scanning systems, and the MEG near-field applied to near-infrared spectroscopy and
ported into existing low-power supplies, will be data-, not weight-, dependent. Additionally, whole-body toroid and multiscan high-resolution options are not required, but rather just a system big enoughto fit a head with a single detection coil of moderate size because high-resolution scans can be collected
pre-mission and digitally carried along. Functional MRI scans are themselves moderate-resolution, andany clinical diagnosis for traumatic injury to a scannable body part can be accomplished with a combi-nation of high- and moderate-resolution images. Finally, the cryogenic components and superconduct-
ing magnet energizer or DC electromagnet power supply can be parasitized off other necessary onboardsystems, vacuum pumps can be replaced with a good valve, and several ancillary failsafes that make thescanner clinician-proof can be eliminated. All told, an appropriate MRI scanner could be put together in
a couple of hundred additional pounds.Near-infrared spectroscopy, the technology behind the nascent real-time finger-clamp pulse oximeter,has developed into a commercially available 48-channel BOLD-signal-monitoring head array mounted
in a flexible cap. The system currently has moderate spatial resolution for cortical activations. Futuresystems promise better resolution and deeper activation detection. Figure E-1 shows the neuroimagingmodalities explained above.The NIRS modality can be built using available technology and dual-task post-processing equip-ment. The sensory array is simply pairs of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and photodiodes either directlymounted in a cap or remotely working through optical fibers. Indeed, the bulk and weight of the
detection array make NIRS, like EEG, an appropriate consideration for integration into advanced EMUsas well as vehicle-mounted systems.Further details of technical methodologies are available in an extended treatise (Genik et al., inpress1) or complete reviews (Hamalainen et al., 1993; Jezzard et al., 2003). In summary, the abovemodalities are best when used in combination, and not necessarily simultaneously, as their neuroimagingstrengths complement rather than duplicate one another. EEG excels at monitoring gross mental load in
steady-state conditions, though it is also adequate for determining activity in pre-mapped corticalstructures. MEG can discriminate between gyral and surface currents with moderate spatial resolution,and this can be vital information if a specific brain network structure is located in either of these places.
MRI is the only noninvasive modality that can specifically localize deep-brain neural systems respon-sible for emotional processing, essential information for determining neuropsychiatric health. Finally,1Genik II, Richard J., Li Hsieh, Francis X. Graydon, and Christopher C. Green. Emergent functional brain imaging andrehabilitation opportunities. In J.M. Pellerito (ed.), Driver Rehabilitation: Principles and Practice. Elsevier, in press.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESFIGURE E-1 Spatial and temporal resolution capabilities of different neuroimaging modalities. Spatial extent iscorrelated with basic brain anatomy and the temporal changes in these images with observation of the working
mind. SOURCE: Genik et al. (2005, in press).NIRS provides a relatively inexpensive and robust monitor for cortical activation, a metric important fordetermining cognitive response efficiency at any instantaneous gross mental activity level.Neuroimaging and Applications to Crewmember Health and TrainingBeyond a discussion of biomedical engineering considerations of brain-imaging modalities, it isvital to determine whether information gathered offers important insight into the health continuum of
crewmembers in military vehicles or of the dismounted, but in the future highly instrumented, soldier.The bandwidth will exist, the channels will exist, and the readouts will be distributed to the companylevel. The first comprehension of the potential for neuroimaging technologies in the context of long-
duration spaceflight, as one example, was discussed in a 2001 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory work-shop.2 The findings are identical to those expected for the current soldier in isolation, perceived isola-
2Workshop on Revolutionary Aerospace Concepts for Human/Robotic Exploration of the Solar System. N.I. Marzwell andH.M. Harris, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, November 6-7, 2001.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E119tion, and/or continual stress. Moreover, the Bioastronautics Critical Path Roadmap identifies threemission confounders of particular relevance to the current Iraq operational scenario, for example:psychological disruption (e.g., circadian and sleep disorders), neuropsychiatric dysfunction (affectivedisorders), and nonspecific stress. All are amenable to current emergent neuroimaging modalities and
can be studied in real time under fairly realistic conditions. Monitoring behavioral health of the crew canprovide important input regarding mission decisions. Furthermore, pre-mission training programs willbenefit from the additional insights into crew performance provided by neuroimaging.Previous soldier long-duration mission training and EEG experiments have concentrated on narrowhypotheses, and the modality has not been adopted as standard procedure. Normal sleep is easilymonitored with EEG, and deviations can raise alerts to possible developing situations. Waking EEG
measurements show level of alertness and thus can help to determine risk levels for starting or continu-ing a mission-critical activity. Additionally, sleeping EEG traces have been associated with predictiveoutcomes for treatment of depression (Hatzinger et al., 2004), waking EEG traces have been associated
with post-traumatic stress disorder (Chae et al., 2004), and functional EEG and changes in ERP havebeen used to monitor attention level in complex cognitive tasks (Ramos-Loyo et al., 2004). The nextgeneration of studies will likely yield insight into many underlying affective disease mechanisms and
metrics of behavior such as vigilance. Generation-after-next work will yield predictive algorithms fromEEG sleep traces to head off circadian- and sleep-related disorders before they affect waking behavior(failure of human performance because of poor psychosocial adaptation or neurobehavioral dysfunction).MEG has advantages over EEG for specific monitoring tasks (Barkley, 2004). Work completed incollaboration with Young et al. (2005)3 concentrates on the basics of piloting motorized vehicles whilefacing cognitive challenges, where MEG was used to locate functional activity related to event detection.
Current work focuses on increasing the cognitive load and seeks to determine thresholds for overload,the point at which event detection breaks down and a driver or pilot can make a fatal error (failure ofhuman performance because of system interface problems and ineffective workload). The next 5 years
promise advances in MEG methodology as a complement to both EEG and fMRI, although it will likelybe useful only for ground-based preflight training and screening of crewmembers. Generation-after-nexttechnology will be required to start in-flight monitoring using this modality in a regular behavioral
health regimen.Advances in understanding of brain networks involved in piloting motor vehicles and high-performance aircraft based on use of the maturing technology of BOLD fMRI will drive functional
neuroimaging understanding of these activities in the next 5 years. Previous studies have focused onnarrow aspects of navigation (Uchiyama et al., 2003), attempts to localize impairment of navigationalabilities (Calhoun et al., 2004), and the beginnings of next-generation understanding of event detection
in simulated driving tasks (Graydon et al., 2004; Young et al., 2005). Current work is focusing onincreasing the level of distraction and monitoring the effect on detection of the primary event. It is wellknown that even heavily sedated primates show activation in the visual cortex as a result of optical
stimulation; it is also well known that humans can be looking directly at events and not react to 
them, abehavior known as cognitive blindness, or colloquially as the Òlook-but-do-not-seeÓ phenomenon. 
What isnot known at all is what disruption in which brain network causes cognitive blindness, as well as
whether the risk of this phenomenon can be consistently modulated (Reilly, 2003). Of special relevance3Young, Richard A., Li Hsieh, Francis X. Graydon, Richard J. Genik II, Mark D. Benton, Christopher C. Green, Susan M.Bowyer, John E. Moran, and Norman Tepley. 2005. Mind-on-the-drive: Real-time functional neuroimaging of cognitive brainmechanisms underlying driver performance and distraction. Presented at SAE 2005 World Congress and Exhibition, April,
Detroit, Mich.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCEShere is the identification friend-or-foe problem set: friendly-fire deaths occur regularly in unmannedcombat air vehicle (UCAV) and umanned aerial vehicle (UAV) maneuvers, helicopter tactical opera-tions, sniper operations, and mounted Bradley and Abrams operations. Technology to understand andmitigate the Òbrain internalÓ disconnect in looking but not seeing, or comprehending, or processing may
be more important statistically than a next-generation set of sensors that must be highly networked andcomputer-centric on the distributed battlefield.The next generation of fMRI multimodal studies will determine the extent to which emotionalresponses and psychopharmaceutical impairment affect navigational task learning and performance. Itis expected that some optimal level of emotional involvement in navigational decisions, especially thosemade under stress from high cognitive workload, sleep deprivation, or some induced affective disorder,
can be determined; for example, it is likely that optimal decision making occurs somewhere betweencold-as-ice detachment and ÒWeÕre all going to die!Ó paranoid neuroses. Such tools will be useful in
training all categories of operators, whether tankers or snipers, or to provide feedback to helicopter or
UCAV pilots, especially those who increasingly may view simulator training as a video game. More-over, monitoring the efficiency of training and the effectiveness of alert systems can directly impact therisk of performance failure owing to interface problems and ineffective workload, as it has already been
shown that pilots show different activation levels once they become fully trained in a maneuver (Pereset al., 2000), when they have reached their fastest reaction times (Mohamed et al., 2004), and when analert interface is optimized to emphasize vigilance (Reilly, 2003). Thus, the basic groundwork is already
in place to Òwatch soldier-operators thinkÓ during and after training that emphasizes attention to psycho-
logical states.Generation-after-next fMRI imaging tools promise to deliver a capability for monitoring deep-brainemotional states in-flight. Research late in the next decade should also lead to simple paradigms andalgorithms capable of benchmarking behavioral fitness in a matter of minutes as part of a weekly healthregimen including examination of any neurochemistry changes in emotional reception and processing
centers.Once BOLD fMRI benchmarks are established, NIRS technology can be used to monitor corticalsignals deemed important during actual task performance instead of a simulated paradigm. NIRS tech-
nology can also be used to monitor BOLD signals from increasing cerebral recruitment during extendeddismounted activities or other long-duration mission-critical assignments (Drummond et al., 2004).THE CURRENT OPERATIONAL STATE OF THE ARTNoncontact Multispectral Neurophysiological SensorsBlood Pressure, Heart Rate, Interbeat Interval, Body Tremor (0.2 to 1.0 Hz), andBallistocardiogramSignal-processing algorithms (originally developed for underwater and spaceflight applications)have recently proved applicable to low-frequency improvement in conditions with a very high signal-to-
noise ratio, such as for enabling real-time monitoring of numerous human neurological signals in bothaware and unaware subjects. The signals illustrate embedded cardiovascular information. Such signalprocessing has been applied to the known technique of ballistocardiogram.The validation of the subsystem, sensors embedded in a chair back, legs, and seat with RF signalsÒportedÓ to a remote station, was accomplished in a medical school: the subjects had arterial (radial)
cannulation, and the software was subsequently ÒtrainedÓ by the ground-truth data. (This was, of course,
Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E121a straightforward series of statistical comparisons of signals of varying bandwidths, with the algorithmsequencing for Òbest fit.Ó) Electron paramagnetic resonance oxygen mappings (EPROMs) were con-structed and devices ÒmeasuredÓ (approximated by estimation) systolic and diastolic blood pressure
with good accuracy (plus/minus 5.0 mm Hg) compared with that of mercury sphygmomanometers.An interesting Òfall-outÓ of the human subject validation experiments was that the heart rate and
interbeat interval were accurate enough to calculate, from tables (programmed in the EPROM), near-real-time caloric expenditure.Detection of Carotid Artery Blood Flow, Differential Stenosis, and Heart RateDuring the test and evaluation of a small, man-portable infrared (mercury-cadmium-telluride) de-tector it was observed that thermographic profiles of humans in the near field (>2 and <25 ft) could beobtained, overtly and covertly. The system was tested in a series of subjects and calibrated. The speci-
ficity and sensitivity to facial temperature bilaterally over the cheeks and forehead were seen to beoperationally useful, and data were collected in less than 1 second (from a seated subject in a reasonablyquiet pose) that were accurate to within 0.5 degrees C.The data were compared and contrasted with breast-tumor and facial thermographic units beingused clinically. The pre-stroke detection data were incorporated successfully into an adult male pre-stroke health-monitoring program and deployed for further operational testing and evaluation in a
scenario identical to that in an interview/interrogation facility (e.g., used in operational settings). Thesystems were installed behind infrared-transparent, visually opaque mirrors. The rooms were constructedwith low ambient temperatures (<65 degrees F) and fans to enhance the utility of clinical data collection.Subjects were unaware of the data collection. Scans were read and interpreted by qualified radiolo-gists for clinical use.Covert Communication System, One-Way to Simulated PolygrapherA system was developed and fabricated that used a very-low-power, highly collimated and directionallydeployed CO2 laser to transmit voice data (1,000 to 10,000 Hz) to an operator
Õs external auditorymeatus, with real-time questions asked for the purpose of interrogating an individual, outside, seated onan instrumented bench (as described above), but inaudibly to the subject. The system was tested and
found to work exceptionally well, under reasonable ambient outdoor conditions.REFERENCESBarkley, G.L. 2004. Controversies in neurophysiology. MEG is superior to EEG in localization of interictal epileptiformactivity. Clinical Neurophysiology 115 (5): 1001-1009.Calhoun, V.D., J.J. Pekar, and G.D. Pearlson. 2004. Alcohol intoxication effects on simulated driving: Exploring alcohol-doseeffects on brain activation using functional MRI. Neuropsychopharmacology 29 (11): 2097-2117.Chae, J.H., J. Jeong, B.S. Peterson, D.J. Kim, W.M. Bahk, T.Y. Jun, K.S. Kim, and K.Y. Kim. 2004. Dimensional complexityof the EEG in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychiatry Research 131 (1): 79-89.Drummond, S.P., G.G. Brown, J.S. Salamat, and J.C. Gillin. 2004. Increasing task difficulty facilitates the cerebral compensa-tory response to total sleep deprivation. Sleep 27 (3): 445-451.Genik II, Richard J., Christopher C. Green, Francis X. Graydon, and Robert E. Armstrong. 2005. Cognitive avionics andwatching spaceflight crews think: Generation-after-next research tools in functional neuroimaging. Aviation, Space &
Environmental Medicine, May, in press.Avoiding Surprise in an Era of Global Technology AdvancesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122AVOIDING SURPRISE IN AN ERA OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY ADVANCESGraydon, Francis X., Richard Young, Mark D. Benton, Richard J. Genik II, Stefan Posse, Li Hsieh, and Christopher C. Green.2004. Visual event detection during simulated driving: Identifying the neural correlates with functional neuroimaging.
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behavior 7 (4-5): 307-322.Hamalainen, Matti, Riitta Hari, Risto J. Ilmoniemi, Jukka Knuutila, and Olli V. Lounasmaa. 1993. MagnetoencephalographyÑtheory, instrumentation and applications to non-invasive studies of the working human brain. Review of Modern Physics
65 (2): 413-505.Hatzinger, Martin, Ulrich M. Hemmeter, Serge Brand, Marcus Ising, and Edith Holsboer-Trachsler. 2004. Electroencephalographicsleep profiles in treatment course and long-term outcome of major depression: Association with DEX/CRH-test response.
Journal of Psychiatric Research 38 (5): 453-465.Jezzard, Peter, Paul M. Matthews, and Stephen M. Smith (eds.). 2003. Functional MRI: An Introduction to Methods. NewYork, NY: Oxford University Press.Mohamed, Mona A., David M. Yousem, Aylin Tekes, Nina Browner, and Vince D. Calhoun. 2004. Correlation between theamplitude of cortical activation and reaction time: A functional MRI study. American Journal of Roentgenology 183 (3):759-765.Peres M., P.F. Van De Moortele, C. Pierard, S. Lehericy, P. Satabin, D. Le Bihan, and C.Y. Guezennec. 2000. Functionalmagnetic resonance imaging of mental strategy in a simulated aviation performance task. Aviation Space EnvironmentalMedicine 71 (12): 1218-1231.Ramos-Loyo, Julieta Andr”s, Antonio Gonzalez-Garrido, Claudia Amezcua, and Miguel A. Guevara. 2004. Relationshipbetween resting alpha activity and the ERPs obtained during a highly demanding selective attention task. InternationalJournal of Psychophysiology 54 (3): 251-262.Reilly, Clay E. 2003. Motor co-ordination in humans is guided by optimal feedback control. Journal of Neurology 250 (2):257-258.Uchiyama Y., K. Ebe, A. Kozato, T. Okada, and N. Sadato. 2003. The neural substrates of driving at a safe distance: Afunctional MRI study. Neuroscience Letters 352 (3): 199-202.