DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11332Building an Electronic Records Archive at the NationalArchives and Records Administration: Recommendations for aLong-Term Strategy112 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09696-6 | DOI 10.17226/11332Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg, Editors; Committee on Digital Archiving andthe National Archives and Records Administration; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; National Research CouncilBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSiBuilding an Electronic Records Archive
at theNational Archives and
Records AdministrationRecommendationsfor a Long-Term Strategy
Committee on Digital Archiving
and the National Archives and Records Administration
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg, Editors
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.www.nap.eduBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National
Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the NationalAcademy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report

were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.Support for this project was provided by the National Archives and Records Administration under Contract No.NAMA-02-C-0012.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that providedsupport for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-09696-0Cover design by Jennifer M. Bishop.Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Wash-ington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholarsengaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academyhas a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M.Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy ofSciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federalgovernment. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nationalneeds, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services ofeminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broadcommunity of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council hasbecome the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr.Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ARCHIVING AND THE NATIONAL ARCHIVESAND RECORDS ADMINISTRATIONROBERT F. SPROULL, Sun Microsystems, ChairHOWARD BESSER, University of California, Los AngelesJAMIE CALLAN, Carnegie Mellon UniversityCHARLES DOLLAR, Dollar Consulting
STUART HABER, Hewlett-Packard LaboratoriesMARGARET HEDSTROM, University of MichiganMARK KORNBLUH, Michigan State University
RAYMOND LORIE, IBM Almaden Research CenterCLIFFORD LYNCH, Coalition for Networked InformationJEROME H. SALTZER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MARGO SELTZER, Harvard UniversityROBERT WILENSKY, University of California, BerkeleyStaffJON EISENBERG, Study Director and Senior Program OfficerSTEVEN WOO, Program Officer (through August 2004)DAVID PADGHAM, Research AssociateJENNIFER M. BISHOP, Senior Project AssistantBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDJEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, CSTB Chair EmeritusWILLIAM DALLY, Stanford UniversityMARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center
DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los AngelesJOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale UniversityHECTOR GARCIA-MOLINA, Stanford University
KEVIN KAHN, Intel CorporationJAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft CorporationMICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, BerkeleyWENDY A. KELLOGG, IBM T.J. Watson Research CenterSARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, CSTB Member EmeritusTERESA H. MENG, Stanford UniversityTOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University
DANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and EntertainmentERIC SCHMIDT, Google, Inc.FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt UniversityANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLCCHARLES BROWNSTEIN, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Research AssociateJENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate
JANET BRISCOE, Manager, Program OperationsJON EISENBERG, Senior Program OfficerRENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program AssistantHERBERT S. LIN, Senior ScientistLYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program AssistantGLORIA A. WESTBROOK, Senior Program AssistantBRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org; write to CSTB,National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001; call at (202) 334-
2605; or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
Just as its constituent agencies and other organizations do, the federal government gener-ates and increasingly saves a large and growing fraction of its records in electronic form.Recognizing the ever-greater importance of these electronic records for its mission of preserv-ing Òessential evidence,Ó the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) launched
a major new initiative, the Electronic Records Archives (ERA) initiative, in 1998. NARA subse-quently requested that the National Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommuni-cations Board conduct a two-phase study to provide NARA with advice as it develops the
ERA program.Phase one of the study resulted in the preparation of two reports by the Committee onDigital Archiving and the National Archives and Records Administration. The committeeÕs
first report, Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administra-tion: Recommendations for Initial Development,1 focused on design and engineering issues relatedto NARAÕs Electronic Records Archives program. Also, the committee issued a letter report2in October 2003 that elaborated on issues discussed in its first report, tying these issues specifi-cally to NARAÕs draft request for proposals for the ERA. Although some of the conclusions inthese two reports relate to specific development initiatives and early design ideas, most of the1National Research Council.  2003.  
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and RecordsAdministration:  Recommendations for Initial Development, 
Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg (eds.).  The National
Academies Press, Washington, D.C.  The ÒSummary and RecommendationsÓ chapter of the 2003 study is reprinted

in Appendix B of the present report.2National Research Council.  2003.  ÒLetter Report on Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National
Archives and Records Administration.Ó  The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., October 16.  The letter

report is reprinted in Appendix C of this report.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.observations about archive system design are not tied to these specifics and are intended toremain useful to NARA as it develops, refines, and iterates the ERA program.This final report is the result of phase two of the study. Prepared by the same committee(see Appendix D for biographical information), it examines longer-term, more strategic issues
related to electronic records archiving at NARA. These issues include technology and othertrends that shape the context in which the ERA exists, the archival processes of the ERA itself,and the future evolution of the ERA system. This final report also discusses record integrity,
which the committeeÕs first report did not address in detail.The committee thanks the many people who made this report possible, although of courseresponsibility for the final result is its own. The support and assistance of the ERA program
staff, especially Kenneth Thibodeau, Robert Chadduck, and Richard Steinbacher, are greatlyappreciated. A number of individuals from NARA, other federal agencies, and the privatesector, listed in Appendix A, provided valuable input to the committee during the course of its
work. Jennifer M. Bishop, CSTB program associate, facilitated our work throughout the courseof this project. David Padgham conducted background research and made a number of contri-butions to the committeeÕs reports.Robert F. Sproull, ChairCommittee on Digital Archiving and the NationalArchives and Records AdministrationviiiPREFACEBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgment of ReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NationalResearch CouncilÕs Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is toprovide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draftmanuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:William Y. Arms, Cornell University,Paul Conway, Duke University,W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts, Amherst,Hector Garcia-Molina, Stanford University,
James Gray, Microsoft Bay Area Research Center,Michael E. Lesk, Rutgers University,Charles McClure, Florida State University,
Mark Seiden, MSB Associates, andJ. Timothy Sprehe, Sprehe Information Management Associates.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and sugges-tions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they seethe final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by RobertBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.J. Spinrad, Xerox Corporation (retired). Appointed by the National Research Council, he wasresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried outin accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefullyconsidered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring
committee and the institution.xACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContentsSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
1ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USEREXPECTATIONS18

An Avalanche of Digital Information, 18Planning for Continued Technology Change, 21Long-Term Preservation, 23
Growing User Expectations, 31Other Technology Trends, 322REENGINEERING PROCESSES TO MEET THE ELECTRONICRECORDS CHALLENGE35
Recent Initiatives of the National Archives and Records AdministrationRelated to Electronic Records, 35Process Reengineering to Realize ERA Goals, 403PARTNERING WITH OTHER INSTITUTIONS46
Application Programming Interfaces, 46Federation, 474BROADENING RESEARCH INTERACTIONS50
Rationale for Supporting Research, 50
Research Management for Agencies Without a Track Record in SponsoringResearch in Information Technology, 52Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSEngaging the Research Community Through Means Other Than FundingResearch, 54Research Challenges Facing the National Archives and RecordsAdministration, 55Concluding Remarks, 585RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY59
Digital Assurance Tools and Principles, 60Assurance at Record Ingest, 62Assurance During Retention, 63
Assurance at Delivery to Archive Users, 68Assurance for Additional Information, 68Threat Modeling and Threat Countering, 69
Evolution of Assurance of Records, 69APPENDIXESABRIEFERS TO THE STUDY COMMITTEE73
BÒSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONSÓ CHAPTER FROM THECOMMITTEEÕS FIRST REPORT76
COCTOBER 16, 2003, LETTER REPORT TO THE NATIONAL ARCHIVESAND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION87
DCOMMITTEE MEMBER AND STAFF BIOGRAPHIES94
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11Summary and RecommendationsThe National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) launched its ElectronicRecords Archives (ERA) program in 1998 to create a system to preserve and provide access tofederal electronic records. Early steps in the ERA program included NARAÕs exploration ofpossible solutions and its undertaking of development projects with partners, including the
San Diego Supercomputer Center, the University of Maryland, and the Georgia Tech ResearchInstitute. In 2004, NARA released the final version of its ERA request for proposals (RFP) andselected two contractors to develop designs for the ERA.The first report1 of the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on Digital Archiving andthe National Archives and Records Administration and its subsequent letter report2 providedrecommendations on design, engineering, and related issues facing the ERA program, which
was being conceived at the time of their writing. Although some of the reportsÕ conclusionsrelate to specific development initiatives and early design ideas, most of the observationsabout archive system design are not tied to these specifics and should remain useful to NARA
as it develops, refines, and iterates the ERA program. The ÒSummary and RecommendationsÓchapter of the committeeÕs first report is reprinted in Appendix B of the present report, and its2003 letter report is reprinted in Appendix C.The ERA program has been involved in procurement activities, but this committee has notbeen given access to information about the ERA design since the issuance of the ERA programÕsRFP, and this report does not containÑor comment onÑtechnical details about the current
system designs. The committee does urge that NARA find a mechanism, consistent with1National Research Council. 2003. Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Ad-ministration: Recommendations for Initial Development, Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg (eds.). The NationalAcademies Press, Washington, D.C.2National Research Council. 2003. ÒLetter Report on Building an Electronic Records Archive at the NationalArchives and Records Administration.Ó The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., October 16.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAprocurement regulations, for obtaining a comprehensive outside technical review of the ERAdesigns that are proposed by its contractors. The committeeÕs first report recommended thatNARA establish an ongoing advisory group on digital preservation and information technol-ogy (IT) system design; such a body might be charged with carrying out a review of this type.This final report focuses on longer-term, more strategic issues that are related to electronicrecords archiving at NARA, including technology and other trends that shape the context inwhich the ERA exists, the archival processes of the ERA itself, and the future evolution of the
ERA system. In addition, it addresses an important set of technical and design issues associ-ated with assuring record integrity and authenticity that were not covered in detail in thecommitteeÕs earlier reports.NARA recognizes that it faces a significant challenge. The ERA program, the RecordsManagement Redesign initiative, and NARAÕs work on records management under the e-government initiative led by the Office of Management and Budget all reflect NARAÕs aware-
ness of these problems and represent positive steps in starting to address them. As the find-ings and recommendations below indicate, electronic records represent both a substantialchallenge and a significant opportunity for NARA.The committeeÕs findings and recommendations are organized under and support thefollowing six high-level recommendations:1. Get ready for a rapidly rising tide of electronic records.2. Plan for continuing technology change and increasing user expectations.3. Reengineer relations with federal agencies to help them create records that are archive-ready.4. Do not assume that ERA is unique: become more involved with other organizations thathave interests in preserving electronic records.5. Learn how to exploit the enthusiasm and capabilities of the research community andwork with others who do that well.6. Take strong measures internally and provide government-wide leadership to ensurerecord integrity and provenance.These recommendations are discussed in more detail below.RECOMMENDATION 1. PLAN FOR A RISING TIDE OF ELECTRONIC RECORDSFinding 1.1  Within a short time, the vast majority of records will be electronic. The volume
of records and the challenge of preserving them will continue to grow significantly.Four technology effects are creating an avalanche of digital materials: the growing fractionof information that is born digital and not systematically retained on paper, the relative easeand inexpensiveness of recording information digitally compared with the effort and cost ofrecording it on paper, the advent of new technologies for communicating and recording infor-
mation, and the decreasing cost of storage, which drives the retention of information thatpreviously would have been discarded.It is reasonable to expect that the growth in the amount of digital information produced insociety at large will likewise occur in governmentÑand thus the growth in the volume ofpermanent records. The volume of data to be stored will also grow because individual recordsBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3will continue to become larger. In addition, the total number and variety of record data types3that must be stored by NARA and other repositories will increase over time as new versions ofexisting types are created and entirely new ones are invented.Recommendation 1.1  The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) should
devote a significant and growing fraction of its attention and resources to electronic records,especially in the areas of records management, appraisal, and transfer of records to NARA.A rapid shift to electronic records has two important implications. First, as the findingsand recommendations below detail, many of the processes associated with appraisal, schedul-ing, ingest (i.e., intake of records and associated metadata), and access will require majormodification in order to accommodate the volume of electronic records expected. Second, as
the share of records that are electronic continues to grow rapidly, the relative resources allo-cated for their management compared with resources for managing traditional records willneed to grow as well. Over the coming decade or so, electronic records will become the
primary line of business for NARA rather than a side activity. This change will have implica-tions for NARAÕs organizational culture, structure, and staffing.Finding 1.2  New forms of records will emerge as electronic systems capture new kinds of
information that may also constitute essential evidence.The way that government conducts its business has been transformed by the pervasive useof electronic systems. As those systems evolve, so too will the types of records that must be
handled by NARA. Certainly, a great many formal government communications continue touse familiar, traditional records: forms, memoranda, pictures, and so on. But other types ofinformation that could well be deemed Òessential evidenceÓ4 are also being captured byelectronic systems. They include new forms of communication, dynamically generated infor-mation, and transactions. Saving the potentially huge amounts of data associated with thesenew types of information, re-creating the behavior of old IT systems decades later, and estab-
lishing what should be retained as a permanent record are all extremely difficult challenges.Recommendation 1.2  NARA should develop the capacity to predict and anticipate signifi-
cant changes in record types and volume, styles of record keeping, and concepts of what
should be preserved as a permanent record as well as the implications of such changes forfuture versions of the Electronic Records Archives (ERA).Sustained growth in record volume, the continual introduction of new record types, newforms of record keeping, and new concepts of what constitutes a record mean that NARA willneed the knowledge and agility to respond in a timely and effective manner so that it can makenecessary changes to its systems and processes and so that it can advise and influence agencies
as they implement new systems. To stay abreast of developments, NARA does not needdetailed surveys, which are costly and difficult to conduct, but it does need to develop thecapacity internally and externally (e.g., through research activities or advisory committees) to3ÒData typesÓ is a more general term than Òfile formats,Ó although the latter may be more familiar.4ÒThe mission of the National Archives and Records Administration is to ensure, for the Citizen and the PublicServant, for the President and the Congress and the Courts, ready access to essential evidence.Ó National Archivesand Records Administration (NARA). 2003. Ready Access to Essential Evidence: The Strategic Plan of the NationalArchives and Records Administration. NARA, Washington, D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARApredict changes and discontinuities in record types by monitoring new data types, informa-tion production rates, and similar trends throughout society and within government.RECOMMENDATION 2.  PLAN FOR CONTINUING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE
AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONSBecause plans at the outset are for the ERA to operate for a long time, considerable technol-ogy change will occur over the course of its existence. The committee does not have a crystalball allowing it to see far into the technology future, but past experience does suggest somerelevant technology trends that are likely to persist, as described below. Technology changes
will, in turn, fuel user expectations: as new technology yields new capabilities that are de-ployed in systems outside NARA, users will expect the ERA to keep up. These expectationsare also considered below.Finding 2.1  Sustained performance improvements in the ERAÕs component technologies
will continue indefinitely.Although precise changes in the ERAÕs component technologies cannot be predicted, somegeneral trends are apparent. For example, as in the past, new forms of storage providing suchdesired characteristics as higher volumetric density, lower cost, and faster access times willcontinue to emerge, and the commercial market will move toward these new technologies. Also,
the familiar trends of ever-faster processors and networks will continue, making cost-effectivenetwork transfer and processing of ever-larger volumes of records possible. The past 20 yearshave seen sustained improvements in computing performance in many different respects, and
there is no reason to suppose that such sustained improvements will not continue.Recommendation 2.1  Because radical changes in information technology cannot be specifi-
cally anticipated, the ERA should be designed for change.The continuous and significant change in technology capabilities into the indefinite futuremeans that flexibility in the design of the Electronic Records Archives will be essential. ThecommitteeÕs first report stressed the need for a modular design for the ERA to allow compo-
nents to evolve or to be replaced incrementallyÑadvice that remains critical for the success ofthe ERAÕs initial design and future evolution. As the ERA evolves, improving its ability tochange should be a major objective. For example, use of commercial off-the-shelf technology
should be emphasized for the ERA, and ERA software should be written to be as portable aspossible across offerings of different computer and storage vendors. Because network inter-faces and protocols are likely to remain relatively stable, the ERA should conform to prevail-
ing network standards. The ERA should also be designed to be readily extensibleÑthat is, toaccommodate change such as the introduction of new record formats without requiring imme-diate or widespread modification of the system.Finding 2.2  The gains of new technologies will be highly skewed toward higher-volume
products.Certain computer technologies, such as ATA/IDE5 disk drives and Ethernet networks, arehigh-volume, low-cost products for which the cost-performance ratio steadily improves. These5The customary industry shorthand for a family of hard-drive interface standards (ATA, Advanced TechnologyAttachment; IDE, Integrated Drive Electronics); see also the subsection entitled ÒExploiting the Commercial Main-streamÓ in Chapter 1.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS5products generally conform to de facto industry standards that have a relatively long lifetime,and backward compatibility is generally provided across several product generations. Low-volume products, in contrast, rarely exhibit sustainable cost-performance characteristics andoften disappear rapidly from use. TodayÕs trend in moving to disk from tape for mass storage
is an example of what often happens in such cases, with a very high volume product replacinga relatively low volume product.Recommendation 2.2  Components of the ERA should evolve in step with prevailing com-
mercial trends.The ERA will benefit from continuing technology evolution only if the ERA implementa-tion stays roughly in step with mainstream commercial trends. NARA should therefore use
high-volume products wherever possible. The functions of the ERA are not uncommon enoughto support the use of unique hardware or software components; using such componentswould expose NARA to the risk of significantly greater costs and more difficult system evolu-
tion. NARA should be wary of special-purpose solutions that do not enjoy the benefits ofcontinuous technology improvements driven by a large and active community of users. TheERA program should plan and budget for renovations of both hardware and software to stay
on the technology curve of mainstream IT.Finding 2.3  Full-content search, information retrieval, and information extraction offer
inexpensive and reasonable, albeit imperfect, capabilities today for textual materials.One of the major challenges for the ERA system is that of ingesting the anticipated volumeof records without being bogged down by the human effort associated with producing thepurely descriptive metadata that have historically been important for finding records. Realis-
tically, there are unlikely to be enough resources (people or dollars) to rely on anything otherthan computer-based algorithms for this purpose.One approach to reducing this burden is full-content searching. There has been consider-able progress in this areaÑthat an enormous body of publicly accessible Web pages anddocuments of multiple data types can be searched effectively by search engines such as Googleis a major achievement of relevance to NARA. Furthermore, there is widespread demand for
better searching technologies.Another approach is to use information-retrieval techniques such as the family of tech-niques for automatic metadata extraction. These methods, which make use of information-
extraction techniques to extract metadata from the content of records, have reached a level ofmaturity that permits them to be used in production systems; the techniques will continue toimprove steadily, but no breakthroughs are on the horizon. Information-extraction techniques
do not and will not provide the accuracy of a human. Nevertheless, they are much less expen-sive than manual processing is, and in some instances the margin of error they provide may beacceptable to NARA (and to NARAÕs customers, who may be more interested in having rapid
access to a larger universe of archived records than in high precision).  For the foreseeable
future, automatic metadata extraction will need to be combined with expert guidance toachieve usable results.Importantly, as is true with the provision of search capabilities, automatic metadataextraction need not be performed at ingest of records. The highest priority at ingest iscapturing the records along with metadata that are not discernible from the content; the
extraction of additional metadata can be deferred and can of course be repeatedly applied astechniques improve.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAFinding 2.4  There is no general technical solution for the digital preservation problem
today, and one is unlikely to appear any time soon.As discussed in the committeeÕs first report, the ability to create, store, and retrieve the bitsthat represent a record is a fundamental requirement of the ERA. Good implementations of
this capability will be quite complex and will require refinement and evolution over time.However, the basic requirements for this part of the ERA are fairly well understood, andtechnologies exist or are being developed to satisfy most of them.Ensuring that bits can be understood by systems and by human beings in the distant futureis much more difficult, however. The committeeÕs first report, citing the imperative of makingsignificant progress toward implementing an archival system, proposed a pragmatic, short-
term strategy. But as development of the ERA proceeds, NARA will need to seek out longer-term solutions.For the long term, no generally applicable technical solution is evident. No single pro-posed approach to digital preservation, including migration, migration to durable fixed for-mats, or emulation, will work in all cases. Each method has its advantages; each has draw-backs and associated costs. One cannot know with any great certainty which proposed methods
for preserving the interpretability of digital objects into the distant future will subsequently bedeemed successful, much less relatively cost-effective. Preservation will therefore require acombination of approaches. Selecting the appropriate preservation techniques is part of the
expertise that will be required of electronic records archivists. There will be a need for compro-mises based on user requirements and varying levels of service that NARA provides fordifferent records.The preservation problem is unlikely ever to be completely solved. Instead, our under-standing will grow over time in IT areas that become relatively stable, such as relationaldatabases and geographic information systems, and as digital preservation increasingly be-
comes a mainstream activity. In spite of this growth in understanding, new problems will ariseas novel record data types emerge.There is, however, a significant opportunity for NARA to ease some preservation prob-lems by helping promote the development and adoption of formats that have desired at-tributes for preservation. These attributes include public specifications, broad applicability,compatibility with prior-format versions, and stability. NARA has already been involved in
the development of one such format, the nascent Portable Document Format (PDF)/A stan-dard. NARA will need to determine and periodically amend the list of formats that it preferen-tially supports and work to ensure that record-creating agencies provide records in these
supported formats. This is an important part of ensuring that records are created archive-ready (see Recommendation 3.1).Finding 2.5  User expectations will be high and will continue to grow as the capabilities
offered by other information technology (IT) services improve.Users are likely to expect NARA to keep pace with the aggressive rate of improvementsthat they see in commercial online services. Also, it is reasonable to expect that users will want
appropriate transformation and processingÑsuch as conversion from persistent forms intoeasily usable formsÑand not just access to raw data. In other words, users will expect serviceswell beyond the simple delivery of static records.Given its limited resources, NARA cannot afford to meet all of these expectations for allBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS7records. Expectations will need to be reconciled with the notion of varying levels of service fordifferent record types. One such adjustment would be to make all records easily accessible eventhough they were not all equally easy to view or process. Another approach would be to enablethird parties to meet the requirements of users who have special retrieval or processing needs or
who must work with infrequently used document formats (see Recommendation 4.1).RECOMMENDATION 3. REENGINEER PROCESSES TO ACCOMMODATECHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES PRESENTED BY ELECTRONIC RECORDSIf NARA and federal agencies do not succeed in transforming their approach to transfer-ring permanent records for preservation, the probable result will be significant difficulty inacquiring the desired permanent records and a costly, labor-intensive effort applied to thoserecords that are acquired. As the subrecommendations below detail, NARA should therefore
establish procedures and systems to ingest new records automatically on a routine basis,capture metadata at or close to record creation, take steps to increase the likelihood thatrecords are provided archive-ready, and use automatic techniques to supply missing metadata.
In implementing the recommendations below, NARA should determine the areas in whichexisting law and regulations provide sufficient flexibility and those in which changes to thepolicies governing records management may be required.Finding 3.1  The growing volume of electronic records will swamp a system that relies on
manual processing.As the volume of electronic records to be stored in the ERA grows (Recommendation 1),existing processes, which rely on manual handling of records, will cease to be cost-effective, oreven feasible. Affordability requires automation. It is, for example, not feasible to manuallysupply additional metadata about ingested records except at a very coarse level of granularity.Finding 3.2  Preparation for the ingest of electronic records closer to their creation will make
archiving easier, cheaper, and more accurate.The ingest of electronic records decades after their creation could be problematic. This isbecause obsolete data and metadata formats may be difficult to interpret, and it may be quitedifficult to modify the systems in which the records reside in order to facilitate ingest.There are two very similar techniques for addressing this problem: a passive one, in whichNARA is sent records early, on a provisional basis, and carries out a Òdry runÓ of ingest; andan active one, in which NARA actually ingests records in anticipation of a future transfer ofcustody to NARA. Both give early warning of potential problems with ingest. Although the
active mode gives NARA the most information about the records that it will have to handle, itis probably harder for agencies (and NARA) to implement. On the other hand, the resultingarchival copies might also provide additional incentives for agencies to support the creation of
archive-ready records and their delivery to NARA, as the ERA could provide off-site backupof agency records.Finding 3.3  Automated ingest depends on records being provided in structured, standard-
ized formats together with sufficiently standardized essential metadata.Without some degree of standardization in the essential metadata (metadata that cannotbe derived from the record itself through information extraction or search), the ingest of eachBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAset of records will require significant, costly human intervention.  Nonetheless, NARA and the
ERA system will have to be flexible in accepting records from originating agenciesÑthat is,neither NARA processes nor the ERA design should be brittle with respect to variationsresulting from legacy systems, poor implementation of unusual record types, and other cir-
cumstances.Recommendation 3.1 To permit records to be ingested using largely automated processes,NARA should strive to change federal agency practice and system design so that permanent
electronic records are created or provided to NARA Òarchive-ready.ÓIn order to achieve the requisite degree of standardization of formats and essentialmetadata, NARA will need to provide very explicit guidance and realistic requirements that
record-keeping software systems can support. These would need to be requirements thatagencies can implement without significant changes to normal business processes or withoutinvesting in large amounts of human effort to provide needed metadata. In particular, NARA
should consider requiring all newly acquired agency systems that produce permanent recordsto do the following: create those records in formats acceptable to NARA, include explicitmetadata in their output, and use standardized mechanisms for transferring records to NARA,
such as using secure network communications.  In the long run, archiving considerations willhave to become part of the government process of software procurement and development forsystems that produce or are deemed likely to produce permanent records.When a government agency does indeed revise or reengineer its business practices, it can(and sometimes does) vastly improve its records-management practices. These reengineeringefforts are opportunities for NARA to furnish the guidance and standards that ensure that
archive-ready records are created by the reengineered system.Successful implementation of the ERA system may also require NARA to become moreactively involved in the establishment of standards used in constructing federal systems, such
as those governing the formats used to represent records and associated metadata. It may alsorequire NARAÑor other bodies responsible for information policy, such as the Office ofManagement and BudgetÑto establish guidance to agencies, together with auditing and en-
forcement tools as necessary.Experience shows the difficulty of implementing systems that depend on user-suppliedmetadata or that depend on user compliance with externally imposed requirements that take
effort and do not necessarily support the userÕs internal business needs. Consequently, NARAshould foster the development of software that automatically captures metadata at recordcreation. It should also work closely with agencies to determine whether its requirements can
realistically be implemented and link archive-ready concerns with agency interests in support-ing the agenciesÕ own record-keeping operations.Finding 3.4 NARA should not let the existing backlog of electronic records that are notarchive-ready undermine the long-term objectives of developing capabilities and processesto handle new records through automation.Over the long term, the preceding recommendations address the move to automated in-gest of records. However, a considerable backlog of electronic records already exists, and itwill continue to grow before automatic measures take full effect. If NARA is to avoid beingtotally swamped, it will have to perform triage on the handling of the backlog. This will mean
avoiding significant manual processing, preserving the obvious context and features of theBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS9environment that would support extraction of automatic metadata in the future, and usingautomatic metadata extraction (and accepting its shortcomings).Recommendation 3.2 The ERA system should include fallback capabilities that do notrequire intensive manual processing for instances in which agencies do not provide records
archive-ready. NARA should accept and accommodate the resulting varying levels ofmetadata quality.There will be many cases, including those involving legacy and noncompliant systems, inwhich the specified or desired metadata are not provided along with agency records. As afallback, NARA should employ low-cost if imperfect techniques for automatic metadata ex-traction. Such techniques are a much more cost-effective way than is manual processing for
handling enormous volumes of records. Using these techniques will require NARA to acceptsignificant imperfection in some of its metadata and thus to shift from the current mindset ofhaving very high quality metadata.It will also be necessary for ERA systems and processes to carefully track the provenanceof metadata and to distinguish among different metadata sources, which have varying quality.As metadata-extraction techniques improve, the metadata can be upgraded; the ERA should
accommodate easily making such updates to record descriptors. Improved search techniquescan also be used to improve future access.Recommendation 3.3 NARA should carefully consider its approach to the description, ap-praisal, and selection of electronic records for retention. The trade-off between cost andutility should always be considered.As discussed above, it is essential for the ERA to able to ingest records automatically andto have the agencies that create records take on greater responsibility for providing requiredmetadata. However, this does not mean that agencies would have to take on the full burdentraditionally borne by archivists.The costs and benefits for varying levels of investment in metadata (using either manual orautomatic processing) should be considered carefully. Electronic records present significantopportunities to exploit new capabilities, such as full-content searching, structured docu-
ments, and automated metadata creation. To the extent that NARA can make use of full-content searching, and exploit search and other access mechanisms that agencies themselveshave created for their own records, there will be opportunities to create new kinds of finding
aids that do not rely on manual processing.Also, there are trade-offs between what is gained through fine-level appraisal versus thecosts of making the selection of electronic records for retention. There is a growing volume of
information being produced, there are ever-improving automated techniques for findingrecords, and a rapidly falling cost of storage. Thus, instead of examining records carefully tomark only a select few for retention, it may become more expedient, and more appropriate, to
retain larger ÒchunksÓ of records (even if some of the records may not warrant retention aspermanent records), in order to ensure cost-effective preservation of the governmentÕs output.Such a shift would appear to be consistent with NARAÕs Records Management Initiative, with
its emphasis on functional appraisal, which implicitly is more broadly granular.Recommendation 3.4 NARA should continue to expand the use of cooperative arrange-ments that shift responsibility for preserving and providing access to records to the agen-
cies that create them.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAThe model of having certain agencies retain responsibility for certain types of records byoperating what are, in effect, affiliated archives, is well established (e.g., the arrangementscovering the preservation of large scientific data sets; a NARA-Government Printing Officeagreement). This model could be expanded. Under such arrangements, NARAÕs role shifts to
that of a standards setter, a records-access federator, and a repository of last resort.NARA would benefit from allowing more agencies to operate affiliated archives because itcould then spend its scarce resources on problems that the agencies cannot address on their
own. Such arrangements would also provide a way for NARA to partner with agencies toprovide better access to records. Advanced access services are best provided or supported bythe mission agency that knows the domain; in this way the requisite expertise in managing a
complex system need not be transferred to NARA. Advanced access capabilities can also beprovided by third parties, possibly for a fee (see Recommendation 4.1). With these opportuni-ties comes the responsibility for establishing and verifying appropriate standards for affiliated
archives and for establishing fallback mechanisms in the event that agencies cannot fulfill theirresponsibilities at some point in the future.For such partnerships to work, NARA will have to offer some form of incentive. Forexample, as NARA develops its electronic capabilities, it has the opportunity to provide ge-neric expertise in electronic records management and preservation that complements the sub-ject-matter expertise of the partner agencies. Finally, as the number of partnerships grows,
NARA can collect, codify, and disseminate best preservation practices.In addition to depending on NARAÕs contributions, the success of cooperative agreementswill depend on agencies honoring their commitments under these agreements. NARA may
need to assume the role of auditor.RECOMMENDATION 4. ENABLE PARTNERSHIPS WITH OTHERORGANIZATIONS WITH INTERESTS IN ELECTRONIC RECORD PRESERVATIONIn the long run, the ERA should become part of a larger collection of archives, libraries,and information services operated by governments, nonprofit organizations, and the privatesector rather than a unique, stand-alone system that only NARA runs. Many other organiza-tions are also developing large collections of electronic materials and associated systems and
toolsÑnotably, initiatives launched by the Library of Congress, the Government PrintingOffice, and the National Library of Medicine.Finding 4.1  An open architecture with public interfaces would allow NARA to outsource
some functionality, encourage competition of services, and foster innovation in access.By designing the ERA system so that third parties can build new capabilities on top of it,NARA can accomplish several things. It can, at low cost, tap the resources and entrepreneur-
ship of other organizations, commercial firms, and researchers to provide enhanced services,help fulfill NARAÕs mission, increase the perceived value of NARAÕs holdings, and explorenew technologies and approaches.Recommendation 4.1  NARA should use a design strategy for the ERA that enables a rangeof other organizations to provide access services that NARA does not offer.NARA does not have to be the sole access provider. Instead, it can enable agency partnersand private service providers to develop alternative access mechanisms. Different providersBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11could, for example, offer different views of the same underlying data, index them differently,or derive new digital products from them. Capabilities that might be built on top of the ERAsystem include the following: data annotation to supplement and correct record metadatathrough third-party systems that are separate from NARA, but accessible as if part of a unified
system; the continued introduction of specialized, enhanced capabilities by partners and ven-dors that support particular needs; and entrepreneurship to provide value-added services,either through application programming interfaces (APIs) or bulk download.The resultÑand the desired outcomeÑis that NARA would be able to leverage consider-able assistance from its customers, partners, and other third parties. Once the technical capa-bilities were in place, NARA could take the concept one step farther by actively seeking out
partners to work in areas of interest. This effort would provide NARA with a low-cost methodof exploring new technologies and staying on the leading edge.Recommendation 4.2  NARA should anticipate future demand for federated access to
records in the ERA and other affliated archives.Federated access, in which a software layer allows one to access a collection of archives asif it were a single archive, would be a valuable capability.  Federation would provide a

common interface to federal records regardless of which agency happened to have responsi-bility for managing them. (Recommendation 3.4, above, recommends distributing some of theburden for archiving to institutions beyond NARA.) Federated access would also be valuable
in allowing access to span NARA and presidential library resources, for example.  Early
iterations of the ERA design may well not include these capabilities, but the ERA should bedesigned with their future addition in mind.Although there is a large relevant technology and standards base, there is currently no realcorresponding base of operational practice in federating access to archives. Among the issuesto consider are the minimum common standards that archives must agree to (e.g., unique
record identifiers) to support federated access. The easiest way to accommodate federationmight be to expose an API that accommodates it. And if that API is exposed, federation couldbe provided by third parties with minimal effort by NARA.RECOMMENDATION 5. BROADEN INTERACTIONS WITH THERESEARCH COMMUNITYFinding 5.1  NARA has been too narrowly engaged with the research and development
occurring in digital archiving, digital libraries, and related areas.In the early stages of the ERA program, NARA sponsored several research and develop-ment projects in which it worked with limited segments of the relevant research communityconsisting of a small number of specific organizations. It has not, however, fully exploited
opportunities to engage the broader research communities working in areas related to NARAÕsinterests. Prototypes are a useful part of the system development process and a valuable wayto test and communicate the results of research, but prototypes by themselves do not advance
the state of the art or science.Recommendation 5.1  NARA should be more actively engaged with multiple and diverse
sources of research so as to gain early experience with emerging technologies, build inter-
nal expertise, and ensure that its future needs are met.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARABy virtue of its extensive experience in archiving and its significant needs for preservingelectronic materials, NARA should more actively engage relevant research communitiesÑforexample, by sponsoring research, suggesting problems that need to be addressed, engagingwith researchers, hosting workshops and seminars, and hiring students. These activities would
help meet NARAÕs needs and those of the broader archival and preservation communities.An organization like NARA should be involved in research for several reasons: (1) to gainearly experience with technologies that might be expected to begin appearing in commercial
products within roughly 3 to 5 years, (2) to learn more broadly about a research area throughdirect and regular engagement with related research communities and the experts withinthose communities, (3) to describe to researchers challenging problems faced by NARA, and
(4) to build absorptive capacity to understand how to apply the results of relevant researchsponsored by other organizations.NARA should anticipate that since research involves a degree of risk, not all researchprojects will necessarily produce results that can be implemented directly. The trade-off is thatNARA stands to benefit from innovative ideas that had not been anticipated.To manage its research activities most effectively, NARA should seek to employ individu-als who have existing relationships with the various relevant research communities. Suchindividuals should also bring with them a proven track record of producing or applyingresearch results in these areas.Finding 5.2  Most of the technical challenges faced by NARA are shared with other organi-zations operating large repositories for digital materials, but a few problems are specific tothe operation of NARA and similar archives.Two distinct classes of research areas in which NARA appears to have unmet technologyneeds are apparent:1. Problems shared with other organizations. Most of NARAÕs technical problems are the sameas those faced by designers and operators of any large digital library or repository. For thesetypes of problems, NARAÕs greatest leverage will come from drawing on research sponsored
by other organizations, learning about best practices, inducing others to work on problems ofinterest to NARA by offering corpora, and participating in joint research programs with otherfederal agencies and organizations that face similar challenges. Wherever technologies may be
shared with other applications, partnerships to jointly address problems involving these tech-nologies will help stretch limited research resources. By joining with others, NARA also cancouple to a joint learning curveÑthat is, it wonÕt have to make unique mistakes.2. Problems specific to government archives and similar institutions. Examples of research prob-lems of particular importance to NARA and similar institutions include the following: howgovernment transactions systems should be preserved, how to provide digital assurances over
a very long period of time, and how to provide semiautomated redaction and declassificationof materials. Working on these more specialized problems may require engagement withspecific existing research communities. Partnership with agencies that have greater experience
in managing IT research programs is also likely to be the most effective mechanism for thisclass of research problems.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS13Recommendation 5.2   NARA should develop a research strategy that lays out its technical
needs and the partnerships that would best address them.Considering NARAÕs limited resources, its limited capacity to manage research programs,and a set of challenging technical problems related to the general topic of archiving and digital
preservation, the issues of how and where NARA should invest arise. Questions for NARA toconsider include these: What agencies share an interest in NARAÕs problem or a similarproblem? What research community is working on that problem or a similar problem? How
can NARA most effectively join and influence that community?  How can it learn from or
participate in othersÕ research programs? What results are anticipated, and how will the re-sults be brought back to NARA?The development and deployment of the ERA will engender a number of research topics.Some of these topics can perhaps be anticipated now, but others will arise only as experiencewith the ERA accrues. Having a research agenda will help guide NARA in selecting which
research initiatives and organizations to become involved with. As NARA defines its researchagenda, it should be careful to frame its needs as problems that academic and commercialresearchers can understand and address, and it should frame them in ways that are amenable
to working in partnership with other organizations.Developing a research agenda is likely to be daunting when an organization is in the midstof a rapid technological and cultural shift, as is NARA today. Fortunately, NARA need not
(and should not) work in isolation or start from scratch in developing a research agenda.Partnering with more experienced research organizations, as recommended below (see Rec-ommendation 5.3), will help, but NARA will nonetheless need to develop its own voice.
Several recent research agendas in the area of archiving and preservation (including reportsprepared for the National Science Foundation [NSF], the Library of Congress, and NARAÕsNational Historical Publications and Records Commission) provide a basis for NARA to find
common ground with other research initiatives.Recommendation 5.3  NARA should implement its research strategy by working with other
agencies that have similar research needs and expertise in managing research programs.Implementation of NARAÕs research strategy will require parsing the agenda into a re-search program, building or joining a community of researchers, monitoring work, and creat-ing incentives and opportunities for technology transfer. In carrying out all of these activities,
NARA should seek partnerships with agencies for which research management is a corecompetency, such as NSF or the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Theseagencies have developed considerable expertise with selecting and reviewing research, engag-
ing with research communities, and managing research projects. The selection of specificresearch proposals and routine management of the research process should be left to organiza-tions for which research management is a core competence. NARA should work with its
partners to ensure that it has a voice in developing research initiatives and has opportunitiesto engage directly with the organizations and experts that do the research.NARAÕs fundamental requirements for digital preservation and access are shared to vary-ing degrees with a number of government organizations that also must maintain access todigital records into the indefinite future. Problems such as semiautomatic redaction or declas-sification can be investigated with partners such as DARPA or the intelligence communityÕs
Advanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA). Another opportunity is presented byBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARANSFÕs program in digital preservation, which is explicitly designed to support multiagencyparticipation.Recommendation 5.4  NARA should also engage the research community by providing
access to data in the form of electronic records.Academic researchers are often starved for data: they have good ideas, but no way to testthem in the real world. Providing interesting data in a form that the research community canuse is often a sufficient incentive to get the best people working on a problem. It also provides
a very cost-effective way of engaging a research community. The National Institute of Stan-dards and Technology and a number of university groups have experience in this area;partnering with such an organization would help NARA learn how to create data sets that are
interesting and useful to various research communities.NARA might also consider providing direct access to some of its digital archives in theform of APIs that provide access to selected internal data or operations of the ERA system,
enabling people to build new interfaces or applications on top of NARAÕs archives. Suchaccess would be attractive to a variety of computer science and social science research commu-nities, and it could be provided by NARA at relatively low cost, considering the potential
benefits.RECOMMENDATION 6. ENHANCE CAPABILITIES AND PROVIDE GOVERNMENT-WIDE LEADERSHIP FOR RECORD INTEGRITY AND PROVENANCEAs NARA recognizes, electronic records are subject to a variety of threats, ranging fromaccidental corruption to deliberate tampering, that are quite different in character from thethreats to which paper records are subject. It is essential for the ERA and the records-manage-ment practices that it supports or requires to be up to the task of adequately protecting the
public record.Fortunately, electronic records also afford important opportunities to improve integrityand authenticity assurance through the use of robust cryptographic techniques, automatic
replication, and system design. In order to ensure trust in the digital records held by the ERA,stringent measuresÑincluding the use of cryptographic techniquesÑshould be taken to pro-tect records against deliberate or accidental compromise. These methods should be built into
the ERA system design and its operational procedures. The overall trustworthiness of recordsalso depends on the methods used by agencies that supply records to the ERA. Thus, NARAshould concern itself with the trustworthiness of a record throughout its entire custody chain,
and it should provide leadership on these issues.Finding 6.1  NARAÕs past procedures and practices would be inadequate for safeguarding
digital records.Concepts developed and applied to paper records, such as chain of custody, are also ofvalue in assessing the authenticity of electronic records. They do not, however, adequatelyaddress the threats associated with electronic records. These threats include hardware, soft-
ware, and operational errors, as well as individuals (both outsiders and insiders) who mayeither tamper in subtle ways with individual records or systematically modify large numbersof records.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS15Recommendation 6.1  The ERA should use appropriate technical and procedural methods
available for assuring the integrity and authenticity of electronic records.The new vulnerabilities introduced by virtue of the digital nature of the records to bepreserved underscore the importance of complementing traditional procedures by making
use of robust digital techniques and an appropriate overall system design for verifying integ-rity and authenticity.Digital assurances for records are based fundamentally on maintaining multiple, geographi-cally and administratively separated copies and on two cryptographic toolsÑhash digests for integ-rity checking and digital signatures for authentication.  Digital signatures are an excellent tech-nique for verifying that recently transmitted dataÑsuch as a set of records being transferred
from an agency to NARAÑactually came from where they were supposed to have come, butdigital signatures are a poor means of verifying the origin of stored data. Instead, the origincan be verified (1) at ingest, by recording metadata on the outcome of having verified the
origin of those data at the time they were received, and (2) from then on, by maintaining theintegrity of the stored data and associated metadata. Designing digital assurances into an electronic records archive is similar to designingsecurity measures: that is, the cryptographic techniques must be chosen carefully, but moreimportantly, the overall system design, not just the cryptographic mechanisms, must notallow openings for attackers.  And as with security systems, provisions must be made to

change the cryptographic algorithms or system design if the chosen cryptographic algorithmsare ever found to be faulty (a very likely contingency at some time in the future) or if thesystem design is found to be susceptible to attack.Cryptographic protections are only a part of the solution, however, in part because theydetect damage or attack only after the fact. Prevention and repair are even more crucial partsof the solution and depend on careful procedures and system designs, including the follow-
ing: (1) maintaining multiple copies that are geographically separated and independentlyadministered; (2) tracking records from their origins, through storage and IT systems of vari-ous sorts, and eventually into the archive; (3) protecting the systems that hold records from
unauthorized tampering, both by internal employees and external attackers; (4) employingaccess controls, audit logs, and procedural safeguards when changing the archive contents toreduce human errors (e.g., requiring multiple people to authorize a change); and (5) employ-
ing sound software development methodologies to reduce the likelihood of record corruptiondue to software bugs.Recommendation 6.2  Throughout the ERA system design and operation, NARA should
carry out an iterative threat modeling, analysis, and response process.A threat analysis should be done early in the design of the ERA so that proper securitymeasures can be designed and implemented from the outset. It is essential that ERA design
proposals be analyzed against a threat model in order to gain an understanding of the degreeto which alternative designs are vulnerable to attack. The threat analysis should be under-taken not only for the ERA itself, but also for the entire chain of custody of a record from its
creation, through its retention for active use in a government agency, to its eventual transfer tothe archive. This initial threat modeling would be only the first step of a larger, iterative threat-countering process that involved designing against expected threats, observing failures that
occur, and designing new countermeasures. Threat modeling and analysis are a specializedBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAart, which suggests that NARA should seek outside specialists to undertake these tasks undercontract.Recommendation 6.3  The ERA should be designed so that auditing, monitoring, and test-
ing of ongoing operations verify that digital assurance measures are working as intended.Methods for detecting very rare events such as the corruption of stored information areextremely susceptible to error because they are rarely exercised. The ERA should be designedto include ongoing processes that detect errors and that exercise error-detection and correction
procedures.  One of the threats to ERA integrity is software errors that corrupt file structures.
For this reason, procedures associated with introducing new software must provide for ad-equate testing, gradual introduction of software changes so that impacts on data integrity are
apparent early on, and capabilities to repair any errors that are introduced.Recommendation 6.4  NARA should ensure that it has access to expertise in digital assur-
ance techniques and in the operational procedures that accompany them.The basic cryptographic techniques and other trustworthiness measures discussed in thisrecommendation are widely used in a variety of contexts. However, their application in asystem designed to provide very long term assurances of authenticity, integrity, and chain-of-
custody management is likely to be leading edge for the foreseeable future. As a result, NARAwill need access to highly specialized expertise on an ongoing basisÑfor example, to assessinitial and subsequent system designs and operational procedures. As it would seem difficult
for NARA to maintain this kind of highly specialized expertise in-house, it should considerestablishing an expert advisory committee to specifically address the kinds of issues discussedin this recommendation. Digital assurance in the context of long-term preservation is also a
possible research area for NARA.Recommendation 6.5  NARA should lead an effort to enhance digital assurance for elec-
tronic records government-wide.Agencies also need to protect records, lest NARAÕs archiving activities turn into a Ògar-bage-in, garbage-outÓ exercise. All of the subfindings and subrecommendations presentedabove are equally applicable to the agencies that originate records and later pass them to
NARA and to agencies that manage records locally under cooperative agreements.NARAÕs role in records management offers an opportunity to establish federal standardsand to inaugurate, advance, and even mandate their use in records management. By virtue of
its central role and planned longevity, the ERA is the ultimate client, and perhaps the one withthe most stringent requirements, for secure digital records management. NARA has under-taken leadership in other areas of records management through the Records Management Rede-
sign program and the E-government Electronic Records Management initiative and has issued
records-management guidance in several areas related to digital assurance.  
NARA should helpspread the use of digital assurance techniques, as well as monitor their use in records manage-
ment, throughout the government.CONCLUDING REMARKSAs the National Archives and Records Administration recognizes, its initiatives for elec-tronic records are critical to fulfilling its mission to preserve essential evidence as society andBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS17government information continues to move to a born-digital and even only-digital state. Infulfilling its mission, NARA enters an era in which it must understand, cope with, and em-brace the rapid pace of change that characterizes information technology. As these changesunfold, NARA will face a number of difficult questions, some of them alluded to above.The rapid evolution in government information and information systems provides a goodillustration. Formal government communications continue to be conventional records: forms,letters, pictures, and so on. But citizens and government officials increasingly interact via e-
mail and text and voice messages, not memoranda and forms. Web pages increasingly presentnot only static documents but also ephemeral views that are not stored as records, but aremerely computed from online databases through software that itself changes over time. What
portions of this constantly changing material are essential evidence that documents the na-tional experience? Handling the resulting flood of data and re-creating the behavior of ever-more-complex IT systems decades later are both extremely difficult challenges. The National
Records and Archives Administration of an e-government will have to be equipped to addressthe technical challenges that arise, and to examine and possibly revise how it carries out itsbasic mission.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA181Ongoing Technology Change and
Rising User ExpectationsAN AVALANCHE OF DIGITAL INFORMATIONSeveral important trends are driving the increase in the volume of digital records: moreinformation is being produced and stored, a greater fraction of information is born digital, and
a greater fraction of the born-digital material is retained only in digital form.A study conducted at the University of California, Berkeley, estimated at about 30 percenta year the rate of growth in the total amount of new information stored between 1999 and
2002.1 Much of this information is being produced and stored in digital form. Although it isdifficult to isolate the amount of federal government information in these general data, there isno reason to assume that the federal government is not experiencing these broader trends.A growing percentage of information is born digital, stored in file servers, database sys-tems, correspondence-management systems, and other electronic information systems, andnot systematically retained on paper. The University of California, Berkeley, study found thatthe amount of information printed on paper is still increasing but that printed documentsrepresent less than 1 percent of the total information being produced today and that the vastmajority of information is being stored on magnetic media. This result seems reasonable,
given anecdotal evidence that the vast majority of documents, for example, are created usingoffice automation software. No paper copy may ever be produced of many of the variousborn-digital records that are stored in file servers, database systems, correspondence-manage-
ment systems, and other electronic information systems. As electronic filing systems becomemore commonplace, it will become less likely than in the past for the paper copies that areprinted to be retained systematically.1Peter Lyman and Hal R. Varian. 2003. How Much Information, 2003. School of Information Management andSystems, University of California, Berkeley. Available online at <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/how-much-info-
2003>. Accessed January 7, 2004.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS19This trend away from paper documents is illustrated by the experience of the GovernmentPrinting Office, which reports that the number of documents that it prints has fallen by roughly
two-thirds over the past decade. People are increasingly accessing documents via the Web,and many publications are no longer produced in paper form at all.Five major technology trends support a prediction that the National Archives and RecordsAdministration (NARA) will soon face an avalanche of digital materials:¥Computer technology makes it easier and less expensive to record more information than can berecorded in the paper world. The increasing use of automated systems will make it possible tocapture a larger number of records associated with government functions. Automated e-
government services and systems, for example, will enable and encourage more transactionsper citizen and per government employee.¥Information and transactions are finer-grained. Information is becoming Òfiner-grained.ÓFor example, it will be possible to recordÑand preserveÑall of the individual changes madeto a case file as well as its final contents. Content/document-management systems allow anaudit trail for every individual who ÒtouchesÓ (i.e., creates, displays, copies, or modifies) a
record. This audit trail metadata could be quite voluminous. Also, new kinds of records will becreated as data from government-operated sensors are automatically logged.Many record-keeping systems are transaction-based, with databases whose contents arecontinually changing. In many cases, it may be impractical to log and preserve all of thesetransactions. The alternative is that systems are designed so that snapshots are captured andpreserved on a regular basis. This way of preserving data will require changes in system
design and careful consideration about what should be captured, what format it should becaptured in, what the refresh rate should be, and so forth.¥Information is often dynamically generated. Information used by the public and by decisionmakers is increasingly created on-the-fly. For example, many Web pages today are dynami-cally created and formatted for presentation from underlying databases. The problem ofarchiving databases that change over time is not a new one, but archivists will face more
complex preservation decisions as more and more information is dynamically generated.Even when the underlying database itself is amenable to preservation, displaying informationfrom that database for users poses enormous challenges. For example, the information dis-
played might be the output of analysis software that has gone through multiple revisionsÑwhat was actually viewed on any particular day is a function of the version of the softwarerunning on that day. Capturing such changes and transformations is both challenging and
crucial.¥Technologies will allow people to communicate and record information in new ways. In the1990s, some e-mail messages began to be determined to be permanent records. Likewise,
technologies today are creating records that may be selected in the future for permanentpreservation; examples include video conferencing, instant messaging, voice over InternetProtocol, and video presentations.¥The drop in storage costs drives the retention of information that previously would have beendiscarded. The cost per unit of storage currently falls by roughly a factor of two per year.2 As a2For a detailed examination of trends in disk drive storage, see, for example, H. Grochowski and R.D. Halem,2003, ÒTechnological Impact of Magnetic Hard Disk Drives on Storage Systems,Ó IBM Systems Journal 42(2).Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAresult, enormous quantities of information are being stored today. The University of Califor-nia, Berkeley, study estimates, for example, that just over 400,000 terabytes of original infor-mation are stored each year on hard disks.
3 Indeed, storage costs have dropped so much in thepast decade that many individuals and organizations have stopped Ògarbage collectingÓ (i.e.,
deleting old files) within their stored information. As this trend continues, businesses willincreasingly destroy electronic records on the basis of the business risks of retaining recordsbeyond regulatory mandates rather than because of storage costs. With digital storage grow-
ing ever cheaper, it becomes more economical to keep everything than it is to put in the effortneeded to decide what can be thrown away. Tools capable of searching ever-larger volumes ofinformation will help fuel demand for more things to be considered permanent records.The volume of data to be stored will also grow because individual records will continue tobecome larger. It is becoming easier and more commonplace to generate and digitally store
multimedia and other rich content. A 30-minute video file is much larger than a 30-minuteaudio file. A PowerPoint presentation with embedded animation is much larger than aplaintext file.Finally, the total number and variety of record data types that must be stored by theNational Archives and Records Administration and other repositories will increase over timeas new versions of existing data types and entirely new data types are invented.4The overall growth in the variety of data types will be accompanied by spurts of growthand contraction in the number of data types in active use at any point in time: as a new class ofrecord types emerges, one will likely see an initial explosion of data types. That proliferation
will occur as various vendors introduce products, and it will be followed by a consolidation toa smaller number of de facto standards as the market picks winners and losers. Over time,barriers to market entry will tend to increase as an industry segment matures; those barriers
will lead to a smaller number of vendors and higher expectations of greater interchangeability.There were, for example, many early word processors, each with its own file format, but today3Peter Lyman and Hal R. Varian. 2003. How Much Information, 2003. School of Information Management andSystems, University of California, Berkeley. Available online at <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/how-much-info-
2003>. Accessed January 7, 2004.4A data type refers to the data-encoding rules describing how various kinds of recordsÑword-processing docu-ments, e-mail messages, imagesÑare expressed as a collection of bits. For example, an image might be represented
by bits whose data type is TIFF, GIF, or JPEG, where the specification describes how the bits are to be interpretedas an image. The more commonplace term Òfile formatÓ is often used interchangeably with data type, but datatype is more appropriate. The literal interpretation of file format is a specification for a file made up of bits. In
some cases the bits might be embedded within a file (e.g., a file might contain a folder that contains multiple e-mailmessages, one of which contains an image of data type GIF). Some data types are wrappers that encapsulate otherdata types. For example, files of data type WAVE may contain linear pulse code modulated or highly compressed
audio. Other data types support bundling of multiple collections of bits that represent a single record togetherwith associated metadata. Compounding the complexity of the problem are the myriad options and subtypesassociated with some data types. For example, TIFF, which is a well-established data type for images, specifies a
wrapper that can contain several different image encodings. Newer image data types such as JPEG-2000 are evenmore complex. The Library of Congress Web site (ÒDigital Formats for Library of Congress Collections,Ó <http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/formats/>, accessed May 1, 2005), from which this discussion was partially drawn,
provides information about various data types.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS21only a small number of data types are commonly used. Similarly, early Web sites depended onnumerous ad hoc scripts, but todayÕs Web sites are commonly implemented using more stan-dard approaches. Today, the broad range of Extensible Markup Language (XML)-related for-mats is relatively immature and can be expected to follow a similar pattern.Despite expected changes over time, for the foreseeable future there will be many datatypes and subtypes in use, creating great difficulty for archiving. NARA will never be able tosupport all of these types and subtypes equally well, yet important records may be created in
these formats. Compromises in terms of the level of service provided will be necessary (see thesection ÒLong-Term Preservation,Ó below).NARA will need to monitor the kinds of trends described above for several reasons. Thevolume and types of electronic records that it must handle have implications for the resourcesdevoted to them. NARA must be able to anticipate trends in order to be able to make necessarychanges to its own systems, to issue requests for proposals (RFPs) with sufficient scalability
requirements, and to advise and influence agencies as they implement new systems. Theobjective is to avoid surprises like the one that occurred in the 1990s when use of e-mailbecame widespread and it proved difficult to adapt to this novel form of records.It is neither essential nor cost-effective to carry out detailed surveys of potential types andvolumes of records. Internally, NARA will need staff with the expertise and responsibility totrack changes. External advice, such as that obtained through research activities or advisory
committees, can supplement NARAÕs capacity to predict changes and discontinuities in recordtypes and volume. Such external advice would be based on an awareness of new data types onthe horizon and on an understanding of information production inside government and more
broadly in society.PLANNING FOR CONTINUED TECHNOLOGY CHANGEIt is envisioned that NARAÕs Electronic Records Archives (ERA) will operate for manydecades. The enormous changes in information technology (IT) that have occurred just in the
past 10 years suggest that the ERA will experience considerable technology change during itsexistence. These changes will come about in terms of both the types of records that the ERAwill need to accommodate and the technology components that will be available for use in
future iterations of the ERA. Indeed, the technology context and the system itself are likely toevolve during the ERAÕs lifetimeÑso much so that the problem can be usefully viewed largelyin terms of how the ERA system will evolve around the archiveÕs data and the data structures
used to represent them, both of which are comparatively stable.An important component of planning for the ERAÕs evolution will be to identify anddistinguish various trendsÑthose requiring system change, those requiring system additions,
and those requiring simply that the system be sufficiently scalable.Technology Performance ImprovementsAlthough the committee does not have a crystal ball for seeing far into the technologyfuture, past experience suggests some relevant technology trends that are likely to persist.
Precise changes in the ERAÕs component technologies, for example, cannot be predicted, butsome general trends are apparent. Storage will continue to become much denser and cheaper.As in the past, new forms of storage providing such desired characteristics as higher volumet-Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAric density, lower cost, and faster access times will continue to emerge, and the commercialmarket will move toward these new technologies. As was discussed in the committeeÕs firstreport, at present, tape-based storage is gradually being replaced by magnetic disk storage.Also, the familiar trend of processors and networks becoming ever faster will continue, mak-
ing possible cost-effective network transfer and processing of ever-larger volumes of records.The past 20 years have seen dramatic performance improvements in many directions. In1984, for example, a state-of-the-art workstation had a processor that operated at 1 million
instructions per second and had 1 megabyte of RAM. In 2004, a competent off-the-shelf per-sonal computer (PC), which cost much less than the 1984 workstation, had a processor with aclock rate of around 2 gigahertz and 1 gigabyte of RAM. In 1984 a 10 megabyte hard drive for
a PC retailed for $2,500; today a 250 gigabyte hard drive for a PC retails for under $200. Thecapacity is up by a factor of 25,000, and the cost per byte is down by a factor of 300,000. In 1984,the fastest links in the Internet were 64 kilobits per second; today the fastest links are 40
gigabits per secondÑup by a factor of nearly a million.Experience has shown that it typically takes a decade or more to figure out what can bedone with such new capabilities. For example, all of the Internet technology necessary to
support the World Wide Web existed by 1982. That included a working Internet, a good-sizedcommunity of users with a need to communicate organized information of various types, theconcept of hypertext, the Domain Name System, and desktop PCs connected to the network.
But the World Wide Web itself wasnÕt invented until 1991Ñit took a full 9 years to work outthe implications and realize that this application was possible. Therefore, even if technologyimprovements were to stop in their tracks tomorrow, one would still expect a very high rate of
change (improvement in performance and cost) in delivered systems for at least another twodecades. And there is no reason to suppose that these sorts of sustained performance improve-ments will not continue into the indefinite future.Exploiting the Commercial MainstreamThe ERA system will benefit from continuing technology evolution only if the ERA imple-mentation stays roughly in step with mainstream commercial trends. The functions of the ERAare not uncommon enough to support the use of unique hardware or software components,
and relying on such components would expose NARA to the risk of significantly greater costsand more difficult system evolution. There will be, to be sure, some solutions that lead the wayand appear to have a good chance of being adopted by a larger community later on. However,
NARA should be wary of special-purpose solutions that do not enjoy the benefits of continu-ous technology improvements.Sustained improvements in the cost-performance ratio are reflected almost entirely inhigh-volume products. Examples of high-volume products today are personal computers;ATA/IDE5 disk drives; compact-disk read-only memory (CD-ROM), CD-recordable (CD-R),digital versatile disk (DVD)-ROM and DVD-R optical storage devices; and Ethernet (10 mega-5The conventional industry shorthand for a family of widely used hard-drive interface standards known asAdvanced Technology Attachment (ATA), Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE), Enhanced IDE (EIDE), and Ultra
Direct Memory Access (UDMA).Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS23bit [Mb], 100 Mb, and 1 gigabit [Gb]) networks. Each of these products has seen sustaineddecreases in cost per unit of performance. In contrast, low-volume products rarely exhibitsustainable cost-performance improvement and often disappear rapidly from use. TodayÕstrend in moving to disk from tape for mass storage is an example of what often happens in
such cases, with a very high volume product replacing a relatively low volume product.Despite the anticipated rapid changes in many component technologies, past experiencesuggests that network interoperability will be relatively stable. Important examples include
the backward compatibility among several generations of Ethernet and the persistence of theInternetÕs Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) standards. As network-ing hardware and software evolve, they are likely to offer backward compatibility of network
protocols and interfaces. Thus it will be possible to connect new equipment to old equipmentvia network hardware of various kinds, and it will be relatively easy to add new capacity to anarchival system and to federate archival systems.Flexible, Modular, and Extensible DesignEffective upgrading of hardware and software to stay on the technology curve of main-stream IT also places a premium on flexibility. At a minimum, the software for the ERA systemshould be written to be as portable as possible across offerings of different computer and
storage vendors. NARA should also seek out products that can be obtained from multiplevendors, so as to avoid being locked in to an arrangement with a single vendor.Another key to the successful functioning of the ERA over time will be careful modulardesign, which is critical to allowing components to evolve or to be replaced as needed. Itsimply takes too long to redesign a monolithic system to exploit technology improvements.Modular design makes a complex problem more tractable by breaking it down into a set of
smaller components and enabling the independent evolution of the parts. This type of systemis decomposed into separate modules, each with a well-defined interface. Properly designedcomponents can then be replaced with improved versions, while causing minimal disruption
to other modules or to the system as a whole. If modules are too large, they become hard tomodify or replace. If the interfaces are overly complex or if they permit internal details of amoduleÕs implementation to become visible to other modules, the ability to change one mod-
ule independently of others may be lost.In addition to being designed for change, the ERA should be designed to be extensibleÑthat is, to be able to adapt to some kinds of changes without requiring modification of the
system, at least not immediately. For example, if NARA began accepting a new format, thesystem should at first accept it as a type Òunknown.Ó That way, new records could be acceptedwithout having to wait for the system to be modified. Later, a small, type-specific module
could be added to facilitate more sophisticated handling of the type.LONG-TERM PRESERVATIONThe committeeÕs first report, citing the imperative of making significant progress towardimplementing an archival system, proposed a pragmatic short-term strategy that included the
following: (1) preserving the original bit stream representing a record; (2) converting recordsto Òpreferred variantÓ formats, where available, that are likely to be more readily interpretablein the future; and (3) preserving enough information for records amenable to emulation ap-Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAproaches so as not to foreclose that option. However, as development of the ERA proceeds,NARA will have to seek out longer-term preservation solutions.As the committeeÕs first report discussed, a fundamental requirement of the ERA is theability to store and retrieve the bit streams representing a record and its associated metadata.
The requirements for this part of the ERA are fairly well understood (although good imple-mentations will be quite complex, and they will certainly require refinement and evolutionover time). In addition, technologies exist or are being developed to satisfy many of these
requirements, and research projects are already reaching advanced states.As a general rule, one keeps the original bits,6 since this allows for using the originalviewer if that is still possible, and it ensures that all information that was in a record is still
there (even if interpreting it may be problematic). Also, the bit stream resulting from a revers-ible transformation applied to the original bits is as good as the original bit stream, providedthat the transformation is error-free. The transformation of an uncompressed bitmap image
into a run-length encoding produces a file equivalent to the original bit stream, assuming, ofcourse, that the technical metadata identify or define the new representation correctly.The lowest level of a system architecture for a digital archive is a storage component thatsees the bit streams as objects. This component supports a simple object interface used tocreate, delete (in cases where a specific retention period applies), and retrieve an object. Manyof the design issues associated with object storage were addressed in the committeeÕs first
report. In practice, good implementations will be quite complex and they will certainly evolve.Therefore, one of the main characteristics of such a subsystem should be its modularity,enabling components to be upgraded without affecting other parts. There is also a growing
commercial interest in subsystems with such object stores. This interest is driven by suchdevelopments as new regulations that mandate long-term retention.However, ensuring that bits can be understood in the distant future is a much more difficultproblem than are issues involving object storage. Various approaches have been developed,7none of which is suitable in all cases. Moreover, one cannot know with any great certainty which
proposed methods for preserving the interpretability of digital objects into the distant future will
subsequently be deemed successful, much less prove relatively cost-effective.Preservation of records will thus require selecting the appropriate preservation techniquesfor particular types of records. An archive can and should, of course, use different approaches
for different types of record, and it can and may simultaneously and in parallel pursue severalapproaches for a particular type of record. Electronic records archivists will need to under-stand the range of available preservation techniques and make judgments about which are
appropriate.Because each approach has potential drawbacks and associated costs, compromises will beneeded, based on levels of service. A compromise may involve preserving a subset of the6The Òbit streamÓ or Òdata streamÓ to be preserved does not include media-specific encoding techniques,checksums, and so forth, that take place at the physical storage layer. The marketplace can generally be relied on toshake out any such Òunder the coversÓ concernsÑfor example, no one today worries about whether (or how) aDVD-ROM reversibly encodes the bits.7There is an extensive literature on the long-term interpretation problem. A compilation of some recent work canbe found in Gerard Clifton and Michael Day, 2004, ÒFile Formats and Tools,Ó in DPC/PADI WhatÕs New in DigitalPreservation, No. 9, July-December, Digital Preservation Coalition, York, United Kingdom; available online at<http://www.dpconline.org/docs/whatsnew/issue9.html#2.3>, accessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS25functionalities associated with a particular record. For example, the archivist may stipulatethat the printed representation of a document is all that matters. In that case, saving the pictureof the page may be sufficient (assuming that there is enough metadata to support efficientaccess). For another type of document, the archivist may require a higher level of service by
asking that the comments hidden in the file also be archived. Then, in order to be equivalent tothe original, the new representation will have to contain the comments. A still higher level ofservice may require that the interactive environment of the word processor itself be reproduc-
ible in the future. Box 1.1 provides some additional examples of levels of service.For each document type (or document type in a particular collection), the archivist needsto determine the appropriate levels of service that should be used. In the example above,
preserving the look of the page and the comments is sufficient if the look and commentsconstitute the essential information of the document. This means that any additional informa-tion (for example, which buttons were used to produce it!) is deemed nonessential, or inciden-
tal. Any incidental information may be discarded in the preservation process without any lossof value.  Deciding what is essential is crucial to good archiving. A report from the National
Archives of Australia says it well: ÒDetermining the essence of records . . . is essential to an
efficient, effective and accountable preservation program. Focusing on the essence of a recordallows us to clearly state our archival requirements for the preservation of that record and tobe held accountable against those requirements.Ó8The archivist has three basic approaches among which to select:1.Keep the information in its original format and rely on running the original viewer on an
emulation of the original system, or running a viewer (or at least a program that decodes theoriginal data) on a stable virtual machine.2.Keep the information in a standard or intermediate format (i.e., converted once at most)
and commit to providing a viewer for that format into the far future.3.Convert the format into a new one when obsolescence is threatening the readability of
the record.Each option is discussed in more detail below.One General Approach to Preservation:Keep the Information in Its Original FormatAs described below, several approaches to preservation rely on keeping the informationfrom a record in its original format.Relying on the Availability of the Original ViewerIn the long term the original viewer will no longer work, but it is important to realize thatthe viewer may still exist in the medium-term. When the original representation is kept, thatviewer can be used, and the threat of obsolescence is delayed, possibly by several years. The8Helen Heslop, Simon Davis, and Andrew Wilson. 2002. An Approach to the Preservation of Digital Records. Na-tional Archives of Australia, Canberra, Australia, December. Available online at <http://www.naa.gov.au/
recordkeeping/er/digital_preservation/green_paper.pdf>. Accessed May 23, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAmetadata play an important role: they must specify (very precisely) the program to be usedand all of the parameters that will ensure a faithful interpretation. The preservation subsystemmay also contain information on various paths for accessing the right application program.For example, the same application program may run on Windows 2000 or Windows XP.
Similarly, the same operating system may run on different hardware environments. Therefore,when a component becomes obsolete along one access path, another path may still be avail-BOX 1.1Examples of Varying Levels of Service for Records Preservation¥Preserving textÑwithout presentation. Assuming that a file is an ASCII text file (original orobtained by converting the document once), metadata can be used to specify how to interpret
the bits. The metadata must include the definition of every character, either in English or by
showing the bitmap of each character in a common font (the bitmap format itself must be ex-
plained). But still, the amount of metadata remains very reasonable.¥Images. It may be reasonable to assume that a few formats for images may be used asstandards (the commonly used options within the Tagged Image File Format (TIFF) standard are
an example) and that such formats will be explained in detail in so many places that decoding
algorithms will always exist. However, some special formats will always exist as well, and once
many formats exist, some will become obsolete more quickly. In such cases, it is preferable to
make sure that the format interpretation is specified in the metadata; if the interpretation is too
complicated, it may be better to convert the original bit stream into another one that may be less
compressed but easier to explain. An alternative is to store a program executable on a virtual
machine; this keeps the original format and only converts it to a simple bitmap image (a logicalview) for presentation on demand. Note that the logical view can be the same whatever theoriginal format is, greatly simplifying the job of the future user.¥Data structures in XMLÑno presentation. Given the widespread and growing use of XML(Extensible Markup Language), an increasing amount of information will be organized and ex-
changed as XML structures. Nonetheless, metadata describing the semantic meanings of the
tags must be captured.¥Relational databases. Multiple levels of service can be identified. The most basic level onlypreserves the data. It comprises the content of the table in a character form and the schema
containing the table and column names, comments on their semantics, units, integrity con-
straints, and so on. Instructions on how to decode the format in which the elements are stored
must also be archived (as a precise explanation or as a program written for a virtual machine).A higher level of service will request that one preserve the querying and reporting capabilitiesof the initial system. If these capabilities were simply those of standard SQL (Structured Query
Language), nothing other than the data would be needed, since a query component could be
written in the future. But modern database systems employ user-defined functions. To be able in
the future to ask the same questions as those asked today, the definition of these functions must
also be preserved. If there is enough incentive to code these functions for a stable virtual ma-
chine, a future system would be able to make use of them. However, as soon as the complexity
increases, a full reenactment of the SQL system may be needed, which in turn requires anBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS27able. A particular use of such metadata may be to trigger an alarm condition when the lastpath is in danger of being broken by obsolescence.9emulation of the original machine. More generally, an application is often used to present thedata (presentation is more than just a literal display of the data in the Relational Database
Management System [RDBMS]), accept transactions, and so forth, and thus it embodies consid-
erable information about the meaning of the data. The raw data (or data schema) alone does not
specify the meaning; either very careful additional documentation must be preserved or there
must be some way to execute or emulate the application at least in part (e.g., for presentation).Another approach is to consider the database as a vehicle in which records are stored so asto provide efficient access and other capabilities. Instead of archiving the vehicle itself, the
records can be rebuilt from the database and archived as data structures.¥General data structure. Not all records are relational or XML. Many files may have theirown format to represent geographical data, engineering data, or statistical data. Not all files can
be converted to XML because, in some cases, the volume of the information in them would
increase dramatically. Thus, there is a need to specify how to decode these formats as well.¥Documents with presentation. When it is important to preserve the look of a printed docu-ment, it is always possible to store an image of the individual pages. In any case, the original bit
stream can be archived, together with information on how to decode it. But these formats can be
so complicated that only a program can do the job. The program can be written for a virtual
machine; it would essentially generate on demand a structure that contains both the tagged data
elements of the document and their explicit presentation attributes, down to the individual char-
actersÕ images. Reconstructing a page is then easy; there is no need for any original word
processor or viewer. An alternative is to do the conversion once at ingest time and to archive the
resulting structure.¥Spreadsheet. A spreadsheet is a document with presentation, so the item above applies. Afirst level of service may be to save the content as an image. But some of the values appearing
in cells are specified as formulas that compute them as a function of the values in other cells. In
the next level of service, these formulas could be stored as metadata to convey the mathemat-
ical relationships between cells. If the archivist decides that a future user should be able to
execute these formulas, then the execution of a program becomes necessary. A virtual machine
approach or emulation can be used.¥Dynamic applications. Extreme cases such as video games or highly interactive applica-tions may require the archiving of programs to reenact the original behavior. If the code exists in
a high-level language, compiling it for a stable virtual machine is possible. But more often the
best alternative is to emulate the original hardware and software on which the program ran.
Since the emulator may have to be time-sensitive, the implementation would be much more
involved.9This functionality has been implemented in a development system. See R.J. Van Diessen, 2002, PreservationRequirements in a Deposit System, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, The Hague, The Netherlands. Available online at <http://www.kb.nl/hrd/dd/dd_onderzoek/reports/3-preservation.pdf>. Accessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARARelying on MetadataIn some simple cases, it is possible to include a specification of the process itself withoutintroducing a program.10 For example, the definition of the BMP bitmap image data type canbe explained in a few sentences. Unfortunately, however, processes are generally too compli-cated to be completely defined by a textual explanation.Relying on StandardsIf it were possible to rely only on a small set of well-established standards, it might bereasonable to imagine that the viewer could be rewritten every time the platform changed.Using standards is certainly good practice. However, the variety of formats that exists today isdue in part to the fact that different formats have different performance or ease-of-use charac-
teristics. Users and communities may not be satisfied with tools that they do not think areoptimal for their applications and their environments.Emulating the Original SystemThe approach of emulating the original system consists of keeping the original executableprogram that was used to create and/or manipulate the information in the first place. Thatprogram (with its operating system) works only on the original or an equivalent machine. Inthe future, the only way to execute the program would be to rely on an emulator.Initial proposals for emulation suggested that a description of the original machine archi-tecture be archived in all its details so that an emulator might be written when needed. Thissuggestion is hard to carry out when the expertise on the original machine has evaporated or
when the original machine is not available for testing. An alternative to this approach is towrite some kind of emulator specification early, when the expertise exists, and to use thatinformation to generate an emulator when the new machine on which it would run is known.
A second alternative is to rely on a stable virtual machine,11 allowing an emulator of theoriginal machine to be writtenÑand debuggedÑat the time the original machine is known. Inthe future, a virtual machine emulator will make it possible to execute the emulator of the
original machine, providing an original machine that then executes the original applicationcode. The metadata must simply contain a userÕs guide on how to run the program.Preserving the execution of the original program is justifiable when reenacting that
programÕs behavior is of interest, but it is overkill for data archiving. In order to archive acollection of pictures when only the pictures themselves are of interest for posterity, it shouldnot be necessary to save the full system that enabled the original user to create, modify, and
enhance the pictures. To read an e-mail, it is not necessary to reactivate the whole e-mailsystem! There is another drawback: in many cases the application program may display thedata in a certain way (for example, a graphical representation) without giving explicit access to10J. Rothenberg. 1999. Avoiding Technological Quicksand: Finding a Viable Technical Foundation for Digital Preserva-tion, Council on Library and Information Resources, Washington, D.C.11R. Lorie. 2001. ÒLong-Term Preservation of Digital Information.Ó Paper presented at Joint Conference on Digi-tal Libraries, Association for Computing Machinery/Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Roanoke,
Va., June 2001.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS29the data themselves. In such a case, it is impossible to export the basic data from the old systemto the new one, making the reuse of the data all but impossible.Relying on a Stable Virtual MachineThe method of preservation that relies on a stable virtual machine consists of archivingwith the original file, a decoding program P, which understands the internal structure andpresents the information in a logical view (a hierarchical structure of tagged elements similarto those used in XML). That program P is written for the virtual machine. In the future, arestore-application program reads the bit stream and the program P; it passes P to an emulatorof the virtual machine that executes it. During that execution the data are decoded and re-turned to the client according to the logical view. The schema of the view (the definition of thetags) can also be archived and retrieved by using a similar technique.Note that in addition to decoding the data structure, the program P may perform anyarbitrary code on the data. For example, some data elements returned in the logical view canbe obtained by computation on other data elements. If the virtual machine provides a minimal
communication mechanism, the program P can receive parameters from the future environ-ment and compute a new object content dynamically.12A Second General Approach to Preservation: Convert Once to aStandard or Canonical FormatRelying on MetadataA format can be converted once into a new format. It is quite possible that the new formatis much simpler to explain than the original one was. This may be a reason to convert once,probably at record ingest time. On the other hand, the new format may be less efficient (withless compression, for example). There is also a risk of error or loss of features in any conver-
sion. The trade-off must be carefully evaluated. However, converting once does not mean thatthe original file cannot be kept as well.Converting the data (once) to XML is starting to be recognized as one approach to thepreservation problem.13 Although it is true that XML can play a very efficient role for purposesof preserving information, it is not by itself a panacea. XML is a convention for identifying dataelements in a character string through the use of tags (the particular tags can be chosen to best fit
the particular application). XML per se does not specify what to do with the data; in particular,it does not say how the data should be presented. However, the tags provide a way for otherprograms (such as style sheets), associated with the XML technology, to take care of the presen-
tation by providing a syntax to specify the presentation attributes for each tag (for example: titlein Helvetica font, 18-point, centered; author in Helvetica, 12-point, centered; and so on). But
XML does not help in preserving the execution of style sheets for the future.12Raymond Lorie and Raymond van Diessen. 2005. ÒLong-Term Preservation of Complex Processes.Ó Paperpresented at Image Science and Technology Archiving Conference, Washington, D.C., April.13For example, the National Archives of Australia has developed an open source software package that providesa plug-in architecture to convert a range of file formatsÑsuch as Microsoft Office and OpenOffice formats, rela-
tional databases, JPEG, GIF, TIFF, PNG, and BMPÑto XML representations for longer-term access.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARARelying on StandardsThe fact that a format can be converted once into another format is very useful if the otherformat is so standard and stable that a viewer will remain available Òforever.Ó Desirable
properties of such standard and stable formats include a public definition, broad applicability,compatibility with prior versions, and a slow rate of change. NARA has played an importantrole in the development of one such formatÑthe draft PDF/A standardÑand can continue to
help promote the development and adoption of formats that have attractive archival proper-ties.Relying on a Stable Virtual MachineAs explained above, a virtual machine can be used to preserve the decoding of an originalfile. The same applies to a file obtained by an initial conversion of the original file onto a newformat. This may be appropriate when tools are available for extracting all essential informa-tion from the original document and storing it in a new format that is simpler to decode.A Third General Approach to Preservation: Migrate the Format into a New One WhenObsolescence Threatens the Readability of the RecordThe third general approach to preservation is what is generally understood by the termÒmigration.Ó14 Each time the configuration of hardware or software is changed in a mannerthat affects the interpretability of a document file, the data and/or the program must bealtered. Conversion poses some special challenges for several reasons: (1) it imposes the ongo-ing burden of assessing the interpretability of formats contained in the archive; (2) it has
unbounded costs, because there is no end to the conversions that need to be done; (3) it mayintroduce errors at each conversion; and (4) features of a record may be lost as they aremapped from one version to another.The third considerationÑthe possibility of introducing errorsÑis particularly significant.As with other aspects of archive management, human inspection, except on a very sparsesample, will be prohibitively expensive. Even if the conversion failure rate is very low, the
consequence of automatic conversion and little or no human checking is to place the burden ofdiscovering errors and recovering from them on the ultimate users of the record. This eventu-ality is likely to lead the user to fall back on one of the other preservation approaches described
above.Conversion would be more attractive in some particular scenariosÑfor example, if theoriginal form of a record is in some version of a very popular, well-characterized format such
as PDF (which also happens to be relatively stable, in the backward-compatibility sense).When that record is migrated to succeeding versions of PDF and then into successor formats,each of these conversions is likely to be highly accurate because society in general invested a
great deal in their being so at the time. Moreover, because all earlier (con)versions would havebeen kept in such cases, there would be a window of opportunity (while interpreters for the14Note that the term ÒmigrationÓ is sometimes defined also to include the refreshing of bit streams onto newstorage media. However, this refreshing is, of course, a fundamental requirement for all three approaches de-
scribed above.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS31last format or two are still available) in which errors could be corrected. (And since ÒliveÓinterpreters would be available for both original and new formats at the time, at least someform of automatic error checking would be possible, such as comparing resulting bitmaps.)A variation on this strategy is migration on access, which postpones the conversion until auser requests a record. This approach has several possible advantages. For example, deferralcan save on resources when most content is rarely accessed; additionally, on-the-fly conver-sion makes it more likely that the most up-to-date conversion software will be used.15 How-ever, deferral pushes the problem to a time when data-type obsolescence would make it muchmore difficult to develop or validate a converter. Also, the advantages of migration on accessare reduced in proportion to the fraction of data types that end up being accessed in the future.GROWING USER EXPECTATIONSUsers of online services, such as e-commerce sites, Web search engines, and the like, havedeveloped expectations for near-immediate access to vast data sets. UsersÕ expectations for theERA will include the following:¥Easy, online access to entire collections. Users will expect the full contents of digital collec-tions archived by the ERA to be searchable and accessible online. They will expect access to be
available on an unmediated basisÑthat is, without going through an archivistÑthough theymay sometimes seek such assistance. People increasingly expect to be able to locate govern-ment information online, and the Internet is rapidly becoming the primary channel for access-
ing government information.16¥Free and anonymous nominal access. As with other online government information, userswill expect to be able to search for and access information archived by the ERA without having
to pay fees or to register. Users will be more willing to pay fees for bulk downloads and othersuch services.¥Speed. Users have come to expect near-instantaneous response times even when search-ing databases containing many billions of items (e.g., Web search engines and e-commercesites). Users are increasingly intolerant of slow response caused by high demand; those pro-viding Web services today carefully architect and provision their systems to minimize re-
sponse time. Similar requirements are being placed on government systems.17 Capacity plan-ning, performance measurement, and production engineering will need to be done on anongoing basis in order to provide a particular level of quality as public demand scales up. Of
course, not all access can be provided on an instantaneous basis: much richer data types andmore sophisticated approaches for searching records may require much more processing time.15David S.H. Rosenthal et al. 2005. ÒTransparent Format Migration of Preserved Web Content.Ó D-Lib Magazine11(1). Available online at <http://www.dlib.org/>. Accessed May 1, 2005.16John B. Horrigan and Lee Rainey. 2002. Counting on the Internet. Pew Internet & American Life Project, Wash-ington, D.C., p. 9. Available online at <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/PIP_Expectations.pdf>. Ac-
cessed May 1, 2005.17For example, the FirstGov search engine was specified to have a response time under 5 seconds. WilliamMatthews. 2002. ÒVendors Vie for New FirstGov Contract,Ó Federal Computer Week, January 21. Available online at<http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2002/0121/news-first-01-21-02.asp>. Accessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARANor can prebuilt indexes or other specialized access paths be made available for all types ofrecords.¥High levels of availability. Users have come to expect the generally high levels of availabil-ity that major commercial services provide by investing substantially in redundant systems
and network connections.¥A well-designed user interface. Commercial services offer well-designed user interfacesthat are continually being refined. Users will expect the same of the ERAÕs interface.¥Federated search. Users are beginning to expect services that allow them to search acrossmultiple sources of content. For example, search engines such as Google provide a federatedsearch across the Web, and Fedstats.gov provides a federated search across data from U.S.
federal statistical agencies. Users will, for example, increasingly expect to be able to search forgovernment documents and records regardless of which agency has custody of them.¥Appropriate interpretation and processing, not just access to the raw dataÑsuch as conversionfrom persistent forms into easily usable forms. If users were able to access the Nixon tapes onlinetoday, for example, they would expect them to be available in Real Player or Windows MediaPlayer format.User demand for certain types of records can also be quite high, exceeding initial projec-tions. A recent instance was the United KingdomÕs release in 2002 of the 1901 census data.
According to the U.K.Õs National Archives, the Web service was designed to support 1.2million users per day, but demand on the first day was 1.2 million users per hour. The demandcontinued to rise in the days that followed, and the Web site had to be taken down so that its
capacity could be significantly increased.18These are demanding expectations. In the list above, the last item in particular anticipatesthat users will expect services that go well beyond the simple delivery of static records on a
disk. However, as this report recommends, NARAÕs priority should be to ingest, manage, andprovide basic access to records. Given limited resources, NARA cannot afford to meet all ofthese expectations for all recordsÑexpectations will need to be reconciled against the notion of
varying levels of service for different record types. Therefore, third parties should be encour-aged to develop user services beyond the basic level provided by NARA, an option discussedin Chapter 3 of this report.OTHER TECHNOLOGY TRENDSFull-Content Search and Automated Metadata ExtractionOne of the major challenges for the ERA system is that of ingesting the anticipated vol-umes of records without being bogged down by too much (costly) human effort. Somemetadata tell how the records are structured, what kind of records they are, where they camefrom, when they were created, and so onÑinformation needed both for the management of
the records within NARA and to help users find records. Other metadata, such as subject18Additional information is available online at <http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/about/operate/meetings/censusadvisory/17jan2002.htm>. Accessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ONGOING TECHNOLOGY CHANGE AND RISING USER EXPECTATIONS33indexing terms, have historically been assigned by humans and are used primarily for findingrather than management.Several technologies make it possible to avoid the human effort associated with generatingthe second kind of metadata. One approach to reducing this burden is full-content searching.
There has been considerable progress in this areaÑthat an enormous body of publicly acces-sible Web pages can be searched effectively by search engines such as Google is a majorachievement of relevance to NARAÑand there is widespread demand for better searching
technologies.Another technique for increasing the degree of automation possible is the use of automaticmetadata extraction. This type of technique involves a wide variety of algorithms and ap-
proaches, often referred to as information-extraction techniques, for extracting informationfrom text that is either semistructured or natural language. To take a simple example, suchtechniques enable the sender, recipient, and subject of a memorandum to be extracted auto-
matically even if these items are not explicitly tagged in the document. Information extractionappears in a number of production systems, including the following:¥CiteSeer,19 in which a Web crawler monitors university Web sites, finds things that itidentifies as research publications or technical reports, and extracts information such as thetitle and author names from the file (usually a PDF and PostScript version of the paper), as
well as citations to other papers (at the end of the paper). This system, which has been opera-tional since the late 1990s, is very heavily used in the computer science community.¥WhizBang! TechnologiesÕ job search system FlipDog (subsequently sold to Monster.com), whichcrawled the Web looking for job postings and extracted data (e.g., location, salary, and title)from them.20¥Google, which uses information extraction to answer search queries such as ÒWhat isJupiter?Ó The first link returned will probably be ÒWeb definitions for Jupiter.Ó Clicking on itdisplays a list of several-sentence definitions that have been extracted from Web documentsusing a set of rules for finding things that look like definitions.¥Shop-bots , which use information extraction of some kind. In the early days most shop-bots used handwritten extraction rules, and many probably still do. However, handwrittenrules are fragile, because when a site changes, the handwritten wrappers stop working. Thus,
there has been much research on automatically learning to extract information from e-commercepages. The details of which algorithms are used by which sites are generally proprietary.19See C.L. Giles, K. Bollacker, and S. Lawrence, 1998, ÒCiteSeer: An Automatic Citation Indexing System,Ó inProceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Digital Libraries (DL.98), pp. 89-98, Pittsburgh, Pa., June 23-26; S. Lawrence,K. Bollacker, and C.L. Giles, 1999, ÒIndexing and Retrieval of Scientific Literature,Ó in Proceedings of the EighthInternational Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM 99), pp. 139-146, Kansas City, Missouri,November 2-6; Y. Petinot, C.L Giles, V. Bhatnagar, P.B. Teregowda, H. Han, and I. Councill, 2004, ÒCiteSeer-API:Towards Seamless Resource Location and Interlinking for Digital Libraries,Ó Proceedings of the 13th Conference onInformation and Knowledge Management (CIKM 2004), pp. 553-561, Association for Computing Machinery, NewYork.20Related techniques are discussed in U. Nahm and R. Mooney, 2002, ÒText Mining with Information Extrac-tion,Ó in Proceedings of the AAAI 2002 Spring Symposium on Mining Answers from Texts and Knowledge Bases, AAAIPress, Menlo Park, Calif.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAAnother technique for the automated supply of metadata is categorization, which discernsgroupings of related content.Although the techniques discussed here are valuable, they do not always yield correctmetadata. The errors that occur will tend to have a minimal impact on the precision (the
proportion of items retrieved that are relevant) of finding aids, although they obviously willreduce recall (the proportion of relevant items retrieved by a search).More complex natural language problems, such as parsing and Òunderstanding,Ó are quitedifficult and appear likely to remain so. Nevertheless, the information-extraction techniquesthat have been developed over a period of several decades have reached a level of maturityallowing their use in production systems when guided by human expertise. Although they do
not and will not provide the accuracy of a human, they offer the considerable advantages ofimproved speed and reduced 0cost that is several orders of magnitude lower than that formanual processing.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES35352Reengineering Processes to Meet the
Electronic Records Challenge
Chapter 1 describes factors driving the shift to electronic records and the growing volumeand variety of such records. Electronic records offer considerable new flexibility with respectto duplication (perfect digital copies can be made readily and cheaply), transfer (records canbe transferred electronically using networks or physical media), and physical custody (be-
cause storage is cheap, it is feasible to maintain multiple copies). Many electronic records existwithin information systems, which makes it possible to capture records and associatedmetadata systematically, and to automate their transfer and processing. The properties of
electronic records support the establishment of new processes and relationships with agenciesfor scheduling and transferring custody of records.  The anticipated volume of records that
will be submitted for archiving compels the use of automated transfer and ingest.This chapter first reviews three National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)initiatives that bear on process reengineering. It then points out a number of additional oppor-tunities for NARA.RECENT INITIATIVES OF THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDSADMINISTRATION RELATED TO ELECTRONIC RECORDSThrough three major initiativesÑthe Electronic Records Archives (ERA) program, theRecords Management Redesign initiative, and an initiative on records management under the
administrationÕs e-government initiativeÑNARA has taken a number of steps toward build-ing needed technical capabilities for the archiving and preserving of the federal governmentÕselectronic records and toward making associated changes in process.Electronic Records ArchivesNARAÕs Electronic Records Archives program was begun in 1998. Its purpose was toaddress the growing volume and diversity of electronic records being used and relied on byBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAgovernment agencies, as well as to address issues of format obsolescence and preservation. Afundamental objective of the ERA program is to confront the formidable challenge of creatinga Òsystem that will authentically preserve and provide access to any kind of electronic record,free from dependency on any specific hardware or software.Ó1Early steps in the ERA programincluded NARAÕs exploration of possible solutions and undertaking of development projectswith partners. The partners included the San Diego Supercomputer Center, the University ofMaryland, and the Georgia Tech Research Institute.In August 2003, NARA released a draft request for proposals2 (RFP) for the ERA system,Òseeking input from industry to ensure that the final RFP clearly communicates the purpose ofthe acquisition.Ó3 Before preparing this report, the National Research CouncilÕs Committee onDigital Archiving and the National Archives and Records Administration prepared two re-ports providing advice related to the ERA acquisition: its first report recommended a strategyfor engineering and acquiring the ERA using an iterative design approach, and a letter report
provided specific comments to NARA regarding the draft RFP.4 Also in August 2003, theGeneral Accounting Office released a report5that Òfound several deficiencies in NARAÕs planfor the [systemÕs] acquisition,Ó including the lack of a Òconcept of operations for the systemfrom the usersÕ perspectiveÓ and an Òincomplete schedule and process to track the costs of theprogram.Ó6In 2004, NARA released the final version of its RFP and subsequently selected two contrac-tors to develop designs for the ERA.7 As NARA observes, much Òremains to be done beforethe vision of ERA becomes a reality. The necessary projects and tasks fall in two large catego-ries: [1] designing the structure and [2] building it.Ó8NARA hopes to Òhave a functional subsetof the [ERA] system operational in 2007.Ó9Records Management RedesignResponding to Òtechnological advances, budget cuts, and other events [that] have signifi-cantly changed the environment surrounding Federal records management,Ó10 the National1See <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era.html>. Accessed May 1, 2005.2The draft RFP is available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/acquisition/draft_rfp.html>. Accessed May 1, 2005.3See the news release, ÒNational Archives Releases Draft Request for Proposal for the Electronic Records Ar-chives,Ó online at <http://www.archives.gov/media_desk/press_releases/nr03-59.html>. Accessed May 1, 2005.4National Research Council (NRC), 2003, Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and RecordsAdministration: Recommendations for Initial Development, Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg (eds.), and NRC, 2003,ÒLetter Report on Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration,ÓOctober 16, both published by The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.5General 
Accounting Office (GAO). 2003. 
Records Management: National Archives and Records AdministrationÕs Acquisi-tion of Major System Faces Risks (GAO-03-880), available online at <http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03880.pdf>.6Diane Frank. 2003. ÒGAO Sees Electronic Archive Problems,Ó Federal Computer Week, August 22. Availableonline at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2003/0818/web-nara-08-22-03.asp>. Accessed May 23, 2005.7The final RFP is available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/acquisition/rfp.html>.8NARAÕs ÒAbout ERAÓ document, available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era.html>.9NARAÕs ÒAbout ERAÓ document, available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/about_era.html>.10For more information, see <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/rm_redesign_project.html>.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES37Archives and Records Administration began a redesign of federal records management in2001. This was done through an initiative with the ultimate goals of (1) documenting thecurrent record-keeping and records use environments in the federal government, (2) usingsubsequent findings to analyze NARAÕs records-management policies, and (3) redesigning the
scheduling, appraisal, and accessioning processes where necessary.With respect to the first of those goals, NARA issuedin December 2001 a report prepared
for NARA by SRA International. The report examined the views and perspectives on record
keeping and archiving of a sample of federal employees (Box 2.1). The results of NARAÕs ownrecords systems analysesÑwhich pointed to the importance of Òsituational factorsÓ withinagency records-management operationsÑwere included in the report, which offered Òa num-
ber of approaches, options, and interventions that may assist NARA and the agencies toimprove Federal [records management].Ó11Building on the work that produced the 2001 report, NARA issued a draft proposal in July200212 for rethinking the regulations, policies, and processes for managing federal records andfor developing a set of strategies to support federal records management. A year later, afterÒworking with stakeholders and [testing] proposals,Ó NARA released Strategic Directions forFederal Records Management, its Òroadmap for redesigning NARAÕs records-management pro-gram and records management in the federal government.Ó13The Strategic Directions report begins by asserting NARAÕs goals with respect to its rede-sign of federal records management before moving on to more specific strategies and tacticsfor reaching those goals. The following are among the reportÕs enumerated strategies:¥[NARA] will demonstrate that effective records management adds value to agency busi-ness processes. . . .¥[NARAÕs] approach to records management will be based on the ISO [International Orga-nization for Standardization] Records Management Standard 15489.¥[NARA] will focus on those records that are essential to the government as a whole foraccountability, protection of rights, and documentation of the national experience. . . .¥[NARA will] partner with Federal agencies and others to develop, adapt, or adopt prod-ucts and practices that support good records management.¥[NARA] will provide leadership, in partnership with other key stakeholders, to focusagency attention on electronic records needs and to guide and support solutions to electronic
records issues and problems.14The Strategic Directions report also details some of the tactics that NARA will use to pro-11National Archives and Records Administration. 2001. An Overview of Three Projects Relating to the ChangingFederal Recordkeeping Environment: Report on Current Recordkeeping Practices Within the Federal Government (preparedfor NARA by SRA International, Inc.). NARA, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/
records_management/initiatives/report_on_recordkeeping_practices.html>. Accessed May 1, 2005.12National Archives and Records Administration. 2002. Proposal for a Redesign of Federal Records Management.NARA, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/
rm_redesign.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.13National Archives and Records Administration. 2003. Strategic Directions for Federal Records Management. Na-tional Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/
records_management/initiatives/strategic_directions.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.14National Archives and Records Administration, 2003. Strategic Directions for Federal Records Management. Na-tional Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/
records_management/initiatives/strategic_directions.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA15The white papers may be found online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/white_papers.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.mote these strategies and goals. Those tactics include such things as promoting good commu-nications between NARA and stakeholders, modifying guidance and training programs, pro-
viding assistance to agencies, providing agency oversight, supporting the development ofrecords-management tools, and reengineering NARAÕs own business processes.Recently, NARA has also issued several white papers in support of the Strategic Directionsreport. The white papers focus onÑamong other thingsÑadvocacy, appraisal policy, certifica-tion of training, custody, expansion of the records-management training program, inspectionsand studies of records management, and resource allocation.15BOX 2.1Major Findings of Study on Current Record-keeping PracticesWithin the Federal GovernmentFollowing are the major findings from the 2001 study prepared for the National Archives andRecords Administration by SRA International, Inc., on perceptions in the federal government
with respect to record keeping:¥The quality and success of recordkeeping varies considerably across the agenciesstudied.¥Government employees do not know how to solve the problem of electronic recordsÑwhether the electronic information they create constitutes records and, if so, what to do
with the records.¥When agencies have a strong business need for good [recordkeeping], such as thethreat of litigation or an agency mission that revolves around maintaining ÒcaseÓ files, then
[recordkeeping] practices tend to be relatively strong with regard to the records involved.¥Although records officers and other agency records managers are familiar with thelife cycle of records, integration between [recordkeeping] and the business processes of
many agencies is distinctly lacking.¥For many Federal employees, the concept of a ÒrecordÓ and what should be sched-uled andpreserved is unclear.
¥[Recordkeeping and records management] in general receive low priority, as evi-denced by lack of staff or budget resources, absence of up-to-date policies and proce-
dures, lack of training, and lack of accountability.¥While agencies appreciate specific assistance from NARA personnel, they are frus-trated because they perceive that NARA is not meeting agenciesÕ broad needs for guid-
ance and [records management] leadership. Primarily, agencies want timely and respon-
sive guidance and leadership from NARA on current [records management] issues.SOURCE: National Archives and Records Administration. 2001. An Overview of Three Projects Relating tothe Changing Federal Recordkeeping Environment: Report on Current Recordkeeping Practices Within theFederal Government (prepared for NARA by SRA International, Inc.). NARA, Washington, D.C. Availableonline at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/report_on_recordkeeping_practices.
html>. Accessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES39The Electronic Records Management InitiativeNARAÕs Electronic Records Management (ERM) initiative was launched as part of theBush administrationÕs e-government agenda. This initiative is intended to provide Òpolicy
guidance to help [federal] agencies . . . better manage their electronic records, so that recordsinformation can be . . . used to support timely and effective decision making, enhance servicedelivery, and ensure accountability.Ó  The ERM Òwill provide the tools that agencies will need

to manage their records in electronic form, addressing specific areas of electronic recordsmanagement where agencies are having major difficulties.Ó16The ERM Initiative was started with the following three goals in mind:1.To integrate e-records-management concepts and practices with comprehensive infor-
mation-management policies, processes, and objectives in order to assure the integrity of e-
records and information;2.To employ ERM to support interoperability, timely and effective decision making, and
improved services to customers; and3.To provide the tools for agencies to access e-records for as long as required and to
transfer permanent e-records to NARA for preservation and future use by government andcitizens.As the managing agency for the ERM initiative, NARA has organized the project into fourissue areas:1.Correspondence tracking,
2.Enterprise-wide ERM (to provide tools for agencies to use as they plan and implement
ERM systems),3.Electronic information-management standards (to promote government-wide use of the
Department of Defense 5015.2 Standard for Records Management for federal agencies), and4.Transfer of permanent electronic records to NARA (to address an expansion of both the
number of formats that NARA can accept and the media and techniques that can be used byfederal agencies when transferring their permanently valuable electronic records to NARA).The overall ERM initiative includes a number of deliverables.  For example, NARA has
expanded the acceptable methods for transferring electronic records to NARA, and it has
issued guidance for transferring permanent electronic records of the following types:  e-mail
records (including attachments), Web content records, scanned images of textual records,digital photography records, digital geospatial data records, and records in portable docu-
ment format.16NARAÕs overview of the Electronic Records Management initiative, available online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/erm_overview.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAPROCESS REENGINEERING TO REALIZE ERA GOALSOutlined below are broad areas of process reengineering that will be important to thesuccess of the ERA and, more generally, to NARAÕs success in handling electronic records.Automated IngestExisting processes for ingesting records rely heavily on manual processes. Paper recordsnaturally require a good deal of manual processing to acquire and appraise. Current proce-dures for transferring electronic records also involve significant manual intervention, starting
with the effort associated with creating and organizing metadata into finding aids and thetransfer of physical media or the initiation of a network file transfer. Similarly, appraisal anddescription require significant manual effort, including such steps as manually examining
record structures and capturing metadata.As outlined in Chapter 1, the volume of electronic materials will grow substantially andrapidly. At the same time, a major increase in NARAÕs budget for archiving appears unlikely.
The only possible resolution in order for the ERA system to be able to handle the anticipatedvolume of records is to make a major shift to automation. Fortunately, it is possible to makethis change by improving how records are delivered to NARA, by establishing procedures
and systems to ingest new records automatically on a routine basis, and by capturing metadataat record creation and using automatic techniques to help fill in gaps.To make the automation effort successful, it will be critical to establish how to handleerrors that occur in the ingest process. This is important because the costs of exception han-dling are a common reason for the failure of automation. Careful consideration should begiven to the amount of effort that should be expended on trying to fix problems, on the extent
to which the responsibility for resolving problems can be pushed back to the originatingagency, on ways that errors can be corrected in the future when they are discovered byarchives users, and so forth.Even as NARA develops capabilities and processes to handle new records through automa-tion, a considerable backlog of electronic records will continue to grow before these new mea-sures take full effect. To avoid being swamped by the backlog, triage measures may be needed.
These could include avoiding significant manual processing, preserving the obvious artifactsthat would support the extraction of automatic metadata in the future (e.g., when accepting e-mail, it is important also to receive the mapping from e-mail address to personal directory
information), and using automatic metadata extraction (and accepting its shortcomings).Early Processing or Ingest of RecordsThe ingest of electronic records decades after their creation can be problematicalÑobsoletedata and metadata formats may be difficult to interpret, and it may be quite difficult to modify
the systems in which the records reside so as to facilitate ingest. When the originating systemsare still active, preservation problems can be tackled before obsolescence.One way to mitigate problems at record ingest is to conduct dry-run testing (runningthrough all of the steps that would be taken at ingest, conducting the dry run over full sets ofrecords, or using a sample as a spot check). Such testing allows a number of potential prob-lems to be uncovered and resolved, including the following: Are the data and metadata for-Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES41mats known, and can they be processed by the ERAÕs (automated) ingest process? Is appropri-ate information as to the recordÕs authenticity and integrity available? Are access and trans-mission procedures in place at the creating agency and at NARA to effect ingest? This type ofsystem debugging serves as an early warning of problems.Another option is the early capture of records in anticipation of future custody transfer toNARA. Unlike paper records, electronic records offer considerable new flexibilityÑcopies arereadily made and cheaply stored. Early capture is best done by designing systems that gener-
ate permanent records so that records are created archive-ready at birthÑautomatically re-cording metadata, providing users with very easy ways to create metadata manually as recordsare created, and designing systems that produce outputs that are easy to interpret, self-de-
scribing, and otherwise well suited for long-term preservation.ÒPullÓ technologiesÑsuch as automated download of records and Web harvestingÑareone way to routinely obtain records earlier in their life cycle. This technique is not limited to
publicly accessible records. For example, an agency could provide a restricted-access Webservice for NARA to use to extract records as they are created or to search the agencyÕs internalrecord-keeping system. The resulting archival copies might also provide additional incentives
for agencies to support the creation of archive-ready records and their delivery to NARA,since these records would then serve as off-site backups of agency operational systems.Thus, there are two almost-identical techniques: a passive one in which NARA is sentrecords early, on a provisional basis, for purposes of a dry run; and an active one in whichNARA extracts and ingests records. Both give early warning. The active mode is probablyharder for agencies (and NARA) to implement, but it gives NARA the greatest visibility into
the records that it will have to handle. The active approach also provides the potential incen-tive of NARAÕs copies serving as a backup.Appraisal, Selection, and Description of Electronic RecordsArchival practice was developed primarily to handle paper and other tangible-mediarecords. However, several trends over the past three decades have made it more difficult tocarry out traditional records scheduling and disposition activities:¥New ways of working that supplant the traditional organizational hierarchy with greateruse of teams, task forces, and so on that are project- or goal-oriented, rather than procedure-oriented;¥The reduction in administrative and clerical staff responsible for organizing, filing, andretrieving records and developing retention and disposition schedules, and the resulting trans-fer of responsibility for record management to end-user agency staff;¥The preference for electronic communication and record keeping over paper-based sys-tems; and¥The dearth of useful tools that can integrate records management into end-user tasksand activities.At the same time, several technology trends compel a rethinking of selection, appraisal,and description in two major areas:Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA¥First, the granularity of appraisal should be larger. The appraisal of physical records wasdriven in part by a need to reduce significant storage costs in an archive. But with ever-declining storage costs, the opposite is the case with digital information. Investing time inreducing a set of records by 10 percent or 40 percent or even 60 percent costs more than it
saves, because these decisions require human intervention and professional judgment andresearch. Also, records are more interconnected when they are digital. The information orevidential value of a set of records considered in isolation may not be obvious, but one set of
records may be crucial for understanding or using another set.Rather than examining sets of records carefully and marking only a select few for reten-tion, it may become more expedient and more appropriate to retain larger ÒchunksÓ of records,
The committee is not advocating a Òsave everythingÓ approach, but a rethinking of selectioncriteria. For example, it may be better to preserve entire classes of electronic records (e.g., all ofthe records from certain offices, all of the records covering function X in both the federal andregional offices, and so on) that would not have been feasible for paper records, even thoughsome records with little permanent value may be intermingled. NARA appears to be movingin this direction in the Records Management Redesign initiative, with its emphasis on func-
tional appraisal, which implicitly is more broadly granular.Consider a specific example. For the material that will be included in the U.S. Departmentof StateÕs new SMART system, NARA currently has more than 2,000 retention and disposition
schedules for series of records with various retention periods. It might be much more cost-effective simply to keep everything from this system, or to replace the current fine level ofappraisal and disposition with one that has fewer than a dozen schedules.¥Second, archives should place less emphasis on manual record description of records and oncreation of finding aids and more on automated tools for improving access. The characteristics ofelectronic records permit new access methods that can decrease the burden on archivists to
describe records and create finding aids. Agencies can supply records in a structured formatand attach metadata. Full-content search on the records and associated metadata can supple-mentÑor even supplantÑmanually generated finding aids. Finally, agencies themselves cre-
ate search and access tools for some of their records. Such tools might be maintained by theoriginating agency (perhaps as part of the sort of agreement to distribute archiving responsi-bility, as discussed below) or adapted for use by NARA.Another way to think about the trade-offs discussed here is that it may be advisable inmany cases to make access for end users (when and if it occurs) potentially more difficult (byincreasing the total volume of records to be examined and describing records in less detail) in
exchange for making ingest cheap (by reducing the burden on the archivist to select anddescribe materials).  Of course, as tools such as full-content search improve, the burden on the
end user will be reduced.Delivering Records Archive-ReadyElectronic records transfer to NARA and their ingest are greatly eased if records can besupplied to NARA Òarchive-ready.Ó Archive-ready records, at a minimum, are packaged withthe metadata required for them to be transferred and otherwise processed using largely auto-
mated processes. Preferably, archive-ready records would also be provided in structured,standardized formats approved by NARA as amenable to long-term preservation.The closer to record creation that archive readiness is established, the more likely it is thatBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES43the appropriate metadata will be captured. This means that less work (and cost) will beincurred in adding the information later. Ideally, agencies would design systems so that
records are created archive-ready at birth. This condition would occur through automaticrecording of metadata, agencies providing their own staff members with very easy ways to
manually create metadata as records are created, and so forth. Alternatively, agencies can addnecessary metadata at some point after creation, but then still deliver records to NARA archive-ready.If a large fraction of the records delivered to NARA are to be archive-ready in the long run,archiving considerations will have to become part of the government software procurementand development process. This is especially true for those systems that produce or are deemed
likely to produce permanent records. Successful implementation of the ERA system may alsorequire NARA to become more actively involved in the establishment of standards used inconstructing federal systems, such as those governing the formats used to represent records
and associated metadata, and for NARAÑor other bodies responsible for information policy,such as the Office of Management and BudgetÑto establish guidance to agencies and auditingand enforcement measures as necessary.As a practical matter, these efforts should link archive-ready concerns with agency inter-ests in supporting the agenciesÕ own record-keeping operations. Experience shows the diffi-culty of implementing systems that depend on user compliance with externally imposed
requirements that necessitate effort and do not support the userÕs internal business needs. Asa result, requirements should support agency record-keeping needs, and implementing therecords should be realistically possible. Experience also shows that schemes that depend on
user-supplied metadata are unlikely to succeed, meaning that software and systems that mini-mize additional manual contributions of metadata are more likely to succeed.Close coordination will also be needed between the Records Management Design initiativeand the ERA program, because if changes along the lines of those envisioned in the RMI do notoccur, the flow of records into the ERA will be seriously impeded. The amount of work thatNARA would then need to do to make the records useful would be unsustainable.Metadata CollectionAs discussed above, metadata describing electronic records can and should be createdwith as little recourse to manual description as possible. It is useful to distinguish three waysin which metadata can be collected automatically:1.Metadata can be collected as a matter of course when a record is created (or by virtue of the seriesor collection in which it lies). For example, a word processor may automatically attach metadataidentifying the author and last modification date (assuming that the system is correctly config-ured with such information).2.Metadata can be automatically extracted from a record without any recourse to informationextraction or otherwise ÒunderstandingÓ the record.  For example, header information in an e-mailmessage is readily extracted by parsing the message.3.Metadata can be automatically extracted from a record using information-extraction or categori-zation techniques. As discussed in Chapter 1, these techniques are imperfect, but they can beexpected to improve with time.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA17National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). 2003. Strategic Directions: Custody of Federal Records ofArchival Value. Section 10. NARA, Washington, D.C. September. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/records_management/initiatives/custody.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.18See the NARA press release at <http://www.archives.gov/media_desk/press_releases/nr03-60.html> or theGPO press release, ÒThe GPO and National Archives Unite in Support of Permanent Online Public Access,Ó at
<http://www.gpo.gov/public-affairs/news/03news46.html>. Accessed May 23, 2005.The first of these options is relatively easy and inexpensive. It is the preferred approach forauthored records. Ideally, agency record-keeping systems would have facilities for automaticcapture built in. The second option is also easy and inexpensive for records that have thenecessary structure.The third option should be viewed as a fallback. Even when it is necessary to use automaticmetadata-extraction techniques, this is better done early on, by the creating agency, whichmay be able to use content-specific techniques.In cases in which NARA will have to resort to automatic metadata extraction using naturallanguage techniques, it will have to accept significant imperfection in some of its metadataÑa shift from the traditional mind-set of archival institutions. It will also be necessary for
systems and processes to distinguish among different degrees of quality in the metadata,which have varying reliability. Finally, as metadata extraction techniques improve, themetadata can be upgraded (possibly on-the-fly as records are accessed). The ERA should
accommodate making such updates to record descriptors.Cooperative Arrangements with AgenciesThe increased flexibility afforded by electronic records opens up a number of options forcustody and access in partnership between NARA and federal agencies. The model of having
certain agencies retain responsibility for certain types of records is well established; for ex-ample, several agencies have been given the responsibility for preserving large scientific datasets. NARA policy has established criteria for determining whether to establish such an affili-
ated archive.17 In 2003, NARA entered into a new partnership with the U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office (GPO) which makes the GPO an Òarchival affiliate.Ó18 The agreement ensuresthe permanent availability of the documents available today (and in the future) through the
GPO Access Web site, which provides online public access to more than 250,000 publications,including the Congressional Record, Federal Register, and Code of Federal Regulations. The agree-ment gives NARA legal custody of the documents while delegating to GPO the responsibility
for public access and preservation. Users are directed from NARAÕs catalogs to documentsheld for access and preservation by GPO.This approach has several important advantages:¥By leveraging the skills and resources of other agencies for preservation and access,NARA can spend its scarce resources on problems that agencies cannot address on their own.¥Giving an agency responsibility for the preservation and access of records means that
the specialized expertise required to understand or manage a complex system need not betransferred to NARA. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau currently provides public access to
survey data through a Web interface and supporting analysis software. It would be impracti-cal to expect NARA to develop domain expertise sufficient to operate online access to all formsof government data.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REENGINEERING PROCESSES45¥It provides a clear path for NARA to identify permanently valuable essential evidencefrom a government-wide perspective, and it also enables agencies to make independent judg-ments as to whatever else they want to retain for their own purposes.¥Diversity of responsibility is created with multiple agencies taking on the responsibilityof preservation, and this diversity provides some additional measure of safety compared tothat afforded by a monolithic repository.¥By banding together, NARA and other organizations stand a much better chance ofspreading widely the standards and tools for preparing records that are archive-ready, ofdeveloping affordable software to meet the needs of researchers and other clients of theserepositories, and of otherwise making electronic records archives practical in the long run.Despite these advantages to cooperative arrangements, there is a potential downside to adistributed set of archives. If systems proliferate and diverge, users of affiliated archives will
be frustrated by different user interfaces, different access or authorization requirements, anddifferent implementation of services (such as downloading electronic records). To increase theutility to users, the affiliates should federate search and authorization techniques and coordi-
nate their services.If such arrangements become more common, NARAÕs role would shift to that of a stan-dards-setter, federator, troubleshooter, and repository of last resort.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA463Partnering with Other InstitutionsThe National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) need not go it alone in pro-viding services to its users. NARAÕs work with electronic records affords a number of oppor-tunities to leverage and partner with other organizations, commercial firms, and researchersto provide access to NARA collections. Designing the Electronic Records Archives (ERA) to
feature public interfaces can enable much broader use of NARA holdings. The inclusion ofappropriate application programming interfaces (APIs) in the ERA design would enable thirdparties to access records and to provide access services that are layered on top of the NARA-
provided records and access understructure. Federation would allow collections held byNARA and other organizations to be accessed as if they were a single collection. This chapterbriefly describes ways of partnering with other institutions and technologies that would make
such partnerships possible.APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACESAn application programming interface allows access to selected system internal data oroperations, enabling people to build new interfaces or applications on top of NARAÕs systems.
APIs would allow third parties to do such things as run queries against NARA holdings(catalogs or content) and retrieve individual records. A good example of the potential of openAPI access is illustrated in the commercial arena by the search service Google. Simple API-
level access to its search engine is provided to anyone who registers, letting others spend theirown research resources developing applications that might eventually be interesting or usefulto Google.Capabilities that might be built on top of the ERA include the following:¥Data annotation to add and/or correct record metadata. Third parties with an interest inparticular records could provide services to annotate recordsÑusing systems separate fromthe ERA but accessible to users as if they were part of it. These annotations could be held byBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PARTNERING WITH OTHER INSTITUTIONS47external parties (provided there was a way for third parties to point to ERA records unam-biguously, e.g., via a unique identifier), or the ERA could hold and provide access to theoverlays.1¥The continued introduction of specialized enhanced capabilities by partners and vendors tosupport particular needs. For example, a third party or NARA might supply an interface thatprovides translations of popular audio recordings (e.g., the Nixon White House tapes) fromthe format in which they are archived into commonly used formats (e.g., Windows Media or
Real Audio). Some of these capabilities might prove useful enough to be folded back into theERA system proper.¥Entrepreneurial innovation to provide value-added services, through either APIs or bulk down-load. Today, for example, third parties provide value-added access to information in the Secu-rities and Exchange CommissionÕs Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval(EDGAR) system. Similarly, commercial third parties currently provide enhanced access to
old data of the U.S. Census Bureau.¥Educational materials. Overlays onto NARA holdings could be a relatively low costmethod of dramatically providing a new set of services that satisfy NARAÕs educational
mission. Educational publishers, as well as historians and social scientists, could developonline materials that draw on NARA holdings.Such capabilities would allow NARA to tap at low cost the resources of third parties in orderto provide enhanced services, help fulfill NARAÕs mission, increase the perceived value ofNARAÕs holdings, and explore new technologies and approaches.In allowing such capabilities to be built on top of the ERA, NARA will have to consider theproblem of how a typical user distinguishes between results that are provided directly fromNARA and those produced via a third-party extension. It would probably not be practical for
NARA to certify third-party software or services. However, NARA may want to find ways ofletting users know when they are using NARA versus third-party software and services,because the guarantees that NARA would make about the authenticity of what is viewed in
the two cases would be very different.Additionally, support for bulk download of records should be provided by NARA toallow third parties to retrieve sets of records against which to run their own full-content
searches, perform data mining, and so forth. And an additional design issue that wouldfacilitate third-party access is the adoption within the ERA of a persistent (i.e., stable anddurable) record-identifier scheme.FEDERATIONFederation is a technique whereby a software layer is used to make a collection of rela-tively different systemsÑwhich are often controlled administratively by different organiza-1The overlay concept also has application internally within NARA. For example, Thomson West undertakes torebuild the full index for the Westlaw databases only every 10 to 15 years. Between rebuilds, it augments the indexwith new information, some generated automatically, some manually. The system is structured so that a querycollects information from all of these sourcesÑthe original index and the subsequent overlays. NARA could accept
overlaid annotations from partners to add value to its holdings.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAtions and often integrated looselyÑappear to be a single system.2 Federation has technical(e.g., the definition of standards for the federation layer and connection to the systems belowthe federation layer) and organizational (e.g., agreement on standards and the forging ofagreements to federate holdings) dimensions.Applications of federation to the ERA would include the following:¥Federated access. There are several reasons why federated access to electronic recordscollections held by NARA and other organizations would be an attractive capability. First, itwould provide a common interface to federal records regardless of which agency happened tohave responsibility for managing them, allowing responsibility for electronic records preser-
vation to be distributed among multiple agencies without giving up the advantages of acommon access point for users. For example, users could retrieve in a single query recordsheld by NARA as well as agency records that had not yet been transferred to NARA. Feder-
ated access would also be valuable, for example, in allowing access to span NARA and presi-dential library resources.  Another example would be enabling seamless access across multiple
systems containing archived and active data. For example, someone searching for data about
the Snake River would otherwise have to look across many U.S. federal agencies (e.g., theBureau of Indian Affairs, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of the Inte-rior, and the Library of Congress), and the archives and agency records of four states (Wyo-
ming, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington) as well as NARA, all of which might have relevantrecords. With agreement on how to federate, access could be enabled across NARA and thearchives and other holdings of international, state, and local archives, libraries, and other
institutions.¥Federation of archival systems. More generally, it may prove useful to federate the ingest ofrecords, their access, and other functions across multiple archival systems. This arrangement
would provide a way to combine multiple instances of the ERA, allow simultaneous operationof multiple versions of hardware and software, and generally avoid having to maintain asingle monolithic archival system.¥Federated storage. Placing a federation layer between an archival system and its filestorage is a very useful technique. Among its benefits are that file systems at multiple sites canbe treated the same by software using the file system, and new implementations of file systems
(or storage types) can be added to the system as it evolves. Old file systems, no longer used,can easily be removed.Federation is a mainstream design approach employed in a number of commercial appli-cations today. Databases are routinely federated, usually at the Structured Query Language(SQL) level, in industry. Federated file systems (the San Diego Supercomputer Center Storage
Request Broker3 is one example) similarly appear in a variety of production systems today.The Z39.50 Information Retrieval Protocol4 is used to support federated cross-library searches.Following are some other examples of applications that use federation:2By contrast, the term ÒdistributedÓ usually means multiple instances of identical or similar systems, oftenunder a single administrative control, often tightly integrated. The terms ÒfederatedÓ and ÒdistributedÓ label endpoints in a spectrum.3A detailed description is available online at <http://www.sdsc.edu/srb/>. Accessed May 1, 2005.4ANSI/NISO Z39.50Ñ2003 Information Retrieval: Application Service Definition and Protocol Specification.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PARTNERING WITH OTHER INSTITUTIONS49¥Some comparison shopping systems. For example, Orbitz federates several airline reserva-tion systems. It is not just a portal providing access to multiple sites, but an actual federationof several airline reservation systems.¥Identity servers managing identity in computer systems. In such an application, a (corporate)user logs on to a single identity server; that server then prepares credentials for variousinformation technology (IT) systems when asked by the IT system, using whatever credentialtypes the particular IT system requires. The Liberty Alliance is an industry group working to
build federated identity capabilities.¥New designs federating mail servers. With such a federation, when one queries a set of e-mail folders (e.g., in a large e-mail archive), the folders residing on different e-mail servers will
be searched within their respective servers, but the results will be consolidated. This form offederation involves only a single product, so it is simpler than a federation in which thefederated systems run different software (in such a case, the federation interfaces must be
carefully defined).Despite the use of federation in various commercial applications today, there is no com-mon way to federate access to electronic records archives or digital libraries. There is alreadya significant technology base to draw on, including metasearch technologies and standardssuch as the Z39.50 Information Retrieval Protocol and the Open Archives Initiative Protocol
for Metadata Harvesting.5 There is, however, no established base of practice for federatingaccess to archives. As NARA and other organizatons start building such archives, federation isa technical area in which NARA might become a leader or engage the research community by
informing it of its needs.  If NARA is to take advantage of these opportunities, it will also have
to address policy issues involved with allowing its resources to participate in federations (thatmight be run by groups other than NARA).5Additional information is available online at <http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/2.0/openarchivesprotocol.htm>. Accessed May 23, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA504Broadening Research Interactions
The Electronic Records Archives (ERA) program of the National Archives and RecordsAdministration (NARA), currently being undertaken to build significant new capabilities forpreserving digital records, has contracted out for two system designs in preparation for theacquisition of an operational system. As a prelude and ongoing complement to procurement
activities, the ERA program has sponsored several research and development (R&D) activities(Box 4.1). This chapter examines the role that future research could play in helping NARAbetter understand and address emerging and future technology issues and medium- and long-
term technical challenges.RATIONALE FOR SUPPORTING RESEARCHInformation technology (IT) research has traditionally been concentrated in several federalagencies, many of which have research as part of their central mission.1 A recent NationalResearch Council (NRC) report, Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government
,2broadly considers the rationale for IT research by a broader set of federal mission agencies. Itconcludes that, where possible, government should follow the private sector in designing and1Twelve agencies or major units of agencies were participants in 2004 in the National Coordination Office forInformation Technology Research and Development, which coordinates activities and prepares an annual sum-
mary of the federal IT R&D budget. These were the National Institute of Standards and Technology, NationalOceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Defense InformationSystems Agency, National Security Agency, National Nuclear Security Administration, Department of EnergyÕs
Office of Science, Environmental Protection Agency, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, National Insti-tutes of Health, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and National Science Foundation.2Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2002. Information TechnologyResearch, Innovation, and E-Government. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BROADENING RESEARCH INTERACTIONS51implementing IT-based services. However, the report also concludes that there are some areas,such as the long-term preservation of government records, in which government require-ments differ, at least somewhat, from those in the commercial world. In these areas, the reportsays, federal agencies should recognize and act on their role as a demand leader.The NRC report goes on to characterize some of the benefits of research activities for bothgovernment agency sponsors and researchers. Government stands to benefit from collabora-tion between government agencies and the IT research community despite the fact that these
two groups are at opposite ends of an extensive supply chain that also includes vendors andsystem integrators. Although government agencies and researchers may appear to be unlikelyallies, they have a shared interest in innovation and in meeting future needs.Through research, agencies can gain an understanding of emerging and future technolo-gies, and of the technology risks they face. The most effective form of risk reduction occurswhen an organization does in-house testing of research prototypes; with in-house testing the
organization gains firsthand experience about what is easy and what is not, where the systemis reliable and where it fails, and how to run the system on a daily basis. A somewhat-less-BOX 4.1List of Electronic Records Archives Research ProjectsThe Web site of the Electronic Records Archives program lists the following as current re-search projects:¥Persistent Object Preservation. Work by the National Partnership for Advanced ComputingInfrastructure, led by the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC), examining digital preserva-
tion methods.¥Presidential Electronic Records Pilot Operations System. Work sponsored by the NationalArchives and Records Administration (NARA) at the Georgia Institute of Technology Research
Institute, on archival processing of presidential electronic records.¥Distributed Object Computation Testbed. This project, led by the SDSC, brings togethersupercomputers, large electronic archival technology, and high-speed wide-area networks. Its
purpose is to develop solutions for handling massive amounts of data that are stored at sites
nationwide and to provide an infrastructure on which to test advanced technologies for the pres-
ervation of electronic records.¥U.S. InterPARES (International Research on Permanent Authentic Records in ElectronicSystems) Project. NARA is a participant in this project, which is studying the problem of authenticelectronic records.¥Grid Technology. Grid technology is being developed in a joint partnership with the SDSCand the University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies. Its purpose is to provide
a distributed interoperable network that will provide efficient and effective access to users, regard-
less of location, and be linked using a logical name space to create global, persistent identifiers.SOURCE: National Archives and Records Administration. 2005. Electronic Records Archives: Research.Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/research/research.html>. Access-ed April 8, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAeffective form of risk reduction occurs when an external organization develops and tests theprototype; in this case the organization learns something, but most of the expertise about howthe system really works resides within the external research organization. Agencies also gainan opportunity to influence the trajectory of technologies through engagement with research-
ers. Research should, however, not be seen as a way of short-circuiting the IT supply chain ofresearchers, technology vendors, and system integrators, and agencies should not necessarilybe early adopters.  However, when agencies and researchers work together, the overall risk of

innovation in acquisition can be reduced.Absorptive capacity for research results requires in-house people who can be engaged at atechnical level with relevant research communities and who will take results from the re-
searchers, test them in-house, and explain and propagate results within the agency. Merefunding is not enough. The real goal is substantive technical coupling between the researchcommunity and the agency that allows the organization to learn about new technologies, to
learn more broadly about a research area than it would otherwise, and to understand how toapply research that it is not itself supporting.RESEARCH MANAGEMENT FOR AGENCIES WITHOUT A TRACK RECORD INSPONSORING RESEARCH IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFor an agency such as NARA that has neither a long track record of sponsoring IT researchnor a large research budget, how can limited research resources be spent most effectively?Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government observes that most federal agen-cies have limited experience in and capability for managing IT research programs. The reportgoes on to recommend that consideration be given to cross-agency collaboration with agenciesthat already have IT research programs and/or that share common research interests.Partners with Research Management ExpertiseSeveral federal agencies, most notably the National Science Foundation (NSF) and theDefense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), but also the National Institute ofStandards and Technology, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the
Department of Energy, the National Institutes of Health and its National Library of Medicine,the armed services laboratories, and others, have extensive expertise in the management of ITresearch projects. The selection of specific research proposals and routine management of the
research processÑfor example, selecting among peer-reviewed IT research proposals or main-taining an armÕs-length relationship with research organizationsÑare capabilities that theseagencies have developed over time as they have gained experience, identified and worked
with particular research communities, brought in researchers to manage programs, and other-wise developed research management talent. These organizations maintain relationships withvaried research and user communities, which gives them easy access to a wide range of
expertise and peer review when needed.The agencies referred to above also have experience in launching research programs innew areas, including the building of a research community around a set of technical topics that
were not previously identified as related or important. This process is more complicated thansimply stating a problem and looking for people to work on it. Researchers will not be drawnBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BROADENING RESEARCH INTERACTIONS53to work on problems that are not well thought out, for example, or that are shallow or short-term enough that they do not lead to significant research results (e.g., sufficient for the promo-tion of academics or the funding of start-up companies). Strong, successful research communi-ties often are developed by several customers and funders. The digital libraries program
managed by NSF is a highly relevant example of successful program development and com-munity building.Exchanging staff for limited assignments is a way of both learning about relevant researchand letting others learn about oneÕs own research needs. NARA staff members could spendprofitable 6-month assignments in other research organizations to learn what is on the cuttingedge and let the researchers know what NARAÕs problems are. Similarly, members of research
organizations could spend profitable 6-month assignments inside NARA learning what NARAis really up against and offering suggestions on how to apply what they know to these problems.
Partners with Shared Research InterestsMany of NARAÕs most basic needs for digital preservation and access are shared to vary-ing degrees with organizations such as the Library of Congress, the National Library of Medi-cine, NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the intelli-gence agencies, all of which must maintain indefinite access to digital records. The Library of
Congress has established the National Digital Information Infrastructure and PreservationProgram (NDIIPP) to work collaboratively with federal agencies, research libraries, and otherorganizations that have an interest and expertise in digital preservation. It has partnered with
the National Science Foundation to establish a research grant program focused on digitalpreservation and has launched joint research activities with four universities to investigatevarious approaches to digital preservation using a test collection.A number of the technical problems faced by NARA are likely to be faced by other agen-cies as well. For example, semiautomatic redaction or declassification is a topic that could beinvestigated with partners such as DARPA or the intelligence communityÕs Advanced Re-
search and Development Activity (ARDA). Another organization with shared interests inpreservation is the Department of Veterans Affairs, which is currently developing theHealtheVet-VistA program to provide long-term access to veteransÕ electronic health records
(Box 4.2).Partnership on Research-Oriented PrototypesAs NARA becomes engaged with a broader range of research communities, it will benatural for it to participate in research-oriented prototypes. The National Science FoundationÕs
Digital Government program has, for example, fostered close relationships between universi-ties and agencies such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, and the Environ-mental Protection Agency. NSFÕs Digital Libraries program has fostered similar government
and academic partnerships. These partnerships give the research community access to realdata and users and thus an opportunity to receive real-world feedback about their research. Inreturn, government agencies gain experience with new technologies before the innovations
become commercially available, and the agencies develop long-term relationships with out-side experts. Such partnerships and in-house testing of research prototypes should eventuallybecome an important part of NARAÕs research portfolio.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAENGAGING THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY THROUGH MEANSOTHER THAN FUNDING RESEARCHNARA can engage relevant research communities in a number of ways other than directsponsorship of research. They include the following:¥Hosting workshops and seminars. Workshops and seminars bring researchers and NARAemployees together, allowing a two-way exchange of ideas and problems. The ERA programtook advantage of this opportunity by holding a November 2004 conference, called ÒPartner-ships in Innovation: Serving a Networked Nation,Ó organized in conjunction with the Univer-
sity of MarylandÕs Institute for Advanced Computer Studies.¥Hiring students. Another way of engaging research communities is to seek out and hiretheir students. This is well understood in industry as a very effective approach to technology
transfer.¥Suggesting important problems and providing access to artifacts (data, software, and systemcapabilities) and subject-matter experts.  As the NRC report Information Technology Research, Inno-vation, and E-Government observes, working on government IT problems offers researchersaccess to applications with a Òrichness and texture often lacking in the laboratoryÓ as well asother potential benefits.3BOX 4.2HealtheVet-VistAHealtheVet-VistA is a program currently under design. It will create an online environment inwhich veteransÕ electronic health records, medical images such as x-rays, pathology slides,
scanned documents, results of cardiology examinations, wound photos, and endoscopies,
among other records, are stored for ready access.Currently, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) treats more than 3 million patients annual-ly in more than 1,300 health units, 163 hospitals, and 850 clinics. The Committee on VeteransÕ
Affairs of the U.S. House of Representatives has mandated that the VA retain all veteransÕ
health records (which are in electronic form) for 75 years after the death of veterans. Given
technology obsolescence, this mandated retention period creates an enormous challenge for
the VA. The VA also faces a comparable challenge in standardizing veteransÕ electronic health
records across all of its components and in implementing ÒupstreamÓ creation and capture of
veteransÕ electronic health records that facilitate access for 75 years or more.Setting aside the commitment of the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) topermanent storage (i.e., forever) of selected electronic records created by federal agencies, the
VA and NARA face a comparable challenge over the next hundred years in ensuring long-term
access to electronic records. The two agencies also share common interests in approaches,
tools, and procedures to support long-term access to electronic records.3Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 2002. Information TechnologyResearch, Innovation, and E-Government. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 12-13.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BROADENING RESEARCH INTERACTIONS55The opportunity of providing researchers with access to artifacts is discussed in moredetail in the following subsection.Providing Access to ArtifactsAs a complement to sponsoring research, NARA can also engage the research communityby providing data. This opportunity represents a very low cost yet effective way of engaging
substantively with the research community. Academic researchers are often starved for data;they have good ideas, but no way to test them against reality. Providing interesting data in aform that the research community can use can be enough to get the best people in the world
working on a problem, essentially for free. For example, Reuters created two databases ofcategorized newswire articles for research use and made them easy to acquire. Almost everytext classification algorithm developed in the preceding decade was tested on these data sets,
and hundreds of research papers have been published about them, none paid for by Reuters.Similar stories can be told about data sets from news organizations such as the Wall StreetJournal, AP Newswire, Ziff-Davis, and the Financial Times, and about medical data sets based
on the National Library of MedicineÕs MedLine system.There are many vehicles for providing data to the research community. Since 1992 theNational Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has created a variety of widely used
data sets that have focused research attention on a diverse set of problems, often of interest tothe U.S. intelligence community. Some universities, for example the University of California atIrvine and the University of Pennsylvania, have specialized in creating and becoming long-
term distributors of research data sets. Partnering with an organization that has prior experi-ence in this area, such as NIST, the University of California at Irvine, or the Linguistic DataConsortium (LDC) at the University of Pennsylvania, would help NARA learn how to create
data sets that are engaging and have long-term value to various research communities.Chapter 3 in this report points out the benefits of providing an application programminginterface (API) that gives direct access to some of the ERAÕs digital archive so that third parties
can develop new tools. This approach is particularly applicable to research initiatives. Google,for example, allows a simple API-level access to its search engine to anyone who registers. Theadvantage to Google is that others can spend their own research dollars to develop applica-
tions that might eventually be interesting or useful to Google. API-level access can also pro-vide access to users, enabling researchers to conduct experiments with live populations in realtimeÑfor example, by varying system characteristics and observing user behavior. Such ac-
cess would be extremely attractive to a variety of computer science and social science researchcommunities, and it could be provided by NARA at relatively low cost relative to the benefitsobtained.RESEARCH CHALLENGES FACING THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES ANDRECORDS ADMINISTRATIONThe research problems facing NARAÑand appropriate research strategiesÑfall into twocategories:1.Problems shared with other organizations. Many of NARAÕs technical problems are thesame as those faced by designers and operators of any large digital library or repository. ForBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAdealing with these problems, NARAÕs greatest leverage will come from drawing on researchsponsored by other organizations, learning about best practices, inducing others to work onproblems of interest to NARA by offering corpora of content that researchers can use to testnew ideas, and participating in joint research programs with other federal agencies and orga-
nizations that face similar challenges. Wherever technologies may be shared with other appli-cations, partnerships to jointly address shared problems will help stretch limited researchresources.2.Problems specific to government archives and similar institutions. A few problems are spe-cific to the preservation of records or otherwise unique to NARA and may need separateresearch thrusts. Working on these more specialized problems may require specific engage-
ment with existing research communities. Partnership with agencies that have greater experi-ence in managing IT research programs is also likely to be the most effective mechanism foraddressing this class of research problems.What are some of the specific research problems that NARA faces? The organization mustdevelop its own list, but it need not start from scratch in doing so.4 The subsections belowprovide some illustrative examples of research problems in each class.Research Problems Shared with Other OrganizationsFollowing is a list of examples of research problems that NARA shares with other organi-zations, together with appropriate strategies.¥Automatic classification. Traditional archiving processes rely heavily on controlled-vo-cabulary metadata, which is usually assigned manually. Large-scale use of automatic catego-
rization to assign metadata provides a way to handle the expected flood of digital records in acost-effective manner. There has been significant progress in this technology area during thepast decade, and there is now a greater understanding of what makes problems ÒdifficultÓ and
Òeasy.Ó Automatic categorization, which is used routinely in a variety of commercial settings,is often as accurate as human categorization is. Automatic categorization must become a corecompetency for NARA. Human effort should be applied only when automatic solutions are
inadequate. The use of this technology can be broadened to related problems such as filteringrecords for retention and distinguishing between federal and presidential records.Engagement with leaders in the research community would provide NARA an opportu-nity to better understand the state of the art. NARAÕs contributions in this case might well notinvolve direct support for research; NARA could make significant contributions to the re-search community by making corpora available, stating its own requirements clearly, and
learning from research sponsored by other agencies.¥ScholarsÕ tools for searching large collections of records.  Some shortcomings of record classi-fication can be remedied by increasingly powerful search methods.  While a casual searcher
4See, for example, Library of Congress and National Science Foundation, 2003, ItÕs About Time: Research Chal-lenges in Digital Archiving and Long-Term Preservation, Margaret Hedstrom (ed.), Library of Congress, Washington,D.C., p. ix, available online at <http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/repor/NSF_LC_Final_Report.pdf>; accessed
May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BROADENING RESEARCH INTERACTIONS57may be content with a result that is Ògood enough,Ó scholars want better tools and are likely tobe continually pressing the limits of technology. For example, Google already offers a ÒGoogleScholarÓ search designed to find online scholarly material, and libraries and technical litera-ture publishers are beginning to offer customized searching. Many of these emerging tech-
niques will probably be useful to scholars searching the ERA, but the archives may pose someunique problems. This is a case in which NARA could stimulate a research community with adatabase of archival records and a set of demanding users with specific needs.¥Preserving computer programs. Improved capabilities for preserving software may be ofgeneral interest to the community interested in digital preservation, including NARA, butthey may or may not be required by NARA to preserve records. Here a modest level of
funding in a jointly funded program of research looking broadly at digital preservation prob-lems might be appropriate.¥How to preserve Web sites. Government Web sites publish information in a wide variety offormats, use static and dynamic information, use information from a single source or manysources, and present general or user-specific views of information. Government Web sites alsocollect information from the publicÑfor example, public comments on proposed regulations.
What government Web site material should be archived? The variety of problems posed bygovernment Web sites could be viewed as daunting, but it can also be an advantage in that thesites afford a means to gather much valuable information. Of course not all Web sites produce
unique ÒrecordsÓ; some are merely access portals to an underlying set of records that may bearchived in other ways. Web sites should be a particular priority for archiving because they areso dynamic and also because they provide information that may not be captured by other
archiving processes. An essential part of the national historical record may have simply beenlost because government Web sites were not systematically archived in the past decade. (Seri-ous efforts aimed at archiving Web content, however, are being made by such organizations as
the Internet Archive.) NARA will need to co-develop policies and technical approaches forhandling Web sites.¥The interplay between information technology and human and organizational behavior related torecords. NARA, like many other organizations, has an interest in understanding how peopleand organizations use new technologies and an interest in the implications of this use for newforms of communication, new types of records, and new divisions of responsibilities for ad-
ministrative and record-keeping activities. Relevant areas of research include business-pro-cess redesign, organizational restructuring as a result of new information technologies, adop-tion and adaptation of new technologies, work flow analysis and design, compliance with
policies and requirements, and design of incentive mechanisms.Problem Areas in Which NARA and Similar Institutions Have Special Interests¥How to tease out (or define) records in interactive systems. Interactions with and withingovernment increasingly involve ephemeral views not stored as records but merely computed
from online databases through software that itself changes over time. Web sites (discussedabove) are one important example.¥Transactions systems. How should government transactions systems be preserved? Arethere uniform ways (e.g., logs or snapshots) to archive them? Or should transactions systemsbe designed to emit records in order to preserve records as part of the standard work flow?¥Providing digital assurances over a long period of time. The computer science and cryptogra-Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAphy to support authenticity, integrity, and chain-of-custody requirements associated withlong-term preservation are likely to be leading edge for the foreseeable future. A researchprogram would explore new techniques to be able to assure integrity and authenticity ofrecords held for many decades. Is an end-to-end scheme that would span hundreds of years
possible?CONCLUDING REMARKSWith necessarily limited resources, a limited capacity to manage research programs, and alarge set of research challenges related to the general topic of archiving and digital preserva-
tion, NARA has to decide how and where it should invest. Questions for NARA to considerinclude these: What agencies share an interest in NARAÕs problem or a similar problem? Whatresearch community is working on that problem or a similar problem? How can NARA most
effectively join with and influence that community?  Does NARA need to sponsor its own
research, or can it learn from or participate in othersÕ research programs? What results areanticipated, and how will the results be brought back to NARA?As the ERA starts to operate, NARA will surely uncover new problems. Some of theproblems will lead to evolution of the system and its operation in straightforward waysÑthatis, known methods or engineering techniques will solve them. But operation may also reveal
deeper problems worthy of new research activities.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY59595Record Integrity and Authenticity
An archive is vitally concerned with the authenticity and integrity of its holdings.  An
ÒauthenticÓ record is, loosely, one that is what it purports to be: it was duly issued by an
authorized person or agency. A record has ÒintegrityÓ if it is preserved without any alterationthat would impair its use as an authentic record.The issue of digital record assurance, the topic of this chapter, is discussed in greater detailthan are other technical issues in this report for two reasons. First, the committee did notaddress this topic in depth in its first report, which emphasized other system design andrelated acquisition issues. Second, digital assurance is an area in which correct implementa-
tion requires great care.To ensure the authenticity and integrity of paper records, archivists have worked outtechniques such as establishing a chain of custody from a recordÕs issuer to a recordÕs user.
Although the same techniques can be applied to digital records, the properties of digitalrecords compel the use of additional techniques for ensuring authenticity and integrity. Digi-tal techniques are available that can provide much stronger assurances than can existing
techniques for paper records. Also, digital records are potentially more vulnerable to forgeryand tamperingÑan attacker with access to the archiveÕs computer could add, delete, or alterrecords in a wholesale fashion or make subtle alterations that would be difficult to detect by
inspection. Increased experience with personal computers has made the public aware of howeasily digital documents can be altered undetectably. The committee firmly believes thatwithin the decade, both the public and the courts will have little confidence in digital records
that lack the best assurances that technology can provide.Digital checks have another huge advantage: an archive can verify the integrity of allrecords periodically. If errors are foundÑwhether due to hardware or media failures, operator
errors, or unauthorized changesÑa redundant, undamaged copy of the record can be re-trieved.  When this form of auditing is performed often enough, errors in the archive can be
fixed before they spread (e.g., before a redundant copy is created from an erroneous record).Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAA comprehensive system design that addresses authenticity and integrity has many piecesand a great many design and operational details. This chapter first describes basic tools andprinciples for digital record assurance and then offers some basic detailed approaches. Thoseapproaches are presented as examples of the level of care that must be applied; it is not
claimed that they are the only possible approaches.DIGITAL ASSURANCE TOOLS AND PRINCIPLESDigital assurances for records are based fundamentally on maintaining multiple, geo-graphically and administratively separated copies and on using cryptographic techniques to
provide integrity checking and secure transmission of records to and from the archive. Thesetechniques and their appropriate application to a long-term archive are discussed below.Geographical ReplicationMultiple, geographically and administratively separated replication provides an essentialtechnique for protecting integrity. There are various ways to meet this requirement, involvingcomplete replicas or multiple partial replicas. A detailed design starts with reasonable goalsfor the acceptable bit loss rates and desired availability for each local site. Given these reliabil-
ity metrics for the local sites, one can compute the reliability of an N-way replicated archive,and the total archive can be designed to achieve a specified level of reliability.At any given point in time, the engineering and design question will be how to achievethese goals in a cost-effective manner with currently available storage technologies. Storagetechnologies and their relative prices are evolving rapidly, so the National Archives andRecords Administration (NARA) needs a flexible design that can evolve along with them.Cryptographic TechniquesAs described below, cryptographic techniques provide basic tools for ensuring authentic-ity and integrity.1 Both qualities depend on cryptographic algorithms for which forgery iscomputationally infeasible: that is, defeating the system (e.g., by altering the original record
without altering the digest or its signature) would require so many samples of records or somuch computing power that no attacker has the resources to succeed.Integrity Check Using Hash DigestsThe technique of computing a hash digest or checksum of a record is used to check itsintegrity. A secure hash algorithm computes a compact hash digest from the digital bits thatcomprise a record.  There are several algorithms in common use; Federal Information Process-
ing Standards (FIPS) Publication 180-22 specifies four standard algorithms. The standard ex-plains that a secure hash algorithm is one for which Òit is computationally infeasible (1) to find1More details on these and other assurance techniques can be found in the following reports from the NationalResearch CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board: CryptographyÕs Role in Securing the Informa-tion Society (1996), Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age (1991), and Trust in Cyberspace (1999), allpublished by National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY61a message that corresponds to a given message digest, or (2) to find two different messagesthat produce the same message digest.  Any change to a message will, with a very high
probability, result in a different message digest.Ó3In the field of databases, ÒwitnessÓ is the technical term for a hash digest that is computedwhen a record first enters an integrity-management system.  One later verifies the integrity ofan offered record by computing a new hash digest from the offered record and comparing thatnew value with the witness.Secure TransmissionVarious cryptographic techniques can be used to ensure that what is received is what wassent. A digital record can be authenticated by creating a digital signature that can be verifiedby anyone using the record. If the record is altered in any way, the signature check will fail. To
sign a digital object, one performs a key-driven cryptographic transformation, typically on awitness of the digital object (such as a hash digest) rather than on the object itself, to createwhat is known as an authentication tag or signature for the given digital object. To verify the
origin of a digital object, one performs an algorithm that involves a second key-driven crypto-graphic transformation, taking as input the authentication tag and a public key of verifiedauthenticity; the output is a binary value, Òorigin verifiedÓ or Òorigin not verified.Ó The mean-
ing of Òorigin verifiedÓ is that the object originated with someone who possessed the privatekey. One must trust that the putative possessor of the private key has properly protected it, sothat he or she is the only one who could have created the authentication tag.It is important to recognize that digital signatures have limited value for the long-termpreservation of a chain of custody or for data integrity. Their value is limited by their validitywindow: the time-to-compromise of the secret signing key, the time-to-compromise of the
signature algorithm, and the time-to-obsolescence of the public key infrastructureÑwhich-ever is shorter. For example, if a private key used to form digital signatures for recordsbecomes compromised as of a certain date, any records verified with the public key corre-
sponding to that private key after that date are suspect. The case of a private key becomingcompromised after it is no longer in use is more subtle: while the compromise does notendanger records already verified, it allows the attacker to forge a document and to record its
creation date as one during which the key was still valid. Discovery of the compromise of akey may come a long time after it actually occurred. Compromise could also occur as a resultof a cryptoanalytic attack.4 Digital signatures are, therefore, an excellent means of verifyingthat recently transmitted dataÑsuch as a set of records being transferred from an agency to2National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2002. Federal Information Processing Standards [FIPS]Publication 180-2. Information Technology Laboratory, NIST, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.,hereafter referred to as FIPS Publication 180-2. Available online at <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/>. Accessed
May 23, 2005.3NIST. 2002. FIPS Publication 180-2.4The first widely distributed description of the RSA algorithm for public-key encryption was in Martin Gardner,1977, ÒMathematical Games: A New Kind of Cipher That Would Take Millions of Years to Break,Ó ScientificAmerican 237(2):120-124. The article included a challenge ciphertext, which was decoded in 1994, as reported inDerek Atkins, Michael Graff, Arjen K. Lenstra, and Paul C. Leyland, 1995, ÒThe Magic Words Are Squeamish
Ossifrage,Ó Advances in Cryptology (ASIACRYPTÕ94), Lecture Notes in Computer Science 917:265-277.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARANARAÑactually came from where it is claimed that they came from, and a poor means forauthenticating the far-in-the-past origin of stored data.Digital signatures can be used together with several other cryptographic tools to establisha secure communications channel. The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol, first implemented
in Netscape browsers, later standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force, and imple-mented today in all widely used Web browsers, is an example of a secure channel. It estab-lishes a secure channel on top of the insecure channel provided by the InternetÕs Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP) by an exchange of credentials (using digital signatures), negotiation ofshared secret keys, and then exchanges of message authentication codes (MACs). The MACsare essentially a shared-secret-key signature mechanism. One important step that is some-
times overlooked in the application of SSL is that the protocol reports who is at the other endof the secure connection. For authentication to be complete, the recipient must check thatreport to see that the correspondent that it identifies is the expected one. Many current Web
browsers that use SSL either omit or deemphasize this step, with the consequence that theirsupposedly secure channel may not be secure at all.Long-term record assurance depends on measures other than digital signatures or securechannels. It requires (1) at record ingest, securely transmitting the data from its origin toNARA and recording metadata about that assurance; and (2) from then on, maintaining theintegrity of the stored data and associated metadata while the record resides in the archive.
These two steps, ingest and retention, are examined in the following sections.ASSURANCE AT RECORD INGESTVerification of ValidityAgencies that create and retain records must use appropriate techniques for authenticatingthe origin of records and for maintaining their integrity while they remain in the custody ofthe agency. When a record is transferred to NARA, the agency should transmit, along with the
record, metadata that exhibit an audit of the recordÕs assurances using the agencyÕs internaltechniques. If the agency maintained integrity checks, these should be included as part of themetadata.Digital signatures may be helpful in this verification, depending on the particular circum-stances. If a set of records were digitally signed and the digital signature system is still opera-tional and the validity window (see above) is believed not to have expired, agencies can
provide additional information about record validity by checking the signatures and record-ing the result in metadata. On the other hand, it would be problematic for NARA itself toperform this verification, because the verification depends on the operation of a system out-
side NARAÕs control. Moreover, if an agency retains custody of its records for a lengthyperiod, it must face the prospect that the validity window of its digital assurances expiresbefore the records are transferred to NARA.Once a recordÕs authenticity has been verified and the record ingested, the primary re-quirement from then on is to record the verification method and outcome in the metadata andto use integrity assurances to protect the integrity of both the record and the metadata while
they are retained in the archive.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY63Assurance in TransmissionAs NARA evolves away from transfer and storage based on the delivery of physical mediatoward network-based transfers and online storage, the use of more robust safeguards in
transferring records from agencies to NARA becomes even more important. For example,verifying that an electronic file transfer via File Transfer Protocol (FTP) yields a file with theright number of bytes provides little assurance against either unintentional corruption or
deliberate tampering.Assurances for the transmission between the Electronic Records ArchivesÕs (ERAÕs) ingestcomponent and the originating agencyÕs system are needed to provide adequate assurance
that the transmitted data come from the claimed source and thus that an unauthorized personhas not attempted to submit false records and that the records have not been altered intransmission. The best option is for NARA to use a standard and well-vetted scheme rather
than a custom scheme (which would necessarily have been subject to less scrutiny).A good example of such a standard, widely used scheme today is a properly authenticatedSSL connection. Records themselves can be sent securely via such a channel. Alternatively, a
secure channel can be used to send individual hash values for the records, and the records canbe sent any which way as long as they are checked against the hash values at NARAÕs end. IfStandard Form 258 (ÒAgreement to Transfer Records to the National Archives of the United
StatesÓ) becomes electronic in the future, it would also be appropriate to authenticate andsecurely transmit these forms as well.Guarding Against Human ErrorMultiple copies and integrity checks can protect against mechanical threats to integrity,but they do not address the biggest remaining threat to integrity: human error. To illustrate: acareful look at Òagency report 493Ó reveals it to be another copy of Òagency report 492,Óaccidentally created when someone clicked on ÒRevertÓ just before clicking on ÒSave as.Ó Such
errors can occur within an agency before the records reach NARA or during the ingestionprocess.NARA ingest processes should be designed to minimize the opportunity for human errorof this sort. In addition, NARA may be able to afford to have humans occasionally inspect theincoming records and query originating agencies to resolve problems. The results of suchinteractions with agencies would constitute additional metadata (e.g., Òat ingest, so-and-so
received assurances from so-and-so that this record, and not record xxyyxx999-04444, is theauthentic representation of the document with the given titleÓ). In other words, ingest negotia-tions add additional metadata. This observation is not intended to suggest that NARA under-
take comprehensive examination and repair of records at ingest.ASSURANCE DURING RETENTIONThe starting point of a full design for the assurance of archived records is to carry out acareful, comprehensive threat assessment (see the discussion below). This section considers
several of the obvious threats and techniques available to address them.Designing digital assurances into an electronic records archive is similar to designingsecurity measures. First, the cryptographic techniques must be chosen carefully, and theBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAarchive must be ready to change the cryptographic algorithms that it uses. For example, ifsomeone were to discover a way to create two different documents that generate the samehash digest with the current hash algorithm, the algorithm would need to be replaced. Second,the overall system design, not just the cryptographic mechanisms, must not allow openings for
attackers. For example, if an attacker can surreptitiously tinker with the code that NARA runsto perform signature or hash code verification (to make it say ÒyesÓ when it should have saidÒnoÓ), the assurances are worthless. If such vulnerabilities are discovered, the system will
require modification.Cryptographic Integrity AssuranceMultiple, geographically separated copies provide the fundamental basis for establishingintegrity. Hash algorithms provide a performance enhancement for checking that records have
not been corrupted, whether by hardware failure, system errors, or deliberate tampering. Theintegrity of a record can be verified by computing the hash digest for the bits in the record andcomparing this digest to a previously calculated and separately protected witness for the record.
If the two digests match, the integrity of the record is established to a very high degree ofprobability. A witness computed for a bit stream that includes the record plus metadata repre-senting the time at which the hash was computed provides a digital time stamp that allows one
to verify the contents of an object at the time the witness was calculated and published.Although the description of integrity checking presented here has assumed that eachrecord carries a separate hash digest, this need not be the case. After all, integrity consider-
ations apply not only to individual records but also to collections, or series, of records. A townclerk who issues 10 marriage licenses on July 12 passes 10 records to the archive, but alsoattests that these records constitute the entire collection of licenses issued on that dateÑthat is,
that these and only these licenses were issued on July 12. A hash can be computed for a set ofrecords in a given order. Checking such a hash may require retrieving all of the records onwhich it is based and recomputing the hash, which might be time-consuming. In exchange,
however, fewer known good hashes have to be published.To protect against malevolent change by an attacker, a recordÕs witness must be separatelyprotected so that an attacker who manages to gain access in order to change the record cannot
also alter the witness. Since a hash digest can be written in a relatively small number of digits,one way to protect it from change is to publish it in a very public place, such as a classifiedadvertisement in a major newspaper (which will, a short time after publication, be distributed on
microfilm to many hundreds of libraries), or by otherwise depositing the hash value in hundredsof libraries. (Such a hash publication service could be provided by the Government PrintingOffice, which currently distributes government documents to Federal Depository Libraries.)
Because integrity checking requires being able to establish a relationship between a record andits published hash digest, a unique record identifier associated with each record is very useful.The published list is then simply a correspondence between record identifiers and hash digests.Techniques for combining hash values can be used to reflect the integrity of a huge archiveusing a single hash digest, which is more practical to publish than a very large number ofindividual hashes. The most straightforward approach would be to compute the single hash
digest formed by hashing the hash digests of every record in the archive, but such a sequentialcomputation would be prohibitively time-consuming. Also, a too-simple combination such asconcatenating all hash values may lower the precision of the integrity check. Techniques haveBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY65been devised that require far less computation to update a single hash value when the archiveis changed and do not lower the precision of the check.5 The important property of all tech-niques that compute a single hash value is that the value irrefutably depends on the precisebit-string contents of every record in the archive. 6Other Assurance MeasuresCryptographic protections are only a part of the solution, however. They detect damage orattack only after the fact. Prevention and repair are even more crucial, and they depend oncareful procedures and system designs for handling digital records. They include the mainte-
nance of multiple, geographically and administratively separated copies; access controls; au-dit logs; retention of old or deleted files to recover from unauthorized or faulty operations; andprocedural safeguards for changing the archive contents to reduce human error (e.g., requir-
ing multiple people to authorize a change). These protection measures are important in orderto avoid or correct tampering with the archive. Although cryptographic techniques can detectthat tampering has occurred, they are not able to deter or repair tampering.ContingenciesWhat if stored records are found to contain errors? What if one or more of the crypto-graphic algorithms on which digital assurances are based are shown to be easy to subvert?Over the life of records in the archive, some of these events are sure to occur. Thus, the archive
must be designed to anticipate corrective responses.Correcting Post-Ingestion ErrorsErrors may creep into the archive after records have been verified and ingested. This couldhappen as a result of hardware failure, operational error, a software bug, malicious attack, or
something else. Errors are detected by comparing each file in the archive with another copy orby reading the file, calculating its current hash, and comparing that hash with the separatelyprotected witness for that file. There must be an ongoing process that performs such compari-
sons so that errors do not accumulate unnoticed.5One such approach, first suggested by Ralph Merkle (1980, ÒProtocols for Public Key Cryptosystems,Ó pp. 122-133 in Proceedings of the 1980 Symposium on Security and Privacy, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.),is to build a binary tree out of the million witness values, as follows. The leaves are these values, and each internalnode is the hash of the concatenation of its two children. The root of this tree is published so that it is widely
available and hard to tamper with, such as in a major newspaper that is stored on microfilm in libraries across thenation. Stored with each of the million witness values is the following linking information: the list of 20 siblinghash values (each one accompanied by a bit indicating whether it is the right or the left sibling) along the path
from the leaf up to the published hash value.6The Merkle-tree technique was adapted for the purpose of digital time-stamping by D. Bayer, S. Haber, andW.S. Stornetta, 1993, ÒImproving the Efficiency and Reliability of Digital Time-Stamping,Ó pp. 329-334 in SequencesII: Methods in Communication, Security, and Computer Science, R.M. Capocelli, A. De Santis, and U. Vaccaro (eds.),Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y., and by Josh Benaloh and Michael de Mare, 1991, Efficient Broadcast Time-Stamp-ing, Technical Report No. TR-MCS-91-1, Clarkson University Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,Potsdam, N.Y. The technology is offered commercially by Surety, Inc.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAWhen integrity checks fail, both repair and investigation are required. First, invalid datamust be restored from mirrors or backups provided by redundancy mechanisms designedinto the archive. Second, the cause of the error must be investigated. Failure to rigorouslyinvestigate cases of failed integrity will eventually lead to failure to protect the archive; modi-
fying the system design in response is an essential part of iterative design.If it turns out that files have been improperly altered by the ERA software or its operators,it will be necessary to ÒundoÓ certain changes to the archive. Repair can be facilitated by
designing the file system to allow operations that modify files to be Òundone,Ó at least to somelevel; techniques similar to those used to implement ÒundoÓ in desktop word-processingsoftware can be applied to a file system as well. The most effective technique will be to limit
the amount of the archive that can be modified at all: ideally, most storage would be treated asÒread onlyÓ by the software; only portions of the archive in which collections of records werebeing assembled during the ingest process would be modifiable. Read-only records may, of
course, be subject to data-type transformations so as to combat obsolescence, but these pro-cesses should only add new forms, not delete the old forms.Compromise of Cryptographic Algorithms over TimeCryptographic algorithm compromise is a distinct possibility that must be assumed tohappen at some point during the lifetime of the ERA. Breakthroughs in mathematics,cryptanalysis, or computing power over the lifetime of the ERA may result in successfulattacks on the one-way functions that form the basis of digital assurances used in the archive.
For example, results reported at the 24th Annual International Cryptology Conference (held inSanta Barbara, Calif., in 2004) indicated some weaknesses in hash functions commonly usedtoday. After the conference, NIST announced that it plans to phase out the use of Secure Hash
Algorithm (SHA)-1, the recommended federal standard cryptographic hash function, by 2010.In mid-February 2005, it was announced that a team of cryptanalysts at universities in Chinahad invented a new hash-collision algorithm attacking SHA-1 that is substantially faster than
all previously known attacks. While these results are far short of a devastating compromise ofexisting standard algorithms, they remind us that the algorithms may not be impregnable.If a cryptographic algorithm were to be compromised, hash values computed using thatalgorithm would not provide assurances of integrity. The following provisions are, therefore,essential for long-term archival preservation:¥Archive systems should be designed to accommodate replacement of cryptographicfunctions and to allow records to be reprocessed to attach revised digital assurances. Well-designed security and signature systems accommodate more than one cryptographic algo-
rithm for just this reason; such provisions are especially important owing to the very longlifetime of an archive system.¥Replacement of the algorithm and recalculation of hash values should be performedboth when compromise is threatened and when more-robust hash algorithms are developedand accepted by the cryptographic community.¥Better algorithms should be adopted early rather than waiting until the older algorithmsare known to have been compromised.  This action would guard against the old integrity
schemes being compromised, unbeknownst to NARA, before the new one was applied.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY67¥Archive systems should also support multiple algorithms simultaneously. It would beprudent to use two hash functions in parallel in anticipation of future cryptanalytic advances.
In addition, migration to new hash schemes would likely be performed over time, as recordsare copied from one medium or storage system to another, rather than all at once.Box 5.1 describes an approach to putting a new integrity scheme in place.The issue of algorithm compromise will be an ongoing operational concern. Someone mustpay enough attention to keep track of the need to apply a new integrity scheme and must
make a judgment call about when to add the new scheme to the system. Once the new schemeis added, new hash values can readily be calculated during the course of routine scans of thearchive for errors.BOX 5.1How to Introduce a New Integrity Scheme into an ArchiveOne way of introducing a new integrity scheme would require that, in addition to the hashingsystem for integrity, there would also be a secure time-stamping system. Suppose that an imple-
mentation of a particular time-stamping system is in place, and consider the pair (r, c1), whereÒc1Ó is a valid time-stamp certificate1 (in this implementation) for the digital record Òr.Ó Nowsuppose that some time later an improved time-stamping system is implemented and deployedÑ

by replacing the hash function used in the original system with a new hash function, or even
perhaps after the invention of a completely new algorithm. Is there any way to use the new time-
stamping system to buttress the guarantee of integrity supplied by the certificate c1, in the faceof potential later attacks on the old system?One could simply submit r as a request to the new time-stamping system, but this would losethe connection to the original time of certification. Another possibility is to submit c1 as a requestto the new time-stamping system, but that would be vulnerable to the later occurrence of a
devastating attack on the hash function used in the computation of c1, as follows: if an adversarycould find another record r with the same hash value as r (a hash collision), then the renewalsystem could be used to backdate r to the original time.Suppose instead that the pair (r, c1) is time-stamped by the new system, resulting in a newcertificate Òc2,Ó and that some time after this is done (i.e., at a definite later date), the originalmethod is compromised. The certificate c2 provides evidence not only that the record contents rexisted prior to the time of the new time-stamp, but also that it existed at the time stated in theoriginal certificate, c1; prior to the compromise of the old implementation, the only way to createa valid time-stamp certificate was by legitimate means.21Whatever output a time-stamping system produces in response to a time-stamp request for a particularbit string, such as a signature returned by a hash-and-sign system.2This approach first appeared in the technical literature in D. Bayer, S. Haber, and W.S. Stornetta, 1993,ÒImproving the Efficiency and Reliability of Digital Time-Stamping,Ó  pp. 329-334 in Sequences II: Methodsin Communication, Security, and Computer Science, R.M. Capocelli, A. De Santis, and U. Vaccaro (eds.),Springer-Verlag. The paper is available online at <http://www.surety.com/solutions/DN/bhspap.pdf>, ac-cessed May 1, 2005.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARABy using standard schemes, NARA can leverage the knowledge of a wide community ofcryptographers and system designers to inform its decisions over time. For example, NARAcan look to NIST, which monitors developments in this area and issues advisories, for advice.ASSURANCE AT DELIVERY TO ARCHIVE USERSWhen it delivers an electronic record or batch of records to a customer, NARA can use asecure transmission method or a digital signature, which provides assurance that the data canbe trusted because they originated at NARA (which checked the origin of the data at ingestand then held the data in a trusted repository). Such protections also provide assurance that
data have not been tampered with in transit after leaving the ERA system.ASSURANCE FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATIONThe records themselves, in their original forms, are considered above. But additional infor-mation, such as derived forms and metadata, should also be protected with the same level of
assurance.Assurance for Record Migration and Derived FormsDuring its operation, the ERA may need to create alternative forms of the records that itingests. These alternatives may be needed to simplify meeting ERA usersÕ needs (derived
forms, as described in the committeeÕs first report), to prevent records from becoming unus-able if the data type in which they are encoded becomes obsolete, or to meet the needs ofcertain users (e.g., for the redaction of classified records). In any case, the new form of the
record will not contain the same bits as those in the original, and as a result neither theauthentication nor the integrity checking associated with the original record will apply to thenew form. Nevertheless, a chain of trust can be established from the original record to the new
form, assured by cryptographic techniques.The basic idea is that the operation that transforms a record in order to create a new onemust certify the following: (1) the record it used as input, (2) the authority imputed to the
transformation process, and (3) the integrity of the output of the process. Whether the transfor-mation involves only computer processing or includes manual processes (e.g., redaction), thetransformation process must make such a certification. It includes an unambiguous identifica-
tion of the input record (e.g., record identifier and hash digest), an unambiguous identificationof the output record (e.g., record identifier and hash digest), and perhaps other informationsuch as the identity of the person performing the redaction or the version number of the
software that performs a data-type conversion. The transformation process or processes arethus unambiguously identified, and the user of the record in its new form is thus presentedwith an assurance history of the document. Users can then decide, based on the trust they
impute to any transformation processes applied, whether to trust the new record.The scientific community that records, processes, and analyzes sensor data is grapplingwith similar problems. Agencies and disciplines seeking to keep track of these transformations
applied to streams of data include NOAA (weather), NASA (satellite imagery), and high-energy physics (records of particle accelerator experiments). Developments in these areas mayprove useful to NARA in the future.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECORD INTEGRITY AND AUTHENTICITY69Assurances for MetadataSome metadata is an essential accompaniment to a record and must be protected accord-ingly. For example, the date on which a record was created may not be a part of the record, but
is instead recorded as metadata. This metadata must be protected by digital assurances, just asis the rest of the record.Some metadata may change over time, being revised as metadata standards change or asbetter techniques become available for extracting metadata from record contents. This infor-mation is similar to a derived form of a documentÑthat is, it should be assured by an audittrail that identifies the original input record and the processes used to derive the new metadata.THREAT MODELING AND THREAT COUNTERINGThreat modeling is a systematic technique for enumerating threats against digital systems.It includes, among other elements, developing scenarios involving accidental or deliberatemisuse of systems that might lead to vulnerabilities. The model is then used to analyze a
system design to understand how it performs in different scenarios.After developing a threat model, designing ways to counter the expected threats, andbuilding the system, one should then observe the system to see what kinds of integrity,
authenticity, and security failures occur despite carefully laid plans. Next, this failure analysisis used to adjust the threat model, to design additional or better threat-countering procedures,and to upgrade the system. The process is repeated for the entire lifetime of the system.
Systems that are to provide fault tolerance, integrity, security, or life safety all require this kindof continual iteration throughout their entire life cycle. The buzzword is Òdesign for iteration,Óand this style of system design makes the feedback mechanism an essential component of the
system design.EVOLUTION OF ASSURANCE OF RECORDSAn ideal scheme for digital assurance would afford an end-to-end verification of authen-ticity and integrity. That is, the reader of a record, many decades after its creation, would be
able to directly verify the authenticity of the creator and the integrity of the recordÕs preserva-tion. As described above, current techniques are limited to piecemeal assurances that togetherbridge the validity windows of key management systems, of cryptographic algorithms, and
data-type transformations. An ideal scheme is not currently available; perhaps research canimprove on the techniques that we depend on today (see Chapter 4).With present techniques, the chain-of-custody and assurance bridging techniques are onlyas strong as their weakest link. An archive that superbly guarantees the integrity of its recordswill not be useful if the agencies sending records to the archive have been sloppy about anyaspect of stewardship of the records in their custody. To ensure that the ERA, decades hence,
will be valued as a source of authentic government records, the entire chain of record custodymust use robust assurances.Promoting Digital Assurance Throughout the Federal GovernmentThe preceding arguments clearly call for digital assurances to be applied to recordsthroughout their life, not just starting at the time they are ingested by NARA. However, digitalBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAassurance techniques are not currently widespread in either government or commercial infor-mation technology (IT) systems or electronic records-management systems.NARAÕs mission to preserve essential evidence suggests that it take a much more activerole in promoting digital authentication and integrity assurance techniques that agencies can
use to safeguard the records they create.  If NARA cannot provide state-of-the-art attestations
about the records it holds, the records will not be honored as valid in an environment in whichsignificantly better practices exist.A well-designed and well-operated ERA itself can serve as an exhibit of Òbest practicesÓ inthe digital retention of electronic records, including both technical and operational methodsfor assuring record authenticity and integrity. Also, as new government IT systems are devel-
oped and as new records-management systems are developed or procured, NARA shouldassist agencies in their adoption of acceptable digital assurance measures. These techniquesrequire software to create and maintain digital signatures and the like, but also operational
measures to issue and manage cryptographic keys, and operational measures to ensure thatthe records-management system itself is not compromised.The Records Management Redesign initiative, currently underway, provides an opportu-nity to inaugurate and promote the use of digital assurance techniques for government records.The thrust of this initiative is to engage the record-creating agencies in the overall records-preservation mission, taking on responsibility for defining, creating, and maintaining digital
records in a form that streamlines the preservation and later use of the records. Strong assur-ance is a vital aspect of electronic records preservation that has not received adequate atten-tion.Until record creators use digital assurance methods that conform to NARAÕs standards,agencies that create and hold electronic records should be held to stringent chain-of-custodystandards for their holdings. When records without digital assurances are transferred to

NARAÕs custody, NARA should immediately augment these records with suitable digitalassurances, which can then be maintained throughout the recordsÕ life in the ERA. The ulti-mate goal must be to achieve and maintain the best digital assurances and other record-
retention practices in both the creating agencies and the archive itself.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73Appendix ABriefers to the Study CommitteeAlthough the briefers listed below provided much useful information of various kinds tothe committee, they were not asked to endorse this reportÕs conclusions or recommendations,nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.AUGUST 8-9, 2002WASHINGTON, D.C.John Carlin, Archivist of the United StatesRobert Chadduck, Research Director, Electronic Records Archives Program, NationalArchives and Records Administration (NARA)Michael Lesk, National Science FoundationReagan Moore, San Diego Supercomputer Center
Kenneth Thibodeau, Director, Electronic Records Archives ProgramNOVEMBER 4, 2002NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATIONCOLLEGE PARK, MARYLANDNARA StaffMargaret Adams, Electronic and Special Media Records Services DivisionNancy Allard, Co-director of Electronic Records Management (ERM) Initiative, Policy andCommunications StaffBruce Ambacher, Electronic and Special Media Records Services Division
Michael Carlson, Director, Electronic and Special Media Records ServicesBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARARobert Chadduck, Research Director, Electronic Records Archives ProgramAllen Church, Electronic Records Archives Program OfficeSusan Cummings, Archives Specialist, Policy and Communications StaffFynnette Eaton, Electronic and Special Media Records Services Division
Sharon Fawcett, Office of Presidential LibrariesWilliam Harris, Office of Presidential LibrariesMark Huber, Electronic Records Archives Program
Greg Lamotta, Electronic and Special Media Records Services DivisionDyung Van Le, ERA Systems Engineering DirectorEdwin McCeney, Federal Records Officer for the Department of the Interior
Richard Steinbacher, Electronic Records Archives ProgramKenneth Thibodeau, Director, Electronic Records Archives ProgramSteven Tilley, Chief of the Special Access/Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Staff
Haseen Uddin, Chief Technology OfficerJon Valett, Electronic Records Archives ProgramSam Watkins, Office of Human Resources and Information Services
Lisa Weber,  Information Resources Policy and Administration Division
Yvonne Wilson, Office of Records ServicesNOVEMBER 5, 2002WASHINGTON, D.C.James Gray, Microsoft Research (by telephone)Joseph King, National Space Science Data CenterMichael Miller, Archivist, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Anna Karlin Nelson, American UniversityJim Olson, Sabbath, Inc. (by telephone)James Ostell, Chief, Information Engineering Branch, National Center for BiotechnologyInformationAnne Van Camp, Research Libraries GroupFEBRUARY 27-28, 2003WASHINGTON, D.C.Rick Barry, Principal, Barry AssociatesLaura Campbell, Associate Librarian for Strategic Initiatives and Chief Information Officer,Library of CongressMacKenzie Smith, Associate Director for Technology at the MIT Libraries, MassachusettsInstitute of TechnologyMAY 8, 2003WASHINGTON, D.C.Lewis Berman, Branch Chief of the Informatics Branch of the Division of HealthExamination Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A75Lee Dantzler, Director of the National Oceanographic Data Center, National Oceanic andAtmospheric AdministrationJames Erwin, Director of Information Science and Technology, Defense TechnicalInformation Center (DTIC)Chris Olsen, Chief of Records and Classification Group in the Office of the ChiefInformation Officer, Central Intelligence AgencyCharles Rothwell, Associate Director for Information Technology and Services of theNational Center for Health Statistics, CDCTim Sprehe, President of Sprehe Information Management Associates, formerly with theOffice of Management and Budget and the Census BureauPete Suthard, Director of Operations, DTICJeanne Young, Federal Reserve Board (retired)MAY 29, 2003SITE VISIT TO GOOGLE, INC.MOUNTAIN VIEW, CALIFORNIAHoward Gobioff, Google, Inc.Brian Rakowski, Google, Inc.AUGUST 14, 2003NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATIONCOLLEGE PARK, MARYLANDNARA Staff
Nancy Allard, Co-director of ERM Initiative, Policy and Communications StaffL. Reynolds Cahoon, Assistant Archivist for Human Resources and Information Servicesand Chief Information OfficerRobert Chadduck, Research Director, Electronic Records Archives ProgramSusan Cummings, Archives Specialist, Policy and Communications Staff
Mark Giguere, Co-director of ERM Initiative, Modern Records ProgramsMichael J. Kurtz, Assistant Archivist, Office of Records ServicesJames McKan, Executive Officer, Electronic Records Archives Program
Kenneth Thibodeau, Director, Electronic Records Archives ProgramBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76Appendix BÒSummary and RecommendationsÓ Chapter from
the CommitteeÕs First ReportAs in other sectors of society, much of the businessÑand thus record keepingÑof thefederal government depends on digital information. Documents are created, transmitted, and
stored electronically. E-mail has become an importantÑand often primaryÑcommunications
technology. And many records exist only in electronic form, stored in databases and other
computer systems. Some of these records will, in time, be transferred to the custody of the
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) for long-term preservation.NARAÕs current systems for archival preservation of electronic records are limited in capa-bility and ad hoc in nature. Recognizing the growing importance of electronic records to its
mission of preserving Òessential evidence,Ó1 NARA launched the Electronic Records Archives(ERA) initiative. It sponsored work through this program at the San Diego Supercomputer
Center (SDSC), which resulted in a series of archival preservation demonstrations. Building on
this experience and that of other institutions studying digital preservation, NARAÕs new ERA
Program Office plans to begin initial procurement for a production ERA in 2003. As of this
writing, NARA has hired a contractor to assist with the ERA program and has started to define
desired capabilities and requirements for the system, including a vision statement and concept
of operations for the ERA.NOTE: Reprinted from National Research Council, 2003, Building an Electronic Records Archive at the NationalArchives and Records Administration: Recommendations for Initial Development, Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg(eds.), The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B77THE IMPORTANCE OF THE ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVES PROGRAM(CHAPTER 1)Finding 1. As NARA recognizes, it is critical to start developing new electronic recordspreservation capabilities quickly in order to continue to fulfill NARAÕs mandate to preserve
federal records.With the rapid increase in federal records in digital formÑand with many records borndigital or existing only in digital formÑit is clear that solutions must be found for preserving
these records in order for NARA to continue to fulfill its mandate. NARA has determined and
the committee concurs that new capabilities for electronic record archiving are needed for NARA
to perform its mission to preserve and provide access to federal records of enduring value.The overall challenge facing NARA is substantial. The volume and diversity of digitalrecords that will be eligible for transfer from the custody of federal agencies to NARA are
projected to be very large. Indeed, it is reasonable to anticipate that in the not-too-distant
future, the number of digital records is likely to exceed the number of records originating in
paper form. NARAÕs current systems for electronic records, designed primarily to support
preservation of relational databases and similar highly structured records, cannot meet these
demands.The backlog of electronic records presents additional challenges. Under the paper-basedmodel, NARA receives records from a few years to many decades after they were are created.
The transfer of electronic records to NARA has for the most part proceeded in similar fashion.
Thus when the ERA system becomes operational, NARA will face a large backlog of electronic
records that were created over the past few decades, many of which may pose challenging
preservation problems owing to their age (media deterioration, loss of documentation and
other metadata, and obsolescence of data types). For records yet to be created, there may be
ways to avoid the technology obsolescence problem by restructuring records acquisition pro-
cesses to obtain records closer to the time they are created. (Discussion of this opportunity and
related process issues is deferred to the committeeÕs second report.)If NARA fails to design and implement an electronic records archiving program that iscapable of handling the projected volume and diversity of electronic records, important records
are likely to be lost for the reasons discussed above. Likewise, significant delays in the ERA
program would put records at greater risk of loss. The consequence of either failure to institute
a program or a significant delay in doing so would be the possibleÑindeed even likelyÑloss of
an important part of the nationÕs history.Finding 2. ERA systems can and should be built, but it is a challenging, leading-edge engi-neering undertaking, not a routine procurement.Although no one has yet designed, built, or managed a production digital archives systemon the scale that NARA envisions, the ERA program can be launched in a technically sound
way. No off-the-shelf overall solution is available, but there are demonstrated solutions to
many of the important system components the ERA will need, making it possible to start
building ERA capabilities today. The projected scale and complexity of the ERA program mean
that the task of designing, engineering, and evolving the system is a formidable challenge.Recommendation 1. The ERA should comprise a series of interrelated systems that evolveover time to fulfill NARAÕs digital preservation needs.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAThe scope of the ERA in terms of time and function demands that the digital archives bethought of as a set of systems that evolve over time. Digital materials (records and associated
metadata) will need to be preserved for a very long timeÑlonger than the lifetime of any
physical device or software component that is part of the ERA. This means that hardware and
software will have to be replaced or modernized many times without disrupting the archive.Because requirements for NARAÕs digital archives will change over time, the ERA systemsmust be designed to evolve gracefully. For example, new data types (or Òfile formatsÓ2) willemerge and require modifications to parts of the system. Likewise, storage and other imple-
mentation technologies will evolve, necessitating the replacement or upgrading of parts of
systems without disrupting the operation of the ERA as a whole. The volume of records to be
stored will continue to increase, requiring a strategy for graceful scaling of storage and pro-
cessing. New options for preservation will probably emerge and be incorporated into the ERA.
User demands will also change over time, requiring modifications in the ways that records are
located and accessed by users.COMMONALITIES WITH OTHER DIGITAL PRESERVATION ACTIVITIES (CHAPTER 2)Finding 3. The requirements of NARAÕs ERA program have much in common with those ofother digital preservation systems.Although NARAÕs statutory mandate to preserve federal records is unique, many organi-zations need to preserve digital objects and are taking steps to design and implement systems
that address this need. They are developing architectures, techniques, experiments, pilot sys-
tems, and expertise relating to digital preservation. NARA has embraced some of these devel-
opments, such as the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference model for character-
izing archival systems in terms of their ingest, storage, and access functions,3 and is aware ofactivities in organizations such as the Library of Congress, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), and the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC).The technology to address the ERA largely overlaps the technology required to build otherdigital repositories. For example, NARA and others require robust long-term storage of bits,
accommodation for many different data types, metadata standards and processing techniques,
and flexible searching and access provisions. Many systems require a high degree of scalability
and the ability to evolve their architecture and implementation. And a number of organiza-
tions, government agencies, and businesses also face the challenge of long-term preservation of
large volumes of data. As it examines commonalities with others working on digital preserva-
tion, NARA should evaluate what is already available as commercial software.There are a few areas where NARA faces requirements that are more stringent than thosetypical of other digital repositories. NARAÕs mandate to guarantee record authenticity is stron-
ger than that of some but not all organizations. NARA must also be ready to preserve materials
of very diverse types, even if they were created by obsolete systems or saved on obsolete
storage media; by contrast, many digital libraries can simplify their challenge by accommodat-
ing only a limited set of contemporaneous or common data types. Indeed, the ERA will have to
be capable of ingesting the full variety of data types used to create permanent records across
the federal government, which will roughly correspond to the full variety of data types in use
more broadly. Also, NARA must sometimes redact classified or restricted documents in order
to produce versions that can be released to the public. While these and other requirements may
be special to NARAÕs electronic preservation systems, the list of special requirements is modest
compared with the list of requirements that the ERA shares with other digital preservation
systems.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B79Recommendation 2. NARA should emphasize the ERA programÕs commonality with otherdigital preservation systems and engage with other programs and organizations wherever
possible.NARA would benefit from increased coordination with other federal entities (such as theLibrary of Congress or NASA), other institutions (such as OCLC, university libraries, archiving
projects, and foreign national libraries and archives), and businesses that share common inter-
ests in digital preservation. Enhanced coordination should extend at least to increased infor-
mation sharing as the various institutions move forward with digital repositories. It might
extend to such activities as joint work on standards or best practices. However, the committee
is not recommending coordinated or joint procurements, which could significantly complicate
or delay the ERA program.It is not enough to be aware of efforts by other institutions; NARA must engage them bybecoming an active participant. Engagement means not only that NARA will have better ac-
cess to the expertise and artifacts that these efforts develop but also that it can influence the
research, development, and deployment agendas of these groups when it is appropriate and
help build a larger community addressing engineering issues related to digital preservation.NARAÕs long-term objective should be to increase the commonalities between its preserva-tion systems and those of other digital repositories such as libraries, because this will (1) make
it possible to share software and metadata standards with other institutions, (2) help stimulate
the development of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components by increasing the size of the
market for these components, and (3) help grow the cadre of professionals trained in digital
preservation and build ties that would help NARA recruit them to work on the ERA program.LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE SDSC DEMONSTRATIONS (CHAPTER 3)Finding 4. Demonstrations conducted at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) forNARA have provided a useful opportunity for NARA to explore relevant technologies. How-
ever, the work has not informed many significant aspects of the ERA design, has not reduced
the engineering risk of the program, and has not enhanced NARAÕs operational capabilities
for running ERA systems.The SDSC proof-of-concept demonstration projects have provided NARA with the oppor-tunity to interact with the information technology (IT) community and to explore approaches
for a production digital archiving system. The SDSC projects have demonstrated options for
parts of a production digital archiving system, but NARA should not interpret these projects as
solutions to digital archiving issues, as a substitute for gaining experience with operational
pilots, or as a source of components of a production system. The areas where the SDSC work
falls short of what would be accomplished through operational pilots include the following:¥Scale. The quantity of records tested in the SDSC demonstrations is small compared withthe quantity of records that NARA anticipates ingesting.¥Complexity. The demonstrations addressed only a few relatively simple record types(such as e-mail and Senate legislative records), so the experience is not easily transferable to
more complex problems.¥Attention to trustworthiness issues. For example, the SDSC work did not address require-ments related to redundancy, integrity checks, or access controls.¥Attention to operational matters. The SDSC work should be understood as a demonstra-tion of technology rather than as a prototype of an operational system or an operational pilot.
The SDSC demonstrations shed little light on the operational issues, such as the work flowBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAassociated with ingesting high volumes of varied records, that NARA will need to address inorder to run ERA systems. Nor does this exploratory work substitute for having NARA staff
work with a system in a production environment; users of SDSCÕs scientific data management
systems, unlike the potential users of the ERA, are generally very savvy about technical mat-
ters and can turn to a highly proficient support staff.Finally, the SDSC work emphasized a particular strategy for digital preservation: migrat-ing records to XML-based formats. Although XML has important applications in archiving, the
use of an XML document format does not solve the problem of format obsolescence, and it
would be inappropriate to rely on a migration strategy alone for long-term preservation (see
Recommendation 4 below). In addition, some aspects of the SDSC demonstrations were re-
search work that attempted to express semantic constraints within records. This is a worth-
while long-term goal that may have some utility as a technique for ingesting or preserving
certain types of records. However, this particular demonstration of Òlifting knowledgeÓ from a
document is not persuasive; the technology is far from ready for inclusion in a production
system.ENGINEERING THE ERA (CHAPTERS 4 AND 5)Finding 5.  The broad principles and expectations that NARA has established thus far for the
ERA are an insufficient basis for proceeding with its design, procurement, and operation.NARA has thus far expressed the requirements and objectives for the ERA in very high-level terms. Some of these objectives stem directly from its statutory mandate, e.g., Òpreserve
and provide access to any kind of electronic record.Ó4 It has also embraced the OAIS referencemodel to describe the high-level structure of the system.More preliminary work is required in setting expectations for the system and estimating itssize and scope before NARA can start procuring a workable production system. This includes
(1) characterizing the electronic records that the ERA should be expected to ingest in the near
term and (2) making pragmatic engineering decisions and defining realistic requirements and
priorities. Only by jointly considering archival and technical concerns can NARA chart a course
to meet its preservation mandate with achievable IT systems.Recommendation 3. Before proceeding with design and procurement of the ERA, NARAshould gather more data about the electronic records that it expects to preserve in the near
future.To formulate some of the quantitative and qualitative requirements of the ERA, NARAneeds more information about the population of government records that it will hold and
projections about how the records will be used. To guide the engineering of the ERA, and
especially of its early versions, NARA should obtain or estimate these data now. None of these
attributes will remain unchanged over the life of the system, but it is nonetheless important to
develop the system based on these initial requirements.When data are not available or are impractical to obtain, estimates should be prepared,justified, and made explicit; otherwise, a system design will reflect implicit estimates, which
may be dangerously wrong. Importantly, the intent of this recommendation is not that the
ERA program should be significantly delayed to conduct detailed surveys; only rough esti-
mates are needed, and order-of-magnitude estimates will suffice in most cases.Examples of the required data include these:Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B81¥Characterization of the population of digital records that will need to be preserved.How many government records, using what data types, will require preservation? How many
records does NARA expect to receive in each future year? As remarked below, the ERA will
need to prioritize handling of records based on archival and technical considerations. Both
current data and forward estimates are required in order to make these decisions.¥Estimates of size and scaling trajectory. How much data will be stored in the ERA, and
how will it grow over time? These estimates, which are needed to inform the technical struc-
ture of the system, may follow directly from estimates of the record population but may also be
governed by the overall project plan, ingest rates, and other considerations.¥Mechanisms for delivering records to NARA. While todayÕs and future records can be
delivered to NARA using secure networking techniques, records generated over the past 30
years or less may reside outside network-connected systems on media that are rapidly becom-
ing obsolete. How many records are stored on which media?¥Estimates of access rates. Since the ERA does not yet exist, access rates can only be estimat-ed, perhaps based on experience with digital libraries (which might provide a better indication of
user interest in online collections than would data on access to NARAÕs non-electronic records).
The system will certainly need to be designed to increase access performance as demand increas-
es, but even an initial system will require some estimate of access rates.¥Budget estimates. The quantitative estimates lead to estimates of costs for developing,
procuring, and operating the ERA and are critical to making informed design decisions and
investment trade-offs. If, for example, it turns out that the originally planned scope of the ERA
would be unaffordable, criteria for preservation scheduling may have to be adjusted. Many
design decisions concerning ingest processes and the amount of automation required for them
will be driven by the cost of ingesting records of different types. The committee could not find
much basis to support estimates for the cost of the ERA, nor could it determine whether cur-
rent ERA plans are consistent with budgetary constraints.Recommendation 4. NARA should address key design issues before commencing imple-mentation and apply a pragmatic engineering approach to the ERAÕs development and evo-
lution.Although it may be tempting to speak in absolutes (e.g., Òevery important record will bepreserved foreverÓ) when designing a system, engineering practice recognizes that there are
objectives that are subject to constraints. Engineering the ERA will require specifying the objec-
tives and constraints of such a system.This report describes and the section below summarizes some of the important designissues that need to be addressed and provides some advice on how to think about them. In
some cases, the committeeÕs preliminary analysis led to design suggestions, but this is no
substitute for comprehensive analysis by NARA. Key engineering tasks include these:1.Prioritize the functions of the ERA and focus initial design on capabilities that permit rapid
deployment of operational pilots. NARAÕs most basic requirement is to save bits for a hundredyears or more. To achieve this requires a combination of careful technical and operational
design based on extensive industry experience with robust storage systems of shorter life.
Examples of measures to meet this goal are (1) redundant storage of bits at separate physical
sites to survive physical destruction, (2) copying bits to new physical storage devices as exist-
ing devices age, (3) using storage systems with nonproprietary interfaces to prevent lock-in by
any specific vendor, (4) careful system design and operation to guard against human error that
might delete vital bits, and (5) diverse system implementations to guard against software er-
rors that could lose data.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAOne way to gain experience is to build an effective bit storage capability that supports pilotprograms to begin preserving records in the short term and that provides a critical foundation
for future systems with broader capabilities.Some basic ingest (i.e., intake of records and associated metadata) and access mechanismsare required in early ERA versions, but other functions that are less important can be deferred
for later implementation, as long as the initial architecture, design concept, and implementa-
tion strategy are sufficiently flexible and evolvable and sufficient attention has been devoted to
overall robustness, survivability, maintainability, and compatibility with critical long-term re-
quirements.2.Design for common cases. 
Given resource limitations, it is not reasonable to expect a sys-tem to preserve and provide equally good support for all records. A relatively small number of
data types will likely support the majority of records that federal agencies are creating. It is
also advisable that early system builds concentrate on a relatively small number of types. It
will be necessary, therefore, to make some choices about what quality of service to provide for
different types of record. To decide on the service level accorded each class of record, NARA
will need to assess both technical and archival aspects of records. For some lower-priority
formats, ERA support should, at least initially, be limited to capturing, storing, and providing
access to the original bits and essential metadata.3.Take pragmatic steps now to facilitate future access to records. 
NARA does not have to antic-ipateÑor invest inÑall the higher-level services that future users might want. Indeed, future
archivists and researchers will be skilled in computing and thus will be more able to manipu-
late and interpret digital records. Also, many institutions, including NARA, share an interest in
building an infrastructure of tools that support conversion, migration, and emulation; these
will be available to NARA and its users.The ERA should be designed so that certain fundamental information about a record issaved to enable future access. This pragmatic strategy includes the following elements:¥Be neutral with respect to migration, emulation, or other approaches. None of todayÕs ap-proachesÑsuch as migration or emulationÑfor dealing with data type obsolescence have been
perfected, nor has one emerged as accepted archival practice. Today, one should rely foremost
on saving the original bitsÑeven if one is unable to decode or render those bits when the
records are ingestedÑtogether with additional information that facilitates their interpretation
(preferred derived forms and essential metadata; see below). The viability of whatever strate-
gies are used in the future will depend on the availability of the original bits.¥Save records in Òpreferred derived formsÓ in addition to the original bits. The derived formssimplify access to records because the formats are chosen pragmatically to be common, well-
documented, and expected to last a long time. These derived forms can readily be created for
many common record types by making use of existing export functions or conversion software.
Derived forms are, however, no substitute for preserving and providing access to the original
bits. (A related strategy that may be discussed in the committeeÕs second report is to encourage
agencies to create records in preferred formats at the outset.)¥Do not rely primarily on a strategy of converting records to platform- and vendor-indepen-dent archiving formats in an attempt to avoid obsolescence. This point follows from the previoustwo elements but is stated explicitly because it runs directly counter to the approach of con-
verting all records to technology-independent formats, which is not likely to be effective. XML
formats are often proposed for this role, but they cannot assume the role of the original data
type because they cannot be relied on to faithfully encode all of the elements of all data types.
By contrast, an XML derived form may be a very useful derived form that serves as an adjunct
to saving the original data type.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B83¥Save essential metadata. While it is often advisable to save as much metadata as possi-ble, the most important metadata to save are those that cannot be derived from the record itself
and thus would otherwise be lost (e.g., contextual metadata).¥Save essential external references that are implicit or explicit in the record. Digital files oftenrefer to other digital objects, such as embedded images, tables generated by running some
program, and files belonging to other organizations. The possibilities for cross-reference in
digital files are far richer than in paper files, and rules will have to be developed to decide
which cross-references should be preserved by copy, by reference, or both.¥Archive as much information as possible about the software and work flow processes used toingest the original records. This information may be essential when future users of the archivewish to understand in detail how records have been processed. A desirable goal would be that
the ingest process work flow be log-based and otherwise designed to facilitate analysis in case
the preserved form of the record is later discovered to have been incorrectly ingested.4.Safeguard the bits. 
The risks of the various possible causes of data lossÑsuch as maliciousacts, natural disasters, software bugs, human error, and hardware failuresÑshould be assessed
and used to make informed engineering cost-benefit trade-offs. A combination of appropriate
system design and operational policies and procedures will be required. Measures to consider
include redundancy (e.g., geographically distributed replicas), media refresh (copying data to
new media before old media fail due to age), integrity checks (e.g., to verify the integrity of
records received from agencies, to detect errors in data storage systems, and to protect against
tampering), access controls (e.g., to control who can write or modify records and to protect
classified or otherwise nonpublic records), and auditing. Some records may be deemed more
important than others and will justify greater investment than others to ensure that they persist.5.Select the appropriate storage media. 
The economics, performance, and robustness of all-disk storage systems have recently begun to exceed those of systems that include magnetic
tape either as a primary storage medium or as a backup. While not yet common practice, it is
likely that robust disk-only storage systems will become an attractive alternative to tape stor-
age early in the life of the ERA. NARA should seriously consider such designs for the first ERA
systems; they are much simpler than storage involving both tape and disk. Offline, possibly
write-once, storage may continue to play some useful role in storing infrequently accessed
records; the cost, complexity, performance, and reliability trade-offs associated with each tech-
nology option should be carefully considered. Even if the ERA does not initially eschew tape, it
should be designed to make it easy to switch away from tape in the future.6.Decide where to invest in access capabilities.
 Historically, the primary tool for finding phys-ical (paper) records of interest has been the finding aid; finding aids, along with other surro-
gate records, are now used by computer systems that help people to find physical records.
When the entire contents of digital records are available for computer processing, content-
based retrieval techniques like full-text searching (which has proven to be a high-payoff, rela-
tively low-cost method in other contexts) become possible. These will alter access interface
designs, ingest, processing, access strategies, cost trade-offs, and even approaches to handling
confidential or classified records.7.Plan for consistent access to digital and physical records. 
Over time, it should become possi-ble to use single, consistent access tools to search all the records in the custody of NARA, be
they physical or digital. Indeed, over time, some current physical records may even be trans-
ferred to digital form. The ERA design needs to take this into account, and while such cross-
collection capabilities would probably not be implemented in early iterations of the ERA, it is
essential that the architecture recognize this long-term convergence.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERTISE (CHAPTER 6)Finding 6.  Greater information technology (IT) expertise is needed if NARA is to success-
fully design, acquire, and operate ERA systems.Insufficient technical expertise at NARA is a major obstacle to successful development andacquisition of the ERA. Based on briefings and other interactions with NARA staff, the com-
mittee concludes that while there is recognition of the importance of the ERA program, few
NARA staff members have experience with or fully understand the complexity of building and
managing a program as challenging as the ERA. NARA today does not appear to have suffi-
cient technical depth to assure success in launching the ERA programÑthat is, to define and
manage the overall architecture, develop the appropriate request for proposals, evaluate tech-
nical responses, negotiate changes in the architecture with vendors, and manage the imple-
mentation of the system.In addition to needing a quick ramp-up in the IT expertise necessary to oversee the earlyphases of procurement, NARA faces a longer-term need for a more pervasive culture changeÑ
IT skills related to preservation will need to be a core competence throughout the organization,
on a par with its other institutional strengths. NARA recognizes the existence of this issue in its
appointment of a change manager associated with the ERA program, but the difficulty in
achieving this shift cannot be overestimated. It will not be possible to achieve the needed
changes quickly; this pervasive change should be addressed in parallel with other facets of
ERA development.Recommendation 5.  In order to pursue technical development of the ERA, NARA should
first hire a small team of first-rate information technologists with systems design expertise.The addition of a few employees with properly focused systems design expertise wouldgreatly increase the likelihood that the ERA program will be successful.Preparing the architectural design of the ERA requires first-class talent having both archi-val and IT expertise. Whether the architecture is defined by NARA staff (the preferred ap-
proach; see Recommendation 7) or contractors, the challenges of hiring qualified IT people are
almost identical for these two approaches. If it is to be successful, the contracting approach
requires NARAÕs expertise to equal that of the design contractors in order to determine wheth-
er a design will meet NARAÕs needs.Contracting for system implementation once an architecture is defined likewise requires ata minimum an in-house contract monitoring staff (e.g., the contracting officerÕs technical repre-
sentative) with IT expertise at least as good as that of the contractorÕs people. This expertise
will be essential, in particular if NARA is to successfully pursue an iterative development
approach (Recommendation 7).Recommendation 6.  To supplement its in-house expertise, NARA should recruit an advisory
group of government, academic, and commercial experts with deep knowledge of digital
preservation and IT system design.A standing ERA advisory committee focused on digital preservation issues would providean ongoing way to supplement NARAÕs IT capabilities. By drawing expertise from the range of
digital preservation efforts under way in government, industry, and elsewhere, the advisory
committee would allow NARA to learn from those efforts and to foster collaboration (e.g., on
techniques, standards, or common components) were warranted.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B85STRATEGY FOR EVOLVING AND ACQUIRING THE ERA (CHAPTER 7)Finding 7.  Building the ERA as a conventional procurement is unlikely to succeed owing tothe difficulty of accurately anticipating all system requirements. Instead, an iterative ap-
proach is needed.Procurement of the ERA is fundamentally different from procurement of a payroll or othercommonplace IT system. No one has built an ERA before, and its requirements are not yet
completely understood. Also, some of the requirementsÑsuch as safeguarding bits with very
high confidenceÑare stringent. As a result, the procurement should emphasize modularity,
iteration, and working with vendors to define and evolve the system rather than arms-length
specification and delivery of a completed, turnkey system.The ERA will need to evolve, perhaps rapidly, during its early years as technical andoperational requirements are modified by experience. Later in its life, the ERA may evolve
more slowly as new needs are identified and as old hardware and software components are
replaced or upgraded.Recommendation 7. The ERA should be designed as a modular system that can be built,maintained, modified, and evolved incrementally, subject to an overall architecture.A proper modular design allows components to be upgraded without disrupting the oper-ation of the system. An overall structure for the ERA is suggested by the OAIS reference
model, but a design for the ERA will need to be much more detailed in order to exploit the
benefits of modularity. A modular structure would make it easier to use COTS components for
the ERA.The systemÕs architecture ensures that the pieces fit together, that the system can be incre-mentally modified, and that it can evolve over time. Interfaces between major parts should be
specified using an open approach that allows multiple vendors to supply components over a
long lifetime. The architecture is itself subject to evolution over time as requirements are better
understood or new requirements emerge. However, devising a good initial architecture is very
important as the programÕs success will be sensitive to the nature of the architectural decisions
that are made early on. It is, for example, far harder to evolve the modular structure than to
evolve individual modules.The architecture of the ERA system(s) should be ÒownedÓ (specified and evolved overtime) by NARA. This would help ensure that NARA understands the implications of alterna-
tive proposals, reduces its dependence on vendors and the risk of proprietary lock-in, and
understands the limitations and strengths of systems that vendors deliver.  Preparing the ar-

chitectural design of the ERA requires first-class talent having both archival and IT expertise.
So too does evolving it over time to meet new requirements.A far poorer alternative to a NARA-owned architecture is for NARA to contract for one ormore architectural designs. In this case, it may be worthwhile to obtain several proposals,
because different contractors may have different opportunities or ideas for incorporating COTS
elements. This alternative also requires first-class technical talent in order to specify the scope
of a design contract, to evaluate resulting designs, and to proceed with acquiring and evolving
a system.Recommendation 8. NARA should begin development of the ERA with a small number offocused pilot production systems designed to gain early experience and to converge ulti-
mately into a smaller number of more comprehensive systems.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARANARA should concurrently develop and deploy small, focused systems that rapidly buildoperational experience. All of these systems should be built within a common architectural
framework (Recommendation 7), so that they may eventually coalesce into a smaller number
of more comprehensive systems as experience and confidence grow. It is especially important
that the data modelÑthe data types and related metadataÑconform to the architecture so that
the digital data obtained by ingesting records into one of the early systems will carry forward
into future evolutions.The initial systems should be selected and scoped for rapid deploymentÑthis is the key togaining early experience to inform the requirements of later systems. The following are some
examples of limited-scope systems that might be considered for early pilots:¥U.S. State Department diplomatic cables. NARA is preparing to acquire a collection ofdiplomatic cables, which are simple structured text files, in digital form. Ingest might include
automatic extraction of metadata from the cables; access might include full-text search or other
methods appropriate to the collection. For quickest deployment, NARA might consider mak-
ing these records available using software already developed for operating a digital library.¥Records at the National Personnel Records Center.  There is interest in preserving large buthomogeneous collections of official military records scanned in TIFF image format when they
are transfered to NARAÕs National Personnel Records Center. Confidentiality considerations
and the imperative to provide ready access to veterans or next-of-kin would require careful
attention to access controls.¥E-mail from the Clinton administration held by the Clinton Presidential Center. Metadatacould be extracted from the e-mail headers, full-text search could be provided, and so on. The
presence of attachments would permit gaining experience with preserving and providing ac-
cess to a broad range of relatively contemporary data types.These three examples illustrate collections that could be organized and made availablequickly. Although these collections might lack the scale of the eventual ERA, early deployment
of systems to preserve and access them would yield important operational experience for
NARA and avoid costly mistakes in later, more complex systems.Experience with early systems can be expected to lead to changes to the ERA architectureand to the substantial refinement of requirements for subsequent, more comprehensive sys-
tems. Managing the initial architecture, the first system deployments, the learning from early
operations, and the revisions to architecture and specifications, and evolving the ERA will be
the task of NARAÕs augmented IT staff.NOTES1.National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). 2000. 
Ready Access to Essential Evidence: TheStrategic Plan of the United States National Archives and Records Administration 1997-2002 (revised 2002).National Archives and Records Administration. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.2.ÒData typesÓ is a more general term than Òfile formats,Ó though the latter may be more familiar.
3.Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS). 2002. 
Reference Model for an Open ArchivalInformation System (OAIS), CCSDS 650.0-B-1 (Blue Book). CCSDS Secretariat, National Aeronautics andSpace Administration, Washington, D.C. January. Available online at <http://wwwclassic.ccsds.org/docu-
ments/pdf/CCSDS-650.0-B-1.pdf>.4.The basic goals of NARA and the ERA program, as expressed in NARA documents, are presented in
Appendix A [not reprinted here].Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87Appendix COctober 16, 2003, Letter Report to the NationalArchives and Records Administration
October 16, 2003Dr. Kenneth ThibodeauDirector, Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Program Management Office
The National Archives and Records Administration
8601 Adelphi Road
College Park, MD 20740Dear Dr. Thibodeau:In this letter,1 the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on Digital Archiving and theNational Archives and Records Administration, chartered to study the Electronic Records Ar-
chives (ERA) program, offers comments on the ERA programÕs draft request for proposals
(DRFP)2 and the attached requirements document (RD)3 and ERA deployment concept (ERADC)4 that were made available for public review in August 2003.The comments below elaborate on issues discussed in the committeeÕs first report, Buildingan Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations
for Initial Development (hereafter referred to as the committeeÕs first report),5 tying the issuesspecifically to the DRFP, which was not available in early 2003 when the committee completed
its report. A meeting with the ERA team on August 14, 2003, helped the committee to better
understand the philosophy underlying the DRFP and also informed the comments below.The committee supports the National Archives and Records AdministrationÕs (NARAÕs)goal of building new electronic records preservation capabilities quickly to meet NARAÕs and
the nationÕs needs to preserve federal records (committeeÕs first report, Findings 1 and 2, pp. 1-
2). The committee understands that the general objective of the DRFP is to spell out these needs
and to seek proposals that offer thoughtful and innovative ways to meet them (thus challeng-
ing industry), rather than to prescribe too narrowly how the ERA must be designed.As detailed in item 1 below, the committee is especially concerned that the software devel-opment process outlined in the DRFP and RD does not reflect Finding 7 of the committeeÕs first
report (p. 11), ÒBuilding the ERA as a conventional procurement is unlikely to succeed owing
to the difficulty of accurately anticipating all systems requirements. Instead, an iterative ap-
proach is needed.ÓThe committee makes the following specific suggestions for how the DRPF might be im-proved:Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA1.Adopt an iterative design approach. The DRFP is written assuming a classic waterfalldesign methodology in which requirements are established early and development proceeds in
a serial fashion. The committeeÕs first report advocated a quite different approachÑspiral de-
signÑthat makes use of early prototyping and continuous refinement of requirements (Find-
ing 7, p. 11; Recommendation 8, p. 12; and discussion, pp. 67-70). The DRFP asks vendors to
provide information on their proposed use of prototyping,6 but prototyping does not receiveas much emphasis as it should.Discussion with NARA indicated that the two design phases and five deployment incre-ments described in the DRFP are to be treated somewhat like iterative design: at each stage, a
new set of requirements will be prepared, and parts of the system may be revised and new
parts implemented for the first time. Discussion also indicated that easier, less risky system
parts would be designed first and the more difficult ones delayed in the expectation that new
and better approaches would emerge. This strategy will not reap the full benefits of iterative
design, which requires learning early on from prototypes and an ability to evolve requirements
and improve subsequent designs as more is learned.For example, a number of important technical detailsÑe.g., file formats supported, essen-tial metadata tags selected, and the data model used to save ingested recordsÑare likely to
require iterative development. Some of these design decisions (e.g., the data model) will be
much easier to change when the system is young and has not yet ingested a large amount of
data. In fact, some revisions may require reading and reformatting the contents of the entire
archive.Also, the mechanisms for ingesting new records are likely to require extensive iterativedesign. The degree of automation, human interface, and resulting productivity of the ingest
process will be critical to the success of the system (committeeÕs first report, p. 49). Designing a
good user interface is hard even when the needs and skills of users are well understood;
neither is the case here. The DRFP is silent on the qualifications of individuals required to
operate and maintain the ERA; such aspects as the human error rate will be critical to the long-
term viability and cost of the system.2.Specify that an explicit threat model be developed early in the ERAÕs life cycle. TheDRFP makes occasional mention of measures that might help in averting threats (physical
distribution of storage sites, user authentication, audit logs, etc.), but it includes no overall
requirement that the system be capable of surviving an attack or accident.7 Records stored inthe ERA will be kept for hundreds of years and must be protected against loss due to natural
disasters, hardware and software failures, operator errors, and potential attacks from both
inside and outside NARA (committeeÕs first report, Recommendation 4, p. 9). The committeeÕs
first report advocated that NARA develop an explicit threat model and evaluate ERA designs
against the model (p. 54). Retrofitting of security measures has repeatedly been demonstrated
to fail. Because security should be designed in from the beginning (committeeÕs first report, p.
53), a threat analysis should be done as early as possible in the ERA life cycle. Moreover,
contractors may propose quite different system designs depending on the threat model that is
developed.3.Tighten up requirements related to security, integrity, survivability, reliability, androbustness. In addition to specifying that a threat analysis be done at the outset, the RD shouldbe revised to clarify a number of additional points:¥ ERA 1.28 should include a requirement that record transfers can be integrity-checked(committeeÕs first report, Recommendation 4, p. 9 and p. 56). ERA 1.2 mentions authoriza-
tion and ERA 13.7 mentions authentication, but these safeguards are distinct from integri-
ty-checking.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C89¥Protection should be provided against human error and malicious insiders. Any request thatwould delete or permanently alter data in the archive should require confirmation by two
or more separate humans who are authorized to act on the request, a requirement that is
not in the current RD.
¥ERA 13.4, ÒThe system shall support virus detection,Ó and ERA 13.5, ÒThe system shall supportvirus elimination.Ó How will the system handle a record that appears to include a virus? Isthe virus part of the record? Whose responsibility is it to deal with embedded virusesÑ
NARAÕs or the end-userÕs?
¥ERA 13.8, ÒThe system shall provide for backup of ERA.Ó How does this requirement relateto the deployment strategy of Òsafe storesÓ? Is such backup in addition to safe stores, or do
safe stores meet this requirement?
¥ERA 14.5, ÒThe system shall use templates to check the authenticity of transferred electronicrecords.Ó This requirement is unclear, given the use of the vague term Òtemplate.Ó Whatinformation contained in a template can be used to check authenticity? How? Also, it
might be better to require simply that the authenticity of records be checked and leave it to
contractors to develop a suitable approach.
¥ERA 18.10.2, ÒThe system shall output certified copies of electronic records in formats selectableby the user from available choices.Ó What is a Òcertified copyÓ? Will these copies be electronicfiles ÒsignedÓ by NARA? Is the contractor being asked how to certify copies and how to
record such certification?
¥ERA 21.1, ÒThe system shall register users.Ó This requirement appears to imply that accesscannot be anonymous. Is this necessary or desirable?
¥RD, section 2.7.4 second paragraph. The term Ònon-repudiationÓ is used incorrectly here(either that or the committee misunderstands the paragraph).4.Explicitly require a levels-of-service approach. Service-level differentiation is a practi-cal necessity (committeeÕs first report, p. 26). If the ERA must be able to accept all data types
supplied by agencies, then ÒidealÓ preservation solutions cannot practically be developed for
the full spectrum of data types expected.The committee has observed a growing recognition at NARA that different record types orcontexts will require different levels of service. The DRFP includes references to this approach,9but the full ramifications of service-level differentiation are not yet clearly expressed, and the
level-of-service approach does not appear in the requirements themselves. In the spirit of seek-
ing industry ideas, the DRFP should include an express requirement to classify records as to
levels of service, so that proposals will include mechanisms to help set, enforce, and revise the
service levels associated with records or groups of records. Just as templates may be required
to streamline the ingest of common record types, so also a codification of service levels may be
an important part of the ERAÕs structure.ERA 18.5.2, ÒThe system shall provide the capability to electronically present electronicassets independently of the software with which they were created,Ó should also be clarified
and reconciled with the notion of providing levels of service. Presumably the intent of ERA
18.5.2 is that lack of access to the software that created a record should not preclude access to
the record itself. Yet if the level of service for a particular record provides for keeping only the
bitsÑbecause, for example, the data type is so seldom used or so unimportant that no attempt
has been made to emulate or migrate the record or do any other form of conversionÑthen
ÒpresentÓ must mean Òdeliver the bitsÓ rather than Òdisplay an image.ÓFinally, Table C-4, ÒERA Supported Data Types,Ó10 should be filled in more completely toreflect (1) the data types that NARA has already announced it will support, such as Portable
Document Format (PDF), (2) a concrete approach to requirement ERA 28, ÒThe system shall
accept all types of electronic records,Ó and (3) varying levels of service and how they would beBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAprovided for different record types. The ERA must be designed, at the outset, to support abroad range of record types, even if implementations of some types are deferred.5.Avoid overspecification. In some places, the DRFP calls for specific approaches to im-plementation rather than asking for proposals for an overall system that exhibits particular
desired behaviors. Calling for the latter would be consistent with the strategy presented at the
August 14, 2003, meeting, which is to challenge industry to propose innovative solutions.
Specific instances of the requirements specifying particular implementation approaches rather
than input-output behaviors include the following:¥Multiple references to Òpersistent data formats.Ó11 It would be best to omit these references,because whether and how to employ persistent data formats is an internal implementation
decision. Instead, NARA can evaluate proposed designs on the basis of how they handle
the obsolescence of data types, the degree to which they introduce errors, and so on. Al-
though the use of persistent formats may ultimately be the best strategy for at least some
types of records, it is not the only possible approach nor necessarily the best in all circum-
stances.12 The requirements should be neutral with respect to how a contractor may pro-pose designing a system that will retain the requisite level of functionality and access over
time.
¥ERA 11.5, ÒThe system shall store electronic records such that an individual electronic recorddoes not span media volumes.Ó This decision should be up to the implementers as long as theinput-output requirements are met. In particular, this requirement would seem to rule out
redundant array of independent disks (RAID) technology and related techniques for file-
system redundancy, which are arguably applicable to the ERA.
¥ERA 9.2.7.2, ÒThe system shall maintain an archive file directory defining the physical locationsof all electronic records within the system.Ó This requirement also appears to overspecify thedesign. A requirement to be able to obtain the physical location of electronic records in the
ERA should be made into an external (output) requirement.
¥ÒERA will support automated media maintenance and tools to recover data from failed me-dia.Ó13 Does this requirement apply to ingesting records from media provided by others,or to media used within the ERA to store records? (See also ERA 11.4.) If the latter, this
requirement would intrude on a contractorÕs ability to provide the best technologies for
storing data for long periodsÑchiefly, using redundancy techniques in such a way that
recovering data from failed media is unnecessary. If the phrase Òautomated media mainte-
nanceÓ refers to robotic tape libraries, it, too, overconstrains the solution.
¥Detailed requirements on search characteristics included under ERA 17.5. Is this detailed spec-ification necessary? Proposals should include state-of-the-art searching capabilities. (See
also points 7 and 8, below.)6.Strengthen the requirement for the ERA to preserve the original bit stream. An essen-tial input-output behavior is that the ERA be able to ingest, preserve, and produce the original
bit stream of a record in its native format (committeeÕs first report, p. 31). Although the August
2003 discussion indicated that this is the intent, the committee believes this requirement may
not be stated sufficiently strongly in the RD. Perhaps requirement ERA 7.2, ÒThe system shall
support retaining data files in the formats in which they were ingested,Ó is intended to address
this requirement. If so, it should be strengthened to specify that the original bit stream of each
record must be saved (the requirement as currently worded says only that the original format
be used, not that the bits must remain unaltered). (Of course, depending on the level of service
deemed appropriate for a particular record or class of records, additional preservation mea-
sures might well be undertaken as specified in the recordÕs preservation plan.)Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C917.Require more flexible search facilities. The RD as written assumes that there is a singlesearch mechanism for the entire archive. But different collections or record types might be
more accessible with quite different search engines or techniques. The committee recommends
that the ERA be structured so that several search techniques can be accommodated, and so that
search software can be easily changed or replaced over time. (Search technologies are dis-
cussed briefly in the committeeÕs first report, pp. 51-53.)8.Explicitly require a federation interface that supports search and retrieval across mul-tiple archives. Researchers often search more than a single archive and will benefit from feder-ated search and access mechanisms whereby several archives can be accessed at once. (This
capability to search for and access items across institutions would be in addition to whatever
federation techniques are used within the ERA to manage storage.) If ERA, as the nationÕs
archive of electronic records, offers a federation mechanism and invites others to join, it will
induce others to do so as well. The RD should challenge industry to design a federation inter-
face based on approaches being developed or prototyped by others (e.g., the digital library
community).9.Plan for increasingly distributed operations. While the core of the ERA will be distrib-uted among several sites and closely managed by NARA, some processes may be deployed
elsewhere. For example, it would seem essential to permit record ingest to be performed with-
in a client agency, or by a contractor working for the agency and/or NARA. Over time, agen-
cies may come to play a greater role in record ingest, and NARAÕs role will be to provide the
ingest software or specifications, and to provide careful automatic checking of the records that
have been ingested, together with associated data (data currently entered in Standard Form
258, metadata tags, file format integrity, authenticity checks, etc.). Another good example of
the value of distributed operations is the opportunity to leverage externally supplied preserva-
tion tools, either for file migration or for on-the-fly presentation of an obsolete format.The ERA should, therefore, be designed from the outset so that certain parts can be operatedat geographically separate sites to accommodate flexible workflows. Perhaps ERA 1.8 and ERA
1.9 are intended to address distribution, but it is not clear. ERA should, for example, be designed
so that NARA employees or contractors physically outside a NARA facility can have secure
access to the ERA. This capability will enable contracting out various processing tasks and also
allow NARA employees to work from home. (Note that a remote access requirement also affects
ERA 20; the user interface should permit operation from, say, standard PCs on the Internet.)Any need for other agencies or contractors to be able to examine records for sensitivecontent (ERA 12.4) will have an impact on workflow and other matters. Is there a need to
record who (or which automated process) made a decision regarding a recordÕs sensitivity?Of course, a careful threat analysis (see point 2, above) with respect to distributed opera-tions is essential, and security requirements associated with distributed operations should be
included under ERA 13.10. Specify more precisely the acceptable update lag between primary and Òsafe storeÓdata repositories. The ERA DC correctly notes that there will be a lag while data stores syn-chronize.14 For system design to proceed, this lag will have to be specified more precisely: ifthe lag is on the order of seconds, large instantaneous bandwidth may be required to connect
the safe store sites in order to communicate updates, whereas if the lag can be longer, then the
communications need only meet average ingest rates and might even use mailed media rather
than network connections for synchronization.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARA11.Provide better definitions for key terms. Despite an impressive glossary in RD Ap-pendix B, some important terms are used without clear definition in the DRFP. The DRFP
should introduce better definitions or cite literature in which these terms are explored further.
For example:¥Essential characteristicsÑA clear idea of what this phrase means in practice would bevaluable. For example, will the need for strong functional equivalence arise? Some con-
crete examples might be helpful.
¥Persistent formatÑThis term has been introduced in several papers written in conjunc-tion with the ERA program, but the committee found especially helpful the clarification
offered at the August 2003 meetingÑthat is, the use of persistent formats as a form of
migration that tries to minimize the number of transformations.
¥Self-describing formatÑThis is a slippery term: every description is written in a Òlan-guageÓ that itself must be described, thus begetting an infinite recursion. Again, examples
would help to clarify a non-obvious term. See also ERA 11.3.
¥Conceptual searchÑThis phrase means different things to different people. If the intent isto distinguish between controlled-vocabulary (metadata) search and full-text search, it
would be sufficient to say simply Òfull-text search.Ó If something more elaborate is meant,
the requirement is asking for a capability beyond the state of the art.
¥TemplateÑThe term is defined in operational terms, but not clearly with respect to itscontents or (detailed) role.
¥ElectronicallyÑThis term is used in an unnatural way in several places in the RD. Forexample, ERA 14.2 says, ÒThe system shall provide the capability to accept transfers elec-
tronically.Ó Why not simply say Òvia a network connectionÓ? Or is the term Òelectronical-
lyÓ meant to include disk and tape, too? Similarly, ERA 18.1 says, ÒThe system shall be
capable of electronically presenting all electronic record types.Ó Should the wording be
Òdelivering via a network connectionÓ instead of Òelectronically presentingÓ? For some
records, the level of service may be limited to delivering the original bit stream. In each
case, a more explicit definition would help.Sincerely,Robert F. Sproull, ChairCommittee on Digital Archiving and the National Archives and Records AdministrationBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C93NOTES1.Support for this project was provided by the National Archives and Records Administration under
Contract No. NAMA-02-C-0012. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed inthis letter are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organization thatprovided support for the project.This letter report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectivesand technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕsReport Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical
comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensurethat the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the studycharge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the
deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of the report: William Y.Arms, Cornell University; David. D. Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Judith L. Klavans,Columbia University; MacKenzie Smith, MIT Libraries; and J. Timothy Sprehe, Sprehe Information Man-
agement Associates. Although these reviewers provided many constructive comments, they were notasked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report beforeits release.The review of this report was overseen by Robert J. Spinrad, Xerox Corporation (retired). Appointed bythe National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examinationof this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments
were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with theauthoring committee and the institution.2.Electronic Records Archives Program Management Office, National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration (NARA). 2003. Electronic Records Archives Draft Request for Proposal (DRFP). NARA, College Park,Md., August 5. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/acquisition/draft_rfp.html>.3.Electronic Records Archives Program Management Office, National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration (NARA). 2003. Electronic Records Archives Requirements Document (RD), (DRFP, Section J, Attach-ment 2). NARA, College Park, Md., July 31. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/
electronic_records_archives/acquisition/draft_rfp.html>.4.Electronic Records Archives Program Management Office, National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration (NARA). 2003. ERA Deployment Concept (DC), (DRFP, Section J, Attachment 17). NARA, CollegePark, Md., July 29. Available online at <http://www.archives.gov/electronic_records_archives/acquisi-tion/draft_rfp.html>.5.National Research Council. 2003. 
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives andRecords Administration: Recommendations for Initial Development, Robert F. Sproull and Jon Eisenberg, edi-tors. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. The committeeÕs final report will be issued in early2004.6.DRFP, subsection 3.1.2, p. L-18.
7.Storage robustness issues are discussed in the committeeÕs first report at pp. 42-44, security and
access controls are discussed at pp. 53-55, and record integrity is discussed at pp. 56-57.8.References in the form (ERA x.y) are to numbered requirements appearing in the RD, pp. 19-48.
9.ÒERA must be capable of providing different levels of service,Ó RD, p. 8. ÒLevels of serviceÑthe
ability of ERA to provide different capabilities for different records,Ó RD, p. B-6.10.RD, p. C-4.
11.ÒFor permanent recordsÑthose preserved foreverÑand for some temporary records which need to
be kept for lengths of time that exceed several generations of information technology, it will be necessary
to transform the records from the formats in which they were received to persistent formats,Ó RD, p. 10.ÒNARAÕs goal is to preserve electronic records in persistent formats that will enable access to authenticelectronic records indefinitely into the future,Ó RD, p. 14.12.The committeeÕs first report cautions against relying primarily Òon a strategy of converting records
to platform- and vendor-independent archiving format to avoid obsolescenceÓ (p. 32) and discusses vari-ous approaches to preservation (p. 8 and pp. 32-34).13.RD, p. 15, last paragraph under heading 2.7.3.
14.DC Section 4.0, ÒSynchronization with the operational record stores,Ó p. 8.
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94COMMITTEERobert F. Sproull, Chair, vice president and fellow at Sun Microsystems, founded and led theMassachusetts branch of Sun Microsystems Laboratories for more than 10 years. Now he
serves in a research role. Since undergraduate days, he has been building hardware andsoftware for computer graphics: clipping hardware, an early, device-independent graphicspackage; page-description languages; laser printing software; and window systems. He has
also been involved in very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit design, especially of asynchro-nous circuits and systems. Prior to joining Sun, he was a principal with Sutherland, Sproulland Associates; an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon University; and a member of the
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. He is a coauthor with William Newman of the early textPrinciples of Interactive Computer Graphics. He is a member of the National Academy of Engi-neering and has served on several National Research Council (NRC) committees, including
the CSTB committee that produced Making IT Better.Howard Besser is an associate professor in the School of Education and Information Studies atthe University of California, Los Angeles, where he teaches courses and does research ondigital longevity, multimedia, image databases, digital libraries, intellectual property, instruc-tional technology, and the social and cultural impact of new information technologies. For the
past decade, Dr. Besser has been involved in digital longevity issues for cultural heritagematerials. He served on the 1995 Commission on Preservation and Access Task Force onPreservation of Digital Information, and wrote the background paper on digital longevity for
the Getty Research InstituteÕs 1998 Time and Bits Digital Longevity Conference. In 2001 heserved on the University of CaliforniaÕs Task Force on Digital Preservation and Archiving, andhe ran a series of workshops on digital longevity for the San Francisco Museum of ModernDCommittee Member and Staff Biographies
Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D95Art. In the past few years, Dr. Besser has authored three pieces on digital longevity. Herecently joined the InterPARES Project (International Research on Permanent AuthenticRecords in Electronic Systems) and will be the founding director of New York UniversityÕsnew masterÕs degree in moving image archiving. Dr. Besser served on a previous NRC/CSTB
committee that examined intellectual property in the digital age and produced the report TheDigital Dilemma. He received his B.A. (1976), M.L.S. (1977), and Ph.D. (1988) from the Univer-sity of California, Berkeley.Jamie Callan is an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon University. His background is ininformation retrieval and machine learning. His recent research on information retrieval ad-
dresses automatic database selection, high-speed adaptive information filtering, novelty de-tection, question answering, and information literacy in K-12 education. His earlier researchstudied architectures for large-scale information retrieval and filtering systems, first-genera-
tion Web-search systems, methods of improving search accuracy, and integration of text searchwith relational database systems.Charles Dollar is a consultant in archiving and records management, currently addressing thearchival preservation of Smithsonian Institution Web resources. He has 20 yearsÕ experienceworking at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). While he was on the
NARA staff, Dr. Dollar organized and directed the first electronic records program for thefederal government and subsequently had a major role in research projects on digital technol-ogy standards, digital storage media, and digital imaging applications in electronic archiving.
In 1994 Dr. Dollar joined the graduate faculty of the School of Library, Information, andArchival Studies at the University of British Columbia, where he taught in the Archival Stud-ies Program. In 1999 he joined Cohasset Associates as a senior consultant. Dr. DollarÕs publica-
tions, reports, and consultant studies are noted for their clarity in explaining digital technol-ogy issues and for providing practical guidance on such matters as planning and implementingeffective life-cycle electronic records management programs with an emphasis on electronic
archiving. Dr. Dollar is a fellow of the Society of American Archivists. He has a Ph.D. inhistory from the University of Kentucky.Stuart Haber is a researcher at Hewlett-Packard Laboratories. Along with Scott Stornetta, hewas a co-founder of Surety, Inc., which was spun off by Bellcore in 1993 to commercialize thesecure digital time-stamping technology that the two of them developed as researchers at
Bellcore (now Telcordia Technologies). In addition to Bellcore and Surety, he has also workedas a researcher in STAR Laboratory, the research arm of InterTrust Technologies, which pro-vides digital rights management systems. Dr. Haber received his B.A. from Harvard Univer-
sity and his M.S. from Stanford University, both in mathematics, and his Ph.D. in computerscience from Columbia University in 1988. He has lectured and published scientific articles onseveral practical and theoretical aspects of cryptology, on the theory of computing, and in
electrical engineering.Margaret Hedstrom is an associate professor in the School of Information at the University ofMichigan, where she teaches in the areas of archives, electronic records management, anddigital preservation. Prior to joining the faculty at Michigan in 1995, she worked for 10 years atthe New York State Archives and Records Administration, where she was chief of State RecordsBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAAdvisory Services and director of the Center for Electronic Records. Dr. Hedstrom earned hermasterÕs degrees in library science and history and a Ph.D. in history from the University ofWisconsin-Madison. She wrote a dissertation on the history of office automation in the 1950sand 1960s. She is a fellow of the Society of American Archivists and was the first recipient of
the annual Award for Excellence in New York State Government Information Services. Sheserved on the CSTB study committee that wrote LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library ofCongress. Dr. Hedstrom is widely published on various aspects of archival management, elec-tronic records, and preservation in digital environments, and she has served as a consultant tomany government archival programs. Her current research interests include digital preserva-tion strategies, the impact of electronic communications on organizational memory and docu-
mentation, and remote access to archival materials.Mark Kornbluh is an associate professor of history at Michigan State University and thedirector of MATRIX: The Center for Humane Arts, Letters, and Social Sciences On-line. Dr.Kornbluh also serves as executive director for H-Net: Humanities and Social Sciences OnLine,an international scholarly society composed of more than 140 online networks, edited by
scholars in North America, Europe, Africa, and the Pacific. He is the principal investigator onresearch and education projects funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities, theNational Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, and the Andrew Mellon and Ford Foundations. The impact of new communica-tions technologies on scholarly research and education is the prime focus of Dr. KornbluhÕsresearch interests. In addition to awards for excellence in teaching, he has been the recipient of
a number of grants to create multimedia teaching tools and resources. He has also authored abook on voter participation in the early part of the 20th century, Why America Stopped Voting:The Decline of Participatory Democracy and the Emergence of Modern Electoral Politics, 1880-1918
(New York University Press). He earned a B.A. in history and political science from the Uni-versity of California, Berkeley (1977) and an M.A. (1979) and a Ph.D. (1988) in history from theJohns Hopkins University.Raymond Lorie is a research staff member at the IBM Almaden Research Center in San Jose,California. He graduated as Ing”nieur Civil Electricien-M”canicien from the University of
Brussels, Belgium, and joined IBM Belgium in 1960. On assignment in Cambridge, Massachu-setts he developed one of the very first access methods for relational data. He joined IBMResearch in San Jose in 1973 and did pioneering work in relational database systems. Dr. Lorie
was a major contributor to the architecture and implementation of System R, the early researchprototype that became the precursor of the relational products. In later years, he managedprojects on the application of the relational technology to engineering and other nonbusiness
areas and on the use of parallelism in database systems. At various points in his career, Dr.Lorie dealt with document processing, from the design of a typesetting system in the earlydays to the co-invention of the Geography Markup Language (GML), the application of con-
textual knowledge to improve automatic recognition of characters, and finally the develop-ment of a technology to preserve digital documents for the very long term. He is a fellow of theAssociation for Computing Machinery (ACM). For several years, he taught a graduate class on
database topics at the University of California, Santa Cruz. His work on System R brought himan IBM Corporate Award; he also shared with colleagues from IBM and the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley, the 1988 ACM System Award for developing the relational technology.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D97Clifford Lynch has been the director of the Coalition for Networked Information (CNI) sinceJuly 1997. CNI, jointly sponsored by the Association of Research Libraries and Educause,includes about 200 member organizations concerned with the use of information technologyand networked information to enhance scholarship and intellectual productivity. Prior to
joining CNI, Dr. Lynch spent 18 years at the University of California Office of the President,the last 10 as Director of Library Automation. He is an adjunct professor at BerkeleyÕs Schoolof Information Management and Systems. He is a past president of the American Society for
Information Science  and a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) and the National Information Standards Organization. Dr. Lynch currently serves onthe Internet 2 Applications Council and the National Digital Preservation Strategy Advisory
Board of the Library of Congress. He was a member of the National Research Council/CSTBcommittee that published The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age, andhe served on CSTBÕs Committee on Broadband Last Mile Technology, which produced the
report Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits. He holds a bachelor of arts in mathematics andcomputer science from Columbia College, a master of science in computer science from theColumbia University School of Engineering, and a Ph.D. in computer science from the Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley.Jerome H. Saltzer is a professor of computer science, emeritus, at the Massachusetts Instituteof Technology (MIT). Since 1966, he has taught at MIT, where he helped formulate the under-graduate curriculum in computer science and developed the core subject on the engineering ofcomputer systems. At the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science he developed RUNOFF, the
ancestor of most typesetting formatters. It, together with the context editor TYPSET, consti-tuted one of the first widely used word-processing systems. He participated in the refinementof the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) and was involved in all aspects of the design
and implementation of the Multiplexed Information and Computing Service (Multics), includ-ing the design of the first kernel thread package, the first time-of-century clock and, in theearly 1970s, a project to develop what would today be known as a microkernel. Together with
David Clark and David Reed, Professor Saltzer articulated the end-to-end argument, a keyorganizing principle of the Internet. More recently, his research activities have involved thedesign of a token-passing ring local area network, networking of personal computers, and
designing the electronic library of the future. From 1984 through 1988 he was technical direc-tor of MITÕs Project Athena, a system for undergraduate education comprising networkedengineering workstations, and probably the first successful implementation of the network
computer. Throughout this work, he has had a particular interest in the impact of computersystems on society, especially on privacy and the risks of depending on fragile technology. InSeptember 1995, Professor Saltzer retired from the full-time faculty. He continues to write and
teach about computer systems part-time from his MIT office. Professor Saltzer is a member ofthe National Academy of Engineering and a former member of the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board. He served on CSTBÕs Committee on Information Technology
Strategy for the Library of Congress. He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and ElectronicEngineers (IEEE) and the AAAS, a member of the Association for Computing Machinery,Sigma Xi, Eta Kappa Nu, and Tau Beta Pi; he is also a member of the MayorÕs Telecommunica-
tions Advisory Board for the City of Newton, Massachusetts. He received the degrees of S.B. in1961, S.M. in 1963, and Sc.D. in 1966, from MIT, all in electrical engineering.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98BUILDING AN ELECTRONIC RECORDS ARCHIVE AT NARAMargo Seltzer is the Herchel Smith Professor of Computer Science and the associate dean forcomputer science and engineering in the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences atHarvard University. She is also the founder, chairman of the board, and chief technical officerfor Sleepycat Software, which produces Berkeley DB, an embedded, transactional data store.
Her research interests include file systems, databases, and transaction processing systems. Sheis the author of several widely used software packages, including database and transactionlibraries and the 4.4BSD log-structured file system. Dr. Seltzer spent several years working at
start-up companies designing and implementing file systems and transaction processing soft-ware and designing microprocessors. She is a Sloan Foundation Fellow in Computer Science,a Bunting Fellow, and was the recipient of the 1996 Radcliffe Junior Faculty Fellowship, and
the University of California Microelectronics Scholarship. She is recognized as an outstandingteacher, winning the Phi Beta Kappa teaching award in 1996 and the Abrahmson TeachingAward in 1999. Dr. Seltzer received an A.B. degree in applied mathematics from Harvard/
Radcliffe College in 1983 and a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of California,Berkeley, in 1992.Robert Wilensky is professor in the Computer Science Division and the School of InformationManagement and Systems at the University of California, Berkeley, where he has spent hisentire professorial career. While at Berkeley, Dr. Wilensky has served as director of the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley/Hewlett Packard Science Center, director of the CognitiveScience Program, director of the Artificial Intelligence Research Project, and as chair of theComputer Science Division from 1993 to 1997. Dr. Wilensky has published numerous articles
and books in the area of artificial intelligence, planning, knowledge representation, naturallanguage processing, and digital information systems. He is currently principal investigator ofthe University of California, BerkeleyÕs Digital Library Project. Dr. Wilensky is a fellow of the
American Association for Artificial Intelligence and an ACM fellow.STAFFJon Eisenberg is a senior program officer with the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board of the National Research Council. At CSTB, he has been study director for a
diverse body of work, including a series of studies exploring networking technologies andInternet and broadband policy. Current studies include an examination of emerging wirelesstechnologies and spectrum policy and a review of the National Archives and Records
AdministrationÕs digital materials preservation strategy. From 1995 to 1997 he was a AAASScience, Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Develop-ment where he worked on environmental management, technology transfer, and telecommu-
nications policy issues. He received his B.S. in physics with honors from the University ofMassachusetts at Amherst in 1988 and his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Washingtonin 1996.Jennifer M. Bishop, program associate, has been with the Computer Science and Telecommu-nications Board of the National Research Council since 2001. She provides research assistance
for several studies, including Telecommunications Research and Development and DigitalArchiving and the National Archives and Records Administration. She also maintains CSTBÕscontact database; manages the content of the CSTB Web site; coordinates the layout and designBuilding an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D99of Update, the CSTB newsletter; and designs book covers and promotional materials for out-reach purposes. Prior to her move to Washington, D.C., Ms. Bishop worked for the City ofIthaca, New York, coordinating the Police DepartmentÕs transition to an SQL-based time ac-crual and scheduling application. Her other work experience includes designing customized
hospitality industry performance reports for a research firm, maintaining the police recordsdatabase for the City of Ithaca, and freelance publication design. She is a visual artist workingin oil and mixed media. She holds a B.F.A from Cornell University.Building an Electronic Records Archive at the National Archives and Records Administration: Recommendations for a Long-Term StrategyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.