DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/1136Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of ComputationalApproaches to Elucidating Macromolecular Structure andFunction186 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-06228-2 | DOI 10.17226/1136Committee on Computer-Assisted Modeling, National Research CouncilComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular Structure...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER-ASSISTEDMODELINGContributions of Computational Approaches to
Elucidating Macromolecular Structure and Function
Committee on Computer-Assisted Modeling
Board on Basic Biology
Commission on Life Sciences
National Research Council
National Academy Press
Washington, D.C. 1987
iComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distin-
guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of

science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the fed-

eral government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Frank Press is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous

in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sci-

ences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering

also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and

research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president

of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy mat-

ters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the

National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal govern-

ment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.

Samuel O. Thier is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of further-

ing knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general poli-

cies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the

National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to

the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is adminis-

tered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Frank Press and Dr. Robert M.

White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.

This study by the Board on Basic Biology was conducted under Contract No. DE-

FGO1-86ER60457 with the U.S. Department of Energy.
Copies of this report can be obtained from the National Academy Press , 2101 Constitution Avenue,
N.W. ,Washington, DC 20418 , for $3.00 per copy prepaid. Supplies are limited.
Printed in the United States of America

Cover: Connolly-Richards Solvent-accessible surfaces of trypsin, thymidylate synthase, and car-
bonic anhydrase. Coordinates from the Protein Data Bank, Brookhaven National Laboratory, and R.

Stroud, University of California/San Francisco. Photographs taken by R. Desjarlais and B. Shoichet,

University of California/San Francisco, using the facilities of the Computer Graphics Laboratory.
iiComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON COMPUTER-ASSISTED MODELING
IRWIN D. KUNTZ (Chairman), University of California, San Francisco
DAVID R. DAVIES, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

RICHARD E. DICKERSON, University of California, Los Angeles

RUSSELL F. DOOLITTLE, University of California, San Diego

RICHARD J. FELDMANN, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

JAN HERMANS, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill

YVONNE C. MARTIN, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois
JAMES H. PRESTEGARD, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
PETER J. ROSSKY, University of Texas, Austin

HAROLD A. SCHERAGA, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

DENNIS H. SMITH, Molecular Design Ltd., San Leandro, California

CHARLES C. SWEELEY, Michigan State University, East Lansing

IGNACIO TINOCO, University of California, Berkeley

WALTER G. ROSEN, Senior Program Officer
SUSAN WALTON, EditorLINDA MILLER POORE, Senior Secretary
iiiComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOARD ON BASIC BIOLOGY
FRANCISCO J. AYALA (
Chairman), University of California, Davis
NINA V. FEDOROFF, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Baltimore, Maryland

TIMOTHY H. GOLDSMITH, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut

RALPH W. F. HARDY, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

ERNEST G. JAWORSKI, Monsanto Company, St. Louis, Missouri

SIMON A. LEVIN, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

HAROLD A. MOONEY, Stanford University, Stanford, California
HAROLD J. MOROWITZ, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
WILLIAM E. PAUL, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

DAVID D. SABATINI, New York University, New York City

MALCOLM S. STEINBERG, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey

JOSEPH E. VARNER, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri

DAVID B. WAKE, University of California, Berkeley

JOHN E. DOWLING (ex-officio), Harvard University, Cambridge,
MassachusettsJOHN E. BURRIS, 
DirectorivComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON LIFE SCIENCESJOHN E. DOWLING (
Chairman), Harvard University, Cambridge,
MassachusettsPERRY L. ADKISSON, The Texas A&M University System, College Station

FRANCISCO J. AYALA, University of California, Davis

J. MICHAEL BISHOP, The G.W. Hooper Research Foundation, San Francisco,
CaliforniaNINA V. FEDOROFF, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Baltimore, Maryland

TIMOTHY H. GOLDSMITH, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut

RICHARD W. HANSON, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio
RALPH W. F. HARDY, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

RICHARD J. HAVEL, University of California, San Francisco, School of
MedicineDONALD F. HORNIG, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts

ERNEST G. JAWORSKI, Monsanto Company, St. Louis, Missouri

SIMON A. LEVIN, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York

FRANKLIN M. LOEW, School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University,
North Grafton, Massachusetts
ROBERT W. MANN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MassachusettsHAROLD A. MOONEY, Stanford University, Stanford, California

JOSEPH E. RALL, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

RICHARD D. REMINGTON, University of Iowa, Iowa City

RICHARD B. SETLOW, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York

JOSEPH E. VARNER, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
ALVIN G. LAZEN, Executive Director
vComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceThe committee, asked to provide an assessment of computer-assisted
modeling of molecular structure, has highlighted the signal successes and the
significant limitations for a broad panoply of technologies and has projected
plausible paths of development over the next decade.
As with any assessment of such scope, differing opinions about present or
future prospects were expressed. The conclusions and recommendations,
however, represent a consensus of our views of the present status of

computational efforts in this field.
The committee's task was made easier by colleagues who generously
provided us with the benefit of their expertise. We wish particularly to thank

Peter Goodford, William Jorgensen, and Andrew McCammon.
The committee is indebted to the excellent National Research Council staff
whose work greatly expedited the production of this report. Special thanks are

due to Linda Poore, Susan Walton, and, particularly, to Walter Rosen for

unfailing help and guidance.
Irwin D. Kuntz

ChairmanPREFACEviiComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviiiComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents1. Executive Summary
 12. Introduction 183. Primary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic Acids
 23  Protein Sequences and Data Bases,
 23  Pattern Based Comparisons,
 284. Secondary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic Acids
 32  Proteins, 32  Nucleic Acids, 365. Tertiary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic Acids: Experimental
 41  X-Ray Diffraction of Biological Macromolecules,
 41  Computer-Assisted Modeling in DNA Structure Analysis,
 44  Using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance to Determine Tertiary Struc-
tures, 57  Areas of Potential Impact of NMR,
 62  Demand on Computational Facilities,
 666. Tertiary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic Acids: Theory
 69  Energy Optimization, 69  Molecular Dynamics,
 77  Results, 79CONTENTSixComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Solvation and Electrostatics in Computer Simulation of
Biopolymers, 88  Heuristic Methods,
 99  Hierarchical Models of Protein Folding,
 102  Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence,
 1037. Functional Aspects of Proteins and Nucleic Acids
 106  Catalysis, 106  Designing New Protein Structures,
 108  Predicting Function from a Predicted Three-Dimensional Struc-
ture, 1148. Structure and Function of Complex Carbohydrates
 131  Biological Function,
 131  Biosynthesis of N-Linked Glycoproteins and Glycosphingolipids,
 133  Analysis of Primary and Tertiary Structure,
 137  X-Ray Analysis of Crystal Structures of Carbohydrates,
 138  NMR Solution Structures of Carbohydrates,
 140  Supramolecular Structure,
 1429. Hardware 144  Central versus Distributed Computing,
 149  Computer Utilization in the next 5 to 10 Years,
 149  The National Supercomputer Network,
 150  Local Area Networks,
 151  Data Base Use,
 151  Competitiveness, 15210. Conclusions and Recommendations 154  Conclusions, 154  Recommendations, 157  References 160CONTENTSxComputer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1.Executive SummaryIn much of biology, the search for understanding the relation between
structure and function is now taking place at the macromolecular level.
Proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides are macromoleculesŠpolymers
formed from families of simpler subunits. Because of their size and complexity,

the polymers are capable of both inter- and intramolecular interactions. These

interactions confer upon the polymers distinctive three-dimensional shapes.

These tertiary configurations, in turn, determine the function of the

macromolecule.A molecular view of biological function has already led to significant
advances. The conceptual breakthrough that led to our present mastery of

genetic control of protein synthesis was the discovery that the nucleotide
sequence in nucleic acids codes for the amino acid sequence of the protein
being synthesized. The Rosetta Stone of molecular genetics was the elucidation

of the actual code, whereby the sequence of trimers (codons) in the nucleic acid

can be translated to the sequence of amino acids in the protein.
Amino acid sequences in proteins can be determined directly through
chemical analysis or indirectly by determining the base sequence in the parent
DNA. These two methods have been used to describe the primary structures
(amino acid sequences) of substantial numbers of proteins. But to understand

the function of a
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.protein, we need to know more than its primary structure. Except, perhaps, for
some structural elements, proteins are not found in nature as simple chains of

amino acids. In their biologically active form, they are folded upon themselves,

forming complex three-dimensional structures. Their shape determines their

biological activity.
Currently, determining the three-dimensional structure of macromolecules
depends on the interplay of various experimental and theoretical approaches,

particularly x-ray diffraction and two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance

(NMR), all of which involve the use of computers. At their most fundamental

level, computers simply function to solve mathematical equations at very high

speeds. Their speed makes it possible to accomplish in fractions of a second

tasks that would take a human orders of magnitude longer, even with the
assistance of mechanical calculators. Computers are also used to generate
graphic representations of the three.dimensional structures of molecules,

thereby aiding comprehension and largely eliminating the need to construct

physical modelsŠanother laborious and time-consuming process. These

graphic representations provide an important stimulus to the development of

new ideas about the way macromolecules function.
Computers have become so inextricably involved in empirical studies of
three-dimensional macromolecular structure that mathematical modeling, or

theory, and experimental approaches are interrelated aspects of a single

enterprise. The experimental methods, such as x-ray crystallography, NMR

spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry provide the data with which to construct a

mathematical model that can account for the electron density distributions, bond
angles, bond energies, and other observed structural properties of the molecule.
Conversely, the mathematical model must generate a structure that agrees with

the experimental data. The interplay between the two is continual; theoretical

models are modified repeatedly to improve their fit with experimental data, and

theoretical results help in the interpretation and planning of experiments.
The potential practical applications of these techniques are myriad. When
can the payoff be expected? What are the anticipated needs in terms of

hardware, software, and human resources? To what extent should the effort be

centralized? Is present funding adequate or should it be increased?
The task of the committee was to examine these questions
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as they relate to two major realms of theoretical molecular biology. The first is
the prediction of tertiary structure from primary structure and other physical/

chemical data. The second is the prediction of biological activity from tertiary

structure and related data and theory.
PROTEINSPrimary Structure
More than 5,000 protein amino acid sequences have been reported, most of
which were inferred from the DNA sequences that encode them. Although the

collection is redundant (same protein from different species) and definitely

biased (many human and few plant sequences, for example), several patterns
stand out. The most prominent is that the number of different types of protein is
not endless. It is clear that most proteins belong to identifiable families, easily

recognized by their amino acid sequences alone. But surprisingly, the same

families of protein primary structures are showing up in proteins in quite

different settings.At this point it is not possible to determine, with accuracy, a three-
dimensional structure of a protein using only the amino acid sequence.

However, recognition of patterns in structure-sequence correlations holds great

promise in this area.
Predicting Secondary Structure from Amino Acid Sequences
The methods used to predict secondary structure from amino acid
sequences have been (1) calculation of the energies of the major conformers for

a given sequence, (2) statistical analysis of known structures, and (3) modeling.
Although these methods have had some success and should continue to improve
with an increasing data base, they have limited accuracy.
It is now computationally feasible to calculate energies for conformations
of short peptides with or without solvent. The near-term developments in this

area are most likely to be incremental improvements. Computer speed will

continue to increase substantially. Data bases will continue to grow at least
linearly. Experiments on the structural consequences of modifying amino acids
are beginning to be reported in significant numbers. More powerful statistical

and modeling efforts are under development.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The situation is less positive for larger peptides and proteins. After 10
years, however, we might well see major improvements in our ability to

correlate sequences and secondary structure. Today's goal of correctly

predicting every major feature in a new sequence is a plausible target for that

time. However, we will need a major conceptual or computational breakthrough

before it will be possible to specify accurately the secondary structural
configuration of each amino acid in a protein.
Deriving Three-dimensional Structure and Function from
HomologyMethods for identifying homologies and for determining sequence
alignments and homologies are powerful tools to relate the structures and,

potentially, the functions of two or more biopolymers. The analyses of patterns

in sequences is a problem in symbolic, not numeric, computation. Languages

that support symbol manipulation and pattern matching primitives such as C

and LISP are often the languages of choice.
Many of the techniques used to infer higher order structural information in
patternsŠsuch as secondary structural analysis
Šare empirical. Sequence-based
methods alone do not take full advantage of the information available in the

primary structures of biopolymers. For example, different nucleotide patterns

may code for the same protein sequence; different protein sequences may share

very similar function.
Predicting Nucleic Acid Structures from Sequence
Computer programs used to predict RNA conformation from sequence
have a limited goal and limited success. The goal is to calculate secondary

structure only
Što specify which bases are paired. The procedure uses
experimental thermodynamic data on double-strand formation in synthetic RNA

oligonucleotides. A dynamic programming algorithm considers all possible

base pairs in the RNA and calculates the free energies of the corresponding

structures. The free energy of a structure is assumed to be the sum of free
energies of its constituent substructures (single-stranded regions, double-
stranded regions, bulges, hairpin loops, and interior loops). The lowest free-

energy structure is the predicted secondary structure.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computer programs of the future will require much more detailed
knowledge of thermodynamics of local regions of an RNA molecule. The

extensive thermodynamic data needed to predict secondary structure correctly

will most likely come from computer interpolation and extrapolation of limited

data measured on synthetic oligonucleotides in a few solvents.
Proposals of methods to fold possible secondary structures into three-
dimensional structures and calculate their energies are in very early stages.

Prediction of secondary structures in RNA is at about the same stage as it is in

proteins. However, prediction of tertiary structure in RNA is far behind similar

prediction in proteins.
Rapid and efficient progress in this area will require:
   effective methods for crystallizing RNA oligonucleotides and naturally
occurring RNA molecules other than transfer RNA;
   NMR methods that can provide conformations for RNA molecules that
contain from 10 to 100 nucleotides;
   computer programs that can reproduce and extrapolate the
experimental results.The higher charge densities in nucleic acids (one per nucleotide) require
special care in the correct treatment of solvent and ionic effects in the computer

programs.Tertiary Structure from X-ray Crystallography
Today, several hundred proteins have been analyzed by x-ray diffraction
and their three-dimensional structures catalogued, and their number is growing

substantially. This knowledge of molecular structure, together with the amino

acid and gene sequence data, enable us to study the mechanisms of action of

these proteins at the molecular level. Two-dimensional NMR techniques are a
valuable complement to x-ray diffraction for relatively small molecules
(molecular weight less than 10,000), but for the foreseeable future, crystal

structure analysis will be the principal experimental source of structural data for

enzymes, nucleic acid binding proteins, antibodies, and other proteins involved

in the immune response or intercellular communication.
Determining the three-dimensional structure of a biological
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.macromolecule involves several clearly defined steps. First, crystals of suitable
size and diffraction properties must be prepared. Next, x-ray diffraction data

must be collected for these crystals and also, typically, for some heavy atom

derivatives of the crystals. These data can then be assembled by a

computational process that yields an electron density map. This map must now

be fitted with a polypeptide chain of the appropriate amino acid sequence.
Because the map is of less-than-atomic resolution and because it also contains
errors in the phase determination, considerable skill is required to obtain the

best fit. The resulting protein model must then be refined to remove as many as

possible of the errors present in the map as well as those introduced by the

fitting process. Computers play an essential role in most of these steps.
The availability of new instrumentation that allows crystallographers to
produce in a few days data that previously took weeks or months of labor-

intensive work is revolutionizing protein crystallography at an opportune time.

In recent years, developments in genetic engineering have made it possible to

produce large quantities of rare proteins and to use site-directed mutagenesis to

answer structural questions.
X-ray diffraction experiments have provided structures for double-stranded
DNA, protein-DNA complexes, and DNA-small molecule compounds in

crystals. Computer modeling is needed to extrapolate these results to more

biological environments and to other complexes. An obvious application of

such insight is to design more specific and more effective antibiotics. In

general, we would like to be able to design molecules that can start or stop the

expression of any gene in any DNA. The key to achieving this is computer-
assisted calculation used in close collaboration with experimental observation.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
NMR is another important source for structural data, and its use is
developing very rapidly. NMR results can be compared directly with theoretical

(mathematical) modeling and with structures derived from x-ray

crystallography. NMR has been applied to macromolecules in aqueous media

and to a limited extent in other environments, such as those that approximate

biological membranes. It is at its best when used to explore changes in preferred

structure in response to environmental or structural perturbations.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY6
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In this sense, NMR can be important in extrapolating to other environments
structural data obtained by other techniques. It also is well suited to exploring

changes in structure when comparing homologous series of macromolecules,

such as a series produced by site-specific mutagenesis.
More recently, technological advances have extended the applicability of
NMR to solids, oriented phases, and even to total structure determination of

molecules in solution. The latter use has attracted the most attention and

currently has the greatest potential to affect computer-assisted modeling efforts.
The major limitation on the use of NMR methods to determine structure is
the restriction on molecular weight. Current applications require proteins of

MW 10,000 and less. A second limitation stems from the restricted range of

measurable distances, less than 4
Å. A third limitation arises because of
underlying assumptions about the rigidity of macromolecules. All these
limitations are likely to be overcome in time, but doing so will require advances

in NMR methodology and computational capacity.
Improved computational and molecular modeling facilities could promote
the use of NMR to determine structure in several ways. Processing and

analyzing structural data for macro-molecules of MW 10,000 is far more time-
consuming than is ac quiring the data. Each phase of this operation could be
improved. Data are normally collected as a two-dimensional time domain set,

and processing involves Fourier transformation to a frequency do main set.

These processes are now handled by array processors associated with

instrument computers, with a moderate investment in time (one hour per

process). However, alternative methods of processing, including linear

decomposition and maximum entropy methods, may be better in terms of the

signal-to-noise ratio and may be more compatible with automating the analysis.

Such methods take far more computer time and may become practical only on

supercomputers.Some efforts are underway to use semiautomated pattern recognition and
expert system strategies to determine three-dimensional structure, but these will
require substantial investments in programming and computer hardware.
An investment in programming is obviously warranted. This investment
could be used best if we acknowledge that, in the future, we may need to
accommodate types of data not used today. Some data may come from other
structural methods applicable to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.solids and oriented specimens. Other data may come from entirely different
methods, such as tunneling microscopy. Thus, programs need not be directed

specifically for use with NMR data, but should, if possible, accommodate

structural data from a variety of sources.
In summary, current NMR methods of determining structure are applicable
to a variety of biologically important molecules that are less than MW 10,000.

Data production in this size range will be greatly enhanced by better

computational facilities, high field spectrometers, and modeling programs that

aim for compatibility with experimental constraints of the form provided by
NMR. NMR data should be meshed with data gathered through other methods
of determining structure. The range of molecules accessible by these methods is

likely to increase by a factor of two over the next five years. The rate of data

production is likely to increase even more quickly as we improve structure

determination protocols and as high-field spectrometers become more generally

available.TERTIARY STRUCTURE FROM THEORY
Energy Optimization
According to the thermodynamic hypothesis, the amino acid sequence of a
protein determines its three-dimensional structure in a given medium as the

thermodynamically most stable structure.
To identify this structure requires some kind of optimization strategy,
which, in turn, requires procedures to generate arbitrary three-dimensional

conformations of a polypeptide chain, compute the free energy of the system for

each conformation, and then alter the conformation so that it ultimately

corresponds to the global minimum of the free energy.
Although algorithms are available for minimizing an energy function of
many variables, there are no efficient ones to use for passing from one local

minimum, over a potential energy barrier, to the next local minimum
Šandultimately to the global minimum in a many-dimensional surface. Thus,

minimization leads to the nearest local minimum, where the procedure is

trapped. This trapping in a local, rather than the global, minimum is referred to
as the 
ﬁmultiple-minima problem.
ﬂ A variety of procedures are
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY8
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.being developed to overcome this problem, including approximations that
initially place the system in a broad potential energy well in which the more

sharply defined global minimum lies.
Although supercomputers will more adequately cover conformational
space, workers in this field will need more time on these machines to achieve

greater efficiency. Parallel processing offers a breakthrough, but will require

that more software be developed to take advantage of the new hardware. With

new hardware and software, it should be possible to surmount the major hurdle

created by the multiple-minima problem. However, bottlenecks may develop as
attempts are made to apply procedures that work on 20-residue segments to
proteins containing 100 to 200 residues.
HomologyProteins can be categorized by families. Evidence for this comes from
protein sequence homology and from the architectural similarity in tertiary

structures of homologous proteins as established by x-ray and NMR methods. A

family of proteins can be modeled if several conditions are fulfilled. First and

most important, the structure of at least one member of the family must be

known. Second, the protein to be modeled must be sufficiently homologous to

the known protein. Many proteins have been modeled over the past five years,
and the general consensus is that if two proteins share at least 30 percent
similarity, it is reasonable to use computer graphics and energy modeling to

propose the unknown structure from the known.
Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics simulations apply Newton's equations of motion to
the atoms of one or several molecules. Newton's equations relate three

independent quantities: time, conformation (three-dimensional atomic

coordinates), and potential energy.
Molecular dynamics simulation allows us to estimate theoretical mean
atomic positions and deviations from the mean; rates of motion and

conformation change; and ensemble averages, including thermodynamic

functions such as energy, enthalpy, specific heat, and free energy. Although

simple in concept, molecular dynamics simulations were not practical until the
advent of high-speed computers. The time is approaching when molecular
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.dynamics calculations will produce useful predictions of the structure,
dynamics, and thermodynamics of proteins, nucleic acids, and complexes of

these macromolecules with one another and other molecules.
The simulation requires two initial pieces of information: a starting
conformation and a potential energy function or forcefield. For a protein, the

starting conformation must be firmly based on experimental observation. The

forcefield is often identical to that used in molecular mechanics.
The forcefield is a very simple empirical approximation of the underlying
physics, which properly should be expressed in terms of quantum mechanics,

but is totally unmanageable in that form. Parameters of the forcefields currently

in use have been proposed on the basis of various experimental data and, to

some extent, on theoretical considerations.
Recently developed forcefields for water-water and water-protein
interactions permit the simulation of the dynamics of proteins in solution. This

capacity is a prerequisite for modeling events at the protein surface, including

most interactions of proteins with other molecules.
The simulations of molecular dynamics of proteins require careful
adjustment of starting configurations and simulation parameters. The limiting

factor is always the available computing power. For example, calculation of

molecular dynamics simulations of the motion of a protein over a 10
9-secondtime interval takes roughly a month of computer time on a CRAY. Making
additional computer time available to those working in the field will help in the
development/application of more detailed forcefields, produce longer

simulations, encourage the simulation of larger systems that pose new physical

and biological questions, and promote the application of new, more time-

consuming dynamics methods to be used to ask different questions about the

system.Molecular dynamics simulations show considerable promise of being able
to more accurately depict the structures that are proposed on the basis of

incomplete information, particularly from two-dimensional NMR. Such

reiterations are thought to be the best method of investigating the atomic details

of macromolecular motion.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY10
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ThermodynamicsPhysicists have known, in principle, how to calculate equilibrium
thermodynamic properties from molecular dynamics calculations for

considerable time. Only very recently have these techniques been applied to

proteins, but their use has already shifted the emphasis of the molecular

dynamics simulation field to calculations of free-energy differences. Several

factors explain the great current interest in this application. The most important
are the magnitude and precision of available experimental data for a variety of
equilibrium-involving biological macromolecules and the unexpectedly

excellent theoretical estimates that were and still are produced by the

simulations.Progress in free-energy simulations, although potentially very rapid, is
severely limited by available computer time. To realize the possibilities already

identified will require a radical increase of computer access for molecular

dynamics studies. An immediate 10-fold increase does not seem an extravagant

objective if we duplicate existing hardware that is already programmed and
inexpensive.In contrast to the folding problem, the problem of computer modeling of
the dynamics of protein interactions can be tackled in a series of small,

increasingly complex steps, each of which solves a discrete problem of

immediate biochemical interest, yet also adds to our insight and experience with

the broader picture.
Beyond the need for adequate computer time, two other needs must be
met. One is the need for better forcefields, particularly for nucleic acids and

carbohydrates; the second is the need for improved molecular dynamic

techniques designed to overcome some of the intrinsic imperfections of existing

forcefields. One possible impediment to this is the apparent trend toward the

development and commercialization of proprietary forcefields much like the
trend toward proprietary software. This trend seems counter to the best interests
of science because it limits access and precludes rigorous testing of results.
Solvent Effects
Biomolecular systems function in vivo in environments of aqueous
solutions or in a membrane. The aqueous environment
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.includes solvent as well as a substantial component that consists of various ions.
Because of the potentially relatively strong interactions of these components

with each other and with the macromolecular species, this environment can

contribute substantially to the observed state of a macromolecule in solution.

The membrane environment differs in that the charged groups and electrically

neutral regions are spatially separated. A quantitative treatment of biopolymer
structure and function cannot be expected to succeed unless we pay attention to
the molecular role of the environment.
The ability to adequately test predictions made from theoretical
calculations is an element of overriding importance in the future of this aspect

of modeling. This can occur at two levels: first and most important in

comparing theory and experiment and second in comparing results obtained

through convenient but approximate theory with those that follow from accurate

theoretical treatment. The first level is essential for accuracy and the second for

the future development of viable theoretical methods for increasingly complex
systems. Therefore, we should continue to encourage
both experiment and
theory forboth macromolecular and smaller model compounds.
The evident rapid progress in the ability to describe the environmental
aspects of biopolymer systems justifies our optimism that this element of

biomolecular modeling will not impede development of useful predictive

methods. For the most challenging aspects, however, we are at least several

years away from being able to accurately mimic environmental effects of

solution.ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF DRUGS
Central questions regarding function include (1) which aspects of protein
structure and dynamics are responsible for the often enormous enhancements of

rates of reaction of enzymes over the rates in water and (2) how the signal of the

binding of a ligand or quantum of light is transduced into a physiological

response such as an increase in blood pressure or a change in mental

functioning. The questions are at best incompletely answered.
In principle, the information needed to predict the function of a biological
macromolecule is encoded in its three-dimensional structure. The problem is

how to decode the rules that govern the relationship between structure and

function. The tools of
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY12
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.molecular dynamics promise to offer insight into this problem, but resources
must be made available.
The prospect of computer-assisted drug design based on the three-
dimensional structure of the target biomolecule has recently received much

attention in the scientific literature. Many medicinal chemists believe that their

field is poised to undergo a revolution as dramatic as that of the 1950s and

1960s that transformed organic chemistry from a descriptive to a predictive

science.This revolution presupposes that we can (or soon will be able to) predict
the functions of macromolecules from their structure. In particular, this would

require predicting whether a protein can recognize and bind a ligand and

predicting the structure of the optimum ligand. Beyond that, however, we would

need to be able to predict how a protein recognizes and interacts with other

macromolecules to alter its own and their functions. These insights will be a

direct consequence of the theoretical studies discussed in this report.
The design of a new drug from theoretical principles must somehow
incorporate the possible interaction of the proposed ligand with all other

macromolecules of the body. Quantitative Structure/Activity Relations (QSAR)

is a logical complement to the more structure-based computer methodologies.

QSAR is based on computing the activity of molecules from the properties and

activities of substituents. This tool can be used to model the potential whole-
animal activity of new ligands and perhaps to search for unanticipated
interactions with other macromolecules.The recent interest in computer-assisted drug design arose because at last
the scientist has available the elements of each of the important tools needed for

such an activity. Two types of computer hardware are necessary: high speed

color graphics and affordable but powerful minicomputers dedicated to

modeling. Data on the three-dimensional structure of proteins are becoming

available at an increasing rate as we improve our understanding of some of the

relationships between structure and function of proteins. Finally, software is
also available for displaying the molecules and modeling the energetics and
thermodynamics of the binding. Equally important, specialized graphics tools

for molecular design have been developed. Some of these arose from the related

activity of 
ﬁdockingﬂ a known ligand into a protein.
We must understand the relation between structure and function if we are
to design agents that alter function by changing
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.structure. Ultimately, we expect to be able to predict the biotransformations of
small molecules from the structures of the enzymes involved, but we cannot do

so now.COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES
Complex carbohydrates occur everywhere in animals, plants, and bacteria.
The enzymes involved in glycoconjugate biosynthesis are glycosyltransferases

that catalyze the transfer of sugar residues from the sugar nucleotides to the

nonreducing end of a growing carbohydrate chain. The distinction between this

process and protein synthesis is key; the latter occurs on a template of

messenger RNA and is therefore determined by the genetic code for a single
structural gene. In sharp contrast, glycoconjugate synthesis is accomplished by
adding sugar units in a stepwise manner, with a different enzyme used for each

step. The current state of knowledge does not indicate that a single DNA

sequence determines the primary structure of the complex carbohydrate.
It is not yet possible to predict the primary structures of complex
carbohydrates from DNA sequences, and the three-dimensional structures of

glycoproteins, glycosphingolipids, and other complex carbohydrate-containing

molecules can never be completely predicted without analyzing the two-

dimensional structures of the carbohydrates. A complete understanding of the
interactions between carbohydrates and proteins (enzymes, lectins, antibodies,
and cell surface receptors) will depend on the generation of accurate three-

dimensional structures of both kinds of molecules.
Of the three major classes of complex biological molecules, we have the
least information at the atomic level about the three-dimensional structure of

carbohydrates. Because no large carbohydrates have been crystallized, we have

no data on relevant crystal structure, other than data on simple monomers to

trimers, upon which to model classical or semiempirical quantum mechanical

calculations. Adequate computer time, including access to appropriate parallel
processors is an important consideration in support of this research.
Configurations that consist of more than one macromolecule may interact
as a whole in biological phenomena such as catalysis by many enzymes,

binding at a cell surface, and signal transduction across cell membranes. Hybrid

systems involving complex carbohydrates, proteins and nucleic acids are

important in protein
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY14
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and nucleic acid synthesis, repair, and regulation. We believe it will be possible
in the near future to use structural methods to characterize at least parts of these

systems. Computer modeling of such supramolecular structures will be

necessary if we are to gain a deeper understanding of how biological materials

are organized to carry out complex functional tasks.
ROLE OF COMPUTERS
Computers clearly play an essential role at virtually every stage and in
virtually every process, theoretical and experimental, in determining the three-

dimensional structures and biological activity of macromolecules. Both

personal and laboratory computers and large, mainframe computers are used.
Computer-assisted mathematical (theoretical) modeling is augmented by
computer-generated three-dimensional graphic representations of molecules.

Modeling from theory is generally tightly coupled to experimental approaches

such as x-ray crystallography, NMR, and monomer sequencing. The interplay

of theory and experiment results in the increasing refinement of the theory-

based models, which in turn can be used to predict the behavior and properties
of the actual molecules.
Availability of computer software and access to computer time and
computer-based data banks are often the factors that limit the rate of progress in

structural biology. The conclusion is inevitable that progress toward fuller

understanding of macromolecular structure and function will be accelerated if

computer-based activities receive greater support. The computer facilities of the
national laboratories have the attributes required to lead in providing computer-
based support for both theoretical and empirical approaches to understanding

macromolecular structure and function.
Progress in structural biology is likely to produce rapid advances in
biotechnology, drug design, toxicology, and medicine, along with advances in

understanding of basic biological processes, including heredity and development.
Our recommendations for dealing with these issues are detailed
inChapter 10
and summarized in the following section.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONSThe conclusions we draw from our examination of the facts related to the
questions contained in our charge may be summarized as follows:
Important advances in the understanding of macromolecular structure and
function have been and will continue to be gained from the application of

techniques using computers. To maximize the speed of progress toward a better

understanding of protein foldings, macromolecular interactions and functions,

impediments and limitations to the effective study of these matters must be

identified and dealt with. The areas requiring attention include the need for

readily available data banks of protein and nucleic acid sequences as well as
model-derived structures; improved capability of and access to supercomputers;
provisions of educational opportunities in the area; and use of the most

appropriate physical and intellectual resources for the performance of research.
Our recommendations for dealing with these issues are detailed
inChapter 10
and summarized in the following section.
RECOMMENDATIONS   A radical new policy on data banking of protein and nucleic acid
sequences is required. A permanent National Sequence Data Bank

should be put in place as soon as possible. A standing advisory

committee of users should be appointed by a consortium drawn from

the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Science Foundation
(NSF), and Department of Energy (DOE). Whether the new facility
should be allied with a national laboratory, or with the National

Library of Medicine, or should be a completely new academic or

commercial enterprise remains to be determined.
   Support for the archiving of coordinate and model-derived structures
should continue. Inclusion of data from new methods of structural

analysis should be encouraged.
   We recommend in the strongest terms expanding the supercomputer
initiative, funding of computer networks, improving access by the

scientific community to the existing supercomputer centers at the

national laboratories, upgrading those centers, and providing individual

research grants for purchasing new computers. DOE should work
closely with the NSF and NIH to provide
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY16
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the broadest and most versatile computer network system on a national
level.   Educational opportunities in structural biology and molecular modeling
should be improved. Several mechanisms are available, such as

expanding graduate programs through new training grants; increased

graduate fellowship and postdoctoral fellow programs; workshops,

including formal hands-on training programs in molecular dynamics

and molecular graphics; and working meetings of independent

investigators to address critical limiting aspects of a particular problem.
   Innovative and interdisciplinary research proposals in both theoretical
and experimental aspects of structural biology should be directly

encouraged through the use of existing funding mechanisms.
   We see a special role for the national laboratories. The national
laboratories should compete for the National Sequence Data Bank. The

national laboratories and DOE have leadership status in the national

computer network. They should increase efforts to make

supercomputers available to the scientific community. Research efforts

are going forward in molecular calculations and structural biology,
with major programs at a few locations. Strengthening these efforts
will assist the department's Office of Health and Environmental

Research to assess the potential health and environmental effects of

chemicals involved in energy processes.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2.IntroductionLife depends on the orderly flow of information among biological
macromolecules. Information is primarily stored as a linear code in nucleic
acids. In general, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the amino acid
sequence specified by the DNA code and that actually found in the protein.

Processing, however, of the DNA itself, the transcribed RNA, or the translated

protein frequently obscures this correspondence and makes it mandatory to

verify the amino acid sequence directly. The amino acid sequence establishes

what is called the 
ﬁprimary structure
ﬂ of a protein. To be biologically active, the
amino acids must be folded into a convoluted three-dimensional structure.

There is some debate over the extent to which the final tertiary structure of a

protein is governed solely by its primary sequence. The most widespread view

follows from experiments by Anfinsen et al. (1961) who showed that bovine

pancreatic ribonuclease regained activity from a denatured state without the

involvement of any other macromolecule.
Today, it is generally accepted that all proteins of low molecular weight
can refold spontaneously. The question remains, then, of whether large proteins

use ribosomes or other cellular materials to fold by a kinetically driven
mechanism. Thus, two important questions must be considered. First, how is the
protein tertiary structure encoded in the linear sequence of amino acids? Second,
INTRODUCTION18
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.is there a set of signals that controls the kinetic process of protein folding? Also,
it is becoming increasingly obvious that the cell employs additional codes to

signal for protein transport, protein destruction, carbohydrate structure, cell-cell

recognition, hormone function, and the like. One place to begin deciphering all

these messages that are so directly tied to the function of living cells is to gather

information about the molecular structures of the proteins and nucleic acids.
Pauling's elegant insights into the importance of hydrogen bonding were
the earliest quantitative ideas about the structure of proteins (Pauling et al.,

1951). The models that emerged of helices, sheets, and the structure of collagen

still form the basis of our understanding of fibrous proteins. Fibrous proteins are

crucial elements in cellular architecture, but the chemistry of cells
Šthemolecular synthesis and metabolism that are hallmarks of life
Šis controlled by
elaborate enzyme systems whose detailed structural principles remain poorly
understood. These proteins are often grouped together under the name of

ﬁglobular proteins
ﬂ because of their roughly spherical shape. In spite of the
hundreds of x-ray studies of crystals of globular proteins (Perutz, 1965; Perutz

et al., 1965) and important efforts at classification (Levitt and Chothia, 1976;

Rossmann and Argos, 1977; Richardson, 1981), the most useful model of

globular proteins remains the fundamental analysis put forward by Kauzmann

in 1959.As Kauzmann (1959) noted on thermodynamic grounds, the water-soluble
globular proteins are formed from a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic

exterior. In the ensuing years, this idea has been generalized in two ways. First,

it is now apparent that globular proteins of more than 100 to 300 residues are

constructed from independent domains, each of which is built according to the

Kauzmann hypothesis (Wetlaufer, 1973). Second, membrane spanning proteins

appear to reflect similar thermodynamic principles. The hydrophobic
environment of the core of the membrane causes the protein architecture to
invert, producing a hydrophobic surface and
a charged or polar interior
, often
in the form of a membrane-spanning channel (Henderson, 1979; Stroud and

Finer-Moore, 1985).Despite the success of the hydrophobic core model, it has not led to a
theory detailed enough to offer an atomic description of protein structure. The

basic difficulty is the amazing complexity
INTRODUCTION19
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the atomic arrangements in these macromolecules. The three-dimensional
structure of globular proteins is governed by a balance of the often

contradictory requirements of optimum hydrogen bonding, burial of

hydrophobic sidechains, and overall close packing. Thus, their geometry is

governed to a significant degree by tertiary interactions, rather than by the

simple hydrogen bonding that dominates the fibrous proteins and nucleic acid
helices.This complexity leaves us with what has frequently been called the
ﬁprotein folding problem
ﬂ: how to calculate the tertiary structure of a protein to
a useful degree of accuracy from the amino acid sequence. This report will

address protein structure calculations at some length. But we recognize that

there are much broader concerns dealing with the structures of nucleic acids and
carbohydrate species. For example, for some years after the modeling efforts of
Watson and Crick (1953), investigators took for granted the structure of nucleic

acids. Recently, there has been renewed interest in the range of structures

presented by double helical DNA (e.g. A,B,Z)(Drew and Dickerson, 1981); by

RNA secondary structures; by higher-order packing of these molecules into

nucleosomes, chromosomes, and ribosomes; and by the specific interactions of

nucleic acids and proteins. As another example, the importance of

postbiosynthetic modifications of all biological macromolecules is gaining

increasing attention. Although the exact roles of phosphorylation, acetylation,

methylation, and glycosylation are still being worked out, there is no doubt that

these modifications frequently constitute the biologically active form of

proteins and nucleic acids in living cells. Further, one must recognize the
critical influence of environment on three-dimensional structure. The protein
surroundings may be as simple as an aqueous electrolyte solution or as complex

as macromolecular assemblies.
Another matter of concern is the actual pathway by which the protein
folding takes place. In the cell, this pathway may be influenced or regulated by

the proximity of the ribosome itself, by chain cleavage, or by the timing of the

addition of carbohydrates or other chemical species. Even in the test tube,

refolding appears to be a complicated process.
Beyond these questions, the interplay of structure and function suggests
that we should try to understand the properties of proteins and how to

manipulate them through the amino acid sequence. We should discourage from

the start the view that a single structure exists for each protein. The

conformational choices are
INTRODUCTION20
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.numerous, even in the crystal state (Smith et al., 1986a). Further, most globular
proteins are designed to provide organized internal motions (allosteric effects)

as part of their functioning. Thus, one expects major conformational flexibility

in many of these molecules. Some of this flexibility can be seen as thermally

induced fluctuations that can be easily accounted for with normal mode

analysis. Other aspects of the conformational freedom are much more complex
and can be examined with the tools of molecular dynamics and statistical
mechanics. In this report we will try to assess our understanding of all these

issues.It is almost impossible to overstate the importance of the protein folding
problem to the elucidation of structure-function relations. As a purely

intellectual exercise, it clearly displays the fascinating complexity of a first-

class scientific puzzle. But the spotlight of attention is directed at protein

structural predictions for other reasons. The most impelling is the incredible

growth of knowledge in molecular genetics and protein engineering. New
sequences are being reported worldwide at a rate of 1 every 10 minutes, while
protein crystal structures are determined at a rate of 1 per month. Thus,

sequences are being generated between two and three orders of magnitude

faster than structures can be determined. Even with dramatic improvements in

the technology of crystallography and magnetic resonance, the backlog of

sequence data will grow rapidly. Further, the need to make rational plans for

modification of protein properties is a major issue for all aspects of the

biotechnology industry. A thorough understanding of the growth and

development of living organisms depends crucially on a molecular structural

and functional description. This understanding would certainly lead to a

revolution in health care and a much firmer grip on the problems of chemical

toxicity.How valuable is it to know the structure of a protein? Clearly, models of
structures have led to the design of pharmaceutical agents (Goodford, 1984 and

Hol, 1986) and the engineering of specific properties such as improved stability

(Ultsch et al., 1985). We are at the very beginning of such activities. They will

surely become very important with time. A more difficult question is, what can

be done with incomplete or lower resolution structures? Their present value is
in organizing experimental data and planning new experiments (Cohen et al.,
1986b). They can also be refined against new x-ray or nuclear magnetic

resonance (NMR) data (e.g. Fitzwater and Scheraga, 1982; Brunger et al.,

1986a).INTRODUCTION21
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It is not yet clear if these approximate structures, by themselves, can be refined
sufficiently to compete with either crystallographic or NMR experiments for all

uses. However, for the design of new pharmaceutical agents they are invaluable

aids if an experimental structure is not available (e.g. Plattner et al., 1986).
FIGURE 2- Hierarchy of structural descriptions of biological macromolecules.
In the broadest terms, the convergence of results from experiment and
theory yields useful models of protein and nucleic acid structure and function.

Given the very large number of sequences expected in the next two decades, we

estimate that thousands of these will yield useful structural calculations.
The body of this report is a review of computer-assisted modeling of
macromolecular structure and function. We have interpreted modeling in broad

terms as the use of computers in molecular calculations of all kinds. The

organization of the report is illustrated in
Figure 2-1
, which shows how
information flows from primary sequence to secondary and tertiary structure

models. The role of computers in experimental methods is summarized in the

section on tertiary structure. Issues of modifying function and designing new
materials are considered next, followed by a discussion of trends in computer
hardware.INTRODUCTION22
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3.Primary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic
AcidsPROTEIN SEQUENCES AND DATA BASES
As of mid-1987, more than 5,000 protein amino acid sequences had been
reported, most of which were inferred from the DNA sequences that encode
them. Although the collection is redundant (same protein from different
species) and definitely biased (many human and few plant sequences, for

example), several patterns nevertheless stand out. Foremost among these is that

the number of different types of protein is finite. It is becoming increasingly

clear that most of the proteins determined thus far belong to identifiable

families that are easily recognized by amino acid sequences alone. Indeed, the

chances are now better than even that a newly determined amino acid sequence

from a eukaryotic organism will be found to resemble a previously entered

sequence.Some of these families were anticipated (
Table 3-1
) on the basis of
similarities in function and size. Thus, globins were all known to bind heme and

to have very similar properties. We knew about large numbers of kinases, serine
proteases, and thiol proteases, for example, and scores of protease inhibitors. It
is not surprising, either, that many dehydrogenases and reductases have related

sequences or that all the ATPases belong to a homologous set.
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS23
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 3-1. Some well-established protein familiesa
Enzymes:Serine proteasesDehydrogenasesCarboxypeptidases

Thiol proteasesReductasesTranscarbamoylases

Acid proteasesKinases ATPasesPhosphorylases
Non-Enzymes:GlobinsCollagensImmunoglobulins

CytochromesKeratinsPolypeptide hormones

HistonesCrystallinsGlycopeptide hormones

Protease
inhibitorsLipid-binding
proteinsInterferonsToxinsTransferrinsT cell receptors

MHC antigens
a In each group some members are known to have similar amino acid sequences.
What is surprising is that the same kinds of protein structures are appearing
in proteins in quite different settings. Polypeptide hormone precursors have

been found that are related to protease inhibitors, for example, and structural

proteins of the lens of the eye have been found to be related to regulatory agents

called ﬁheat shockﬂ proteins (Ignolia and Craig, 1982). Sometimes the
connections seem astonishing at first, but, upon reflection, they are very

reasonable. Thus, the recently determined sequences of the beta-adrenergic

receptor, which binds adrenaline and its derivatives, were found to be similar to

that of rhodopsin, the eye pigment protein that responds to stimulation by light.

This was extraordinary (Dixon et al., 1986), but not inexplicable, since the

activating signalsŠadrenaline in the one case and light in the other
Šboth canprovoke excitatory actions. Subsequently, Kubo et al. (1986) found that a third

protein, the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, also belongs to this family.
Many proteins, then, came into being through a process of 
ﬁduplicate andmodify.ﬂ Gene duplications (partial or complete,
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS24
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as will be discussed further) lead to extra gene copies that suffer base
substitutions in the usual way; the substitutions, in turn, lead to modified

proteins. For most proteins, these replacements are established sufficiently

slowly that, even after a billion years or more of evolution along diverging lines

of descent, it is possible to recognize common origins.
More to the point for this report, an abundance of data show that three-
dimensional structures of proteins are better conserved during the course of

evolution than are their amino acid sequences. In this regard, a detailed

crystallographic study of a series of serine proteases led to the conclusion that

recognizably similar three-dimensional structures may endure as much as 10

times longer than do distinguishably similar amino acid sequences, a natural

consequence of the diverse ways in which amino acids may be arranged to yield
equivalent structures (James et al., 1978). As a result, it is reasonable to assume
that similar amino acid sequences give rise to similar three-dimensional

structures. This is obviously an important point because it is considerably easier

to determine amino acid sequences (albeit using DNA sequencing) than to

determine crystal structures.
The Current Crystal Structure Census
In the next decade, the sequences of 50,000 proteins are likely to be
determined. In the majority of cases, it should be possible to assign them to

existing families. The question then arises: For what fraction of those known

families do we have crystal structures?
The Brookhaven Protein Data Bank, which keeps data for all known
protein structures, lists about 300 entries. Like the sequence data banks,

however, the Brookhaven collection is heavily redundant and biased. The

entries include many variations of the same proteins crystallized in different

settings (14 entries for egg-white lysozyme alone) and from different species.

Actually, only about 100 different protein structures have been determined, and
of these, many belong to the same families, as do the dehydrogenases or the
serine proteases. Equally important, many known protein families
Štheinterferons, for example
Šhave not yet had a single crystal structure determined.
The situation is changing rapidly, however, and the prospects appear very
good for determining a truly representative set of
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS25
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.crystal structures. Innovations in recombinant DNA technology now allow the
production of proteins in quantities sufficient for crystallization; previously,

many of these proteins were available only in trace amounts. Beyond that, new

techniques for crystallizing membrane proteins have opened an entirely new

dimension (Michel, 1982). In addition, modern techniques for rapid data

collection have revolutionized the entire field and hastened the process
immensely (Xuong et al., 1978). Finally, improved techniques for structure
solution and refinement have also accelerated this process.
Modeling on the Basis of Sequence Alone
At present, it is not possible to generate, with any hope of accuracy, a three-
dimensional structure of a protein using only the amino acid sequence. Opinions

differ widely as to whether a general solution to the 
ﬁfolding problem
ﬂ is near
and recent developments in the field are discussed elsewhere in this report.

Certainly Cohen et al. (1986b) have shown that in special situations, much can

be predicted about a protein on the basis of its sequence, but the routine

application of an all-inclusive procedure is not yet in sight.
It is possible, of course, to make computer-assisted predictions about
secondary structure (Chou and Fasman, 1974), and although these methods

have a limited accuracy (Kabsch and Sander, 1983; Nishikawa, 1983), they can

nevertheless provide useful information when applied judiciously. Predictions

about protein structure can also be made with computer programs that assess

hydropathy (Kyte and Doolittle, 1982). These have been especially successful
in predicting the membrane-spanning segments of membrane-associated proteins.
Existing Data Bases
The major data bases for sequences are the Protein Identification Resource
(PIR) at the National Biomedical Research Foundation, Washington, D.C.;

GenBank, operated by Bolt, Beranek, and Newman in Cambridge,

Massachusetts; and EMBLData Bank in Heidelberg, Germany (
Table 3-2
).GenBank and EMBL store only DNA sequences, although recently, they have
begun to make available derived amino acid sequences. GenBank
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS26
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and EMBL exchange data frequently as a way to enhance the data sets.
Currently, these two data bases together contain more than 15 million bases of

nucleic acid sequences.
TABLE 3-2. Some sequence data banks and searching facilities
Protein Identification Resource
Georgetown University Medical Center

National Biomedical Research Foundation
3900 Reservoir Road, N.W.Washington, D.C. 20007 U.S.A.
GenBank: Genetic Sequence Database
Computer & Information Science Div.
BBN Laboratoreis, Inc.
10 Moulton StreetCambridge, MA 02238 U.S.A.
EMBL Data Library
Graham Cameron, Data Library Manager
Postfach 10 2209 Meyerhofstrasse 1

6900 Heidelberg, Germany
University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group (UWGCP)
John Devereux

University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center
1710 University AvenueMadison, WI 53705 U.S.A.
Unite d'Informatique Scientifique
Jean-Michel Claverie
Institute Pasteur
Paris, France
Bionet: National Computer Resource for Molecular Biology
Intelligenetics, Inc.
124 University Avenue
Palo Alto, CA 94301 U.S.A.PRF Amino Acid Sequence Collection
Yasuniko Seto
Peptide Institute, Protein Res. Found.476 Ina
Minon, Osaka 562 Japan
a Although GenBank and the EMBL Data Library primarily store DNA sequences,
translated versions of the data are available.
All of the three major banks currently have backlogs of data awaiting
entry. In the case of the PIR, for example, most of the protein sequence data are

still typed in from the published literature. GenBank and EMBL are trying to

make arrangements
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS27
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with some key journals (
Nucleic Acid Research
is one) that will allow data to be
submitted to the data bases in various computer modes: diskettes, tapes, and

direct transmission.The logistic and policy problems associated with such data bases are
enormous and many committees and societies are trying to establish an

acceptable policy that will speed things up. At the same time, all indications are

that the generation of sequence data will increase exponentially in the next few

years. Clearly, we need a new, permanent, centralized data repository. Ideally,

this should be international; practically, it may be more readily attained at the
national level. This should be an institution at least as large as the National
Library of Medicine. It could be located anywhere, although certainly

consideration should be given to Los Alamos, which has already been heavily

involved in sequence banking with GenBank. Models for this center, which

must be a constantly updated base and not merely a repository, include the

National Bureau of Standards or the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
In addition to these major sequence collections, some smaller enterprises
are operating, both in the United States and elsewhere (
Table 3-2
). However, all
of these appear to rely heavily on the PIR-GenBank-EMBL collections as their

data cores. Finally, some beginning efforts are underway to create a

carbohydrate structure bank.
PATTERN BASED COMPARISONS
Methods for determining sequence alignments and homologies represent a
powerful set of tools for relating the structures and, potentially, the functions of

two or more biopolymers. However, these homologies alone do not take full

advantage of the information content of primary structures of biopolymers. For

example, different nucleotide patterns may code for the same protein sequence;

different protein sequences may share a very similar function. Often the

differences at the level of primary sequence are substantial, and similarity of
function among sequences is lost when the sequences are compared by
homology. Yet, if we can somehow relate the sequence of a new protein to that

of another protein whose structure and function are known, we can begin to

determine the structure of the new protein. How might we take advantage of a

more general view of homology, and view sequences
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS28
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as patterns in order to extract more structural information from them?
FIGURE 3-1 Hierarchical relationship among patterns in biological sequences.
If we consider the concept of a sequence as a string of characters, we can
view the concept of a pattern as a string (or collection) of partial sequences.

This view of primary amino acid sequences derives from our belief in a
hierarchy of structural descriptions of proteins (See 
Figure 2-1).If the only structural information we have about a protein is its sequence or
primary structure, we seek patterns in its sequence that will guide us to a better
understanding of the protein. Patterns can be derived by examining the
secondary and tertiary structures of known proteins, and relating spatial

information back to patterns in the primary structure. In essence, we attempt to

map what is known about spatial configurations into the one-dimensional world

of sequences. This mapping itself can be done hierarchically, closely related to

the hierarchy shown above, as shown from the bottom up in
Figure 3-1
.The scheme symbolized in
Figure 3-1
represents the fact that a sequence can
be analyzed to determine patterns of partial sequences, illustrated by the boxed

elements. The individual patterns
P1 -P4, for example, secondary structural
elements, may themselves be part of a larger patterns, such as
P5, P6, whichPRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS29
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.may only be recognized after the abstraction to
P1 -P4 is accomplished.
P5andP6, for example, structural domains, may then be recognized as part of an
even larger pattern,
P7, for example, the tertiary structure of a protein.
The hierarchy of
Figure 3-1
also represents a computational model for
deriving secondary and tertiary structural information from the patterns

themselves. This computational model is described below.
MethodologyThe concept of patterns is useful for expanding our view of the primary
structure of proteins only if we find some method for labeling the individual

amino acids or partial sequences with properties other than identity. For

example, we can choose labelings related to physical, chemical, or functional

properties of the amino acid. If we choose properties related to secondary or

higher order structure, we can encode higher order properties in the sequence
itself. Labelings can be assigned to individual amino acid residues or to groups
of residues based on calculations over a partial sequence. Typical properties

included are:   charges: plus, minus or neutral
   pK: acidic, basic, neutral; or specific value
   hydropathicity: a hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity value for one
residue or calculated over a set of residues
   chemical similarity: several possible definitions
   tendency for replacement over evolutionary time
   secondary structure calculated over a group of residues (see below)
Some labelings are valuable for examining sequence homologies. For
example, one can examine similarities in the chemical properties of a sequence

by performing the homology search among sequences labeled with characters or
flags that represent assignment to various chemical classes. If the evaluation
function for rating the degree of homology is adjusted appropriately based on

the variety of the labels, or the
alphabet, it is possible to find meaningful
homologies among sequences with substantially different amino acid

sequences. One example of the success of this approach is a method for finding

protein sequence homologies based on the tendency for replacement over

evolutionary time of
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS30
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.one amino acid by another (Dayhoff, 1978; Lipman and Pearson, 1985).
Software and Hardware Considerations
The computer software and hardware needed to carry out the pattern-
matching operations on sequences contrast in interesting ways with those

required for the intense numerical calculations described in other sections of

this report. First, the analyses of patterns in sequences is a problem in symbolic,

not numeric, computation. For efficient program development and application,
languages that support symbol manipulation and pattern-matching primitives
are desirable; C and LISP are often the languages of choice. Second, the

algorithms used are the result of years of development of dynamic

programming techniques, recursion, and other methods that allow flexible

pattern detection and matching. Mismatches, density matches, gaps, and other

irregularities are all characteristics of 
ﬁfuzzyﬂ patterns that must be
accommodated. Third, many of the techniques used to infer higher order

structural information in patterns, such as secondary structural analysis and the

heuristic techniques described below, are highly empirical. These methods often

have a theoretical foundation or justification, but the actual inferences may be

based on statistics over data bases of known structures or on judgmental rules

based on experience and analysis of patterns in known systems.
The computer power needed for these symbolic computations is widely
available on several general purpose machines. However, as is true for

numerical computations, progress in symbol manipulation and pattern matching

could be hampered by insufficient hardware. It is becoming more and more

difficult to explore complex patterns in large data bases because of the

computer time required. Thus, just as array processors and high performance
graphic devices are available to support numerical calculations and present their
results, special purpose pattern-matching hardware has been developed to

emulate the necessary symbolic computations. This hardware contains the

algorithms required for symbol processing. It is often several orders of

magnitude faster than the corresponding software.
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS31
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4.Secondary Structure of Proteins and
Nucleic AcidsPROTEINSThe secondary structural features of proteins can be grouped into three
broad classes: helical features, extended strands, and turns or loops. The most
commonly seen helices are the so-called alpha helices, which were first
described by Pauling and Corey (Pauling et al., 1951). Minor forms include the

3-10 and pi helices. Beta structures are formed from hydrogen bonding between

the backbone amides of extended polypeptide strands. Although such features

are properly considered tertiary structure, they are often discussed as secondary

structure. They are named according to whether the strand pairs run parallel or

antiparallel to each other (based on a vector drawn from the N to C termini of

the feature) and whether the sheets are folded or rolled into a barrel

(Richardson, 1981). Turns are much less regular (Rose et al., 1985). They are

characterized according to local geometric features.
Prediction of secondary structure has been of interest since the first protein
structures were determined. Accurate secondary structure prediction is one
direct approach to the development of a tertiary prediction algorithm.
The methods used to predict secondary structure from amino acid sequence
have been (1) calculation of the energies of the
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS32
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.major conformers for a given sequence; (2) statistical analysis of known
structures; and (3) modeling. It is now computationally feasible to calculate

energies for conformations of short peptides with or without solvent. However,

this is not yet a definite method of predicting secondary structure in proteins

because the energy differences among conformers are relatively small

compared to the interactions between the peptide and the rest of the protein and
because of neglect of the solvent entropy terms.
Statistical methods began with the efforts of Chou and Fasman (1974),
who characterized the preference of each amino acid found in each type of

secondary structure. Other early efforts focused on turns in proteins (Kuntz,

1972; Lewis et al., 1971). Robson (Robson and Osguthorpe, 1979; Robson,

1986) followed with more sophisticated approaches. These approaches give the
general impression that the statistical methods are easy to use but have
significant random and systematic noise that limits their accuracy. For example,

they ignore long-range effects (Kabsch and Sander, 1983) and prosthetic groups.
Modeling efforts have grown from the early observations of Schiffer and
Edmundson (1967) that alpha helices in globular proteins often contain

hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces in agreement with the ideas of Kauzmann

(1959). Many investigators followed this line of thought. Thus, helical

propensity has been identified with helical nets, from a Fourier analysis of the

hydrophobicity (Eisenberg et al., 1984; Finer-Moore and Stroud, 1984), or from
pattern-matching (Cohen et al., 1986b). Beta structures have been treated in
similar ways, although less successfully. Turns are often associated with regions

of hydrophilicity.
Some labelings are valuable for detecting higher order structural
information. One of the most common methods used to explore this information

is secondary structure analysis. This analysis provides information on possible

patterns of coils, sheets, and helices in a protein. Other information can be

extracted from the sequence by recognizing that certain combinations of amino

acids indicate turns or other structural features. Alternative representations can
be used to determine patterns comprising amphiphilic beta-sheets or alpha- or
pi-helices (Kaiser and K
ézdy, 1984). Often this information can be gathered by
empirical, rule-based systems, described below. However it is determined, this

information can be used to build up a hierarchy of patterns. This hierarchy is
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS33
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.indicated symbolically in
Figure 4-1
, which is based on the general scheme
shown inFigure 3-1
.FIGURE 4-1 Hierarchical relationship of a protein sequence to higher order
patterns of organization, culminating in the tertiary structure of the protein
itself.According to this scheme, patterns of partial sequences can be recognized
as representing secondary structural elements. Combinations of these elements

are recognized as higher order patterns that correspond to supersecondary

structures. These, in turn, may be recognized as patterns that make up a domain.

If any portion of such a hierarchy is determined using only a sequence, this

represents a major step toward constructing an actual three-dimensional

structure for a protein. More frequently, this procedure is used with other

computational techniques for examining combinations of patterns that may lead
to recognizable structural motifs in three dimensions.
The general method used to study these problems involves only a few
basic steps. First, one or more techniques are used to make the first assignment

of structural features to patterns in a sequence
Šfor example, hypothesized
secondary structural elements associated with specific partial sequences.

Second, the pattern or patterns obtained are compared to those derived from

known structures or hypothesized by the investigator. Third, if a match is found,

the investigator proceeds to the next step of searching for patterns of the next-

highest order, which may be composed
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS34
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of several different combinations of smaller patterns identified in the previous
step. If one can derive sufficient structural information, hypothetical three-

dimensional structures can be proposed. Several examples have appeared

recently where this approach has been successfully applied to pattern-based

elucidation of structural features of proteins of known and unknown structure

(Abarbanel, 1984, 1986; Cohen et al., 1986; Taylor and Thornton, 1983).
Current Status and Future Prospects
The assignment of each amino acid in a protein sequence to a particular
secondary structure class has rarely been more than 70 percent accurate and is

often worse. Some of the newer approaches increase accuracy by reducing the

scope of the problem. For example, Cohen et al. (1986a) describe procedures

for the prediction of turns in subgroups of proteins. By tailoring algorithms to

take advantage of the characteristics of, for example, all-alpha domains, the
accuracy is improved to about 90 percent.
In the near term, developments in this area are most likely to be
incremental improvements. Computer speed will surely continue to increase

substantially. Data bases will continue to grow at least linearly. Experiments on

the structural consequences of modifying amino acids are beginning to be

reported in significant numbers (Ultsch et al., 1985; Alber et al., 1987). More
powerful statistical and modeling efforts are under development. What is more
important, these approaches can be combined in useful ways. Within five years,

several laboratories should have set up unified programs that allow comp]ex

inquiries of structural data bases. Automatic learning programs that extract

secondary structure features will also have been intensively studied.
Within 10 years, we may well see major improvements in our ability to
correlate sequences and secondary structure. The current goal of correctly

predicting every major feature in a new sequence is a plausible target. Accurate

specification of the secondary structural environment of each amino acid in a
protein is probably not attainable without a major conceptual or computational
breakthrough.SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS35
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NUCLEIC ACIDS
Predicting RNA Structure
RNA molecules are crucial to all stages of protein synthesis. Messenger
RNA carries the code that specifies the amino acid sequence of the protein; the

transfer RNA molecules translate the code word by word into protein; and the

ribosomal RNAs in the ribosome provide part of the machinery to do the

synthesis. Many animal and plant viruses that cause tremendous damage to
human health and economic well-being are RNA viruses. Human disease RNA
viruses include those for colds and influenza, AIDS, some cancers, and

hepatitis. It would be very useful to be able to use only the sequence to predict

the folded three-dimensional structure of any RNA in any environment. This

structure determines how stable an RNA molecule will be in a biological cell,

because the ability of the enzymes that hydrolyze RNA (exo and endo

nucleases) to degrade a particular RNA is very sensitive to RNA conformation.

Also, each RNA molecule requires the correct conformation in order to function

biologically. The conformation, in turn, will depend on the environment as

characterized by the type and concentration of ions, the presence of specific

interacting molecules and other variables.
The computer programs now used to predict RNA conformation from
sequence have limited goals and limited success (see, for example, Zuker and

Steigler, 1981). They were designed to calculate secondary structure only
Štospecify which bases are paired. The computerized procedure uses experimental
thermodynamic data on double-strand formation in synthetic RNA
oligonucleotides (Freier et al., 1986). A dynamic programming algorithm

considers all possible base pairs in the RNA
Ša sequence of N nucleotides has N
(N-1)/2 possible base pairs
Šand calculates the free energies of the
corresponding structures. The free energy of a structure is assumed to be the

sum of the free energies of its constituent substructures (Tinoco et al., 1971),

including single-stranded regions, double-stranded regions, bulges, hairpin

loops, and interior loops. The lowest free energy structure is the predicted

secondary structure. The computer programs allow one to specify that any two

bases are paired to each other or that any
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS36
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.base is unpaired. Thus, other experimental data based on enzymatic digestion
experiments, chemical reactivity, or phylogenetic comparisons can be

introduced.Clearly, the predicted results are only as good as the experimental
thermodynamic and other data used. For example, although all transfer RNAs

are thought to fold as clover leaves, present computer programs only calculate

about 90 percent clover leaves. Also, the thermodynamic experiments have all

been done in one standard solvent, so knowledge about other solvents is needed.

Finally, a limited number of oligonucleotides have been studied; they provide
only a very small sample of the structural elements present in natural RNA
molecules. A much better understanding of the thermodynamics of possible

substructures in an RNA is needed before an accurate and complete prediction

of secondary structure is possible.
The existing computer methods for calculating secondary structure in RNA
are useful as aids in designing experiments to determine the actual secondary

structure. For example, a program can provide the calculated lowest free energy

structure, as well as other significantly different low free energy structures

(Williams and Tinoco, 1986). Experiments are done to test some of the
predicted substructures, and their results are incorporated into the calculation of
the next prediction. Successive approximations thus lead to more correctly

determined secondary structures (Cech et al., 1983).
Computer methods of the future must be based on much more detailed
knowledge of the thermodynamics of local regions of an RNA molecule. The

extensive thermodynamic data needed for correct prediction of secondary

structure will most likely come from computer interpolation and extrapolation

of limited data measured on synthetic oligonucleotides in a few solvents. Once

we understand better the forces and energies involved in the interactions of
nucleotides with solvent, ions, and each other, it will become easier to calculate
secondary structures for large RNA molecules. Algorithms exist for calculating

low free energy structures as a sum of substructure energies, so their use with

RNA of up to about 600 nucleotides requires only the appropriate data.

However, for a rigorous search for structures, central processor (CPU) time and

memory requirements increase as the cube or fourth power of the number of

nucleotides. We estimate that a molecule of 3,000 nucleotides (typical

ribosomal RNAs or small
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS37
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viruses) would require about 40 hours of CPU time on a Cray XMP and 2
gigabytes of memory. Parallel processing or equivalent improvements in

hardware then become necessary.
Prediction of tertiary structure in RNA
Šthe three-dimension al structure
of the RNA
Šis much more difficult. Levitt (1969) made an early attempt at
predicting the structure of transfer RNA, but an algorithm to find the lowest free

energy tertiary structure still does not exist. Proposals of methods to fold

possible secondary structures into three-dimensional structures and calculate

their energies are in very early stages of development. Prediction of secondary
structure in RNA is about at the same stage as it is in proteins, but prediction of
tertiary structure is far behind. Novel methods are needed for RNA that take

into account either implicitly or explicitly:
   the long range electrostatic repulsion of phosphates shielded by counter
ions;   the detailed conformation of hairpin, bulge, and interior loops;
   the hydrogen bonding between loops and single-stranded regions
(pseudo-knots);   non-Watson-Crick base pairs and triple base interactions; and
   all the usual London van-der-Waals interactions, including solvent.
Kollman and his associates at the University of California, San Francisco
have made a beginning in this direction with the program AMBER (Bash et al.,

1987a). This program performs the molecular mechanics calculations of
energies with parameters optimized for nucleic acids. Other programs calculate
differences in free energies caused by changes in conformations.
The most useful computer modeling process would provide real-time
calculation of free energies as the folding of a macromolecule in a solvent was

shown on a computer graphics screen. Achieving this will require great

improvement in hardware and software. Close collaboration with
experimentalists will be needed to ensure meaningful calculated results.
Rapid and efficient progress in this field will require:
   Effective methods for crystallizing RNA oligonucleotides and naturally
occurring RNA molecules. To date, transfer RNA is the only RNA

molecule whose x-ray structure has been determined.
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS38
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Nuclear magnetic resonance methods that can provide conformations
for RNA molecules that contain from 10 to 100 nucleotides.
   Computer programs that can reproduce experimental results. The high
charge densities in nucleic acids (one per nucleotide) require special

care in the correct treatment of solvent and ionic effects. Once

calculations can be done that provide known structures, we can place

some confidence on extrapolation to new structures.
We have been stressing free energies (thermodynamics), but kinetics may
be just as important; equilibrium is never attained in a living system. RNA is

folded as it is synthesized, so kinetic barriers may prevent it from reaching a

global minimum. For some RNA molecules, such as ribosomal RNA, the
dynamic movement from one conformation to another may be an important part
of their function.
We would like to be able to calculate and verify structures of RNA
molecules and their interactions with a wide variety of molecules. In a

ribosome, for example, the ribosomal RNA interacts with messenger RNA and

transfer RNAs, as well as all the proteins involved in protein synthesis. It would
be very useful to know how a change in any variable would affect the efficiency
and fidelity of protein synthesis. We want to be able to design efficient

messenger RNAs to produce any protein desired. We need to develop models of

the process of protein manufacture so that we can then improve the

productivity, cut the cost, and ensure high quality output of proteins. Computer

modeling and calculations should provide the sequences of the ribosomal

RNAs, the transfer RNAs, and the messenger RNAs that would be optimal for

the production of a particular protein. We are very far from this ideal.
We need mathematical and dynamic structural models of how an RNA
virus replicates, how reverse transcriptase copies the RNA into DNA, and how

the RNA is packaged into its protein coat. With this knowledge, we will be

much closer to finding ways to prevent or cure diseases caused by RNA viruses,
which include colds, influenza, AIDS, and hepatitis.
RNA is now known to have catalytic activity (Zaug and Cech, 1986). To
date, it has been demonstrated that RNA catalysis is involved in RNA

processing and in glycogen synthesis. This catalytic activity of RNA is needed

for the replication cycle of
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS39
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.some viroids and virusoids (small infective RNA particles) and the processing
of some ribosomal RNAs. Fundamental advances in understanding this catalytic

activity require knowledge of the location and structure of the active site of

RNA enzymes. Computer calculations in conjunction with mutation

experiments may allow us to progress most rapidly.
Predicting DNA Structure
Although DNA and RNA are very similar, in practice, the important
problems relating to their sequences and structures are usually different. DNA

stores all the genetic information that determines the organism and its

characteristics. Its sequence, conformation, and interactions with proteins, small

molecules, and other DNA molecules determine how and when the genetic

information is expressed. The ability to understand and ultimately to control the

genetic expression will make it possible to control genetic diseases, bacterial
diseases, and DNA viral diseases. Thus,the important questions for DNA are:
   What is the detailed conformation of any sequence of double-stranded
DNA and how does it depend on the environment?
   How does the conformation interact with other molecules?
To answer these questions, we will need to understand nucleic acid
structure, protein structure, and their interactions in complex environments. It

will take a great deal of effort to achieve this understanding, but the rewards for

society will be very high.
X-ray diffraction experiments have determined structures for double-
stranded DNA, protein-DNA complexes, and DNA-small molecule compounds

in crystals. Computer modeling is needed to extrapolate these results to predict

what would occur in different biological environments and to other complexes.

One obvious application is in the design of more specific and more effective
antibiotics. In general, we would like to be able to design molecules that can
start or stop the expression of any gene in any DNA.
SECONDARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS40
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5.Tertiary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic
Acids: ExperimentalX-RAY DIFFRACTION OF BIOLOGICAL
MACROMOLECULESIn 1934 Bernal and Crowfoot demonstrated that a crystalline protein could
give rise to a well-ordered x-ray diffraction pattern, thus setting the stage for

modern analysis of the structure of proteins. Progress was gradual at first,

interrupted by World War II, but in 1953 Green, Ingram, and Perutz took
another essential step when they accomplished the first heavy atom analysis of a
hemoglobin crystal (Green et al., 1954). The culmination of these years of work

came in 1959 when Kendrew and his colleagues (1960) reported the analysis of

myoglobin at 2 
Å resolution, revealing for the first time the underlying structure
of a globular protein. They noted the complexity and lack of regularity of the

moleculeŠmajor features that continue to impress us today as general features
of protein structure. The alpha-helices and beta sheets of Pauling and Corey

(Pauling et al., 1951) form striking regions of regularity, but are joined together

in very complex ways.
Another major event of protein structure analysis occurred the same year
when Cullis et al. (1959) described the structure of hemoglobin at 6 
Å and
demonstrated that the folding of the globin chain is similar to that in myoglobin,
despite relatively low
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL41
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sequence homology between the two. This observation of a family pattern to the
three-dimensional structure of globins has been followed by the identification of

many other families.Today, several hundred proteins have been analyzed by x-ray diffraction
and their three-dimensional structures catalogued. This number continues to

grow at an ever-increasing rate and, together with the amino acid and gene

sequence data, forms the principal basis for understanding the mechanisms of

action of these proteins at the molecular level.
The development of two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques already is a valuable complement to x-ray diffraction for relatively

small molecules (less than 10,000 molecular weight) but for the foreseeable

future, crystal structure analysis will be the principal experimental source of

structural data for enzymes, nucleic acid binding proteins, antibodies, and other

proteins of the immune system, receptors, and indeed, for all proteins that can

be effectively crystallized.
Determining the three-dimensional structure of a biological
macromolecule by crystallography involves a number of clearly defined steps.

First, crystals of suitable size and diffraction properties must be prepared. Next,

x-ray diffraction data must be collected for these crystals and also, typically, for

a number of heavy atom derivatives of the crystals. These data can then be

assembled to obtain an electron density map using a computational process that
resembles the action of the lens in a microscope. This map must then be fitted
with a polypeptide chain of the appropriate amino acid sequence. Because the

map is of less-than-atomic resolution and also contains errors in the phase

determination, the investigator must have considerable skill to obtain the best

fit. The resulting protein model must then be refined to remove the errors

present in the map as much as possible as well as those errors introduced by the

fitting process.
Computers play an essential role in most of these steps. Even the analyses
of the first protein crystal structure, myoglobin, could not have been

accomplished without the use of the EDSACII in Cambridge (Kendrew, 1960).

At present, modern crystallography depends completely on heavy computer use,

and this dependence will certainly increase steadily in the future. In the four
mathematical procedures required to solve a structure using protein
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL42
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.crystallographyŠdata processing, phase determination, map fitting, and
refinementŠnew methods are continually appearing that depend on ready
access to considerable computer power.
First, we will consider the first step, data collection. This is now changing
significantly, as most laboratories in the United States convert from the use of

film or diffractometer to the use of area detectors. These machines can increase

the speed of data collection within the laboratory by as much as two orders of

magnitude. The output from the area detectors is generally processed directly,

resulting in the speedy production of finished intensity data. The ability to
produce directly, in a few days, data that previously were collected in weeks or
months of labor-intensive work is revolutionizing the field at an opportune time,

when developments in genetic engineering have made it possible to use site-

directed mutagenesis to answer many structural questions. These questions,

however, require separate data sets for each mutant.
When measuring x-ray intensities, whether using photography or area
detectors, the presentation of the data on a computer graphics screen can make

it much easier to analyze the diffraction pattern. Area detectors coupled with

graphics facilities can now be used to align a crystal almost in real time. It is not

clear how much the use of computer graphics in data collection will continue to

increase in the future, since its impact will probably be reduced by the

increasing power of the data processing software.
A major discovery of protein crystallography is that most proteins belong
to families with closely related three-dimensional structures. Examples include

the hemoglobins, serine proteases, aspartic proteinases, and the

immunoglobulin domain structure. Consequently, we can now use the known

structure to obtain phase information about an unknown structure, a method

known as molecular replacement (Rossmann, 1972). There have been numerous
examples of the successful application of molecular replacement to determine
crystal structures. The structure of a bacterial serine protease inhibitor was used

to analyze the structure of the protease bound with an inhibitor (James et al.,

1978). Another example is the use of the known structures of lysozyme and the

two-domain modules of an immunoglobulin Fab to analyze the structure of a

monoclonal antibody bound to lysozyme (Sheriff et al., in press). The use of

this molecular replacement method will become even more widespread as more

members of a protein family are investigated.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL43
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Molecular replacement techniques have also been applied in the use of
redundancy to obtain phase information (Rossmann, 1972; Harrison et al.,

1978). A spectacular illustration of this occurred in the recent analyses of the

picornaviruses for polio and the common cold (Rossmann et al., 1985; Hogle et

al., 1985).These methods require heavy computational analysis for their success. For
example, Rossmann and Argos (1977) concluded that they could determine the

rhinovirus structure only with extensive use of the supercomputer at Purdue

University and could not have carried out the analysis and phase extension

without such a facility.
COMPUTER-ASSISTED MODELING IN DNA STRUCTURE
ANALYSISIn the current method of fitting the electron density map, computer
graphics are essential. Although several programs can fit an approximate model

of a protein to the map without human intervention, most crystallographers do

not use them, preferring to use instead computer graphics to fit. Here, the

development of color and stereo graphics systems has been an important

advance. Computer graphics constitutes such a colorful and seductive tool that

it virtually compels the nonscientific observer to believe in whatever

phenomenon is being displayed. This inherent fascination with graphics display

extends to some working scientists as well. One always must ask whether [to

paraphrase an old joke about statistics] a scientist is using computer graphics
like a drunk uses a lamp post: more for support than for illumination. But in the
area of macromolecular structural analysis, particularly with DNA and its

complexes with antitumor drugs and control proteins such as repressors,

computer graphics will illuminate by enabling the investigator to carry out the

structure analysis efficiently and to see aspects of the structure of the molecule

that he could perceive only with difficulty or would overlook entirely using

more traditional methods.
In the early 1950s, before any protein structure had been determined by x-
ray methods, the British crystallographer J. D. Bernal once remarked that, even

if we were to obtain an electron density map of a protein, we would never be

able to understand it until we could build a map big enough to walk through and

point out features around and above us as we walked (personal
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL44
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.communication, around 1955). Kendrew had this dictum in mind when he
constructed the first electron density map of any protein, myoglobin, by

attaching color-coded spring clips up the lengths of steel rods mounted in a

regular grid on heavy plywood baseboard. (A portion of this first map still

exists on display in the Kensington Science Museum in London.) Richards

(1968) provided the next step in the display of large and complex electron
density maps of macromolecules, with a half-silvered mirror arrangement that
came to be known as a Richards Box. The device superimposed a direct image

of mylar sheets of electron density on a reflected image of the wire model being

constructed (
Figure 5-1
). In the 1960s and 1970s, virtually all macromolecular
structure groups had at least one Richards Box to use in interpreting electron

density maps and building macromolecular models into them.
This entire half-silvered mirror box technology has been replaced by new
methods of computer graphics. Detailed chain fitting is carried out on the

graphics screen, fitting stick bond skeletons into 
ﬁchicken-wireﬂ three-
dimensional contoured volumes. Diamond (1966) wrote the first such display

program, BILDER. This routine has largely been superseded by the easier-to-

use FRODO routines of Jones (1985). More recently many even more flexible
packages have been offered, both for large mainframe computers and
minicomputers.The software most widely used is the program FRODO developed by
Alwyn Jones, who is at the University of Uppsala, Sweden. The use of FRODO

on a computer graphics system has now almost entirely replaced the

construction of mechanical models, and greatly improved the accuracy in the

modeling and, in particular, the speed and precision of the more predictive

kinds of modeling, such as fitting substrates to the surfaces of enzyme molecules.
In these programs, atoms can be placed within the observed density with
great accuracy. Because the coordinates are in the computer as soon as the

atoms are located, acceptable bond lengths and angles can be built into the trial

model from the outset. Once a trial model has been built into the displayed

electron density, least squares refinement against the x-ray can be carried out

using one of several available programs that compensate for a too-small ratio of

data points to refined parameters at less-than-atomic resolution. The programs
impose constraints on
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL45
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 5-1 Illustrations of the method used before the advent of computer
graphics to interpret an electron density map of a macromolecule in a Richards

box. Section through the map of the protein cytochrome
c are mounted on
plexiglass sheets that can be slid over the face of a light box at the upper rear.
The lower left front shows a wire model of the cytochrome
c molecule,
constructed in a framework with transparent top. The half-silvered mirror in
the frame at 45 degrees to the main frame supporting the box superimposes a
direct view of the contoured map and a reflected view of the wire model
below. This approach was 
ﬁhigh tech
ﬂ around 1968.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL46
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bond lengths, bond angles, and (if desired) bond torsion angles to keep
them within known acceptable limits.
In refining protein and nucleic acid structures, the use of new methods is
increasing investigators' dependence on heavy computing. Current methods of

refinement include the use of restrained least squares programs originally

developed by Hendrickson and Konnert (1980), Sussman (1985), and by Jack

and Levitt (1978) among others. These programs can be used successfully on

relatively slow computers, particularly when the Fast Fourier Transform

algorithm is used to accelerate them. At present, the restrained least squares
refinement procedure must be interrupted frequently to compare the fit of the
model to the electron density map, remodel to remove stereochemically

unacceptable local minima, insert solvent molecules, and for other procedures.

This process of model building is the step that is limiting the rate of the

refinement procedure.It takes many days, even weeks, for a comprehensive, residue-by-residue
examination of an average-sized protein molecule of, for example, 40,000

molecular weight. The procedure for identifying solvent molecules on the

protein surface is also tedious and time-consuming. Any method that would

reduce the number of interventions during a refinement or would require less

human intervention during the modeling would speed up the refinement

process. In this respect, Brunger et al. (1987) have recently shown that by
combining protein dynamics simulation with the refinement process, one can
avoid many of the minor minima that sometimes occur in the usual refinement

procedures. However, the successful application of the dynamics calculations

would require considerably more computer power than is currently available to

most crystallographic laboratories.At any point during refinement, computer graphics enable one to examine
the trial structure alone or superimposed on the electron density in one of

several options: a simple Fo electron density map, a (F
o  Fc) difference map, or
the (2F
o  Fc) map that is in fact the superimposition of the two previous
functions. When refinement is complete, the resulting coordinates are

immediately available within the computer for use in drawing figures that

illustrate the final structure. This ability to work within the computer during
model fitting, refinement, and display of results saves an enormous amount of
time over the older technique of constructing physical models.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL47
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Difference Patterson Vector Maps to Locate Heavy Atoms
The standard way of determining the phases of the x-ray diffraction pattern
of a macromolecular structure is to prepare one or more heavy atom derivatives

of the macromolecule that differ from the parent compound only by the addition

of a heavy atom
Šmetal or halogen
Šat defined locations in the molecule. For
DNA, this can be done either by synthesizing the DNA oligomer using 5-

bromocytosine instead of cytosine at one point in the sequence or by diffusing
heavy atom complexes into the DNA after crystallization. Data are then
collected on the parent DNA crystals and on each of the available heavy atom

derivatives. Heavy atom positions are found by interpreting a difference

Patterson vector map, which in principle has features that locate all of the

vectors between heavy atoms in the crystal unit cell.
Difference Patterson vector maps traditionally are examined by using
minimaps stacked on plexiglass sheets that are placed on a light box. Computer

graphics display discussed above, however, offers several advantages over this

old technique. Once a trial position of a heavy atom is established, one must

calculate all of the heavy atom-heavy atom vectors possible and see how many

of them correspond to features in the Patterson map. If the crystal has

appreciable space group symmetry, this is a tedious and painstaking job. But it
is a trivial task for a computer. The operator need only type in or locate a trial
heavy atom position, and
all the resulting interatomic vectors can be displayed
instantly on the graphic image of the Patterson map. This allows rapid

interpretation of the vector map and is especially important if the space group

has high symmetry or there are multiple heavy atom sites.
Computer graphics
per se
 is of relatively little assistance in the subsequent
process of refinement of heavy atoms and single or multiple isomorphous

replacement phase analysis. But once a rough electron density map of the DNA

helix is calculated, graphics again proves extremely useful.
Construction of a Trial Structure into an Electron Density
MapThe advantages of computer graphics in fitting a structure into a displayed
electron density map have already been mentioned: greater accuracy in fitting

the map, the ability to build in
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL48
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.realistic bond lengths and angles from the outset, and the immediate availability
of the coordinates in the computer.
Display of Intermediate Maps for Checking Errors in the
StructureNo restrained least squares refinement process is automatic, and people
who have assumed too much in this regard have made serious errors. The

investigator must monitor the progress frequently during least squares

refinement by examining difference maps (2F
o  Fc) to look for wrongly
positioned groups or missing features. This is tedious when one uses contoured

minimaps, but can be much less so on a computer graphics display.
The value of computer display of difference maps is well illustrated when
one is examining the structure of a DNA-drug complex. In solving the structure

of a B-DNA dodecamer of sequence C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-C-G-C-G with the

antitumor antibiotic netropsin, Kopka first positioned the DNA in the crystal

unit cell, using the results from the DNA alone, and refined the DNA until no

further improvement was possible (Kopka et al., 1985a, 1985b, 1985c). She

then calculated a difference map of coefficients (F
o  Fc), where Fo represented
the observed intensity data from crystals of the DNA-drug complex, and Fc

represented the trial structure calculated from the DNA alone. The result is a
ﬁchicken wire
ﬂ contoured image of the drug molecule (
Figure 5-2
). The known
chemical structure of netropsin could be fitted easily and accurately into the

graphics display, and refinement then continued to completion of the DNA and

drug together. As a control, Kopka also drew a conventional minimap at the

same point in refinement, but this was nearly uninterpretable because of the

awkward orientation of the sectioning of the map and the difficulty of building

an idealized drug molecule into a map of stacked plexiglass sheets. In this

particular application, the conventional minimap was tedious, but the graphics

display was very simple to interpret.
Location of Solvent Molecules and Ions Around a
MacromoleculeThe images of solvent molecules around a macromolecule cannot all be
found from unrefined electron density maps. The quality of detail of the entire

map improves as the fitting of the DNA is sharpened. Locating solvent

molecules is a repetitive process that
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL49
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.involves adding a restricted number of solvent peaks in the immediate

neighborhood of the DNA, refinement, and examination of the improved map

for new images of solvent. This process is shown in
Figure 5-3
 for the B-DNA
dodecamer C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-C-G-C-G. This particular analysis was carried

out with minimaps because the computer graphics capability did not exist at the

time, but recent DNA structure analyses use the more efficient graphics display.
FIGURE 5-2 Stereo pair drawing, photographed off the face of an Evans and

Sutherland Multipicture System graphics station, of the difference electron

density of the antitumor drug netropsin in its complex with B-DNA. The

screen image was photographed onto Ektachrome slide film, and this film then

was used as a negative in making a positive print. The framework is a

representation in three dimensions of one contour level in the electron density

of the drug, and the graphics operator has built a skeleton of the netropsin

molecule within this contour cage. This is the first point at which information

about the drug was built into the analysis and was the point of departure for

further least-squares refinement of the DNA-drug complex. Source: Kopka et

al., 1985c.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL50
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 5-3 Illustration of the iterative process of locating solvent molecules
around a DNA double helix. The quality of the solvent images improves with

refinement and improvement of the phases used in the electron density map
calculation. One must avoid adding 
ﬁsolventﬂ molecules too hastily, for fear of
introducing erroneous peaks that then will persist and confuse during later
refinement. Such a search for solvent requires the inspection of many
successive electron density maps as refinement proceeds, and computer

graphics are of enormous help in speeding up this process. (a) Vicinity of
thymines No. 7 and 19 of the B-DNA dodecamer C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-C-G-C-
G, prior to the addition of any solvent molecules to the phasing. Residual error,
R = 27 percent. (b) Later stage of refinement, R = 21 percent, three solvent
peaks visible in these sections. (c) Still later stage, R = 20 percent, five solvent
peaks visible. (d) Final map, R = 18 percent, ten solvent peaks indicated.
Source: Drew and Dickerson, 1981.
Display of Completed Macromolecular Structure
The most familiar application of computer graphics to macromolecular
structure is the display of the final results. But even
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL51
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.here, the flexibility of computer graphics enables one to go beyond simple
drawing of views of the molecule and see features that ordinarily would be

overlooked. A case in point is provided by the stereo pair in
Figure 5-4
, whichshows the drug molecule netropsin complexed with a 12 base pair B-DNA

double helix. The image was oriented to sight directly down the minor groove,

with the object of demonstrating that netropsin sits in the middle of the groove
rather than to one side. But an unintended secondary dividend emerged. In this
view, the bases of each individual strand of the double helix are seen to be

stacked atop one another, almost as though the other strand of the helix did not

exist. This efficiency of intrachain base stacking means that when the two

strands are wound around one another to build a double helix, the bases of each

base pair are not coplanar; they are given what is defined as a positive propeller

twist about the long axis connecting them.
FIGURE 5.3b continued
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL52
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The lessened resistance to propeller twisting in AT base pairs, which results
because AT base pairs have two connecting hydrogen bonds, as compared to

three for GC pairs, means that the minor groove of B-DNA is closed down

more in AT regions than in GC. This makes a flat multiring drug molecule such

as netropsin fit more snugly into the narrow AT region and is part of the

explanation for the previously established binding of netropsin only to AT base
pairs. Hence, in this example, an unusual view of the DNA that was intended to
illustrate one point revealed an unexpected new association. Examples of this

serendipity with computer graphics are found over and over again in

macromolecular structure analysis.
FIGURE 5.3c continuedStudies of Docking and Macromolecular Interactions
Once the structure of a macromolecule is known, it can be compared with
those of related macromolecules or with other molecules with which it forms

complexes. Computer graphics
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL53
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.permits one to move molecules relative to one another and to introduce minor
changes in a manner that would be tedious or impossible with physical models.

For example,
Figure 5-5
shows the fitting of a netropsin molecule against the
floor of the minor groove seen in profile. Without computer graphics, it would

be virtually impossible even to represent the contour of the floor of the minor

groove, yet the drug binds to this surface. The figure illustrates the structurally
significant finding that the ends of the molecule are more closely associated
with the DNA than is the central amide. One can change base pairs in the DNA

from AT to 2-aminoadeninethymine and show the steric clash that then ensues

with the drug. One also can modify the drug itself and see what effects this is

likely to have on its binding to DNA.
FIGURE 5.3d continued
This ability to examine intermolecular 
ﬁdockingﬂ is equally important
when the two molecules are known, but their complex is not. Trials of various

docking geometries, with calculations of
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL54
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.relevant energies, can suggest new modes of interaction, as well as the
experiments needed to test them.
FIGURE 5-4 Oblique computer graphics stereo diagram of the complex of
netropsin with C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-C-G-C-G, in a view sighting directly down

the minor groove with the drug molecule slotted into it in a crescent curving
away from the viewer. This view also illustrates the strong stacking of bases
down each strand of a Beta-DNA double helix, in a more striking
representation than is obtained from a more conventional view of the Beta
helix. Positive print from Ektachrome photo taken directly from graphics

terminal. Source: Kopka et al., 1985a.
In summary, computer graphics is far more than an attractive way of
drawing pictures of macromolecules. It is a very powerful tool that greatly aids
in understanding the interactions between DNA and other macromolecules and

so leads to insights that otherwise would be overlooked. Even without computer

graphics, considerations of only energy minimization have led to a predicted

structure of an enzyme-substrate complex (Pincus and Scheraga, 1979) that was

subsequently verified by experiment (Smith-Gill et al., 1984).
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL55
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 5-5 Van der Waals surface representations of the netrospin molecule
(top) fitted along the floor of the minor groove of Beta-DNA. This highly

unconventional view is possible only with computer graphics. It follows the
plane of the drug molecule, and hence cuts the DNA base pairs only in oblique
sections. The DNA major groove is seen at bottom nearly in profile, flanked
left and right by phosphates. This view illustrates the less intimate contact with
the floor of the minor groove at the center of the drug molecule than at the two

ends. Source: Kopka et al., 1985c.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL56
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE TO
DETERMINE TERTIARY STRUCTURES
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is an important source for structural
data, particularly when one considers its potential for meshing with theoretical

modeling and other sources of structural data, such as x-ray crystallography. Its

use has been growing explosively. NMR has been applied in aqueous media

and, to a limited extent, in environments that approximate those of biological

membranes (Braun et al., 1981). It is most useful when it is necessary to explore

changes in preferred structure in response to environmental or structural

perturbations. In this sense, NMR can play an important role in extrapolating
structural data obtained by other techniques to alternate environments. It is also
well suited to the exploration of changes in structure when comparing

homologous series of macromolecules, such as a series produced by site-

specific mutagenesis (Markley, 1987).
More recently, technological advances have extended the range of
applicability to solids, oriented phases, and even total structure determination of

molecules in solution. The latter extension has attracted the most attention and

has the greatest potential impact on computer-assisted modeling efforts.

Examples of total structure determination by NMR are most numerous among

relatively small molecules: peptides, oligosaccharides, and nucleotide

oligomers. However, several groups have determined peptide or protein

structure for molecules in the 5 to 10 kDa molecular weight range (Arseniev et
al., 1984; Braun et al., 1986; Havel and W
üthrich, 1985; Kaptein et al., 1985;
Kline et al., 1986; Williamson et al., 1985). A brief discussion of the protein

examples provides insight into the potential contribution NMR may make to the

prediction of macromolecular structure and function in years to come.
MethodologyIn most cases, the basis of structure determination by NMR methods is the
interatomic distance dependence of the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE). This

is a nuclear spin relaxation phenomenon that depends on through space dipolar

interaction between magnetic moments centered on different nuclei (usually

protons). The NOE shows an inverse sixth power dependence on distance. In

principle, Havel et al. (1979) found that the conversion
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL57
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of enough NOE measurements to distance constraints between pairs of protons
in macromolecules would be completely equivalent to the specification of

structure through a set of Cartesian coordinates. The ubiquitous occurrence of

protons as the hydrogen nucleus in chemical structures insures an abundance of

NOE data. These data have been gathered and used for a long time in studies of

small molecules, but until recently, the sheer abundance of data for
macromolecular systems has prevented unequivocal interpretation in terms of
macromolecule structure.
A protein of 10 kDa will have approximately 1,000 protons, each giving
rise to one or more resonances in a proton NMR spectrum. Resolution in

conventional spectral acquisitions is in adequate to identify each resonance, let

alone assign it to a primary structure site or acquire NOE data on a significant

fraction of the possible 5 
× 10
5 proton pairs. The situation with other types of
macromolecules, nucleic acids or oligosaccharides, is less formidable in terms

of numbers of protons. However, it is complicated because residues in these
structures are less chemically diverse and the resulting resonances are less
dispersed in NMR spectra and so it is difficult to assign a particular peak to a

particular proton.
The resolution and assignment problem has been solved with the advent of
higher field magnets (currently 14 Tesla) that provide increased chemical shift

resolution, as well as by the devel opment of two-dimensional acquisition

techniques that provide multidimensional resolution and greatly improve

efficiency of data acquisition (Ernst et al., 1987). W
üthrich (1986) summarizes
the methods for proteins and nucleic acids in his work.
Assignment of a resonance to a proton at a particular point in the primary
structure site relies on a combination of experiments that display through bond

scalar connectivities of resonances (COSY, or coupling correlated spectroscopy,

for example) and through space dipolar connectivities of resonances (NOESY,

or Nuclear Overhauser Effect spectroscopy). COSY is important in finding

scalar coupling patterns that correspond to sets of spins that are characteristic of
a particular type amino acid. For example, only alanine has three equivalent
methyl protons coupled to an alpha-proton. The NOESY experiment is

important in linking resonances assigned to a given amino acid to resonances of

a neighboring amino acid. In cases where the amino acid sequence is known,

the linkage of two to three amino acids is often enough
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL58
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to create a segment that occurs only once in the sequence. In principle, this
procedure provides a complete sequence specific assignment of NMR

resonances.After the assignment of resonances, the determination of secondary and
tertiary structures of proteins proceeds largely on the basis of NOE information.

Qualitative analysis of the intensity of the crosspeaks that connect proton

resonances involved in an NOE is often enough to characterize secondary

structure. For example, in an alpha-helix, the amide protons of adjacent residues

are 2.8 
Å apart as compared to 4.6 
Å in a beta-sheet (W
üthrich, 1986). Because
NOE has a steep inverse distance dependence, this leads to strong amide-amide
crosspeaks in an alpha-helix but crosspeaks that are a factor of 20 less intense in

a beta-sheet (usually unobservable). It is possible to assign residue

conformations to known types of turns as well as to more extended secondary

structural elements. Since this assignment is sequence specific, it gives valuable

information for verifying structure predictions and possibly assessing folding

preferences even without a tertiary structure determination.
Determining tertiary structure is more difficult. To determine a structure, a
limited amount of longer range distance constraint information must be

systematically integrated with other constraints. The most direct approach

probably employs a distance geometry search for structures that have

interproton distances between the experimentally determined upper and lower
bounds (Braun and G
, 1985; Havel et al., 1979). Altman and Jardetzky (1986)
recently developed an expert system that has also succeeded in producing a

space-filling representation of protein structure.
It is, however, proving desirable to increase the degree to which theoretical
constraints play a role in determining structures. This increase has been

achieved using both molecular dynamics and molecular mechanics-based

programs (Brunger et al., 1986b; Kaptein et al., 1985). It is desirable to

integrate NMR data with theoretical predictions for two reasons. First, NMR

data often leave certain regions of the macromolecule poorly defined; for
example, there may be little NOE data on certain sidechain conformations in
proteins. Theoretical predictions can help specify the conformation of these

regions. Second, use of some experimental data seems a viable approach to

selecting among multiple minima in the complex energy surfaces that must be

searched by theoretical modeling programs.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL59
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Viability of Approach
As with any new approach to structure determination, NMR-based
methods are being tested for viability. The most direct method of evaluation is

to compare structures determined independently by the new methodology with

an established technique such as x-ray crystallography. Unfortunately, when

Braun and coworkers (1986) first determined a structure without the aid of an

existing crystal structure (metallothionein, a 7,000 Da protein) the structure
varied dramatically from the x-ray structure when it did appear. The reasons for
the differences, although still unresolved, are more likely the result of actual

structural differences in the samples examined than of a flaw in the

methodology. More recent comparisons show excellent agreement of structures

determined from real or simulated NMR data with structures determined by x-

ray crystallography; examples include an alphaamylase inhibitor, a 8,000 Da

protein (Kline et al., 1986) and crambin, a 5,000 Da protein (Laue et al., 1985).
Resolution is difficult to define in NMR structures because some aspects,
such as the conformation of the backbone, are determined very precisely, while

others involving sidechain conformations are poorly defined. It is even possible

that the lack of adequate numbers of distance constraints will leave some

regions completely undetermined. In principle, distances can be determined
precisely, within 0.01 
Å, but this is only accomplished when relaxation
processes are very well defined and interproton distances are short. Recent

estimates for general resolution based on root-mean-square (
rms) deviations of
heavy atoms in multiple structure solutions of proteins obtained from NMR data

suggest resolution to be approximately 3 
Å (Williamson et al., 1985). Although
these average deviations are larger than those usually seen in x-ray data, NMR

methods can be used in a variety of media and yield very precise distance

information on selected distances. Both of these advantages compensate for the

lower precision.The effort required to produce a structure is difficult to assess in this early
stage of development. The first few tertiary structures probably required several

person-years of effort. However, this is dropping rapidly. Secondary structures

have always been produced with far less effort. To produce a tertiary structure

of a protein in the 10 kDa range, one month of spectrometer time
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL60
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and six months of analysis is a reasonable estimate. Sample requirements are
modest; 50 mg of a soluble 10 kDa protein. Smaller molecules require a

proportionately smaller sample or a quadratically smaller investment in time. It

is important to realize that this is an emerging technology, compared to better

established structural methods. Large opportunities are available to improve

efficiency and viability.Limitations and Prospects for the Future
The major limitation to the above methods appears to be one of accessible
macromolecule size. Current applications in which near-complete assignments

are made and structures are determined appear to be restricted to proteins of 10

kDa and less. This is due in part to inadequate resolution when thousands of

connecting peaks are involved. It is also due to loss of sensitivity in one of the

key spectral assignment data sets (COSY sets). COSY crosspeak intensity is
extremely dependent on the ratio of scalar coupling constants to linewidth. The
linewidths increase rapidly with molecular weight, leading to loss of signal. It is

significant that the principal source of distance information, the NOESY

experiment, does not have the same degree of sensitivity loss as one increases

macromolecule size. If other assignment strategies emerge and resolution of

chemical shift can be improved, it will be possible to use NMR methods on

larger macromolecules.
We believe that improved assignment strategies will emerge. Already
significant work has been done replacing normal amino acids with isotopically

substituted amino acids in order to assign peaks arising from particular amino

acid types (Kainosho and Tsuji, 1982; LeMaster and Richards, 1985). This

strategy by-passes some of the dependence of assignment on NOESY spectra
and can be applied to proteins of more than 12 kDa (Kainosho and Tsuji, 1982;
LeMaster and Richards, 1985). Replacement of normal amino acids with amino

acids that contain 15N and 13C and the use of indirect detection methods to

improve sensitivity also allow use of the increased chemical shift dispersion

displayed in spectra of other nuclei. Proteins of 19 kDa (McIntosh et al., 1987)

and 23 kDa (Kainosho et al., 1987) are under study. In these cases, the isotopic

labelings were easily performed because the proteins were obtained from

microorganisms. These developments, along with the probable advance in

resolution from higher field magnets,
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL61
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.make it likely that general structure determination methods may be applied to
proteins in the 20 kDa class within the next five years. Application to proteins

as large as 60 kDa, where questions are focused on specific sites, already are

possible. A rather limited quantity of residue-specific information may be

required to improve dramatically the quality of theoretical predictions.
A second limitation, to current methodology beyond accessible
macromolecule size, stems from the restricted range of measurable interproton

distances, <4 
Å. Although this range is adequate to determine structures of short
segments, tertiary structures of larger systems are frequently the result of

successive application of many short range constraints. This introduces the

possibility that significant errors will be propagated. Here again, optimism is

justified. The use of paramagnetic labels leads to perturbations of spectra
interpretable in terms of distances over separations of more than 10 
Å (Kosen et
al., 1986).A third limitation occurs because the conversion of NOE measurements to
distances requires assumptions about macromolecule rigidity. Since some

portions of macromolecules are not rigid, the distances extracted for those

portions are imprecise. To some extent, the imprecision is reduced by the 1/r
6dependence of the NOE. An error of ± 50 percent in an NOE ratio for a 3 
Åcontact converts to error limits of 
0.21 and +.33 
Å. It is nevertheless an
important limitation. At present, these potential errors are handled by assigning
generous distance constraint limits, rather than by trying to specify distances
precisely. In the future, it may be possible specifically to include dynamic

information eliminating this necessity.
AREAS OF POTENTIAL IMPACT OF NMR
Proteins and Peptides
It is clear from the above discussion that much of the research into the
structure and dynamics of macromolecules, particularly proteins, may be

restricted to relatively small members of the class. This limitation is imposed

both by the magnitude of the task and the loss of sensitivity as macromolecule

size increases. We should consider how these restrictions may affect biological
science and what special problems or opportunities may arise in considering
smaller members of macromolecule families.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL62
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Limiting research over the next five years to proteins of molecular weight
10 kDa or less may seem highly restrictive. However, a survey of the current

protein sequence data base maintained by the Protein Identification Resource

shows a surprisingly large fraction (20 percent) to be under this size (Barker et

al., 1986). This fraction may be inflated by the ease of handling shorter

sequences, but even 10 percent of the current 4,000 sequenced proteins is a very
large number to be studied by NMR spectroscopy. The current rate of physical
characterization stands at 20 proteins per year by x-ray crystallography and 10

or more by NMR. Given that rate and the likelihood of producing sufficient

quantities of many of the sequenced proteins by cloning techniques, human

resources and characterization facilities are more likely to be limiting factors

than is the number of proteins on which we want information.
Beyond the issue of numbers, small proteins and even smaller peptides
constitute a physiologically important class. Polypeptide hormones such as

atrial naturietic factor, oxytocin, vasopressin, and insulin (subunit) fall in these

classes (Wallis et al., 1985). Various neurotoxins are small polypeptides, and a

number of endogenous opioid peptides exist, such as the enkephalins and

endorphins.One may also ask whether studies of small protein or peptide structure
might be relevant for the understanding of larger structures. Although some

behavior, such as allosteric interaction, is certain to be poorly represented in

small molecules, the basic structural considerations are reasonably likely to

carry over, and it is likely that fundamental processes such as protein folding

can be studied. A large number of proteins are composed of smaller subunits
that largely maintain their structure when isolated. In some single chain
proteins, structural domains that can be cleaved and functionally reconstituted

without reforming a covalent linkage can be identified (Rose, 1985).
Small peptides present some potentially unique problems for
conformational studies. It is not clear that the dominant conformations observed

in solution, crystals, or simulations are those that are important for biological

function. These molecules do interact with receptors, which may select a minor

conformer or dictate a unique conformation that is a function of the properties

of both molecules. Because most receptors exist in very small numbers, it has
only recently become possible to produce enough for physical study. For the
coming years, a major challenge is
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL63
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the modeling of systems in which both activator and receptor can change
conformation. This challenge relates not only to the understanding of

physiologically important molecules, but also to the design of

pharmacologically important molecules. It is possible that a study of relatively

flexible polypeptides will contribute to the development of the methods needed

to meet this challenge.
Experimental measurements designed to explore minor conformers should
contribute in important ways to the understanding and development of modeling

methods. An experiment using NMR where this type of study appears possible

offers one example. Small molecules (1-2 kDa) have relatively inefficient

pathways leading to nuclear Overhauser enhancements. When these small

molecules bind to macromolecular receptors, more efficient path ways are
present. Distance constraints derived from the measured NOEs on molecules
that exchange rapidly between bound and free states therefore pertain to the

conformation of the bound molecule more than the free molecule (Clore and

Gronenborn, 1983). Such experiments have many limitations of size, binding

constants, and rates of exchange, but they still promise to make some inroads

into a very difficult set of problems in molecular biology.
Nucleic Acids
As a class, intact nucleic acids exist as molecular entities in sizes far larger
than the proteins with which we typically work in NMR. However, smaller

segments appear to display structural characteristics important in biological

function. For example, double helix structures formed from oligomers of 8 to 12

bases in length exhibit variations in backbone torsion angles, base twist, and

base tilt angles that characterize helix forms suspected to modulate transcription
activity.A dodecamer helix has an effective molecular weight equivalent to small
proteins. The same two-dimensional NMR methods applied to proteins allows

us to characterize nucleic acid structures and explore in detail the factors that

lead to interconversion of structural forms. The imino protons involved in the

hydrogen bond connecting base pairs exchange slowly with protons in the
solvent and are easily resolved in the low field region of a proton NMR
spectrum. Sequential assignments are made possible by the proximity of imino

protons on adjacent base pairs and the strong cross relaxation peaks that connect

these resonances in NOESY
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL64
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.spectra. Variation in distances between imino protons and sugar backbone
protonsŠfor example, H6 protons on pyrimidine bases and H2' protons on the
attached deoxyribose ring
Šmakes it possible to distinguish the type of helix on
the basis of the presence or absence of cross relaxation peaks. More quantitative

treatments of structure employ the same molecular mechanics, molecular

dynamics, and distance geometry methods used with proteins (Hare and Reid,
1986; Nilsson et al., 1986; Suzuki et al., 1986).
Beyond simple helical structures lies a vast region of structural biology of
nucleic acids that has been much less explored. Nucleic acids are important

elements of ribosome structure and function. Some ribonucleic acids have even

been shown to exhibit enzyme-like activity. Hybrid systems involving proteins

and nucleic acids are important in synthesis, repair, and regulation of protein
structure and function. In the near future, we should have the potential for
structural characterization by NMR of at least parts of these systems. In

building a more theoretical basis for the extrapolation of primary structure to

three-dimensional structure and function, one key step is the experimental

verification of the existence of fundamental structural elements and

understanding of the factors that dictate their occurrence.
CarbohydratesThe carbohydrate moieties of glycolipids and glycoproteins are a third
class of biologically important molecules. They are important modulators of

communication between and across cell membranes. A knowledge of three-

dimensional structure and flexibility is essential to understand this modulating

function. Because the function of these molecules has been less widely

appreciated, they are discussed in more detail later in this report.
Most oligosaccharides, if examined in isolation, are smaller than the
protein and nucleic acid systems we have been discussing. Structure

determination is, however, no less challenging because of the structural

diversity of this class of molecules. The number of monosaccharide building

blocks is intermediate in number between that of proteins and nucleic acids, but

each monosaccharide can be linked through any one of several sites, with either
of two anomeric configurations. That there are multiple linkage sites also opens
the possibility of branching. It is difficult to predict the number of structurally

distinct oligosaccharides in an organism,
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL65
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.but it is certainly large. Even if we attend only to a single class of
oligosaccharide containing-molecules, such as glycosphingolipids, a significant

number (more than 150) of primary structures have been determined

(Hakomori, 1986). Few of these structures have experimentally determined

tertiary structures, and all evidence indicates that 150 represents a small fraction

of the total number that exist. Also, unlike the protein and nucleic acid
problems, carbohydrates present a primary as well as a tertiary structure
problem. NMR methodology has contributed to the solution of both and, with

some advances, should contribute further (Yu et al., 1986).
Analogies with protein structure determination exist. COSY spectra are
important in assigning resonances to particular residue types. NOESY spectra

are important in identifying linkage sites, linkage configuration, and sequence.

Bottlenecks in terms of manual assignment and conversion of cross relaxation

data to structures are very similar to those encountered in protein studies (Bush

et al., 1986; Yu et al., 1986; Homans et al., 1987; Dabrowski et al., 1986).
Progress has been impeded slightly more because computer modeling programs
for oligosaccharides are somewhat less refined than are those for proteins.

Oligosaccharides are also likely to be less rigidly structured and so require more

attention to proper treatment of motional averaging. Nevertheless, significant

advances are possible, at least in smaller molecules and more sterically

constrained molecules of this class. With the establishment of a larger

experimental data base using methods such as two-dimensional NMR,

theoretical predictions of structure from sequence should become possible.
DEMAND ON COMPUTATIONAL FACILITIES
Improved computational and molecular modeling facilities could advance
structure determination using NMR methods in several ways. Processing and

analysis of NMR data for a 10 kDa macromolecule is far more time-consuming

than is data acquisition. Each phase of this operation could be improved. Data

are normally collected as a two-dimensional time domain set and processing

involves Fourier transformation to a frequency domain set. These processes are

now handled by array processors associated with instrument computers with a
moderate investment in time (tens of minutes). However, alternative methods of
processing,TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL66
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.including linear decomposition and maximum entropy methods, may be more
advantageous in terms of signal to noise and may be more compatible with

automating analysis (Laue et al., 1985; Schussheim and Cowburn, 1987). These

require far more computer time and may become practical only on

supercomputers.Automating analysis can be difficult when working directly with a
frequency domain data set. The sets are 4 to 16 megawords in size, and the

connectivity peaks used in assignment are complex shapes that have both

frequency and phase information. Several approaches are being explored to

reduce these complex peaks to a few pieces of connectivity information, but it is

possible that methods such as linear decomposition, which reduce frequency

domain sets to lists of peak frequency and intensity at an early stage, will
provide the breakthrough needed in this area.
Once resonances have been cataloged, the next step is the assignment and
extraction of spectral characteristics important for the determination of

secondary and tertiary structures. This process is now mostly done by hand.

Some efforts are underway to use semiautomated pattern recognition and expert

system strategies, but these will require substantial investments in programming

and computer hardware (Pfandler and Bodenhausen, 1986).
At present, conversion of the data to a three-dimensional structure is
handled by distance geometry or one of the pseudo energy approaches. Most

such programs that currently run on supercomputers require one to several

hours of computer time per trial structure.
At least 5 trial structures should be generated for each data set to explore
the constraint boundary conditions. As interest and capabilities for the

production of data sets increase, the demand for computer time will become

staggering. It is difficult to project if and how much these demands will be

offset by improved algorithms. An investment in programming is obviously

warranted. This investment could be put to best use by acknowledging that, in

the future, it may be desirable to accommodate types of data not used today.
Some data may come from other NMR methods that are applicable to solids and
oriented specimens. Other data may come from entirely different

methodologies, such as fluorescence spectroscopy or tunneling microscopy.

Although modeling and energy refinement programs have existed for years, it is

clear that attempts to accommodate NMR data have met with some obstacles.

Most modeling programs presume the existence of a
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL67
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cartesian coordinate set similar to that obtained from an x-ray structure. NMR
data are most compatible with interatomic distances or interactive manipulation

of segments of known secondary structure.
Present methods, except in a few preliminary calculations, also assume that
structure of biomolecules can be described in terms of a single rigid conformer.

This is certainly not true. Relaxation of these assumptions will lead to

drastically increased computational demands. Some of the problems and

opportunities related to this are discussed more fully under the section on

molecular dynamics.
In summary, current NMR methods to determine structure seem applicable
to a variety of biologically important molecules of less than 10 kDa. Data

production in this class will be made much easier by improved computational

facilities, available high field spectrometers, and attention to the compatibility

of modeling programs with experimental constraints provided by NMR. It is

important that those working in NMR collaborate with investigators attempting
to determine structure with other methods, because such links will increase the
structural data base and also enhance testing and theoretical modeling. It is

likely that the range of molecules accessible by NMR methods will increase by

a factor of two over the next five years. The rate of data production is likely to

increase even more as structure determination protocols are improved and high-

field spectrometers become more generally available. Advances in high-

temperature superconductors may accelerate this process.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: EXPERIMENTAL68
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6.Tertiary Structure of Proteins and Nucleic
Acids: TheoryENERGY OPTIMIZATION
According to the thermodynamic hypothesis, based on Anfin sen's
(Anfinsen et al., 1961) experiments on the oxidative refolding of bovine
pancreatic ribonuclease A from the reduced form, the amino acid sequence
determines the three-dimensional structure of a protein in a given medium as

the thermodynamically most stable one. It must be emphasized that this

hypothesis applies to the length of the polypeptide chain at the stage when

folding takes place, and not at some subsequent processing stage. For example,

this hypothesis would be applicable to the single-chain pro-insulin and

(possibly) not to the processed product, the two-chain disulfide-linked insulin.

Thus, it is a challenge to chemists to understand how the interatomic

interactions within the polypeptide chain and the interactions between the atoms

of the chain and those of the surrounding solvent lead to the thermodynamically

stable structure, that is, the one for which the statistical weight of the system is

a maximum.The hypothesis that the statistical weight is a maximum immediately
implies that some kind of optimization strategy is neces sary to find the most

stable structure. This requires procedures to generate arbitrary conformations of
a polypeptide chain, compute
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY69
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the statistical weight for each conformation, and then alter the conformation so
that it ultimately corresponds to the global maxi mum of the statistical weight.

Although the problem is formidable, current indications are that it can be solved

using a sound scien tific approach without resorting to ad hoc procedures to

deduce ﬁfolding rules
ﬂ that do not explain the molecular Basis of such 
ﬁrules.ﬂTo compute the global statistical weight, one optimizes the conformational
energy of the polypeptide, incorporates the effect of the solvent, and takes

account of the entropy of the system. Procedures are available for carrying out

such computations, and currently available supercomputers permit the

computations to Be applied to very large systems. Although these procedures

will undoubtedly improve, they are now adequate for computating and

obtaining results that can be checked experimentally. The major difficulty still
to be overcome, although partial success has been achieved (see review by
Gibson and Scheraga, 1988; also, Robson, 1986; Crippen, 1984), arises from

the presence of many local min ima in the multidimensional energy surface.

Although algorithms are available for minimizing an energy function of many

variables, there are no efficient ones for passing from one local minimum, over

a potential barrier, to the next local minimum
Šand ulti mately to the global
minimum of the potential energy in a very high dimensional space. Thus,

minimization leads to the nearest local minimum, where the procedure is

trapped. This trapping in a local, rather than the global, minimum is referred to

as the 
ﬁmultiple-minima problem.
ﬂ Efforts are being made to overcome this
problem using a variety of procedures, including approximations that place the

system in the potential well in which the global minimum lies (Gibson and
Scheraga, 1988). Then, any approxi mations (introduced in the initial stages) are
abandoned, and the full energy function is minimized. The use of molecular

dynamics for minimization is an alternative strategy; it is considered in the next

section.The energy minimization approach and its associated compu tational
program, described here for polypeptides and proteins, is equally applicable to

any other type of macromolecules, such as polynucleotides and

polysaccharides, as well as to interactions between the various types of

macromolecule. General references to this methodology include the works of

Anfinsen and Scheraga
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY70
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(1975), N
émethy and Scheraga (1977), Levitt (1982), Karplus and McCammon
(1983 ), Scheraga (1984), and Richards (1986).
Generation of an Arbitrary Conformation
Analytical geometry and associated matrix algebra provide the tools to
generate a polypeptide chain. To do so, internal co ordinates (dihedral angles

for rotating about bonds) or Cartesian coordinates may be used as independent

variables. When inter nal coordinates are used, the bond lengths and bond

angles are held fixed, but chosen very carefully from x-ray structures of model

systems so as to properly reflect the geometric results of side chain-backbone

interactions within each amino acid residue. The validity of this approach has
been demonstrated for both polypeptides and polysaccharides
Šsystems inwhich strained conformations rarely arise (Scheraga, 1984). When Cartesian

coordinates are used, and hence bond lengths and bond angles are allowed to

vary, one faces the problem that force constants for these motions are not as

well known as the geometric features of the molecule. Further, bond-angle

bending modes are anharmonic, and no currently available forcefield takes

anharmonicity into account. Thus, we will have to overcome inadequacies in

the force constants and problems of anharmonicity before we can rely on

computed bond angles. Impo sition of fixed bond lengths and bond angles is at

least reconciled with observed crystal structures of small molecules. The subject

of fixed versus flexible geometries has been discussed by Swenson et al. (1978).
Potential Functions
Many research groups have developed potential energy functions with
which to carry out such computations on polypep tides, polysaccharides,

polynucleotides, and synthetic polymers. The various potential functions have

many similarities, but differ enough in detail to make them difficult to compare.

This difficulty is compounded by the small number of cases for which

parameters that characterize the strengths of the various interactions have been

established in a self-consistent way on experimental data such as crystal
structures, lattice energies, and barriers to inter nal rotation. At present, the
potential functions for polypeptides,
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY71
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.polysaccharides and synthetic polymers have been better parameterized than
have those for polynucleotides, primarily because there are fewer reliable data

for model nucleotide compounds. Similarly, more experimental data will be

required for proper parameterization of the potential functions for the prosthetic

groups attached to biological macromolecules. Until recently, the poten tial

functions involving water molecules still would not account adequately for the
observed radial distribution function of water, but this situation is improving
(see, e.g., the work of Jorgensen et al., 1983).
It must be emphasized that the molecule responds to the total (in principle,
quantum mechanical) potential function, and its partition into various empirical

components (such as non-bonded, electrostatic, hydrogen-bonding, and other

interactions) is at best arbitrary, although there is some physical basis for as

signing such names to the various components. Consequently, one must avoid

combining components from forcefields from different research groups. Each

forcefield must be parameterized by itself in a self-consistent way. The total
energy of a given conformation is expressed as a sum of the energies of all
nonbonded pairs of atoms.
When considering biological function, such as the formation of an enzyme-
substrate complex, then the pair interactions both within and between the two

partners of the complex must be included in the total energy. Thus, the

influence of each member of the complex on the other (the so-called induced fit

phenomenon) is taken into account. Consequently, the conformations of the

partners in the complex can differ from their conformations as individual

species. This means that the computed conformation of an isolated hormone
may not resemble the biologically active one when it is bound to a receptor
(Scheraga, 1984).Although potential functions could still be improved, those for which
parameters have been determined in a self-consistent way have led to many

computed structures that have subsequently been checked by experiment. For

example, the computed structure of the collagen-like poly(Gly-Pro-Pro) (Miller

and Scheraga, 1976) agrees with the subsequently determined crystal structure

(Okuyama et al, 1976) within a root-mean square (rms) deviation of O.3 
Å.Scheraga (1984) has cited many similar examples of experimental verification
of computed structures. Therefore, we can be confident that the problem of
adequate potential functions
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY72
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.is not serious, and more effort should be devoted to the most difficult problem
of all
Šthe multiple-minima problem. After the multiple-minima problem is
solved, it will then be worthwhile to reexamine the possibility or necessity of

improving the potential functions further.
SolvationThere are several methods to include the effect of hydration in the
computations. Hydration tends to force the polar groups to the surface of the

molecule, putting them in contact with water, and forces the nonpolar groups to

the interior, removing them from contact with water.
One method includes the water molecules explicitly, and calculates the
interaction energy between the molecule and the water. The success of this

approach depends on the adequacy of the po tential function describing the

water-water interaction. Another approach ignores the structural features of the
water molecule, and assigns a hydration shell (and an accompanying free
energy of hydration) to each atom or group of atoms. As the conformation

changes and hydration shells overlap, a free-energy penalty is assessed. The

hydration-shell model is parameterized on experimental data on free energies of

hydration (Kang et al., 1987), but current efforts are being made to obtain such

free energies from Monte Carlo and molecular dynamic studies of aqueous

solutions of small molecules (see, e.g., Jorgensen et al., 1983). The compu

tation of free energies by these simulation techniques faces many theoretical

obstacles, although this very active field of research is progressing quickly.
EntropyA variety of methods exist to incorporate entropic effects. One entropic
effect arises from the hydration; this effect is treated as described earlier. The

other entropic effect arises from the conformational fluctuations of the
molecule. Several procedures may be used to compute this contribution, the
most direct being the evaluation of the second derivative of the potential

function. This describes the curvature at the bottom of the potential energy well

and hence the fluctuation in conformation about each local minimum in the

potential energy surface. Local minima that are
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY73
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not the global minimum of the potential energy can become the conformations
of higher statistical weight if there is a large enough entropy gain from large

conformational fluctuations. Paine and Scheraga (1987) have encountered such

effects.Optimization Procedures
Optimization procedures are available for searching for the local minima.
These include direct energy minimization, Monte Carlo, and molecular

dynamics procedures. In energy minimization, the variables describing the

conformation are altered system atically so as to lower the energy continuously.

The Monte Carlo method makes random changes in the conformational
variables and accepts the new conformation according to various protocols that
compute the energies before and after the random changes in the conformation.

In molecular dynamics calculations, Newton's equations of motion for the

atoms of the macromolecule (subject to interatomic forces determined by the

potential functions) are solved to obtain a trajectory in conformational space.

Very ef ficient energy minimization algorithms exist, even for functions of

many variables, but lead only to local minima (however, see the following

section). Conventional Monte Carlo procedures can overcome local minima but

tend not to cover conformational space efficiently enough. However, this

difficulty is being overcome using modifications that include adaptive

importance sampling and other efficiency-seeking procedures (Gibson and

Scheraga, 1988). Molecular dynamics can also surmount local barriers, but the
pi cosecond time scale of practical computations does not approach the
millisecond time scale of actual protein folding.
Because most published papers do not provide the relevant data, it is
difficult to compare the computer time needed for various optimization

procedures. The required computation time will be very sensitive to how well

the code is optimized, whether parallel processing is carried out, and other
factors. To obtain such benchmarks, it would be necessary to run each
procedure on several different computer systems
Ša task not yet undertaken.
Solutions to the Multiple-Minima Problem for
MacromoleculesSince no mathematical procedures are available to locate the global
minimum for any macromolecule (except in energy surfaces
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY74
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of very low dimensionality), as mentioned above we must first resort to
approximate procedures to obtain structures that might lie close to that of the

native macromolecule. Then, the approximations are abandoned, and full-scale

energy minimization, Monte Carlo, or molecular dynamics procedure is carried

out. A variety of such procedures have been developed (Gibson and Scheraga,

1988). These include:   a 
ﬁbuild-upﬂ method, in which large structures are built up from
ensembles of low-energy conformations of smaller ones (with energy

minimization being carried out at each stage);
   optimization of electrostatic interactions;
   optimization in a space of high dimensionality where fewer intervening
barriers exist (with subsequent relax ation back to three dimensions);
   Monte Carlo sampling among local minima (accompa nied by energy
minimization);   adaptive importance Monte Carlo sampling (to drive the system more
efficiently to the global minimum);
   pattern recognition methods to assemble organized back bone
structures as alpha-helices and beta-sheets;
   use of distance constraints either from experiment (Nu clear
Overhauser Effects (NOEs), nonradiative energy transfer, or NMR on

spin-labeled molecules) or from statistical analysis of x-ray structures
of proteins; and
   empirical methods to predict the locations of alpha helices, beta-sheets,
and beta-turns.Numerous valid predictions of global minimum structures of peptides have
been made using these methods (Gibson and Scher aga, 1988). However, they

have thus far been successful only for structures that contain at most 20

residues, and current efforts (most of which require access to supercomputers)
are being made to extend these methods to larger molecules
Što proteins
containing on the order of 100 amino acid residues.
Successes and Failures
Numerous structures have been predicted and subsequently confirmed
experimentally (Scheraga, 1984). The right- or left-handed twists of the

fundamental structures (alpha-helices and
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY75
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.beta-sheets) from which proteins are built have been accounted for by energy
minimization. The observed packing features of alpha-helices and beta-sheets

have likewise been accounted for in energetic terms. Parameters calculated for

conformational tran sitions (e.g., the helix-coil transition in water) have been

verified by experiment. The computed structures of open-chain and cyclic

molecules (e.g., the 20-residue membrane-bound portion of melit tin and the 10-
residue gramicidin S, respectively), and those of collagen-like poly-tripeptides
have also been verified by experi ment (Scheraga, 1984). Finally, the computed

structure of an enzyme-substrate complex (hen egg white lysozyme and a hexas

accharide substrate) (Pincus and Scheraga, 1979) has been verified by

experiment (Smith-Gill et al., 1984). These and other examples should give us

confidence in the validity of the potential functions and computational

methodology (Gibson and Scheraga, 1988).
The failures, in the sense of not yet having solved the protein-folding
problem, exist because no one has yet used optimization techniques to deduce

the three-dimensional structure of even a small protein, such as the 58-residue

bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI). Current procedures applied to BPTI

have not yet yielded a computed structure that comes closer to the x-ray
structure than 2-3 
Å. Several procedures that work to overcome the multiple-
minima problem on small molecules become compu tationally intensive as they

are used on larger molecules. However, the increasing use of supercomputers

will help overcome this prob lem.
Impediments to Progress
Although supercomputers will allow larger calculations and thus cover
conformational space better, workers in this field will need additional time to be

allotted on these machines to do the research necessary to achieve greater

efficiency. Parallel processing offers a breakthrough, and this will require new

software to take advantage of the hardware enhancements. With new Hardware
and software, it should be possible to surmount the major hurdle created by the
multiple-minima problem. However, it is conceivable that bottlenecks may

develop as we attempt to scale up procedures that work on 20-residue segments

to proteins containing 100 to 200 residues. We will also need imaginative new

approaches to overcome this problem.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY76
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Potential functions should be improved, especially those for
polynucleotides and prosthetic groups, and for water-water inter actions, but

this is not now the most serious problem. Certainly, this problem should be

addressed again when the multiple-minima problem is solved for bovine

pancreatic trypsin inhibitor.
Finally, new developments will be needed to bring molecular dynamics
from the picosecond to the millisecond time scale.
Future Prospects
At every stage in the development of conformational energy calculations
over the past 25 years, we always seemed to face in surmountable obstacles.

However, the steady progress during this period indicates that many of these

obstacles have been overcome. The remaining major hurdle is the multiple-

minima problem (Gib son and Scheraga, 1988), but we have an array of

possible solutions to it. The solutions have worked for small molecules, and

current and impending developments in computer hardware and software

should justify our confidence that, within 5 to 10 years, we may ex pect to
understand how interatomic interactions dictate not only the final folded
structure but the pathways taken by the newly formed polypeptide chain to

reach the native structure.
MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
The principle behind a molecular dynamics simulation is sim ply the
application of Newton's equations of motion to the atoms of one or more

molecules. Newton's equations relate three in dependent quantities: time,

conformation (atomic coordinates), and potential energy. As the calculation

progresses and the positions and velocities of the atoms change, the system will

traverse many different states; as the simulation is prolonged, the observed

states together approach a perfect sample of the thermal equilib rium ensemble

of all states the system will occupy. The thermal equilibrium distribution may

also be sampled without considering motion, using appropriate purely statistical
methods (Monte Carlo techniques). In principle, a Monte Carlo calculation
might produce a representative sample using less computer time. Noguti and G
(1985) indicate how, with knowledge of the second-derivative matrix of the

potential energy, the atomic coordinates can be ef fectively used to speed up the

Monte Carlo process. However, it is
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY77
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as yet uncertain whether this accelerated Monte Carlo procedure produces a
more rapid exploration of conformation space of a protein than a molecular

dynamics simulation. Thus, the molecular dynamics simulation gives us a way

to make theoretical estimates of mean atomic positions and deviations from the

mean; of rates of motion and conformation change; and of ensemble averages,

including thermodynamic functions such as energy, enthalpy, spe cific heat, and
free energy. Since free energies can be expressed as equilibrium constants and
vice versa, simulations are being used to obtain theoretical estimates of

differences of affinity of proteins for small molecules. Recent results show

remarkably good agree ment with experimental values. Major pharmaceutical

companies have already noted the usefulness of accurately predicting these

differences.Molecular dynamics simulations, although simple in concept, were not
practical before the advent of high speed computers. This method of theoretical

chemistry is particularly useful for the study of condensed phases and was first

used to study the structure and dynamics of liquids. Later, several investigators

applied existing techniques to protein molecules (Karplus and McCammon,

1983; Berendsen [cf. Hermans, 1985, Beveridge and Jorgenson, 1987]). At
present, several laboratories are active in the field. More are be coming
involved as the methods are applied to increasingly quan titative studies that

aim to reproduce experimental observations as closely as possible in the

computer model. Many investiga tors express the belief that molecular

dynamics calculations will soon produce useful predictions of structure,

dynamics and ther modynamics of proteins, nucleic acids, and complexes of

these macromolecules with one another and with other molecules.
The simulation requires two pieces of information at the out set: a starting
conformation and potential energy function or forcefield. For a protein, current

technology requires that the starting conformation be firmly based on

experimental observation: because many conformations exist at local minimum

energy, a conformation that is very different from the correct most stable
conformation evolves too slowly to reach the correct conformation in the length
of a typical calculation.
The forcefield is a very simple empirical approximation to the underlying
physics, which properly should be expressed in terms of quantum mechanics

but is totally unmanageable in that form. Parameters of the forcefields now in

use have been proposed on
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY78
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the basis of a variety of experimental data and to some extent on theoretical
considerations. Overall, the several forcefields proposed by different groups for

computation of the internal energy of proteins tended to have very similar sets

of parameters. Recently developed forcefields for water-water and water-

protein interactions permit the simulation of dynamics of proteins in solution,

which is a prerequisite for modeling events at the protein surface, including
most interactions of proteins with other molecules. (The problems of
developing adequate forcefields are discussed in the following section on

ﬁSolvation.ﬂ)Carrying out molecular dynamics simulations of proteins is very much an
art of the feasible, the limiting factor always being the available computing

power. One is always facing the conse quence of an inescapable physical fact:

that the most rapidly fluc tuating atomic motions, bond stretching, and bond

angle bending vibrations have periodicities of the order of once in every few

fem toseconds (10
15 sec). Current simulation methodology requires that
periodic motions be sampled several times per period, and each sampling
requires an evaluation of the system's potential energy, requiring computer time

in milliseconds on the fastest machines, Cray and Cyber 205. Clearly,

simulations cannot now span a time that is on the biological time scale of

microseconds to seconds. Unavoidably, molecular dynamics simulations use

sim ple forcefields to span a longer time. Given more computer time, those

working in the field will improve simulations in various ways: use of more

detailed forcefields; longer simulations; simulation of larger systems posing

new physical and biological questions; and application of new, more time-

consuming, dynamics methods to ask different questions about the system. To

those working in the field, the future is bright; ideas and interesting problems

abound, and new computer technology continues to widen the limits of
feasibility.RESULTSCollected papers for symposia held in 1984 and 1985 give an overview of
methods and results of applications of molecular dynamics to

proteins.1Subsequent work achieved many of the
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY79
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.possibilities proposed in these papers, but did not deviate radically from the
directions anticipated at the symposia. The following section summarizes

achievements and describes possible future applications and advances. This

section is divided into three parts that cover structure, dynamics and kinetics,

and thermodynamics of macromolecules. The section concludes with a

prognosis of developments to come.
The Determination of Macromolecular Structure
The first molecular dynamics calculations of protein molecules produced
trajectories whose mean atomic positions deviated very significantly from the

starting positions (by root-mean-square (rms) displacements of several

Angstroms), which were known within a much smaller error from x-ray

crystallography. With the development of better forcefields and the inclusion of

a solvent en vironment or even a complete crystalline matrix that consisted of
solvent and other protein molecules, the root-mean-square differ ence of the
atomic positions decreased significantly. Nevertheless, x-ray crystallographic

structures, especially after crystallographic refinement, have a precision well

inside this difference. The sit uation appears to be reversed with regard to the

thermal distri bution of the atomic positions about their means. Except in rare

instances, x-ray crystallography produces a single parameter for each atom that

represents the width of an isotropic Gaussian distribution of the atomic center.

In contrast, the results of molecular dynamics simulation can be used to

describe in detail anisotropic distributions of any shape, even distributions with

several max ima. In the one case where results of molecular dynamics

simulation have been compared with anisotropic thermal parameters from x-ray

crystallography, the agreement was very good. Meth ods for introducing
theoretical estimates of thermal restraints into crystallographic structure
refinement are being developed.
Molecular dynamics simulations show considerable promise of being able
to increase our knowledge of structures proposed on the basis of incomplete

information, particularly information derived
 Hermans, 985; Beveridge and Jorgensen, 
986; results described in these
symposium papers are not explicitly referenced in this section. Some interesting

work has been reported on nucleic acids. However, the technical difficulties of

working with tese highly charged molecules much exceed the difficulties

encountered in simulations of proteins; given a limited amount of resources, it

is understandable that technically less formidable problems have received
priority.TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY80
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from two-dimensional NMR. Two-dimensional NMR produces a set of
distances between hydrogen atoms, the Nuclear Overhauser Effect (NOE)

distances; for any given (small) protein, many but not all of these distances can

be assigned to individual atom pairs. Regular structures such as helices and beta

sheets are easily identi fied and assigned to particular segments of the molecule.

However, it is seldom possible to obtain a sufficiently large number of the
longer distances that define the relative packing of the regular parts and the
structure of irregular chain segments. In this situation, additional information

must be brought to bear, an obvious choice for this information being the

constraints imposed on the structure by its chemistry and by the requirement of

adequate interchain 
ﬁpacking.ﬂ As these requirements are those observed in a
typical molecular dynamics simulation, this has led to the development of a

method of molecular dynamics with added constraints, i.e., the NOE distances.

By varying the importance of the constraints that determine the conformation

and varying the tem perature (the total kinetic energy), the structure can be

made to evolve to one with a lower conformational energy. This structure also

meets the requirements imposed by the NOE measurements as well as or better

than the starting model and may show new distances between hydrogens that
are sufficiently short to be detected in the NOE measurement, but whose
assignment had been ambiguous (see also the section on 
ﬁTertiary structures of
macro molecules using NMR
ﬂ in this report).
Spectroscopy/Kinetics and Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics is a unique tool for simulating time dependent
processes in condensed systems. The problem of eval uating the time

dependence of motion of a protein is formidable. Because of a lack of

symmetry, each atom introduces molecular motion at three new frequencies

(normal modes), each of which may be distributed over all atoms. This both

overstates and un derstates the situation: it is an overstatement because the fre
quencies of many normal modes (e.g. bondstretching modes) are predictable
and correspond to localized vibrations; it is an un derstatement both because

each conformation of minimum energy (that contributes to the thermal

ensemble) contributes its own set of normal modes, and because transitions

between conformations, across energy barriers, produce additional motion. This

additionalTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY81
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.motion is usually not a periodic oscillatory motion, but one gov erned by the
statistics of barrier crossing.
The high-frequency oscillations of a molecular dynamics tra jectory are
easily determined, but are also the least interesting type of motion. Slower

motions are far more likely to be relevant to biological function. These typically

involve many atoms and have large amplitudes, which are also expected of

molecular motions required for the macromolecule's biological function,

although not every low-frequency mode will be significant in this respect.
Important motions that have been studied by simulation in clude the hinge
bending of lysozyme and the internal breathing motions necessary to transport

oxygen to reach the active site (heme group) of myoglobin and hemoglobin.

The hinge-bending motion is typical of that presumably required for many

enzymes to accept a substrate in the active site and release the products of

catalysis. Because of the low frequency of these motions, the hinge bending was

not simulated by a direct molecular dynamics calculation. Instead, its frequency
was estimated by combining an analysis of the potential energy required to bend
the hinge region with hydrodynamic considerations. In contrast, the breathing

motion of myoglobin was observed in a molecular dynamics sim ulation of 100

picoseconds (10
10sec) to have a period of roughly 30 picoseconds. It would
have been missed had its frequency been only twice as large.
The motion of carbon monoxide in hemoglobin following the
photodissociation of carbon monoxide hemoglobin has been sim ulated with

molecular dynamics (Henry et al., 1985) to compare the results with extensive

spectroscopic experimental studies of the events that follow this reaction. The

agreement is very good; a striking result of the simulation was the considerable

local in crease of atomic thermal motion that follows the absorption of the

photon and breakage of the heme-CO bond. This increase in ther mal motion
has a very significant effect on the early kinetics, i.e. during the time required
for the excess kinetic energy to dissipate into the protein and then into the

solvent.Case and McCammon (1986) have analyzed the dynamics of ligands in the
interior of the myoglobin molecule, with emphasis on the details of the passage

of the ligand molecule into and out of the heme pocket. This movement of

oxygen is an example of a process requiring passage of the system over a (free)

energy barrier. The breathing motions of myoglobin appear to open passages or

gatesTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY82
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that, when open, allow probes (and by implication, oxygen) to move back and
forth between cavities inside the protein (Tilton et al., in press).
Very few thorough investigations have been conducted of such gated
events. The best is a study of the manner in which tyrosine rings inside proteins

rotate by 180
°, a process for which exper imental information is available from
NMR spectroscopy. This rotation is an essentially stochastic process, as

opposed to the regularly occurring oscillatory motions, and can occur only

when the protein assumes particular favorable local conformations, in

cidentally, in the course of its internal vibrations. This is often described as a
ﬁgatedﬂ event. The kinetic process is best studied by placing the protein in a
gate-open conformation and determining the relaxation, during which the

otherwise rare event (i.e. ring flip) may take place with a good probability

(Gosh and McCam mon, 1987). Because the trajectories are reversible, the

required kinetic information can be extracted. A difficulty of these studies is

that the scientist chooses what parts form the gate and how it opens. As this

work has been refined with careful attention to detail and use of improved

potential functions, the model's kinetic parameters have tended to approach the

experimentally observed values. However, because the motion is so localized,

this study of tyrosine ring flips may be the only well-developed example of its

kind. We seem far from being able to analyze the kinetic path ways with

molecular dynamics, let alone predict rate constants, for the biologically
important conformation changes of allosteric proteins, in which many residues
readjust their conformation and parts of the protein may undergo relative shifts

in position of many Angstroms.
Many interesting conformational relaxation processes of proteins are too
slow to be directly accessible using current techniques of molecular dynamics

simulation. However, there is a range of fundamental interest (10
12 to 10
9 sec)
that can be studied by both molecular dynamics and NMR spin relaxation

spectroscopy. We believe there is substantial opportunity for productive

comparison of NMR and the results of molecular dynamics simulation.
Perturbed NMR resonances for spin one-half nuclei relax primar ily because of
modulation of dipolar interactions by global and internal molecular motion.

Resonances in NMR spectra can also be assigned to discrete sites and, in cases

where the geometry of the dipolar interaction is well defined, time scales for

motion at aTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY83
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.particular site can be extracted. Although relaxation mechanisms can be very
complex, especially for protons, useful analysis should be possible in some

cases. Use of
13C NMR can, for example, simplify relaxation time analysis,
because most relaxation interactions occur with directly bonded protons

(Wagner and Bruhwiller, 1986). It is also becoming increasingly possible to

introduce amino acids enriched in
13C at specific sites. NMR of
13C-enrichedproteins and peptides offers substantial possibilities for extraction of
experimental time scales of motion in the 10
12 - 10
9 range for verification of
theoretical predictions.When motion of groups or relaxation interactions are complex, molecular
dynamics simulations may also improve the interpretation of NMR data. Here,

Levy et al. (1981) have shown that it is possible to construct appropriate dipolar

correlation functions from states sampled in a molecular dynamics simulation.

In prin ciple, this allows calculation of NMR relaxation parameters that can be

used to validate models used for interpreting NMR data. Thus, the improvement
of molecular dynamics simulations and the development of experimental
methods for determining structure may prove symbiotic. Carrying out this dual

strategy will require substantial investment in producing an accurate description

of spin relaxation, as well as coordination among those developing simulation

programs.Thermodynamics of Macromolecules
Physicists have known for a considerable time about techniques to
calculate equilibrium thermodynamic properties from molecular dynamics

calculations. The techniques have been ap plied to proteins very recently, but

already their use has shifted the emphasis of the simulation field to calculations

of free energy dif ferences. Several factors explain the great current interest in

this application, the most important being the availability of many precise

experimental data for a variety of equilibria that involve biological
macromolecules and the unexpectedly excellent theoretical estimates that the
simulations produce. The first successes were obtained in studies of the

hydration of small molecules and ions, in which the free energy of transfer of a

small molecule to bulk water could be compared with accurate experimental

data (see following section on 
ﬁSolvationﬂ).An important feature of the ongoing research program on
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY84
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.macromolecular equilibria is that investigators are carefully iso lating a small

subset of the global problem to avoid overwhelming available computers. For

example, in studying enzyme inhibition equilibria, McCammon's group is using

molecular dynamics simu lations to estimate the differences in binding free

energy of a series of small inhibitors to the enzyme trypsin. A complete

calculation consists of two parts, one in which one substrate bound to the

protein is replaced with another, and one in which the first substrate solvated in

water is replaced by the other. As can be seen from the following

thermodynamic cycle (E is enzyme, S1 and S2 are two different substrates),
the difference of the two free energy changes obtained from the
simulations (indicated by vertical arrows) is equal to the difference of free

energy of binding the two substrates to the enzyme (indi cated by horizontal

arrows). The agreement between theory and experiment is of the order of a few

kJ/mole, which amounts to a factor of two to three in the equilibrium constant.

These methods are easily adapted to the estimation of differences in affinity of

substrates and inhibitors caused by alteration of the enzyme by site-directed

mutagenesis (e.g., Bash et al., 1987b). In one study of the interaction of a

protein and a small molecule, the binding of xenon gas to myoglobin, Hermans

and Shankar (1987) found that the molecular dynamics simulation was able to

give a direct estimate of the binding equilibrium constant, which was within a

factor of two of that observed experimentally.
Similar methods are being used to study conformational equi libria of
macromolecules. Most thoroughly studied are conformational equilibria of the

alanine dipeptide, a well-known low molecular weight model of a polypeptide.

The most important result concerns the equilibrium between two conformations,

al pha and beta, which correspond to different helical structures of polypeptides.

In an environment of water molecules, simulations performed by two groups

with different methods gave similar results: a preference by a factor of two to

five for the (extended)
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY85
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.beta conformation. Experiment indicates, imprecisely, a value of around 10.
Prognosis of Developments
The success of the free energy simulations has suddenly changed the scope
and emphasis of molecular dynamics simulations. The early simulations either

clarified properties of proteins that were difficult to study experimentally

(kinetics and dynamics on the picosecond time scale) or else gave

unsatisfactory agreement with experiment (mean atomic positions). However,
free energy calculations suffer from neither of these problems. In addition, the
results are in a field that is traditionally of great interest to biochemists.

Biochemists routinely and accurately achieve exper imental determination of

free energies of binding (from binding equilibrium constants) of inhibitors and

substrates to enzymes. Furthermore, the agreement between theory and

experiment is so good that molecular dynamics simulations are widely believed

to be a useful tool to predict the inhibitory power of new compounds. This tool

will at least screen out a large fraction of possible in hibitors, and thereby

greatly reduce the synthetic work required in the search for the perfect inhibitor.

Replace 
ﬁinhibitorﬂ with 
ﬁdrug,ﬂ and one realizes the potential of these tools.
Add to this the possibility of predicting the properties of genetically altered

proteins produced by the biotechnology industry and the demand for such tools
soars.This new application has created sudden and perhaps unex pected demands
for computer time for two reasons. First, investi gators suddenly have a

seemingly limitless number of technologically and biochemically interesting

questions to answer; one may envision the possibility of rationalizing the

inhibition constants of all studied inhibitors of any one enzyme and its mutants
(the latter designed and manufactured in the laboratory on order). Second, as the
emphasis has shifted from problems of structure and dynamics to problems of

equilibrium thermodynamics, there is less reason to analyze the details of most

trajectories and conformations. This is because free energy simulations typically

pass through a series of artificially constructed intermediates that are physically

un realizable. Thus, each researcher will be able to perform more simulations

without being overwhelmed by the time requirements
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY86
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of analyzing the results. Consequently, one researcher can more effectively use
more computer time.Accordingly, progress in free energy simulations, although po tentially
very rapid, is heavily limited by available computer time. As recently as 5 years

ago the demands of these calculations ex ceeded the available computer power.

At present, each of several research groups is using hundreds of machine hours

of Cray time. In addition, a number of groups have been able to acquire Star

array processors, which may have the power of a Cray but a much lower price.

Dedicating one or more array processors full time to the single task of
molecular dynamics is extremely efficient in terms of total cost of hardware and
programming. Similarly, the economics of building a hard-wired special-

purpose machine for molecular dynamics may be justified in terms of the

economics of building and operating several copies of the final product, and

such a machine is almost complete. In spite of these rapid developments, the

scope of free-energy simulations is still severely limited.
Within a short time, we will need a radical increase in computer time to
realize possibilities that are now clearly defined. An immediate 10-fold increase

appears needed, and does not seem an extravagant objective with proper

planning (i.e., duplicate existing hardware that is already programmed and

otherwise inexpensive). The pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries will

make some investment since companies' efforts at rational drug design require
simulation capability that works in parallel with NMR and x-ray determination
of physiologically crucial enzymes.
Apart from drug and protein design, others within and out side of industry
will apply these techniques to the broad problems of protein-protein and protein-

nucleic acid recognition, by using a combination of molecular dynamics

simulations and the results of site-directed mutagenesis. Once we have dealt

with the problem of rationalizing these equilibria in terms of molecular

interactions in atomic detail, our attention will shift to the application of the

newly acquired skills to problems of the dynamics of interaction of proteins
with other molecules, which will presumably require just as much computer
time. In contrast to the protein folding prob lem described in the previous

section of this report, the problem of computer modeling of the dynamics of

protein interactions can be tackled in a series of small, increasingly complex

steps, each of
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY87
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.which solves a discrete problem of immediate biochemical inter est, yet also
provides additional insight and experience needed to advance the technical

expertise.Beyond the need for sufficient computer time, we must improve
forcefields for proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids by determining better

values for the parameters and extending these to include drug-type molecules;

attempts should also be made to adapt molecular dynamic techniques in ways

designed to over come some of the intrinsic imperfections of existing

forcefields. At present, there is a disturbing trend towards the development and
commercialization of proprietary software instead of free exchange of programs
and subroutines, and there appears to be a parallel development of a proprietary

forcefield. The members of this committee hope that these trends are temporary;

the emphasis on commercialization is appearing too early in the scientific

process. If the trend persists, a national agency should commission the

development of state-of-the-art programs and forcefields that would be

available to all workers.
SOLVATION AND ELECTROSTATICS IN COMPUTER
SIMULATION OF BIOPOLYMERS
Biomolecular systems function in vivo in an aqueous solution
environment. That environment includes solvent as well as a substantial

component that consists of a variety of salt ions. Because these components

interact significantly with each other and typically also with the

macromolecular species, this environment can contribute substantially to the

observed state of macromolecules in solution. Manifestations of its influence

include the relative stability of various macromolecular conformations and the
binding constants that characterize the association of macromolecules with each
other or with other biochemically significant molecules.
The simplest effect of water can be thought of as that of a high dielectric
medium that screens the interaction of charged and polar groups. Hence, the

interaction is in effect much smaller than the corresponding interaction in the

absence of solvent. However, solvent influence cannot be described solely in

such terms. For example, it has long been appreciated that nonpolar moieties are

preferentially excluded from water, and such 
ﬁhydrophobicﬂTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY88
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.effects have long been believed to be a major component in protein
conformational free energies (Kauzmann, 1959). For all po lar interactions,

hydrogen bonding in particular, the
net energy is determined primarily by the
mismatch between short-ranged solvent-solute and solute-solute interactions. In

the case of the highly charged nucleic acid polymers, the identity and

distribution of solution counterions also seems to be particularly significant.
As this brief discussion makes clear, we cannot expect to succeed in the
quantitative treatment of biopolymer structure and function without paying due

attention to the molecular role of the solution environment. In particular, we

must take into account the significant role played by the environment in

determining the strength of ligand binding, as well as the relative stability (free

energy) of the
varied structures that must be encountered during protein folding
and that may accompany function.
In the following section, we describe briefly alternative frame works for
considering environmental effects and discuss the current state of theory in this

area. We focus our attention on the limi tations of currently available results and

methods, as well as on the potential for significant progress in the near future.

Finally, we point out important areas for attention in the short term, and
comment on the prospects for successful quantitative treatments in the longer
term.All-Atom Modeling
Detailed molecular models for the solution environment take the same
form as those used for the biopolymer as such. That is, the solution components

are represented as a collection of sites, typically atomic sites, that carry partial

electrostatic charges and are each associated with a spherical short-ranged
potential that accounts for short distance interatomic repulsion and for London
attractive forces. Molecular entities are usually specified through sets of bond

length and angle constraints. For water, those models that most successfully

reproduce experimental liquid data (Jor gensen et al., 1983) include an

additional charged site that is not aligned with any of the three nuclei of each

molecule. The sol vent molecules (and ions) then interact with each other and

with macromolecular components by a superposition of electrostatic and short-

ranged terms.This format for the potential is itself an approximation, and
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY89
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the quantitative limitations of this form are not yet completely determined. The
most significant limitation is that, in reality, the polarity of a molecule in

solution is substantially influenced by its surroundings due to electronic

polarization. For hydrogen-bonded liquids such as water, it is known that a

successful nonpolarizable model must include electrostatic site charges for each

molecule that correspond to an increased dipole moment with respect to the gas
phase; the increase represents the average additional polarization induced by
neighboring molecules (Stillinger, 1975). Such effects appear, in principle, for

all components of the solution, including macromolecular species. Although we

have no evidence that the neglect of explicit polarizability is now limiting the

predictive power of such models, it should be kept in mind as a potential

limitation to quantitative prediction. Whether such effects are included in

modeling efforts is limited primarily by computational rather than theoretical

capabilities, so even in the worst case, such effects can eventually be added later.
Carrying out any computational study of macromolecular be havior taking
full atomic account of the solvent is an extraordi narily demanding task, since

the surrounding solvent constitutes most of the whole system. In the presence of

finite concentrations of ions, the problem is substantially more difficult, since in

that case, the solvent associated with ionic dilution must be included as well (25

ion pairs require 15,000 water molecules to dilute to 0.1M). Such a computer

simulation study remains at least an order of magnitude beyond what is now
feasible. Nevertheless, consider able progress is being made in simulating
macromolecular systems and related model compounds, taking full account of

the solvent environment. This progress is due in large part to the vast increase

in available computational power.
In particular, in the area of model systems, this power has per mitted a few
studies of small molecule conformational equilibrium (Jorgensen, 1982;

Rosenberg et al., 1982; Zichi and Rossky, 1986) and one direct investigation of

the conformational free energy of a dipeptide (Mezei et al., 1985). Carrying out

such studies requires specialized sampling techniques, termed umbrella

sampling, that allow the accurate determination of relative populations of

conformers that are separated from one another by significant free energy

barriers. Such techniques and their efficient use are the products of recent
research on simulations of molecular model systems.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY90
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The results of these studies are consistent with the limited experimental
data available, as documented in the cited reports. A few other studies have

been carried out on peptides in water without any attempt to fully explore

conformational space (Brady and Karplus, 1985; Hagler et al., 1980a).
Recently, a number of studies have been carried out that aimed to evaluate
directly the relative hydration free energies of small molecules, amino acids,

and nucleotide bases (Bash et al., 1987a; Jorgensen and Ravimohan, 1985;

Lybrand et al., 1986; Singh et al., 1987). Such studies are essential for

calibrating the potentials in use. These relative free energy quantities are
amenable to calculation using a thermodynamic perturbation approach, another
tool added recently to simulators' methods (Postma et al., 1982).
The results of the studies are encouraging in that the investi gators
obtained relative free energies within about 1 kcal of exper imental

determinations. Although this level of accuracy may not be sufficient to

determine quantitatively the stability of systems involving many such groups, it
strongly suggests that the potential functions are sufficiently close to being right
that relatively small adjustments may adequately finish the job.
Similarly encouraging results have been obtained in small model system
binding equilibria. Studies of relative affinities of ions for a cyclic ionophore

(Lybrand et al., 1986) and of base pair stacking and hydrogen bonding (Bash et

al., 1987) have been carried out. In the latter case, the results do not agree
quantita tively with experimental estimates but are, again, close enough to
warrant optimism.
In parallel, several groups have carried out true macromolec ular binding
studies. These will be discussed in detail in the following section on molecular

dynamics of biopolymers.
In the area of globular protein structure
per se
, several at tempts have now
been made to compare the structural and dynamic behavior of the hydrated

model to experimental hydrated crystal structures and to the results obtained in

the absence of solvent (Kr
üger et al., 1985; Teleman, 1986; van Gunsteren and
Berendsen, 1984; van Gunsteren and Karplus, 1982; van Gun steren et al.,
1983; Wong and McCammon, in press). The results of these studies are

encouraging in that they show that the ad dition of solvent makes simulated

structures agree better with experimental crystallographic atomic positions.

Significant quan titative differences remain, however. Further, for hydrated single
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY91
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.proteins, a simulation initiated in the crystallographic protein structure was
found to produce an increasingly deviant structure (as measured by the R factor)

from the crystallographic structure as the simulation proceeds (Kr
üger et al.,
1985; Teleman, 1986). In a recent hydrated crystal study, similar behavior

appeared to be present (Berendsen et al., 1986). One possible interpretation is

that these studies simply sample fluctuations that are not fully av eraged, and
the deviation is only an apparent one
Šthe simulations are relatively short, less
than 100 picoseconds. Alternatively, for the noncrystalline simulations, this

result may reflect real differ ences between crystal and solution structures.

However, one also should suspect the underlying theoretical interaction

potentials as the source of the deviation, and much more testing is required to

narrow the alternatives.
In this context, it is important to emphasize that the state of the art has not
yet reached a level where computational complex ity is the only limiting issue,

as a simple example can illustrate. Although short-range solute-solvent forces

play a very important role, we have already noted that the dielectric screening

of solute charges is of substantial importance. In light of this, it is no table that

for those popular water models for which the dielectric constant has been
determined, the agreement with experiment is not very good; at room
temperature the so-called MCY model yields a value near 35 (Neumann, 1985),

while for the structurally and thermodynamically excellent TIP4P model of

Jorgensen (Jor gensen et al., 1983) one finds about 50 (Neumann, 1986), and

the ST2 model yields about 120 (Steinhanser, 1983), all compared to the

experimental result of about 80. Clearly, for the interaction of charges at long

range, such discrepancies would be quantitatively disastrous. This does not

imply that results obtained, for example, for polypeptide conformational

equilibria would have comparable relative errors, but it does indicate that

caution is warranted, and that further model development is necessary.
Implicit Environmental Modeling
Since the solvent and small ions as such are often not of primary interest, it
is in principle simplest to avoid giving an explicit account of the surrounding

solution and treat its influence only implicitly. Formally, this can be done by

introducing effective, or so-called solvent-averaged, potentials among the solute

atomsTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY92
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of explicit interest. The rigorous existence and formulation for such a reduction
is well known. However, such effective potentials are not generally represented

by only pairwise interactions, but can be resolved into pair, three-body, and

other terms. The pair term, for example, is the potential of mean force between

an isolated solute pair in an infinite amount of solvent. The lack of pairwise

additivity is present even if the full unreduced system is described by pairwise
additive potentials. The use of a continuum dielectric model of an ionic solution
represents the simplest form of a pairwise additive effective potential, where, in

addition, the pair potential is only roughly modeled.
The question is whether pairwise additivity of the effective potentials is a
good approximation. The validity of this approx imation remains largely

untested, although for ionic solutions pairwise additive semiempirical potentials

adequately reproduce experimental solution thermodynamics up to about 1M

concen tration (see Friedman et al., 1973 and references therein).
Current macromolecular modeling of the effects of solution environments
typically invokes such effective potentials in a relatively crude form. Most

often, an effective dielectric constant typical of a nonpolar, polarizable material

is used to account for polarization screening of electrostatic charges (Weiner et

al., 1984). In some treatments, a modification to the potential to account for

short-range, molecular, solvent effects is then added in some treat ments

(Gibson and Scheraga, 1967; N
émethy et al., 1978; Hodes et al., 1979a, 1979b;
Kang et al., 1987). This added 
ﬁhydration shell
ﬂ term introduces a free energy
bonus or penalty associated with the close approach of solute atoms, typically

proportional to the overlap volume of the first solvation shells of the

approaching polypeptide atoms. This approach is closely analogous to the

method widely used in models of ionic solutions pioneered by Friedman et al.

(1973).A significant problem of the implicit approaches to solvents now in use is
that they use an ad hoc form for effective potentials, the reliability of which is

not well established. The ability of such potential functions to produce correct

quantitative results for protein/nucleic acid systems is obviously difficult to

assess since the system is complex, with many theoretical parameters and

relatively little experimental data for comparison. However, G
 and Scheraga
(1984) have demonstrated that such approaches are useful in analyzing
differential hydration effects in specific
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY93
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cases. The current procedure is to establish the parameters for the potentials
from the thermodynamics of hydration (N
émethy et al., 1978; Hodes et al.,
1979a, 1979b; Kang et al., 1987); this procedure is valid at the present stage.

However, in the near future, we should emphasize more direct comparison to

spectroscopic and NMR results for small molecules such as oligopeptides.
In fact, some skepticism of the current forms of the potentials is warranted,
given the results obtained for the most simple so lute systems. It is known, for

example, that for ionic solutions, a detailed molecular solvent treatment of the

interionic potential of mean force does not closely resemble the hydration shell

model, although both are consistent with observed thermodynamics (Pet titt and

Rossky, 1986). The true effective potential exhibits large oscillations as a

function of distance. The minima are shifted in spatial position compared to the
simpler model, but the depth of the alternative potentials appears to compare
favorably. Hence, the hydration shell model may be a viable way to estimate

solvent effects associated with native versus completely unfolded states, but not

for intermediate structures. This last hypothesis is consis tent with the use of

aqueous thermodynamic data to parameterize the potential. It is clear that the

folded state prediction 
per se
 is of great import in the 
a priori prediction of
protein structure and function.
Recent efforts to generalize the molecular solvent theory avail able for
ionic solutions to the atoms that make up peptides appear promising (Pettitt and

Karplus, 1985; Pettitt et al., 1986), but no quantitative comparison to

experimental data has yet been made.
Even if we accept a purely continuum fluid description of the solvent
environment, the issue of dielectric screening itself is a major one. If one is

studying a protein crystal, a small dielectric constant may well be appropriate.

However, the use of such a value to determine structures does not seem

warranted. Particularly for atomic charges near the solvent interface in a folded

protein, one expects that the pure solvent value is more relevant. Recent work is

aimed directly at rigorously examining the usefulness of different distance-
dependent dielectric functions for such interactions within a dielectric
continuum picture, but for dielectrically inhomogeneous systems (Gilson et al.,

1985; Klapper et al., 1986). This work may well produce an optimal and well-

founded treatment within the scope of this simplified model.
The approach for nucleic acid modeling is less refined than
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY94
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for proteins because of the ubiquitous charges and requisite coun terions present
in solutions of nucleic acids. For these macromolecules, it is insufficient to deal

with solvent alone. Current ap proaches have considered various polyionic

charges, solvent, and, in some cases, counterions. In many studies, the polyionic

phos phate charges have been artificially reduced to about 25 percent of the

physical value to account crudely for counterion association (Hingerty and
Broyde, 1982; Tidor et al., 1983). This value arises from the counterion
condensation formalism, which describes a required fractional counterion

screening for counterions that are far from the polyelectrolye (Manning, 1978).

This approach is a valuable qualitative tool, but we do not expect quantitative

results from such a strong approximation.
Only recently have initial all-atom studies of polynucleotide ion-solvent
systems been carried out (Corongiu and Clementi, 1981; Seibel et al., 1985; van

Gunsteren et al., 1986), but it is clear that the exceptionally time-consuming

nature of these simulations with ions present does not yet permit such

calculations to be very informative in practical ways. To simulate a duplex

oligonucleotide without added salt for 2 nanoseconds (a relevant motional time

scale for the polymer) would require roughly 1,000 hours of supercomputer time.
In the case of nucleic acids, an intermediate ground state exists that is not
relevant for many proteins. That is, the set of explicitly simulated atoms can be

extended to include the macromolecule and ambient ions, while retaining the

implicit treatment of only the solvent. In terms of the number of atoms to be

followed, the simplification is substantial.
In any of the cases discussed above in which the solvent is treated
implicitly, one still must implement realistic potentials of mean force, or, at

least, invoke a firmly based dielectric continuum treatment. Since the potential

payoff of knowing viable implicit solvation routes is very large, it is important

to encourage research into implicit modeling in biopolymer related systems.
A potentially useful approach to the ionic atmosphere that avoids even the
intermediate-level treatment of ions is the implementation of solvent and ion-

averaged potentials within the biopolymer. The use of reduced phosphate

charges is an ad hoc form of such a potential function. An oversimplified but

well-founded alternative is the use of a Debye-H
ückel-like screening between
polymer sites (Hesselink et al., 1973; Manning, 1978;
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY95
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Soumpasis, 1984), employing the bulk solvent dielectric constant. The latter
approach cannot, however, account for the unusually high degree of ionic

association that is present in the immediate vicinity of a polyion.
Another unusually promising approach involves applying more analytical
theories for the influence of the solution environment, while retaining a detailed

description of the biopolymer. In essence, one evaluates the effective potentials

that govern the intrapolymer interactions for fixed polymer configuration by

(numerically) solving the relevant equations of an essentially analytical theory.

An example of significant recent progress along these lines is the work of Pack
and coworkers (Klein and Pack, 1983). They have used an algorithm for
solution of the Poisson-Boltzmann equation for the ionic distributions around a

detailed DNA model, and from such distributions the relevant free energies of

different conformations are, in principle, obtainable. At least for simplified

models of DNA, the Poisson-Boltzmann mean field theory has proved accurate

compared to computer simulation for the same mod els (Murthy et al., 1985).

Closely related approaches have been considered for enzyme-substrate binding

involving charged species (Klapper et al., 1986). However, a Poisson-

Boltzmann treatment is tied to a dielectric continuum view of the solvent,

although dielectric heterogeneity can be readily accounted for within this

context.A brief comment on biopolymer dynamics is appropriate here. Dynamics
are clearly connected to the general question of protein folding, and are likely to

be significant for function in many cases. Although molecular dynamics may

not be directly related to the issue of predicting function, it is clearly connected

to the more general question of protein folding. As for the equilibrium time-

independent problem, one can, in principle, consider the full atomic description.

However, one can also focus only on an explicit subset of solute atoms, such as
biopolymer or biopolymer plus ions. The formal theory to be applied when only
some of the atoms are considered explicitly is well established (for recent

discussions in a variety of contexts see: Adelman, 1982; Ermak and

McCammon, 1978; Tully, 1981). The motion proceeds according to the forces

prescribed by the effective potential, but with additional random forces and

friction due to the implicit solvent collisions. In general, these solvent forces are

not simple, but depend on the history of
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY96
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the solute dynamics (memory) and the current solute conformation
(hydrodynamic interaction). In the general case, the relevant equation is the so-

called generalized Langevin equation with the friction described by a memory

function that embodies the sta tistical properties of the solvent collisional

correlations in space and time. The approximation that neglects any frictional

correlation involves only constant drag coefficients, the so-called ordinary
Langevin equation. Further approximation leads to equations of a diffusion type.
As with most areas of theory in physical science, the time-dependent
theory lags behind the equilibrium theory in terms of development and

application. A few examples of attempts to ap ply these methods to realistic and

simplified models exist (Levy et al., 1979; McCammon et al., 1980) but only

once does it ap pear that a polypeptide has been examined (Brooks and Karplus,
1986). The problems encountered in any application involve, first,
computational limitations, since the dynamics that are of biochemical interest

are relatively slow. Perhaps more significant is our extremely limited

knowledge of the memory function and hy drodynamic interactions for a

complex solute. In principle, we can test our assumptions against all-atom

simulations or the relevant functions extracted from these simulations, but this

route is itself limited by the current sparsity of the requisite simulations. Never

theless, future developments in this area seem very likely, although they are

further away than are those in equilibrium theory.
ConclusionsThe ability to adequately test predictions of theoretical calcu lations is an
element of overriding importance in the future of the modeling of solvation and

electrostatics. This testing can occur at two levels: first and foremost by

comparing theory and experiment and second, by comparing results obtained

through convenient but approximate theory with those derived from accurate

theoretical treatment. The first is essential for accuracy and the second for the
future development of viable theoretical methods for studying increasingly
complex systems. Therefore, we should continue to encourage both experiment

and theory for both macromolecular and smaller model compounds.
We cannot expect an immediate and completely satisfactory way to
account for the influence of the solution environment on
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY97
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the behavior of macromolecules. The above discussion indicates that some
unsolved and many partially solved problems remain. Nevertheless, reasonable

approaches already exist that provide adequate grounds for qualitative study.

The degree of quantitative accuracy is not yet well established and awaits both

further model calculations and further thermodynamic and spectroscopic

experimental data, so that we may make unequivocal comparisons between
theory and experiment. Based on the steady progress described above over only
the past few years, we have every reason to expect rapid incremental progress to

continue. A clear view of the capabilities of current models and methods for

describing flexible small molecules should be available within only a few years.
At the same time, the large amount of theoretical activity both in the
development of well-founded approximate approaches and in the simulation of

atomic-level solvated molecules virtually assures our ability to make the

appropriate comparisons between the two in the near future. A very significant

element in recent developments has come from algorithmic breakthroughs.
Biased sampling techniques and thermodynamic perturbation/integration
methods are two new methods that contribute essential capabilities to the

theoretical effort. Hence, we should encourage theoretical developments as

much as computational applications.
The rapidly increasing access to the necessary computer facilities has
contributed significantly to progress, and it is essential that this access continue

to grow. For all-atom models of the environment, the current limitations on

macromolecular simulation are primarily computational. Although limitations

of the model theory are also likely, we now have insufficient data to make that
judgement. An order-of-magnitude increase in available computing power
would be enough to make a dramatic difference in this area; two orders of

magnitude would permit simulations into the interesting many-nanosecond

regime. Such changes are likely within the next five years through the

combined effects of new hardware, improved performance, and lower cost.
To explore adequately events such as protein folding that occur on much
longer time scales (or involve vast conformational exploration), these

computational improvements would still be inadequate by many orders of

magnitude. Thus, a theoretical breakthrough appears necessary if we are to
make real progress within the next several years. Such a breakthrough would
be, for example, the demonstration of an implicit treatment for the
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY98
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.solution environment that yielded accurate biopolymer dynamics on a
nanosecond time scale when compared to a full atomic-level simulation. Such a

treatment could then be applied for longer times.
Considering the very limited knowledge available about the performance
of alternative implicit modeling techniques, we can not now say whether such

an approach is workable, even in prin ciple. However, the process of

determining the usefulness of these techniques requires a one to two order-of-

magnitude gain in computer power.
In summary, the rapid progress in our ability to describe the environmental
aspects of bipolymer systems gives solid ground for optimism that this element

of biomolecular modeling will not impede development of useful predictive

methods. However, for the most challenging aspects, we are at least several

years away from demonstrating the ability to mimic accurately solution

environmental effects.
HEURISTIC METHODS
There are two major approaches to the prediction of three-dimensional
structures of proteins: modeling by extension and hierarchical searching. Both

methods can combine heuristic ideas and energy calculations. They differ from

the energy calculations described earlier and from each other in the way they

arrive at starting structure. Modeling by extension uses the known structure of a

protein or proteins with strong sequence homology to the unknown. The

hierarchical methods use packing considerations derived from the
crystallography of many proteins. The following section describes these
approaches in more detail.
HomologyProtein Homology
Proteins occur in families. Evidence for this comes first from protein
sequence homology and then from the architectural simi larity of homologous

proteins determined by x-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. A family

of proteins can be modeled by homology if several conditions are fulfilled. First

and most important, the structure of at least one member of the family must
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY99
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be known. Second, the three-dimensional protein to be modeled must be
sufficiently homologous to that of the known protein. Many proteins have been

modeled over the past five years, and the general consensus is that if two

proteins share at least 30 per cent similarity, then computer graphics and energy

modeling will be useful. If the global homology is less than 30 percent, then it

is difficult but not impossible to say whether the two proteins are in the same
family. If there are important conserved residues such as disulfide bridges then
even 30 percent homology might be sufficient.
The difficulty of modeling a given protein depends on the range of
homology with the known structure. When the homology is between 80 and 100

percent, normally only the surface amino acids are changing. In these cases,

there is usually no change in peptide length. With homology of between 50 and

80 percent, again, mainly the surface amino acids are changing, but there may

be additions and deletions in the peptide length. The amino acids on the surface

of the protein can be easily substituted. Energy minimization and/or molecular
dynamics are sufficient to reduce the errors caused by any changes in surface
sidechain conformation. Surface-charged amino acids under molecular

dynamics ei ther must be neutralized by artificially altering the parameters or by

adding a solvent box about the protein.
When interior amino acids are changed from one protein to another, the
changes are either to make a long amino acid shorter, thus creating a hole in the

interior of the protein, or a long-short pair of amino acids are changed to a short-

long pair of amino acids.
When amino acids are added or deleted in a helix, they are generally in
multiples of three amino acids. This preserves the hydrophobicity/

hydrophilicity relations in the helix. In contrast, beta strands tend to have

insertions or deletions of two amino acids, thus preserving the inside/outside

relations (Feldmann et al., 1985). The inside amino acids of a protein normally

are hy drophobic, while the outside amino acids are normally hydrophilic.

Graphic modeling of such changes is accomplished by moving the additions
and deletions in helices and beta strands toward the ends of the secondary
structure feature. Graphic modeling of loops is easy to do but fraught with large

inaccuracies. Insertion or deletion of amino acids on a loop can be

accomplished by breaking the peptide chain, making the appropriate change and

then bending
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY100
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the loop ends to accommodate the change. Energy modeling un der local
conditions of relatively high simulated temperature can be used to explore the

local conformational space.
There are two ways to align sequences, automatically and manually. The
automatic alignment methods such as Wilbur and Lipman tend to align the

sequence for highest local match. Man ual methods (see Feldmann et al., 1985)

permit the alignment of secondary structure features which minimize the

number of disturbances which must be made to the protein and convert from the

crystallographic structure to the model structure.
One of the ways to overcome the uncertainties of the structure of a
particular loop is to build a library of representative loops. Alwyn Jones at

Uppsala has done this and recently integrated it into FRODO, his modeling

program.After all the changes have been made either by graphic methods or by
using a loop library, extensive molecular dynamics sim ulation is generally used

to improve the quality of the model. Whether a broad range of scientists can use

molecular dynamics calculations depends on the availability of appropriate

modeling software and on a variety of displays and workstations. To complete
the modeling by molecular dynamics calculations, sufficient computer power
must be available either on a personal supercomputer (PSC) or by network

access to a national supercomputer.
Modeling by Extension
Twenty years ago, Phillips (1967) made a model of the protein lactalbumin
without obtaining a single crystal. This was possible because the amino acid

sequence of lactalbumin had been found to be 35 percent identical with that of

the enzyme lysozyme, a protein whose crystal structure had recently been

determined. The residues for lactalbumin were simply placed in the equivalent

po sitions known to be occupied by the residues of lysozyme (Browne et al.,
1969).Subsequently, Warme et al. (1974) underscored the validity of the
approach by computational approaches to the structures of the two proteins. The

structure of alpha-lactalbumin computed by energy minimization by Warme et

al. (1974) has recently been verified by x-ray crystallography (D.C. Phillips,

personal commu nication, 1987). Since then, 
ﬁmodeling by homologous
extensionﬂTERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY101
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.has become a common if sometimes casually applied approach, that has
benefited from modern computer graphics (Greer, 1985).
A recent example of the utility of modeling by extension is that an
important but elusive factor, angiogenin, involved in the biogenesis of blood

vessels was isolated after a search of more than 15 years. The sequence of this

factor was determined and found to be 45 percent identical to pancreatic

ribonuclease. As a result, Palmer et al. (1986) promptly generated a three-

dimensional structure.
Naturally, the closer the resemblance of the unknown protein to the one
whose structure has been determined, the more accu rate the modeled structure.

Recently, however, Moult and James (1986) have shown that it is possible to

construct good models even when the sequence resemblance is barely

recognizable. In many instances, then, all that is needed is the family

relationship of the new protein.
Exon Shuffling
Many recently evolved proteins exhibit evidence of 
ﬁexon shuf fling.
ﬂ In
this phenomenon, mosaic proteins result from the ge nomic rearrangement of

segments that encode small portions of different proteins. For such proteins, it is

thought that the peptide segments, which often range from 30 to 90 amino acids

in length, all fold independently (Doolittle, 1985); as such, they constitute

domains in the truest sense. As of mid-1987, about six such domains had been

found in a variety of proteins in different three-dimensional settings. Most of
them are tightly folded and contain disulfide bonds that hold the structure in
place. They include such well-known motifs as: the 
ﬁEGF domain,
ﬂ the
ﬁKringle,ﬂ and the 
ﬁfibronectin fingers.
ﬂ They are readily identified by rou tine
computer searches of sequence, and, when such a structure has been identified,

can be immediately modeled in place. Exon shuffling, which is due at least in

part to the additional recombination that ensues from the presence of introns

between exons, is not restricted to the small set of stable structures listed above,

and it is anticipated that hybrid and mosaic proteins of many sorts will be

identified. In all these situations, prior knowledge of any structural motif will

aid in interpreting the overall structure. Doubtless, other motifs will emerge as

more sequences are determined, compared and analyzed.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY102
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HIERARCHICAL MODELS OF PROTEIN FOLDING
The major goal of hierarchical modeling is to build three-dimensional
structures that incorporate directly or indirectly the architectural principles by

which nature constructs globular proteins. The direct approach uses empirical

rules or models that capture recognized aspects of protein folding. The indirect

ap proach uses homology to provide the basic structure and explores the local

environment with energy calculations or other modeling efforts. This latter
work was described in the previous section. Here, we assess the success of rule-
based procedures.Investigators have used these procedures at various levels of formality.
These efforts generally follow the same plan: predicting secondary structure

followed by packing secondary features. They also use the Kauzmann

hydrophobic model as the basic packing principle. Classifying protein domains

by structure has been particularly important because it provides major rules (for

a discussion and extensive references see Richardson, 1981; Cohen et al.,

1983). Such rules include statements about the geometry of helices packing
against helices and beta sheets and beta sheet-beta sheet packing. The efforts
have also led to the development of a list of rules concerning the ordering of

strands within a beta sheet. We should note clearly that rules such as these only

sum marize what is observed in known structures; they are not derived from

first principles of physics or chemistry. Nevertheless, many of the idealized

structures built to be consistent with such rules do look recognizably like

protein domains and some are rather close (average error 4 
Å) to the
crystallographic result.PATTERN RECOGNITION AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
We differentiate the techniques of pattern recognition from those of
artificial intelligence, especially its subdiscipline of ex pert systems. Pattern

recognition is usually defined as including numerical techniques for clustering

observed data into binary or higher order categories (but see below). Artificial

intelligence is usually defined to include use of rule-based systems to express

and use empirical knowledge of a subject.
The usual techniques of pattern recognition, such as linear discriminate
analysis, cluster analysis, and other parametric and
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY103
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.nonparametric methods, have not proved useful in the analysis of protein
structures and functions. These methods pose difficulties in determining the

statistical significance of a derived classification. Given the relative lack of

knowledge about structure-function relationships in complex molecules such as

proteins, it is very dif ficult even to pick a reasonable set of structural

descriptors upon which to build a clustering scheme.
Other definitions of pattern recognition, however, are less controversial in
technique, if not in interpretation of results. These techniques involve, for

example, the presentation of three-dimensional protein structures in the form of

C-alpha distance maps (Kuntz, 1975; Rao and Rossmann, 1973) to infer the

pres ence of secondary and super secondary structures and location of intron/

exon boundaries (G
, 1981).The technology of expert systems may be applied when em pirical
knowledge, which can be expressed in rule-based systems, can be used to solve

problems. For example, production rules of the form IF (x) THEN (y) may be

an integral part of a hierar chical pattern comparison described previously

(Figure 4-1
). To achieve high performance, such rule-based approaches are
often supplemented with methods and data from other sources. Two systems
under development, KARMA (Klein et al., 1986) and PROTEAN (Hayes-Roth
et al., 1986) illustrate this point. The KARMA system employs rule-based

proposal and evaluation of small molecules and their predicted binding

activities in receptor sites of known proteins. A variety of mathematical and

graphic procedures are used to evaluate candidate structures and their affinities

for binding. PROTEAN uses artificial intelligence techniques with interatomic

(nonbonded) distance information from NMR and a variety of mathematical and

graphic techniques to ex plore structural possibilities for proteins of known

primary structure.Cohen et al. (1983, 1986b) have carried out one of the most ex tensive
projects in their studies of alpha/beta domains and four he lix bundles. In the

former case, they identified secondary features by using pattern matching and

then built tertiary structures from exhaustive combinatorial packing of the

secondary elements. In the most favorable case, flavodoxin, they could generate

a unique prediction for the alpha carbons involved in helix or sheet of the
protein. Similar predictions for molecules such as interleukin-2
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY104
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have been made based on a core structure of four helices (Cohen, et al., 1986b).
The important strengths of such projects are (1) they achieve low
resolution structures of the central residues of proteins that contain many

protein features, including a prediction of the 
ﬁac tive
ﬂ portion of the molecules;
(2) the computational labor is modest; and (3) the rule system can be tested

directly against known structures and their homologs. In some sense, they are
the best solution currently available to the folding problem. On the negative
side, the low resolution is an obvious limitation. Details of loops are often

neglected. Only certain classes of proteins can be dealt with successfully.
The next several years should bring improvements in all as pects. More
realistic models will reduce errors. Loops and side chains can be treated either

from rule-based or energy-based ap proaches. Expansion to more protein

structural classes is proceeding rapidly. It is difficult to see the ultimate

limitations of these heuristic methods. We are hopeful that they yield good first-

order approximations that can be refined by the energy minimization and
molecular dynamics calculations.
TERTIARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS: THEORY105
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7.Functional Aspects of Proteins and Nucleic
AcidsWe turn our attention from structural considerations to the more complex
questions surrounding biological function. This section contains discussions of
enzyme catalysis, protein design, and ligand/substrate design.
CATALYSISThe Theory of Enzyme Catalysis
Enzyme catalysis is one of the most crucial and certainly the most
intriguing aspects of the kinetic behaviors of proteins. The central question
about catalysis is, which aspects of protein structure and dynamics cause the

often enormous enhancements of rates of reaction over the rates in water? This

question is, at best, incompletely answered and at worst very much open. One

can not expect that molecular dynamics, with its use of a classical mechanical

forcefield, will, by itself, provide definitive answers. Empirical potentials in

molecular dynamics or molecular mechanics calcu lations are approximations

chosen to model thermodynamically stable minima in energy surfaces. Catalytic

reactions are by their very nature dependent on barriers or maxima in these

surfaces. Not even the form of the potential used in most classical calculations

would be correct. However, it is reasonable to think that this
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS106
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.problem will eventually be solved by an approach that combines molecular
dynamics and quantum mechanical methods. Molecular dynamics techniques

can handle the motion of many atoms, and quantum mechanics can be used to

represent events along the reaction pathway at the catalytic site and in the

reactants (substrates), that is, wherever chemical bonds are broken and/or

formed. Recent studies of simple organic reactions in solution by Jorgensen (in
press) and studies of enzyme mechanisms by Warshel (1986) exemplify this
combined approach.
In work on simple organic reactions in solution, the reaction path has been
investigated by a series of ab initio quantum me chanical calculations of the

reactants in vacuo in different states of reaction, and molecular mechanical

(Monte Carlo) simulation of the solvation of each state. When combined, the

results of these two calculations yielded estimates of the free energy profile

along the reaction coordinate, from which reaction kinetics can be estimated.

Although the quantum mechanical calculations did not take into account the
response of the reactants to the solvent environment, Jorgensen (in press)
nevertheless obtained very promising results for three different reaction types:

SN1, SN2, and addition reactions.Parallel studies of enzyme mechanisms pose additional prob lems, simply
because the systems, including the reacting species, contain many more atoms.

Except in a few simple reactions such as catalysis by carbonic anhydrase, the

substrates are much larger than the reactants in the models chosen by Jorgensen.

Also, in many enzyme-catalyzed reactions, a chemical bond forms between

enzyme and substrate in an intermediate product of the reaction. In these cases
the ab initio quantum mechanics calculation, which by its nature is currently
restricted to systems of a few atoms, will have to be performed on a fragment or

fragments of the chemically reacting species. It is not yet clear how this can be

done without introducing large errors. Warshel has introduced the use of a more

approximate quantum mechanics method, the ab initio empirical valence bond

(EVB) method, into this problem to replace the quantum mechanical

component. Although it can handle more atoms, the EVB method initially had

the drawback of having to be calibrated by simulations designed to predict

known molecular properties. In this instance, acidities of ionizing groups were

used. However, this was done successfully, and Warshel and Sussman (1986)

and Hwang and Warshel (1987) found that the method
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS107
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.now can rationalize observations of changes in catalytic efficiency of mutant
enzymes. These results emphasize the critical role of stabilization of the

reaction's transition state by electrostatic interactions. Because of the empirical

character of the EVB method and a lack of general experience with it, these

conclusions await confirmation through further study with the EVB method and

ab initio methods.
Given the great interest in the theory of enzyme catalysis, investigators
have already begun to apply a combination of ab initio quantum mechanics and

molecular dynamics (Rao et al., 1987). This will generate new problems to be

solved. As noted, a major problem will be encountered for those enzyme

reactions in which a chemical bond is formed between enzyme and substrate in

an intermediate step. It will also be necessary to establish the magnitude of the
systematic error caused by transfer of a quantum mechanical result obtained
without solvation, not only to a solvated situation, but also to a protein active

site environment, where the rates are much enhanced. Some very careful work

will be required before this approach can be applied reliably to enzyme

mechanisms. However, caveats notwithstanding, these studies are worth doing.
DESIGNING NEW PROTEIN STRUCTURES
The following section discusses the future of protein design, which is one
of the key areas of growth in macromolecular modeling.
In the same way as Levinthal's (1966) pioneering studies initiated
computer-assisted modeling, Richardson's (1981) work on the anatomy and

taxonomy of proteins signaled the transition from molecular archeology to

molecular design, for protein chemists. We call our drug design project

computer-assisted molecular design
Šthere are more types of molecules than
proteins. Richardson presented a framework for understanding the organization

of protein architecture. This framework condenses the observations of protein

structure and architecture from individual structure solutions into a form that
allows us to think of protein architecture as manipulable. Site-directed
mutagenesis of protein structure is a simple way of altering proteins without

really altering protein architecture. The technique of producing chimeric

proteins by gross manipulation of gene structure is another early approach to the
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS108
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.manipulation of protein architecture. At this point, the problems involved in
designing new proteins are formidable. Consider the process of designing an

ordinary protease. Proteases typically have 250 amino acids. Since there are 20

amino acids, there are 20
250 possible proteins of length 250. The only sensible
way to reduce the number of possible proteins to one design is to use several

levels of decomposition that specify how portions of the protein are to be
organized architecturally, spatially, and functionally. Our understanding of the
rules of thumb triggered by the Richardson paper is now evolving rapidly.
FIGURE 7- The cycle of protein design and expression.
Protein design cannot be divorced from the issues of protein expression
and folding. The complete cycle for the design, expression, and folding of

proteins can be represented as in
Figure 7-1.To be able to design a protein effectively, one must be able to traverse this
design cycle rapidly and often. At present, several important conceptual

problems prevent us from completing this cycle at all. Suppose that we could

design a hypothetical protein using the architectural concepts. The output would

be a three-dimensional model of the protein embodying a particular amino acid

sequence. Given this hypothetical design, the next task would be to construct a

gene. The problem here is that the amino acid sequence of the hypothetical

protein, in general, specifies only two of the three bases in each codon of the

gene. One way to resolve this issue is to choose a random third base (See
Figure 7-2
).FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS109
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 7-2 The current pattern of the flow of information in the cycle of protein design and expression.
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS110
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Once the DNA of the constructed gene has been transcribed to messenger
RNA and edited, there is a linear sequence of three-base codes that, as

Nirenberg (1965) has described, exist in 64 combinations of the bases.

However, the 64 codons code for only 20 amino acids, so there is, at this point

in the cycle, a surplus of information. The ribosome translates the messenger

RNA codons into nascent polypeptide.
The Anfinsen (1975) experiment involving the denaturation and
renaturation of ribonuclease has been used to convince us that proteins fold into

their active three-dimensional structure solely on the basis of the information

contained in their sequence. Many scientists have been trying for the last two

decades to predict the secondary and tertiary structures of proteins from the

amino acid sequences alone. Their efforts have met with partial success at best.
We lack information about the protein folding portion of the design cycle. The
surpluses of information (denoted by pluses in the upper portion of
Figure 7-2
)and the deficiencies of information (denoted by the minuses) can be abstracted

to form the cycle pattern in the lower portion of the same figure. Clearly, our

current perception of the design cycle is flawed. Recent experiments show, for

example, that a gene that is moved from its native host to another expression

vector does not necessarily produce well-folded proteins. Even when the codon

utilization statistics of the new expression vector are mimicked, complete

protein folding does not necessarily occur. This suggests that third base

redundancy may be partially used to control protein folding, especially for

complex proteins.Experiments should be designed to explore how third base redundancy
influences protein folding. With such data, the information from a hypothetical

protein design could be used to properly construct the DNA of a gene. A proper

gene would then transcribe and translate properly to yield a polypeptide that

folds properly. If these conditions were met, the design cycle abstraction would

be as shown in
Figure 7-3
.If the information flow around the protein design and implementation
cycle is preserved, then it should be possible for protein engineers to rapidly

traverse this cycle in the design and perfection of novel proteins.
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS111
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 7-3 The ideal pattern of flow of information in the cycle of protein
design and expression.
Computer Representation
Computer-assisted modeling of molecules has been evolving since the
original work of Levinthal (1966). His work was the first time that a computer,

a PDP-1 from the then-infant Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), was used

to draw the three-dimensional structure of a small organic molecule. It used one

line segment to represent each chemical bond. With simple software controls,

the molecule could be rotated in space and redisplayed. Similarly, the

conformation of the molecule could be changed by rotating one portion of the

molecule around a bond that formed an isthmus between it and the remainder of

the molecule. The display of the molecule was done in pairs of images where

the image of one molecule was rotated 5 degrees around the vertical axis. This

produced a stereoscopic effect that permitted the three-dimensional structure of

the molecule to be perceived without having to rotate it continually. All of
molecular graphics has simply been an extension and refinement of these
powerful ideas. The number of line segments drawn per second has risen

dramatically. Color has been added. Hardware stereo devices have been

developed, and very recently powerful array processors have been added to

permit the rapid calculation of molecular energetics during modeling.
These techniques for display and modeling were developed and refined in
a few academic research laboratories. They began to diffuse to biochemical and

genetics laboratories in academic and industrial institutions worldwide. Over

the past 20 years, the manufacturers of computer and graphics hardware have

begun to recognize that molecular graphics and modeling is a substantial

market. We are now at the critical point in this respect. Hardware manufacturers

are now willing to design workstations (i.e. integrated computational and

graphics machines for individual
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS112
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.use) for the molecular modeling and design market. A new class of
workstations is expected in the next year. Two members of the class of personal

supercomputers (PSCs) have been identified, and collaborations are in place to

insure that these machines, when they enter the commercial market, will be

fully conditioned 
ﬁchemistry engines
ﬂ. The four functions, molecular energy
computation, molecular configuration control, molecular graphics, and
reasoning about molecular structure, will be integrated in one computer system.
The PSCs will provide a nearly ideal package for mass distribution of
CAMD capabilities. Market forces can be expected to expand the number of

different machines and the features that each machine offers. Standards at

various levels, as defined by the International Standards Organization (ISO),

will permit existing and new program systems to be transported rapidly onto the
PSC class members. The standardization efforts will permit a decoupling of the
computational support systems (i.e. hardware, graphics, operating systems, and

the molecular modeling and design programs) from the intellectual uses of such

systems.The existence of standards, however, does not guarantee portable program
code. Scientists who write new programs must know about these standards and

write programs that conform to them. Commercial organizations that take

existing scientific programs should shape them towards the standard style

because, in the end, the size of the commercial market will depend on the ability
of end users to piece together working systems from components made out of
various standard programs. If these standardization efforts succeed, then in the

future, the molecular modeling community will be able to routinely make

smooth transitions to more powerful computer support systems.
Computer graphics representations offer alternative ways of understanding
molecular structure and function. They started as the simplest white line

drawings on black screens, then progressed to color images, to solid surfaces, to

dot surfaces, and to electrostatic surfaces. Intergraph three-dimensional

representations and white light hologram representations have been developed
and used for molecular structure problems. Intergraph is composed of
approximately 20 individual photographs where vertical strips are selected from

each photograph and composed into one image. The composite image is viewed

through a linear fresnel lens. The
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS113
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.next generation of workstation, the PSC, will offer ray-traced images as part of
the operating system. In a ray traced image the reflections on a surface are

compared by calculating the trajectory of light beams from all possible light

sources. This produces in the extreme the reflections of one object on another.

A truly three-dimensional representation where the molecule would actually

occupy three-dimensional space is needed. A breakthrough in a field such as
plasma physics is necessary to make this a reality.
Impediments to Progress
The central bottleneck to progress in protein design is our inability to
predict protein tertiary structure from amino acid sequence. The notion put forth

by Anfinsen 25 years ago was that the amino acid sequence alone determines

tertiary structure. This notion may be too simplistic, and there may indeed be a

higher level code than the Nirenberg nucleic acid to amino acid conversion by
the ribosome. Since the Anfinsen conjecture and the experimental detail
surrounding it are largely prohibitory in nature, they had the effect of

discouraging experimentation in expression and folding of proteins. Scientists

who are concerned with protein expression are content with the Nirenberg code

and explain away anomolous results because they see no need for any other

effect. Scientists concerned with protein folding cannot explain how proteins

fold, but then are discouraged by the Anfinsen conjecture from asking for more

information from the geneticists. A theory and experiment linking codon

utilization in gene structure with the folding of protein structure would be a

major step toward reconciling these views.
PREDICTING FUNCTION FROM A PREDICTED THREE-
DIMENSIONAL STRUCTURE
In principle, the information needed to predict the function of a biological
macromolecule is encoded in its three-dimensional structure. We assume that

we must know the three-dimensional structure of a macromolecule before we

can fully understand its function. The problem is, how do we decode the rules

that govern the relationship between structure and function? A subset of this

problem will be discussed below: the prediction of the change in
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS114
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the functioning of a protein that results from the binding of a ligand.
Recently, the possibility of computer-assisted drug design based on the
three-dimensional structure of target biomolecules has received much attention

in the scientific literature (Beddell, 1984; Goodford, 1984; Hol, 1986). Those in

the field believe that medicinal chemistry is poised to undergo a revolution as

dramatic as the events in the 1950s and 1960s that transformed organic
chemistry from a descriptive to a predictive science. Since we are at the
beginning of a new age, the many challenges ahead do not diminish the

excitement of knowing that the solutions are also on the horizon. We have a

sense that, at last, we know what it is that we have to learn and have at least the

rudiments of the necessary tools at hand.
In anticipating this revolution, we are presupposing that we can or soon
will be able to predict the functions of proteins from their structures. In

particular, we would need to be able to predict the ability of a protein to

recognize and bind a ligand and to predict the structure of the 
ﬁoptimumﬂligand. Beyond that, however, we would need to be able to predict how the
protein carries out its function and how it recognizes and interacts with other

macromolecules to alter its own functions and theirs. Although we have learned

much about these topics, there are unanswered questions that we must be able to

answer before we will be able to make accurate predictions.
Experience in Ligand Design from Experimental Protein
StructuresOne illustration of our current state of achievement is given by work on
hemoglobin. Ligands affect the function and properties of hemoglobin in

complex ways. Investigators began to attempt to design ligands based on the

three-dimensional structure of a protein as soon as such structures were

available. In the early 1970s, the group headed by Goodford at Wellcome

Laboratories in England began to explore the possibilities of ligand design by
receptor fit (Beddell, 1984; Goodford, 1984). They used the structure of
hemoglobin as determined by protein crystallography and constructed a wire

model that was hinged so that they could examine both the oxy- and deoxy-

states.FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS115
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The first studies involved the design of ligands (using mechanical models)
to fit the diphosphoglycerate (
Figure 7-4
, compound 1) binding site and then to
mimic its function. The investigators used simple concepts of complementary

shapes, electrostatic interactions, and possible covalent bonds. The designed

compounds (
Figure 7-4
, designated compounds 2-4) do indeed mimic the effect
of diphosphoglycerate on the dissociation of oxygen from hemoglobin.
Subsequent crystallographic work supported the proposed binding mode. In
addition, the relative binding energy of various analogues to a number of

different hemoglobins was measured for 29 protein-inhibitor combinations.

Statistical analysis revealed a highly significant correlation between the strength

of binding and the number of covalent and ionic interactions. The use of

computer graphics for the design would have accelerated this process since it

took three months to construct the physical wire model of the protein.
This work was then expanded in an attempt to design a compound for the
treatment of sickle cell anemia. The goal was to develop a compound that

would affect the oxygen-dissociation curve in a way opposite to that of

diphosphoglycerate. An intensive biochemical, physiological, and structural

examination of the problem suggested that a ligand that binds between the alpha
subunits of oxyhemoglobin might have the desired effect. Since no natural
ligand for this site was known, the ligands were designed from the protein

structure alone and designated compounds 5 and 6 (See 
Figure 7-4
). Although
the proposed binding mode has not been experimentally verified, the designed

compounds did produce the expected change in function of hemoglobin. One of

the compounds is now in clinical trials for the treatment of sickle cell disease.

Thus, using rather primitive tools, the Wellcome group was able to predict the

effect of a small molecule on the function of a protein.
The recent experience of Perutz et al. (1986) emphasizes both the
important accomplishment made by these workers and the limits of our

molecular understanding. Perutz and coworkers experimentally demonstrated

several of the potential binding sites that a molecule might recognize in
hemoglobin. Specifically, they solved the crystal structure of eight ligand-
hemoglobin complexes and showed that there are at least six different positions

on the protein at which a ligand might form a tight complex. Since the ligands

were selected on the basis of their perceived structural
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS116
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 7-4 Some molecules synthesized to aid in elucidating the relation of
structure to biological activity of some macromolecules. See text for details.
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS117
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.similarity, this result must be carefully considered by those who attempt to
design ligands to fit a particular site on a protein. Three of the molecules bind in

sites that overlap; two of these raise the minimum gelling concentration of

hemoglobin S, whereas the third lowers it. Each of the bound ligands changes

the structure of the proteins so little that the change is barely detectable, yet

some of the ligands increase the gelling concentration, some decrease it, and
others do not change it at all. This work makes it clear that even after studying
structure and function of hemoglobin for 25 years, an investigator may still be

puzzled by the functional consequences of the minute structural changes that

accompany ligand binding.
The work of Perutz et al. (1986) also illustrates that the design of a drug is
more complicated than the mere design of a tightly bound ligand. Clofibrate

raises the gelling concentration of hemoglobin S. Also, it has been used

clinically for other disorders and so is known to be absorbed, metabolized, and

nontoxic. Yet it cannot be used to treat sickle cell disease because it is so tightly
bound to serum albumin that it is not available to bind to the hemoglobin. The
lesson to be drawn from this is that when we design a new drug from theoretical

principles, we must somehow incorporate the possible interaction of the

proposed ligand with all other macromolecules of the body.
The work cited and other studies on hemoglobin underscore both the
promise and the challenges in predicting the changes in the function of a protein

that are brought about by formation of a protein-ligand complex. This work also

highliglits the further challenges of predicting all of the interactions of the

ligand with the organism.
The design of inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase was aided by the three-
dimensional structures of the proteins. Research efforts of two pharmaceutical

companies and their collaborators culminated in the crystallographic

determination of the structure of the dihydrofolate reductase from several

species, some with bound ligands (Beddell, 1984; Blaney et al., 1984;

Goodford, 1984). Each group designed a trimethoprim (
Figure 7-4
, compound7) analogue (
Figure 7-4
, compounds 8 and 9), that was proposed to form a new
interaction with a nearby arginine. Goodford (1985) was able to verify this

interaction (
Figure 7-4
, compound 8) by crystallography. Both new analogues
show greatly enhanced binding affinity. However, neither shows enhanced

antibacterial activity,FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS118
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.presumably because they do not easily penetrate into the bacterial cell.
Additionally, neither has any antibacterial activity in whole animals, so they are

not candidates for development as new therapeutic agents. Thus, although this

work did successfully predict the local functional consequences of structural

modification of a previously marketed drug, it did not predict all of those

properties needed to convert a biologically interesting compound into a
therapeutically useful one.
In summary, efforts to design inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase have
shown that, although knowing the structure of the target biomolecule is very

useful when designing a ligand, this alone is not enough information to design a

drug. Furthermore, these protein structures have been available for

approximately five years, yet neither company has capitalized on them, nor
have other research groups used the published enzyme structures to design new
compounds.Many other groups have used crystal structures of proteins to design
analogues of known ligands. In an early example, a physical model of lysozyme

and a proposed mechanism of its hydrolytic action were used to design a

transition-state inhibitor (Goodford, 1984). The compound inhibits the enzyme;
it binds 32 times more strongly than the corresponding substrate. The proposed
binding mode has also been confirmed by x-ray diffraction studies.
In the first use of color computer graphics in the design of ligands to bind
to a protein, workers at the University of California at San Francisco used

interactive potential energy calculations and molecular graphics to dock

thyroxine analogues into the binding site in the crystallographic structure of pre-
albumin (Blaney et al., 1982). They designed and synthesized several more
strongly bound ligands. The predictions were confirmed experimentally. Since

the function of pre-albumin appears to be transport of thyroxine, no further

predictions of the consequence of ligand-protein interaction were made.
Experience in Ligand Design from Predicted Protein
StructuresProtein structures modeled by homology to proteins whose three-
dimensional structure is known have also proved useful in the design of novel

ligands. For example, workers at two different pharmaceutical companies have

used a structure of the enzyme renin that was modeled from other members of

the asparticFUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS119
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.proteinase class (Anonymous, 1986; Boger, 1986). Such models suggested the
structures of new inhibitors. The compounds were shown to be potent inhibitors

in vivo as well as in vitro.
Approximate target macromolecule structures have also been used to
design new agents. The classic example is the design of captopril (
Figure 7-4
,compound 9), an inhibitor of angiotensin-converting enzyme and a clinically

successful antihypertensive agent (Petrillo, 1982). Captopril was designed from

a proposed structure of the substrate when bound to the enzyme. The structure

of the enzyme was assumed to be similar to that of carboxypeptidase A because
of mechanistic similarities between the two enzymes.
Inferring Binding Sites
Much of this section has addressed issues related to determining and
analyzing the structures of proteins of known sequence but unknown three-

dimensional structure. Once these structures are known, detailed studies can be

carried out of the relationships between those structures and the corresponding

functions of a protein. Proteins express their functions through binding of other
molecules, often termed effectors, with or without concomitant transformation
of the effector, e.g., degradation or chemical reactions at functional groups. We

have discussed structure/activity studies of the binding of effector molecules to

putative sites in a protein of known structure. A separate body of research has

focused on a complementary problem: relating the structures of several effector

molecules to one another in order to determine information about binding sites,

often termed active sites, in proteins of unknown structure. When such studies

are successful, they can obviously provide structural information about a

protein that can be used in conjunction with some of the techniques for structure

determination discussed earlier in this report.
The general problem of inferring binding sites can be stated simply. Given
a set of molecules that are presumed to bind to the same site in a given protein

of unknown structure, we must infer the size, shape, and binding characteristics

of the active site. Several problems are subsidiary to this general problem. We

mention them here, but a detailed analysis is beyond the scope of this report.
For example, one must consider the process of
recognition of the effector
molecules prior to the actual binding in
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS120
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the active site. One must consider the possibility of conformational changes of
both an effector and an active site during recognition and binding. One must

perform very careful studies to ensure that the measured biological or chemical

responses for several effectors are in fact due to binding in the same active site.

A useful introduction to this research area, with leading references, has been

presented (Olson and Kristoffersen, 1979).
At least three approaches have been used to infer the structure of receptor
sites:  thereceptor mapping
 aproach of Humber et al. (1979);
  theactive analog
 approach of Marshall et al. (1979);
  the DYLOMMS program of Wise et al. (1983).
These approaches are closely related. All follow the same basic principles,
but in different ways. All begin with the assumption that similar effectors

possess related
pharmacophoric patterns
, i.e., similar dispositions in three-
dimensional space of similar structural features important for binding.

Independent studies are used to postulate pharmacophoric patterns of active
molecules, generally using the most conformationally rigid molecules to form
hypotheses. Once such a pattern is assigned, all possible conformations of each

effector are examined to determine if there are low energy conformations that

present the pattern. This both tests the hypothetical pattern and begins building

a set of molecules that can be superimposed based on the pattern. Once

superpositions are established, the volume occupied by the molecules can be

used to define the cavity of the active site. Molecules of related structure that

can yield the pharmacophoric pattern, but that display no activity, can be used

to define the walls of the cavity, further elaborating its shape.
Recently, practicing medicinal chemists have become enthusiastic about
these uses of computational and computer graphics techniques to compare the

three-dimensional structures of ligands that bind to a receptor. They use the

common features of the aligned structures to propose tentative maps of the

receptor topography. These maps are then used to design new compounds

(Ghose and Crippen 1985; Hopfinger, 1985; Humblet and Marshall, 1981).
These techniques have benefited from the knowledge gained through protein
crystallography. In particular, current applications of receptor-mapping methods

usually compare the location of the projection of ligand atoms to possible

binding sites,
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS121
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rather than identifying the location of the ligand atoms themselves as had been
done previously.The final category of computer-assisted prediction of the biological
properties of a small molecule is also the oldest. This type of methodology,

Quantitative Structure/Activity Relation ships (QSAR) uses statistical or pattern

recognition methods to explore the possible relationship between the biological

and physical or substructural (presence or absence of certain functional groups)

properties of molecules. Given the known utility of QSAR methodology to

predict the potency of untested analogues (Hopfinger, 1985; Martin, 1981), it is
important that the developers of this methodology are actively pursuing the
challenge of evaluating the reliability of linear free-energy equations for cases

in which the protein structure is known. In the case of dihydrofolate reductase,

several investigators have compared the conclusions from QSAR and molecular

graphics modeling of the inhibitors (Blaney et al., 1984). The conclusions

derived from the two methods agree closely, confirming the proposal that the

QSAR equations contain information about the types of noncovalent

interactions between the inhibitors and the enzyme. However, a major

advantage of QSAR over other computer-based methodologies is that one can

attempt to develop equations for any biological response. For example,

equations have been developed for the enzyme inhibition, antibacterial, and

whole-animal antitumor activity of dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors (Blaney et
al., 1984). Thus, QSAR is a logical complement to the more structure-based
computer methodologies. It could be used to model the potential whole-animal

activity of new ligands and perhaps to search for unanticipated interactions with

other macromolecules.Computer Tools for Ligand Design from Three-Dimensional
Protein StructureThe recent excitement in computer-assisted drug design has arisen because
scientists now have available the elements of each of the important tools for

such an activity. Two types of computer hardware are necessary: high-speed

color graphics and affordable but powerful computers dedicated to modeling. In

addition, a growing body of data on the three-dimensional structure of proteins

is becoming available, as our understanding increases of some of the

relationships between structure and function of proteins.
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS122
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Finally, software is also available for the graphics display of the molecules and
for modeling the energetics and thermodynamics of the binding.
Specialized graphics tools for molecular design have also been developed.
Some of these arose from the related activity of docking a known ligand into a

protein. The display of the surface of the binding site is more useful for ligand

design if it is color-coded to suggest the preferred type of noncovalent

interaction at that point in space. For example, through such displays we can

distinguish between surfaces near positively charged, negatively charged,

hydrogen-bond accepting, hydrogen-bond donating, and hydrophobic regions of
the protein.Another helpful tool used with the graphics display is the immediate read-
out of energy values as the ligand is docked into a putative binding site and as

bonds in the ligand and/or the protein are rotated to facilitate the docking.

Design of ligands at the computer screen is aided by stereoscopic viewing

devices and implements that allow one to move an object being displayed (such

as a ligand) in three dimensions while keeping the rest of the display as it was.

Experience has shown that molecular mechanics energy minimizations are

necessary to evaluate the geometry and energy of the proposed complexes
(Pincus and Scheraga, 1979).
It was noted previously that one persistent but often hidden problem in
ligand design is that a ligand may bind to a protein in a different orientation or

at a totally different site than the investigator anticipated. Kuntz et al. (1982)

have devised a computerized means of evaluating such possibilities based on

shape alone.The design of a new ligand molecule is aided by the graphics display of the
energetically preferred sites on the protein for interaction with various types of

possible ligand atoms (Goodford, 1985). Such sites are identified as the energy

of interaction of the probe atom at each point on a three-dimensional grid

surrounding a protein. The ligand would be designed to interact at as many of

these sites as feasible.
Once a proposed ligand is designed, its thermodynamics of binding can be
predicted with the free-energy perturbation method if it is a reasonably close

analogue of a known compound.
If there are data on the relative energy of binding of other ligands to the
protein, a QSAR or receptor mapping analysis
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS123
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.discussed above may suggest regions on the target that are conformationally
more flexible than the experimental structure may suggest. QSAR (or at least

consideration of physical properties) is expected to also be useful in the design

of ligands that will have the appropriate whole-animal properties.
Impediments to Ligand Design from Protein Structures
Proteins are conformationally mobile. They are not the static structures
that the graphics display of the crystal structure suggests. For example,

molecular dynamics calculations on myoglobin have shown that within 300

picoseconds, 2,000 different conformational minima are sampled (Elber and

Karplus, 1987). The root-mean-square difference in the location of the atoms in
the most different structures is 2 
Å; this means that many atoms move
substantially more than that.
Proteins also change conformation when ligands are bound to them; hence,
ligand design methodologies must be able accurately to predict such

movements. For example, when the antiviral compound VIN 52084 is bound to

the human rhinovirus, 13 residues of the protein undergo measurable
conformational change (Smith et al., 1986b). The main chain moves as much as
3 Å, the channel to the binding pocket opens to the solution, the isoelectric
point of the system changes from 6.9 to 7.1, and the occupancy of Ca
++ at a
distant point on the virus increases.
Conformational responses to ligand binding may be part of the function of
the protein. For example, in response to Ca
++, the channel-forming proteins of
the gap junction between cells show small cooperative rearrangements of the

relative orientation of the subunits. This rearrangement results in the narrowing

of the diameter of the Ca
++ channel within the cell by 18
Å and thus closes the
channel to Ca
++ passage (Unwin and Ennis, 1984). During this rearrangement,
the conformation of each subunit does not change appreciably, only the

orientation of each subunit changes with respect to the others.
Conformational responses to ligand binding may form the basis of the
selectivity of ligands for very similar proteins. Evidence from crystallography,

QSAR, and molecular graphics suggests that conformational changes in the

enzyme in response to the binding of ligands is responsible for the selectivity of

trimethoprim for bacterial dihydrofolate reductases in contrast to vertebrate

enzymesFUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS124
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Blaney et al., 1984). In the chicken liver enzyme, a tyrosine residue moves 5.4
Å in response to the binding of trimethoprim.
Since there is no experimentally established three-dimensional structure of
a membrane-bound receptor, for this type of protein we depend on indirect

observation and inference for our notions about conformation and

conformational changes in response to ligand binding. Current concepts of

receptor function usually invoke a conformational change as part of the

transduction of the signal of a binding event into the ultimate biochemical and

physiological response. Thus, it is possible that the regulatory and second
messenger binding sites on receptor proteins might become available only in the
presence of the ligand. Furthermore, that certain compounds only partially

activate a receptor suggests the possibility that a whole family of receptor

conformations is available.
Thus, to use protein structure design a ligand that influences the action of a
protein whose function requires more than one conformation or in which the

putative binding site is very flexible, we would like to know the relevant three-

dimensional structures of that protein and be able to predict the conditions

under which each is stable. In other words, we would find it difficult to predict

the function of a new ligand unless we had available structures of these protein

conformations. We see this as a problem that will require at least as much study

as the problem of finding the global minimum energy structure.
The ligand binds to a protein that is part of a system. In solution, a protein
is part of a complex with water, ions, and cofactors. Alternatively, it may

function while interacting with a membrane. These other species affect the

strength of binding of the ligands of interest. For example, trimethoprim binds

to dihydrofolate reductase with a 10,000-fold increase of affinity in the presence

of its cofactor compared to its absence.
The covalent structures of some proteins are modified during the course of
their function. The large family of receptor kinases are responsible for

phosphorylatation of receptors as a means of regulating that receptor function.

Thus, the addition of a single phosphate group to a protein can dramatically

alter its function.
Other proteins are not functional until they are structurally modified after
their synthesis. For example, sperm binds to its receptors on the egg only if

these receptors are glycosylated. Additionally, posttranslational processing can

impart subtle variations
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS125
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in properties to a protein. For example, it is thought that the benzodiazepine
receptor is the same protein throughout the brain, but that it is glycosylated to a

different extent in different regions of the brain. These differences in

glycosylation are reflected in different relative affinities of the receptor for

various ligands.
Thus, for accurate and realistic models on which to base theoretical ligand
design, we need to be able to include such other species in the calculation.

Unfortunately, there are often not molecular mechanics parameters for such

cofactors and transition metals. Including these additional ions and molecules

increases the complexity and time of the calculation enormously, partly because

the number of atoms is increased but more dramatically because the search for

the stable arrangement of atoms is much more complicated. This is the multiple-
minimum problem, but with even fewer experimental constraints on the
solution of the problem. Furthermore, we cannot use traditional molecular

mechanics concepts for transition metals because they undergo changes in

oxidation and spin states that dramatically affect the optimum geometric

arrangement of ligands. To include such ions, we need a combination quantum

and molecular mechanics calculation. Although progress has been made in such

calculations (Warshel, 1981; Singh and Kollman, 1986), they still need

refinement and testing and tend to be calculations that strain available

computers. Thus, we see promise that the tools required will be available, but

they are not yet in routine use.
There may be more than one binding made for the ligand. The experience
with the binding of ligands to hemoglobin and the different binding orientations

of methotrexate (
Figure 7-4
, structure 10) and dihydrofolate (
Figure 7-4
,structure 11) to dihydrofolate reductase highlight this problem (Blaney et al.,

1984). The method of matching ligand shapes to protein cavities is helpful in

predicting such alternate binding modes. However, it is currently limited

because it considers only the correspondence of the shape of the ligand and the

binding site and not their possible flexibility or electrostatic and hydrophobic
contributions to binding energy. In principle, this problem could be solved by
examining the relative energy of all potential conformations of the protein and

the ligand and all potential relative orientations of the two. As noted above, for

such calculations water and cofactor molecules and associated ions should also

be included. Even if there are only two conformations of the protein each with

two binding sites and two
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS126
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conformations or enantiomers of the ligand, the problem increases eight-fold!
The challenge escalates when we consider that, in drug design, we would like to

consider many possible analogues for synthesis. Thus, much more sophisticated

techniques for pruning conformational and orientation hyperspace need to be

developed before detailed calculations of this magnitude will be possible.
Even if we could predict the mode and strength of binding of a ligand to a
protein, the effect of such binding on the function of the protein in the cell

might not be obvious. The simplest case would seem to be the design of an

enzyme inhibitor. If an enzyme is inhibited, we would expect that fewer

substrate molecules would be transformed in a given unit of time. However, this

is not necessarily true. For example, current evidence is that receptor kinases

are present in the cell in high concentrations: the rate of phosphorylation of the
receptor is apparently governed by the concentration of the cyclic nucleotide
and the conformational state of the receptor and not the level of the enzyme.

Inhibition of such an enzyme by even 90 percent might have no observable

physiological effect. In other cases, the level of a particular enzymatic activity

is regulated by feedback control. Inhibition of such an enzyme would be

overcome by production of more enzyme. Alternatively, inhibition of an

enzyme might simply lead to the presence of higher levels of substrate but the

same rate of turn-over of substrate through the biochemical system. The

physiological effects of such agents may be impossible to predict.
The situation is even more complex in proteins that have multiple domains
that control multiple functions. A compound that prevented sickling of

hemoglobin S would be useless as a drug if it also prevented oxygen binding or

release or if, when bound, it promoted the crystallization of hemoglobin in a

different crystal form.
A further complication in trying to understand function from structure is
that a single protein may interact with several small molecules and other

proteins in a complex regulatory scheme. Different subunits of domains of a

protein may have different but interrelated functions. For example, all four

subunits of
Torpedocalifornica
 acetylcholine receptor are necessary to elicit a
nicotinic response to acetylcholine, whereas only the alpha subunit is refquired

for binding the antagonist alpha-bungarotoxin (Mishina et al., 1984). Thus, the
structure of the alpha subunit might help in the design of a ligand, but the
structure and function of all four
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS127
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subunits might be needed to predict whether the compound would be an agonist
or antagonist.
Other factors might make a ligand useless as a therapeutic agent. When a
ligand is administered to an animal, it must survive the metabolic and structural

defenses of the animal in order to reach its proposed site of action at the

required concentration. The ligand may be a substrate for any one of many

enzymes, some of which appear to have evolved broad specificity in order to

metabolize foreign substances and thereby protect the organism from its

unpredictable environment. Ultimately, we expect to be able to predict the
biotransformations of small molecules from the structures of the enzymes
involved, but we cannot do so today.
The ligand may also fortuitously bind to other macromolecules in the body
and, as a result, may not be available to the target protein. The ligand may have

the correct physical and chemical properties to be rapidly excreted into the urine

or bile before it has a chance to move to its target. Finally, the ligand may be so

slightly soluble that it cannot achieve high enough concentrations in the blood

or gastrointestinal tract for it to be distributed to its site of action. Again, we

have some informal rules that allow us to attack these problems, but lack the
basic knowledge we need to make true predictions. A ligand might also be
useless in curing disease because it or one of its metabolites produces toxicity in

the animal.To use a ligand as a drug, it must be technically feasible to do so. This
means that it must be possible to produce the compound in the required

quantities and purity; it must be stable enough to ship to the patient; and an

acceptable pharmaceutical form of the compound must be devised. A major

advance has been made in the computer-assisted design of pathways for the

synthesis of compounds. However, further enhancements would make this tool
even more useful.
Economic factors also figure into feasibility; if the compound is to be sold,
the patentability of the compound, the cost of its manufacture, the cost and

effectiveness of competing therapy, and the expected incidence of the disease

for which it is effective will also be issues in the decision to market the

compound.Other complications may also emerge when one is predicting function or
designing ligands from predicted three-dimensional protein structures. First, the

confidence in the exact coordinates of the protein structures will be lower. This

greater uncertainty
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS128
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.will complicate the investigation of proposed function or the design of ligands
because the exact dimensions of the possible binding sites will be uncertain, as

will the conformation of residues on the surface of the protein. In principle,

these questions can be answered using extensive molecular dynamics and

minimization calculations. The prediction of function might be straightforward

if the unknown protein shows a strong sequence homology with a protein of
known structure and function.
Another complication with the use of predicted structures is that we may
be unaware of posttranslational modifications of the structure. Ultimately, we

expect to be able to predict such modifications from the substrate specificities

of the enzymes that perform them. However, we cannot do so today.
Consideration of protein structures based on DNA sequence may obscure
the fact that the protein may function as part of a multisubunit assembly.

Multiple subunit proteins are common. To predict the function of such a

protein, we must realize that it binds to the other subunits. It is not enough to
consider other proteins coded on the same chromosome; the genes that code for
the two different protein chains that form the subunits of hemoglobin are

located on different chromosomes. Hemoglobin illustrates a further

complication in using DNA sequences: there are at least four different variants

of the beta subunit. Only one of these is produced in quantity by the organism.

Thus, to predict the function of the alpha chain of hemoglobin, we would need

to recognize that it functions in a tetrameric structure with two subunits of a

different type, and that, of those with which the alpha subunits could bind, only

the beta subunit is produced in appreciable quantity.
The transcribed protein may have one activity and be transformed into a
product that has a different activity. Peptide hormones usually arise by the

limited hydrolysis of a larger protein that circulates in serum. Sometimes the
same carrier protein can be cleaved at different sites to produce different
peptide hormones. At present, we cannot predict such events. Only when we

know the sequence of every peptide hormone would we be able to recognize the

potential for a particular protein to be a carrier of a hormone.
In summary we do not adequately understand the relationship between the
details of the three-dimensional structure of a protein and its function. Without
such an understanding, we cannot predict the effect that a bound ligand will
have on the function
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS129
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the protein. We lack this understanding partly because three-dimensional
structures of proteins have been determined only recently, and molecular

graphics hardware and software are also newly available to experimental

scientists. But in many cases, we do not know the three-dimensional structure of

the protein of interest, nor do we have a good idea of all of its functions. We

know even less about the relationship between structure and function of
carbohydrates, because we have so little structural information on them. This is
a problem that will not be solved in the short-term.
While there are methods to predict the potency of molecules once a
structure is suggested, we need better tools for molecular design to help the

chemist suggest molecules to examine experimentally or theoretically. The tools

described above are primitive. Although some methods are available to match

candidate molecules against proposed shape requirements for binding, it is not

possible to also specify the chemical properties of the designed compound with

existing software. The current methods process a file of three-dimensional
coordinates of candidate molecules; this file is generated from experimental or
theoretical studies and so is incomplete. Additionally, we cannot automatically

compare a compound proposed by a computer program with those already in

the world literature as tested for that activity, nor can we automatically detect if

the proposed compound is identical or similar to compounds known to have

some biological activity deleterious to that desired. It is expected that many of

these tools will be developed rather soon.
FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS OF PROTEINS AND NUCLEIC ACIDS130
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8.Structure and Function of Complex
CarbohydratesComplex carbohydrates are very common in animals, plants, and bacteria.
They are constituents of cell membranes, as well as subcellular materials of
cells. They are also found in physiological fluids such as blood, tears, milk, and
urine. It was estimated recently that the covalent structures of between 4,000

and 6,000 natural carbohydrates have been determined (DOE, 1987). Many

complex carbohydrates are unsubstituted at their reducing ends and are referred

to as polysaccharides; examples include the oligosaccharides of milk, the

cellulose of plant cell walls, and storage forms such as starch and glycogen.

Many other naturally occurring complex carbohydrates are covalently

connected to other molecules, such as proteins or lipids, by glycosidic linkages

of the sugar residues at their reducing ends to form glycoconjugates.
BIOLOGICAL FUNCTION
Glycoproteins have many functions in higher organisms. Collagen is an
important structural element in the extracellular space and in cartilage, bone and

basement membranes. Mucins are significant as lubricants and protective agents
in mucous secretions. Important immunological molecules of the glycoprotein
class include the immunoglobulins, histocompatibility antigens,
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES131
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.blood group antigens of the ABO and Lewis types, complement in the blood
clotting mechanism, and interferon. Many human plasma proteins such as

fetuin, transferrin, and ceruloplasmin are glycoproteins, as are several of the

hormones such as chorionic gonadotropin and thyrotropin. Most of the animal

and plant lectins are glycoproteins, as are the lysosomal enzymes. The

recognition and binding of lysosomal enzymes to specific receptors in the Golgi
apparatus and on the cell surface involves one or more phosphorylated mannose
residues on N-linked oligosaccharide chains. Recognition sites on cell surfaces

for binding and uptake of hormones and for interactions with other cells, viruses

and bacteria are also glycoproteins.
Many of the cell surface functions of glycoproteins have also been
proposed for the neutral and acidic glycosphingolipids. In addition, certain

glycosphingolipids of the ganglioside class have been found recently to inhibit

the mitogenic response of cell growth factors by allosteric modulation of their

cell surface receptors (Bremer et al., 1986). Oncogenic transformation by viral
infection or chemical mutagens usually leads to alterations in the cell surface
pattern of glycosphingolipids such that certain types increase greatly in

quantity. In some cases, there are also qualitative differences due to the

expression of genes that are silent in the differentiated normal cells. This is

particularly important in tumor cells, where tumor-associated antigens may

provide a basis for specific monoclonal antibody-based diagnostic assays and

eventually, perhaps, treatment.The binding between glycosaminoglycans and other extracellular
macromolecules contributes significantly to the structural organization of

connective tissue matrix. All of the glycosaminoglycans, except those that lack

sulfate groups or carboxyl groups, bind electrostatically to collagen at neutral

pH because of their remarkable anionic character. Dermatan sulfate, which
appears to be the major glycosaminoglycan synthesized by arterial smooth
muscle cells, binds strongly to plasma lipoproteins, and heparin also interacts

with several plasma proteins, including clotting fac tors IX and XI and

antithrombin III. Interestingly, the 1:1 stoichiometric binding of heparin to Lys

residues of antithrombin III is believed to induce a conformational change in

antithrombin III that increases the binding of antithrombin III to thrombin. This

binding inactivates the thrombin. Hyaluronic acid is deposited on the surface of

Petri dishes by cells growing in tissue culture,
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES132
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.giving them a substratum for attachment during growth. The proteoglycans
have also been implicated in the regulation of cell growth, possibly through

nuclear effects on chromatin structure and activation of DNA polymerase, and

may mediate cell-cell communication and the shedding of cell surface receptors.
BIOSYNTHESIS OF N-LINKED GLYCOPROTEINS AND
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDSThe role of carbohydrates in biological function poses a particularly
challenging problem for the future. The synthesis of these glycoconjugates

occurs during their intracellular transport from the site of initial assembly of a

lipid-linked intermediate (glycoproteins) or ceramide (glycosphingolipids) in

the endoplasmic reticulum, through the Golgi apparatus, to the cell surface,

intracellular organelles, or extracellular space. Their synthesis requires a family

of activated sugar donors called sugar nucleotides that are synthesized in the
cytosolic fraction of cells from sugar phosphates and nucleoside triphosphates.
An interesting exception is the sugar nucleotide of sialic acid, called cytidine

monophosphate sialic acid (CMP-NeuAc), which is synthesized in the nucleus

from free sialic acid and CTP. The enzymes involved in glycoconjugate

biosynthesis are glycosyltransferases that catalyze the transfer of sugar residues

from the sugar nucleotides to the nonreducing end of a growing carbohydrate

chain.The distinction between glycoconjugate biosynthesis and protein synthesis
is key; the latter occurs on a template of messenger RNA and is therefore

determined by the genetic code for a single structural gene.
1 In sharp contrast,
glycoconjugate synthesis is accomplished by the stepwise addition of sugar

units using a different enzyme for each step. Therefore, no single DNA

sequence is involved in determining the primary structure of the complex

carbohydrate, since the order in which sugars are added depends on the

substrate specificities and kinetic characteristics of the different glycosyl
transferases, each of which is coded by a different structural gene. It is clearly
impossible to predict the primary
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES133
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.structures of complex carbohydrates from DNA sequences. Therefore, the three-
dimensional structures of glycoproteins, glycosphingolipids and other complex

carbohydrate-containing molecules can never be completely predicted without

experimental structural analysis of the carbohydrates.
Snider (1984) reported that glycoproteins of the N-linked type are
synthesized as a cotranslational event in the rough endoplasmic reticulum.

While the polypeptide chain is being translated on a messenger RNA and

concurrently passed through the endoplasmic reticulum membrane into the

cisternal space (lumen), a single oligosaccharide is coordinately synthesized on
a phosphorylated polyisoprenoid alcohol (dolichol in higher animals and
smaller, similar substances in insects, yeast, and plants). The entire precursor

oligosaccharide is then transferred to appropriate asparagine residues on the

nascent polypeptide chain (probably before folding into a tertiary structure)

according to rules of specificity that are not completely understood. Transfer

requires an Asn-X-Ser or Asn-X-Thr sequence but additional factors are

involved as well. Accessibility of the Asn residue may be one such factor and

assessment of this possibility could be made by the predictive methods

described in this report.
The second stage of N-linked glycoprotein synthesis involves extensive
posttranslational modification of the protein-linked precursor oligosaccharide

by the removal and addition of sugars. In many cases the protein moiety is also

modified by partial proteolytic cleavages and/or the addition of function-

modifying groups on specific amino acid residues. Posttranslational

modification is initiated in the rough endoplasmic reticulum by the removal of
the three glucose residues by two specific membrane-bound glucosidases. These
glucose residues appear to have the sole function of enabling transfer of the

oligosaccharide chain from dolichol pyrophosphate to nascent polypeptide

chains. It will be interesting to determine from three-dimensional structures and

predicted conformations how these groups interact with the transferase enzyme

involved at this step. Mature high mannose oligosaccharide chains are

synthesized by the subsequent removal of up to four mannosyl residues from

the three branches of the precursor structure. At least three different alpha-

mannosidases in the Golgi apparatus are involved in this process. These

enzymes and the two glucosidases are hydrolases like lysosomal glycosidases

but their activities are
Actually, it is more appropriate to refer to ﬁone cistron-one polypep tideﬂ. This
is no longer strictly accurate either, as more than one gene may contribute to the

primary structure of a protein, i.e., immunoglobulins.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES134
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.greatest at neutral pH, in contrast with lysosomal enzymes that have their
greatest catalytic activity at an acid pH.
FIGURE 8-Intermediate partially processed asparagine
Šlinked carbohy drate chain of a
glycoprotein.In eukaryotic cells, the high mannose oligosaccharide with five mannose
units (See 
Figure 8-1
) is the direct precursor of complex and hybrid structures.
The initial step in the Golgi apparatus is the addition of an N-acetylglucosamine

residue to the last remaining Man on branch I (*), after which the remaining

two Man residues on branches II and III can be removed by alpha-mannosidases

that are almost certainly different from those involved in earlier steps.

Additional branches may be made at this point to produce tri- and tetra-

antennary structures, and the final stages of processing are carried out by the

addition of galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, sialic and fucose residues to give

mature, complex, N-linked chains. An interesting N-

acetylglucosaminyltransferase may add a beta-1,4-linked GlcNAc residue to the

branched beta-linked mannose residue of the inner core region (0) to give a

ﬁbisected structure.
ﬂ This step has been the subject of intensive study by Carver
and coworkers, who have been interested in the structural specificity of the
enzyme with different conformations of the precursor oligosaccharides (Carver
and Brisson, 1984).
It is likely that predictive methods will be employed in studies
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES135
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of processing pathways and the extent of processing of oligosaccharide chains.
If control arises from an enzyme specificity for a particular three-dimensional

structure of the substrate, it may be possible to determine these preferences and,

from predictions of the distributions of three-dimensional structures of the

oligosaccharide attached to the glycoprotein substrate, predict how far the

carbohydrate chain will be processed.
Lysosomal enzymes contain one or more phosphate groups on mannose
residues of the high mannose type oligosaccharide chains. The mannose-6-

phosphate groups are specific recognition markers that are involved in the

transport of lysosomal enzymes from the Golgi apparatus or outside the cells

into lysosomes. Two membrane-bound mannose-6-phosphate receptors have

been discovered in the plasma membrane; at least one of them also resides in
the Golgi membranes. Although their binding specificities have been probed in
some detail, other aspects have not been determined: the nature of the

interaction of the phosphorylated mannose residues with the receptors and the

three-dimensional structures of the lysosomal enzyme-receptor complexes.
Another interesting aspect of lyosomal enzyme synthesis involves the
determination of structural domains on the folded proteins recognized by the

enzyme that initiates phosphorylation of mannose residues, which is an N-

acetylglucosamine-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-P transferase) in the Golgi

apparatus. This is the mechanism by which only lysosomal enzyme proteins are
selected for phosphorylation. It is especially important because one form of a
genetic lysosomal storage disorder, called mucolipidosis II, results from a

defect in the binding domain of the GlcNAc-P transferase for lysosomal

enzyme proteins. Perhaps this problem can be solved only by computer

modeling to predict the three-dimensional structures of both proteins.
Glycosphingolipids are synthesized in an analogous manner, except that
ceramide serves the function served by dolichol for glycoproteins and transfer

occurs directly from a sugar nucleotide to the acceptor glycolipid. Ceramide is

an acceptor for either glucose (from UDP-Glc) or galactose (from UDP-Gal),
giving glucosylceramide or galactosylceramide. These simple
glycosphingolipids predominate in human plasma and the brain, respectively,

and also serve as precursors for more complex glycosphingolipids. In
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES136
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.most organs, including the brain, the major pathways involve conversion of
glucosylceramide to lactosylceramide, Gal-beta-1,4-Glc-Cer. Lactosylceramide

is the substrate for several glycosyltrans ferases, the products of which are the

first intermediates in the synthesis of related glycosphingolipids that may be

classified according to their general structural characteristics. More than 100

different glycosphingolipids have already been characterized, and new
compounds are still being discovered. Although some of the glycosphingolipids
may contain between 15 and 35 or more sugar residues, most of the commonly

occurring types have between 4 and 10 residues in the oligosaccharide chain.
ANALYSIS OF PRIMARY AND TERTIARY STRUCTURE
A complete understanding of the interactions between carbohydrates and
proteins (enzymes, lectins, antibodies, and cell surface receptors) will depend

on the determination of accurate three-dimensional structures of both kinds of

molecules. As was noted, the primary structures of the oligosaccharide chains

of complex carbohydrates cannot be deduced from DNA sequences and so must

be determined by chemical and spectroscopic analysis. Modern
chromatographic methods of separation, along with mass spectrometry and
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), allow us to carry out complete analysis of

a primary structure on a one micromole sample. Still to be determined are

composition; arrangement of sugar residues; ring size; positions of glycosidic

linkages and their anomerity; and the location and the chemical nature of non-

carbohydrate substituents such as lipids, sulfate, and phosphate groups.
Three-dimensional structures of carbohydrates represent the spatial
arrangements of the individual sugar residues. Most commonly occurring

mammalian complex carbohydrates consist of sugar residues that exist in the

pyranose ring form, the most stable and rigid conformation of which are the

chair forms. When two sugar residues are joined together covalently in a

glycosidic linkage, they are free to rotate about the glycosidic oxygen atom
between the two rings, and the resulting disaccharide can therefore assume a
number of different conformations corresponding to the rotations about these

two bonds. It is customary to designate the dihedral angles at the glycosidic

linkage (See 
Figure 8-2
) by theSTRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES137
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Greek symbols phi (
) and psi (
), where the initial conformation (
) = 0
°, =0°) is that conformer where the C-l
ŠH-1 bond eclipses O
ŠC`-X` and C-1
ŠOeclipses C`-X`
ŠH-X`.
FIGURE 8-2 Dihedral angles determining the spatial relationship of two sugar
residues in a disaccharide.
The relative orientations of adjacent sugar residues in an oligosaccharide
chain are described by specifying the rotational angles (
), ) at each
glycosidic oxygen atom. When these angles are the same at each linkage, the

chain has a helical conformation with n residues per turn and h unit translation

along the helical axis. If n and h are available from x-ray data, then (
) and can be computed and vice versa. If (
) and 
 are different among glycosidic
linkages in an oligosaccharide chain, the three-dimensional structure becomes

non-periodic and, for extreme variations, assumes a random coil conformation.

Information about perturbations can be obtained by light-scattering, viscosity,

sedimentation, and diffusion measurements.
X-RAY ANALYSIS OF CRYSTAL STRUCTURES OF
CARBOHYDRATESOf the three major classes of complex biological molecules, we have the
least structural information at atomic resolution about carbohydrates. This is

because they have not been crystallized, and consequently there is no relevant

crystal structure data base other than that of the simple monomers to trimers

upon which to model classical or semiempirical quantum mechanical

calculations. The blood group-specific oligosaccharides, cord factors, and lipids

A and X are typical examples. Exceptions are the cyclodextrins, which

crystallize well, but are conformationally a separate class. Structures derived

from the fiber-patterns of polysaccharides are
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES138
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.model-dependent and do not constitute a source of definitive structural data.
Stachyose, an oligosaccharide consisting of four sugar residues, is the largest

noncyclic oligosaccharide for which there is a crystal structure analysis, but

even in this case, the associated water structure has not been determined.
The crystallinity problem is only partially intrinsic. Carbohydrates do not
solvate the same way as proteins, oligonucleotides, or nucleic acids. However,

fewer efforts have been made to obtain the significant amounts

ofconfigurationally homogeneous
 material needed to conduct crystallization
experiments than were made for proteins and nucleic acids. Another aspect of
the crystallography of glycoconjugates is that the electron density for the
oligosaccharide portion of glycoproteins has rarely been interpreted, even

though several crystalline glycoproteins have been studied. This is because the

standard refinement programs cannot handle the oligosaccharides, or there is

microheterogeneity at the site of glycosylation, and so it is left out of the model.

Thus, a potentially valuable source of information is not being exploited for

lack of appropriate program development or strategic approaches to deal with

microheterogeneity.Steric considerations about the minimum approach distances between
atoms, derived from observed nonbonded distances in various crystal structures,

can be used to predict allowed conformations. This 
ﬁhard sphere
ﬂ approach,
which was originally developed by V.S.R. Rao in the mid-1970s, is a
rudimentary method of theoretical calculation that ignores electrostatic effects
(hydrogen bonding), but does give a qualitative prediction of structure. This

approach was subsequently extended by adapting energy calculations originally

used for peptides, where the potential energy is divided into functions that

describe discrete contributions such as van der Waals energies, electrostatic

interactions, torsional energy, hydrogen bond energy, and bond and angle

deformations (Bock, 1983). The data are presented in the form of computer-

generated energy contour maps.
In much of the recent literature, conformational energy calculations have
been made using a form of Rao's parameters with an added torsional potential

about one of the glycosidic bonds (exoanomeric effect). This approach, which

goes by the name HSEA (hard-sphere exoanomeric) method (Bock, 1983), has
been used with success by Lemieux and Bock (1983), Carver and Brisson
(1984), and others, although it contains a number of untested
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES139
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.assumptions. The addition of a hydrogen bond potential (HEAH method) yields
energy minimization results that differ from those calculated by the HSEA

method, from which geometries can be derived that differ from those obtained

by the HSEA method.
NMR SOLUTION STRUCTURES OF CARBOHYDRATES
Proton NMR methods provide detailed experimental data from which three-
dimensional structures can be determined and compared with conformations

arrived at by potential energy calculations. Carver and Cumming (1987) have

generated contour maps of computed NOEs of various high mannose

oligosaccharides as a function of the torsional angles 
 and 
. They then related
them to experimental results as well as to minimum energy conformations
estimated by various potential energy calculations (Carver and Cumming, in

press). Brisson and Carver (1983) evaluated the utility of this approach using

two biantennary complex type glycopeptides (See 
Figure 8-3
). Since the NOE-
derived conformations were within a range centered on the minimum energy

conformations derived from potential energy calculations, it was concluded

ﬁthat motional averaging is confined to a narrow range about one stable
conformationﬂ (Brisson and Carver, 1983). It now appears, however, that it is
meaningless to seek a single NOE-derived conformation that satisfies a single

potential energy minimum, because the molecules in fact may occupy such

minima for a very small proportion of the time in solution. 
ﬁConformationalflexibility must be incorporated into the theoretical treatment
ﬂ (Carver and
Cumming, 1987), and the calculation of energy surfaces becomes extremely
important. The latest studies by Cumming and Carver indicate that NOE-

determined three-dimensional structures may differ significantly from any

minimum energy conformation. They have concluded from this that the NOE-

derived conformations in such cases might correspond to 
ﬁvirtualﬂconformations as defined by Jardetzky (1980) to be computed structures that

few if any molecules in solution actually adopt.
Scarsdale et al. (in press) have employed a molecular mechanics-based
program in an effort to model conformational averaging of NMR data.

Conformations were calculated using a combination of molecular potentials and

NMR data for the oligosaccharide moiety of an erythrocyte glycolipid

composed of three neutral sugars and an amino sugar. The lowest energy
conformer closelySTRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES140
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.resembled a structure proposed earlier. However, fits to data could be improved
when two equilibrating conformers were considered. Thus, it may be possible to

determine solution conformations of the complex carbohydrates, even in

nonrigid cases, using a combination of calculations and constraints imposed

from experimental NMR data.
FIGURE 8-3 Structures of two partially processed asparagine
Šlinked
carbohydrate chains. The bisecting 
1,4GlcNAc of B causes a conformational
difference from that of A.
Despite the questions raised about the interpretation of NMR results and
the value of potential energy minimizations, some important information has

been collected about interactions of carbohydrate antigens with antibodies

(Lemieux et al., 1985), oligosaccharides with lectins such as concanavalin A

(Sekharudu et al., 1986), and oligosaccharides with glycosyltransferase

enzymes (Carver and Cumming, 1987). Further refinements will depend upon

the development of an agreed-on set of potential en ergy functions, which can

be used with experimentally determined NOE-derived three-dimensional

structures to evaluate whether a given molecule is distributed among several

low energy conformations or occupies a particular subset of them. Tvaroska and
Perez (1986) have recently compared several conformational energy
calculations and proposed a general strategy for oligosaccharides.
Computer time and access to appropriate parallel processing array
processors are important considerations in determining the level of support of

research in this area at the present time. The availability of machines to

calculate interatomic distances and van
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES141
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.der Waals contributions extremely fast is a question that should be addressed by
funding agencies. Interestingly, the several supercomputers currently operating

on campuses have not been used to their capacity; perhaps efforts should be

directed by appropriate advisory groups at these centers toward developing

necessary software in these computers and establishing a policy that would

direct a portion of their time for computer modeling of three-dimensional
structures.SUPRAMOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Structures that consist of more than one macromolecule interact as a unit in
biological phenomena such as catalysis by many enzymes, binding at a cell

surface, signal transduction across cell membranes, and other biological

phenomena. Any enzyme that consists of more than one subunit should be

thought of as a supramolecular structure. When large numbers of subunits are
involved, and perhaps carry out more than one function, special consideration
may have to be given to their relative spatial orientations. Examples are the

replication of DNA by DNA polymerases, where complexes containing 10 or

12 proteins (called primosomes) are required to initiate replication. Ribosomes

are even more complex, requiring at least 75 proteins to translate messenger

RNA. Surfaces that consist of more than one macromolecule often behave as a

functional unit. For example, the uptake of cholesterol by many cells requires

the interaction of a specific cell surface receptor with a polypeptide surface of a

complex supramolecular structure called low density lipoprotein (LDL), which

consists of protein, cholesterol, phospholipids, and triacylglycerols. Alteration

of the LDL protein by acetylation of a Lys residue blocks the binding of LDL to

its receptor and uptake of cholesterol by the cell. Several hormones, including
norepinephrine and epidermal growth factor (EGF), and other signals such as
light (with rhodopsin) induce protein phosphorylation. EGF stimulates the

growth of normal fibroblasts by binding to a specific transmembrane protein

receptor on the cell surface. The hormone signal in this case is transduced by

self-phosphorylation of the receptor on the intracellular side after the hormone

binds, followed by other kinase-catalyzed phos phorylations of proteins,

internalization of the EGF-EGF receptor complex, and a complex set of

consequences in the nucleus and elsewhere in preparation for cell division.

Bremer et al. (1986)STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES142
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.recently found that GM3 ganglioside inhibits this process in an allosteric
fashion by preventing the self-phosphorylation of EGF receptor after EGF

binding. To accomplish this, GM3 in the outer half of the cell membrane must

interact with a domain of the polypeptide chain of EGF receptor, probably

causing a conformational change that prevents phosphorylation. A similar

situation involving a lipid membrane is found with a mitochondrial enzyme,
beta-hydroxybutyric dehydrogenase, which is catalytically active only when
incorporated into a lipid bilayer composed of certain phospholipids. Computer-

assisted mathematical modeling of such supramolecular structures will be

necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the organization of biological

materials for complex functions.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATES143
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9.HardwareFour functions are essential to computer modeling of molecules:
  molecular energy computation
  configurational control
  graphics  reasoningUntil recently, the standard hardware configuration of a VAX and an
Evans and Sutherland display terminal could only achieve the second and third

items. Molecular energy calculation on a VAX is very slow, although these

computers were used to develop the programs. The advent of Cray-type

supercomputers connected by national communications networks has given

scientists access to more computer power for molecular energy calculations.

More recently, the development of special purpose array processors made it

possible to have in the laboratory computational power roughly comparable to

the supercomputers. Reasoning about molecular structure until recently could

be done only with special purpose machines which run the programming

language LISP.As the power of computers available to individual scientists increases we
expect that these four functions will be brought together. The early VAX

computers (for example the 11/780) typically provide 0.5 megaflop (million

floating point instructions per
HARDWARE144Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.second) and 1.0 MIPS (million instructions per second). Typical array
processors provide 100 megaflop while typical LISP machines provide 2.0

MIPS. In the last years it was necessary to have one each of these types of

machines in order to have reasonable amounts of computational power for the

four molecular modeling functions. The next generation of computer described

as a personal supercomputer (PSC) will have between 40 and 60 megaflops of
number crunching power and between 15 to 20 MIPS of general (i.e. logical)
computational power. With this level of numeric and logical computational

power available in the next year at a scientific workstation there will be little

need for separate machines to perform special functions.
The national supercomputers, however, already in place and operational,
constitutes a very real scientific resource. As scientists learn that the

supercomputers can effectively carry out molecular energy calculations, these

machines will be used to their fullest capacity. However, the technology of the

supercomputers is advancing rapidly, and the manufacturers promise that
systems with three orders of magnitude more computational power will be
available in the next few years.
While the supercomputers grow more powerful, the power of workstations
and the PSCs is also increasing. Current workstations have the power of VAXs,

but lack the capacity to run all four functions simultaneously. As the PSCs

emerge, they will offer a combination of capabilities that will make it possible
to run all four functions at once. The PSCs should create the possibility of a
new computational and graphic plateau:
1988 - 1995: personal supercomputer
1977 - 1987: E & S display coupled to a MicroVAX II

1970 - 1976: Tektronix display coupled to a DEC system-10.

The Tektronix display and a scientific mainframe gave us the first plateau
seventeen years ago. On this plateau it was possible for many scientists to view
and manipulate molecules. The VAX computers, and more recently the even

less expensive MicroVAX II computers coupled to an Evans and Sutherland

display, have established over the last ten years a plateau of graphic capability

which has enabled scientists to go over from the physical modeling of

macromolecules to completely electronic modeling. The PSCs expected to

emerge in the next years will permit scientists to compute and to visualize

molecules in much more powerful ways.
HARDWARE145Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using the PSCs, it should be possible to shape molecular models easily
using joystick controls, creating stereo color graphics in multiple modes of

representation, while doing energy calculations and molecular reasoning. The

only foreseeable problem with the supercomputers is that scientists' appetites

for energy calculations may exceed the computational capacities of the PSCs.

Configurational control should make it possible to sketch protein models. Using
collections of rules, we should be able to use molecular reasoning to generate
and evaluate large numbers of possible model states.
Because of the rapidly changing technology of computers, displays,
workstations, and PSCs, national effort should be directed to guaranteeing that

these devices conform to the various levels of standards of the International

Standards Organization (ISO).
Standardization in the United States is achieved by interested parties
working together in committees under the auspices of agencies and

organizations such as the National Bureau of Standards, American Society for

Testing and Materials (ASTM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

(IEEE) or ISO. Considerable standardization at the level of the computer

operating system must be done to make the ISO model work. Hardware vendors
must choose between product uniqueness for sales and market development,
and intervendor product compatibility. Compatibility has many benefits.

Adherence to the standards will make it possible to move programs quickly and

easily from one device to another, as well as making it possible to construct a

complete system from components supplied by many vendors. The ISO model

has several levels, represented below:
1. Ethernet
2. TCP/IP communications protocol

3. NFS - Network File System

4. UNIX operating system

5. VAX/VMS and Cray FORTRAN compatibility
6. X-windows
7. DIALOG-like application program window and functionality
specificationThe Ethernet originated at the XEROX Palo Alto Research Center. The
TCP/IP protocol was developed for the DARPAnet, operated for the

Department of Defense, and so is in the public domain. The NFS was developed

by SUN Microsystems and
HARDWARE146Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.placed in the public domain. Bell Laboratories developed UNIX. VAX/VMS
FORTRAN was originated by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC). X-

windows originated at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where they

were developed to specify a machine-independent windowing system. DIALOG

is an Apollo product that is a first attempt to answer the question of how to

write high level mouse-driven applications programs in a high level
specification language.
Standards are really the key to future progress in molecular modeling. If all
investigators adhere to the ISO standards, then it will be possible to mix various

workstations and special purpose computers on a laboratory network.

Adherence to standards should lower the price of equipment to end users by

enlarging the market. Similarly, with adherence to the standards, it will be
possible to send and receive molecular structure data sets all over the world
using global communications networks such as BITNET, CSnet, DARPAnet,

Japan Universities net (JUnet), and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial

Research Organization net in Australia (CSIROnet).
Special purpose computers offer many possibilities for molecular
modeling. Over the years, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has funded

facilities that developed molecular graphics, computation, and control devices.

The control systems laboratory at Washington University Medical School

developed the MMSX molecular display. The molecular graphics laboratory at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill has been instrumental in
exploring the development of a variety of stereo, configurational control, and

display devices. The molecular graphics laboratory at Columbia University is in

the process of developing FASTRUN, a special purpose computer attached to a

ST-100 array processor that boosts its molecular dynamics power by a factor of

10. The molecular graphics laboratory at the University of California at San

Francisco Medical School has developed stereo and color representation

techniques.Special and general purpose graphics devices are increasingly easy to
produce. General Electric in Research Triangle, North Carolina has produced a

very fast surface graphics processor that can be used to display different types

of objects, including molecules. At least one of the PSCs will have a sphere
graphics primitive embedded in a silicon chip. Every effort should be made to
encourage the development of special purpose processors. However,
HARDWARE147Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.these processors should be required to adhere to the emerging computer
standards, so that they can be easily integrated into existing laboratory networks.
The last few years have seen the emergence of array processors for
laboratory use. The ST-100 array processor from Star Technologies, Inc. has

been programmed by microcoding to produce molecular dynamics calculations

at a rate comparable to a Cray XMP. The ST-100 is rated at peak 100

megaflops, while the sustained calculation rate is about 30 megaflops. The

ST-100 costs about one-thirtieth of the Cray XMP-48. The FASTRUN device

currently under development in the laboratory of Cyrus Levinthal at Columbia
University will increase the power of the ST-100 by a factor of 10 from 30
average megaflops to 300 average megaflops. Floating Point Systems Inc. is

discussing the delivery of a 10 processor FPS-264 system with a peak of 1

gigaflops. Multiple process machines could be added to this list, including the

hypercube machines from Intel and NCUBE. All are laboratory machines. The

power of supercomputers will obviously be increasing at the same approximate

rates.A very strong relationship exists between the architecture of a special
purpose computer and the structure of the scientific problem to be solved. The

question is, how much computational power does molecular modeling really

need? The protein folding problem seems to be the gauge of this question, since

molecular dynamics programs calculate atom position charge in 10
15 second
time steps. If proteins really take minutes to fold, then computation will have to

go from 10
15 to 102 seconds. The most powerful array processors available
today make it possible to calculate and examine molecular trajectories three
orders of magnitude longer than hitherto possible. Extending these trajectories
an additional three orders of magnitude might bring us to the range where

appropriate protein-folding actions can take place. There is some indication that

if amino acids were synthesized at the rate of one per microsecond, then folding

would be possible. Then, computing would only have to range from 10
15 to 10
5 seconds. This would be seven orders of magnitude less computing. If this
estimate is close to correct and computing power increases at a rate of 50

percent per year, then current computer processor development will give us the

necessary amount of power in 5 to 10 years.
HARDWARE148Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CENTRAL VERSUS DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING
The National Science Foundation (NSF) supercomputer initiative again
brings to the forefront the relationship between central computational services

and distributed or personal services. Proponents of centralization argue that

certain types of very large calculations are available only on centralized

machines. The personal computer revolution showed how profoundly scientists

respond to decentralized computation. The capabilities of personal machines
increase at the same pace as the supercomputers, but the baseline machines are
a market of 10
5 to 10
6 machines, whereas the supercomputers are a market of
102 to 10
3. Special purpose boards added to the baseline machine can raise its
capabilities for specific functions (i.e., energy calculation, sequence

comparison, or graphics) to levels approaching those of supercomputers.
The distribution of personal computation is driven totally by market forces
and is not subject to centralized planning. Scientists buy laboratory computers

with funds previously allocated for glassware. Postdoctoral students returning to

their country of origin bring their personal computers. Floppy disks containing

data files and even whole books form a new type of currency in countries

operating centrally planned economies.
These modes of behavior form a valuable dichotomy. We need a balance
between centralizing and decentralizing efforts. Individual scientists can

participate in the planning and use of national supercomputers, while

simultaneously helping to specify and buy smaller machines for their personal

and laboratory use.
COMPUTER UTILIZATION IN THE NEXT 5 TO 10 YEARS
In the next 10 years, workstations will become ordinary scientific tools,
like pocket calculators and balances. The workstations will become more

popular with scientists as they acquire larger, faster, and more complex working

programs; better graphics; more storage and access to other computers; and new

data sources. A few years ago, only specialists searched DNA sequence data

bases; now, because many workers have PCs in their laboratories, almost all

molecular biologists search these data bases.
Workstation use is likely to follow the same pattern. Now, molecular
graphics techniques are used only by departmental or laboratory specialists. In

years to come, as all workstations begin
HARDWARE149Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to acquire adequate graphics capabilities, all scientists will routinely do
molecular graphics, modeling, and energy calculations.
One of the strongest effects in the computer marketplace is the trade-off
between constant dollar and constant performance. Because computer power is

doubling every two to three years, the manufacturers tend to supply their

customers with new models that cost the same but have increasing

computational power. A customer, then, can expect to purchase a given level of

computational power for a decreasing amount of money.
Twenty years ago, one needed a DEC PDP-10 to search protein or DNA
data bases, while 10 years ago one used DEC PDP-11s or DEC VAXs. Now,

one can use an IBM PC or one of its many clones to do the same job. In several

years, one should be able to do DNA sequence searches on a pocket machine.
The brevity of the computer design and manufacture cycles has begun to
overtake our ability to use these machines adequately. Twenty years ago, both

manufacturers and consumers could reasonably expect a computer to sell and be

worth buying for about 10 years; today, a given level of computational power

has a life cycle of 3 years. The cycle length appears to be shortening even

further in the sense that special purpose boards can be added to a small general
purpose machine to make it functionally equivalent to a machine that costs up
to 100 times as much. Why buy a Cray when a PC with a special purpose board

will do the same thing? The cure for this problem will probably be a balance of

market forces favoring the small mass distribution computers. PCs will rise in

power to be general purpose workstations.
THE NATIONAL SUPERCOMPUTER NETWORK
The national supercomputer initiative sponsored by NSF allocates
available computer time by a peer-review process. Individual scientist's requests

for time must meet granting requirements of quality of the proposed work and

size of allocation. From the scientist's viewpoint, the supercomputer network

must perform tasks that cannot be done either in the laboratory or at local

institutions. Since the network communication rates are 9,600 BAUD, only a

limited amount of data can be passed between the scientist and the
supercomputer. Essentially, this means that only batch computing can be run on
the supercomputers. Large jobs run in the batch mode of computing are only

one form of computing.
HARDWARE150Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The highly interactive forms of computing and graphics available on
workstations will be even more competitive with the supercomputer network

when the next generation of high performance workstation, the PSC, becomes

available.The use of national supercomputers can be left to the discretion of
individual scientists as it is in this country or the use of these resources can

bemandated. The ability to mandate use depends on the type of the economy or

pattern of interaction between scientists and the government. The Australian

scientists are also in the midst of this type of central planning (personal
communication, 1987, trip to Australia). The government wants scientists
throughout Australia to use the centralized supercomputer by paying for the use

with funds from the scientists' grants; the scientists see this as a form of

taxation. The market forces in Australia will probably dominate when the

scientists realize that superior computing and graphics performance can be

obtained by purchasing a machine. Once a machine is in a department or

laboratory, the problem of centralized national supercomputer access and

allocation is essentially ended.
LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Molecular modeling in the future will probably be done on local networks
of computers and displays. For the past 5 to 10 years, advanced scientific

laboratories have had one or more minicomputers. Five years ago, laboratory

officials, for the most part, took the first hesitant steps to link these computers
in a network. In the last two or three years, networking of laboratory computers
has become much more common. Laboratory networks contain computers

acting as hosts for terminal and computational servers for other workstations.

The workstations range in power from the smallest PC to powerful PSCs. As

computers age and are replaced because they no longer work or are too

expensive to maintain, they will be replaced by networks of a variety of

computers and displays.DATA BASE USE
Access to molecular structure and sequence data bases through global
communications networks is an opportunity that will be available in the near

future. Currently, most data bases are updated by magnetic tape every three to

six months, including the
HARDWARE151Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DNA sequence data bases at the Los Alamos National Laboratory and at
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) in Heidelberg, the protein

sequence data base at the National Biomedical Research Foundation (NBRF) in

Washington, D.C., the protein structure data base at the Brookhaven National

Laboratory, and the small organic molecule crystal structure data base at

Cambridge University. Generating tapes for institutional and random scientific
users is becoming an increasing burden for the data base operators. The global
scientific networks are organized in such a way that it is possible for the data

base operators to send out one copy of the update and have that copy spread

throughout the entire scientific community.
For those scientific users who need a particular molecular structure data set
for display or further modeling, the global scientific networks are ideal sources

of information. Only recently, the Brookhaven protein structure file was tested

at the National Research Council in Ottawa. A simple mail request to a

BITNET server at the National Research Council produced one or more of the
protein structure data sets in a few minutes.
The small molecule organic crystal structure file from Cambridge
University in England is being used by scientists for molecular modeling and

calculation. The Cambridge crystal file provides an ideal data source for ligand

conformations. The data file and a search program have been available on the

international commercial computer network for the past 15 years. Technology
moves so fast that even while this report is being prepared the panorama with
respect to data bases distribution has changed. For several years 5
¼ inch laser
disks have been on the market for audio. Now this highly developed consumer

technology has been applied to the storage and retrieval of molecular structure

data. Each laser disk, which costs about $2,000 to master and $10 to reproduce,

can hold a complete update for the DNA sequence, protein sequence, protein

structure and small molecule data files. The laser disk and associated software

will be produced by a small starting company associated with the University of

Wisconsin (Fred Blattner, DNAstar, Inc. at the University of Wisconsin, 1987,

personal communication).
COMPETITIVENESSAmerica has a world recognized ability to transfer ideas from
HARDWARE152Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their development in an academic setting to practice by the formation of a small
commercial enterprise. Then by the infusion of capital in several stages these

small companies can be transformed into stable industrial corporations. These

corporations are then able to consume the supply of trained scientific personnel

produced by the universities. The position of the United States in the world

economy is changing very dramatically at present, and certainly will continue to
change in the next 5 to 10 years. Our overall competitiveness will be
determined by our ability to form links between previously separate activities. It

is already clear that biotechnology as an offshoot of our national expertise in

molecular biology will be increasingly determined by the way we use

computers in computational chemistry, macromolecular modeling, and the

design of proteins. We are in the midst of two revolutionary tendencies:

genetics and silicon. Computational chemistry is the glue that will bring these

tendencies together in a stable form.
HARDWARE153Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10.Conclusions and Recommendations
CONCLUSIONSPredicting macromolecular structure from fundamental chemical principles
and information on primary structure is a challenging task. Understanding
macromolecular function is even more demanding. Identifying important steps
toward these goals is possible, however, and we have made considerable

progress in various subtasks and specialized areas. There is every reason to

believe that major breakthroughs can be expected over the next 10 years.
1. The tools of molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics have
proved useful for exploring the conformational space of
polypeptides, oligonucleotides, and oligosaccharides. In favorable

cases, they identify the most stable conformers and quantitatively

probe intermolecular interactions. Although these methods have not

yet successfully predicted, a priori, the structures of molecules the

size of small proteins, they play a major role in the refinement of

experimentally-derived tertiary structures of macromolecules.

Some promising results have been obtained in predicting the

structural and thermodynamic consequences of local changes in

amino acid sequences. Exciting new techniques make it possible to

calculate free energies directly by perturbation methods. The

techniques can be applied to intermolecular interactions or the

changesCONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS154
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in free energy that accompany substitution of one amino acid for
another and are readily applied to nucleic acid and polysaccharide

problems as well.
2. The major limitations of current methods include:
  the quality of the potential functions and of their parameters,
especially the electrostatic terms;
  methods for incorporating the solvent;
  global search algorithms for solving the multiple-minima
problem.Each of these areas has seen notable developments. While
recently introduced procedures may produce solutions, we expect

effective solutions to the multiple-minima problem to await new

conceptual breakthroughs.
3. Heuristic modeling has been successful in the past, particularly in
predicting the double helical structure of DNA, the alpha helix, and

the beta-pleated sheet. When applied to globular proteins, this

approach has yielded results which, although of relatively low

resolution, have proved useful in guiding experiments in pursuit of

more definitive data from crystallographic or nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) techniques.
4. Experimental and theoretical methods can be usefully combined
when the goal is to elucidate a new molecular structure based on a

known one. When they are appropriate, modeling efforts based on

the structural homology of one protein to another are currently the

strongest line of attack.
5. Direct experimental approaches to macromolecular structure have
been very successful; they cannot always be applied. They are

limited by the need for significant quantities of highly purified

material. Acquiring sufficient amounts of many interesting

proteins, glycosylated proteins, and most nucleic acids is a

challenging task. The powerful diffraction techniques all have an
absolute requirement for crystals. NMR has molecular weight
restrictions and some constraints on ultimate resolution. It takes at

best months, and frequently a year or more to deduce a structure

through crystallography or NMR.
6. Recent progress in instrumentation for crystallography has included
the development of area detectors, which are only now
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS155
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.being fully utilized. Synchrotron sources and new neutron sources
offer improved data. Isotopic labeling techniques and improved

magnet technology signal new directions for NMR. We expect

equally important breakthroughs in crystallization techniques.
7. Even with these advances, the most likely situation in the next
decade is a substantial but essentially linear growth in the number

of three-dimensional molecular structures elucidated by empirical

methods. We estimate from current rates that several thousand

protein and nucleic acid structures will be known in 10 years.
8. The explosive growth in the number of known nucleic acid
sequences and hence protein primary sequences will continue to

accelerate with or without implementation of the human genome

project in the United States. Even at current rates, it is reasonable to

expect 100,000 protein sequences to be described in the next

decade. The overwhelming majority of new protein sequences are
likely to be identifiable as members of known families of proteins.
9. Currently, the inventory of three-dimensional protein structural
descriptions underrepresents the general distribution of protein

families. The opportunities for computer-assisted modeling are

enormous and will grow proportionately as more new structures

and sequences are determined. Estimates of the number of
sequences to be reported in the next decade suggest that existing
facilities and resources for structural analysis will be overwhelmed

by the avalanche of new sequence data.
10. Effects of covalent modification on structure and function of
proteins, nucleic acids, and carbohydrates are diverse and poorly

understood. No theoretical basis for predicting these effects exists

in many cases. Describing structural relationships and cooperative

functional roles in supramolecular systems are embryonic research

areas to which modeling methods will contribute. Substantial
attention will be directed toward these areas in the coming decade.
11. Computer speed, availability, and storage capacity are important
limitations on the types of modeling calculations that can be

attempted. Existing equipment is frequently incapable of

performing all the necessary control experiments and refining

major approximations. A 10-fold increase in computer performance
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS156
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.capability is required for conducting many current projects of
biological importance systematically and rigorously. A minimum

of a 100-fold improvement is needed for exploring new time scales

or studying molecules of greater structural complexity than small

proteins. We expect supercomputers, specialized hardware, and

personal supercomputers (PSCs) to be significantly more available
in the next few years. Most promising is the development during
the next decade of high-capacity parallel processors.
12. A national computer network, operating at high speed and linking
major government, academic, and industrial research facilities, will

be crucial to molecular computation in the coming years. The uses

of the network include transmission of sequence and structural data

as well as access to computational facilities.
13. Of immense applied potential is the design of ligands to interact
preferentially with macromolecular receptors, and the design of

receptors to cause alterations of structure and/or function. These

programs are in the earliest stages of development, and many

hurdles must be overcome on the way from the laboratory to full

clinical or commercial utility.
14. The intellectual, practical, and economic benefits of improved
understanding of protein folding, macromolecular interactions, and

macromolecular function are substantial.
RECOMMENDATIONS1. The burgeoning volume of new sequence data requires a radical
new policy on data banking of protein and nucleic acid sequences.

A permanent national facility should be put in place as soon as
possible, and considerable attention should be given to developing
a data storage format that facilitates data retrieval. There should be

no direct charges to the user. The initiation of this new national

resource should be undertaken only after a round of detailed

proposals has been sought and reviewed. A standing advisory

committee of users should be appointed by a consortium drawn

from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Science

Foundation (NSF), and Department of Energy (DOE).
2. Whether the new facility should be allied with a national
laboratory, such as Los Alamos, or with the National Library of
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS157
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Medicine, or should be a completely new academic or commercial
enterprise remains to be determined. Until the new unit is

functioning, current facilities should be maintained to ensure an

orderly transition.
3. Support for the archiving of coordinate and model-derived
structures should continue. The Protein Data Bank at Brookhaven

and the Cambridge Crystallographic File in England currently serve

this need for the national and international community. Inclusion of

data from new methods of structural analysis should be encouraged.
4. We recommend in the strongest terms expanding the
supercomputer initiative, funding of computer networks, improving

access by the scientific community to the existing supercomputer

centers at the national laboratories, upgrading those centers, and

providing individual research grants for purchasing PSCs. DOE

should work closely with the supercomputer project managers at
NSF to provide the broadest and most versatile computer network
system on a national level. NIH should become more involved in

direct support of scientific supercomputer centers.
5. Although the report does not specifically address this issue, the
committee felt strongly that educational opportunities in structural

biology and molecular modeling should be improved. Several

mechanisms are available, such as expanding graduate programs

through new training grants. We recommend that NSF and DOE

increase graduate fellowship and postdoctoral fellow programs in
this area. Workshops have been particularly effective for
transferring information and skills. These include formal hands-on

training programs in molecular dynamics and molecular graphics,

and working meetings of independent investigators to address

critical limiting aspects of a particular problem. Such workshops,

which also promote crucial interdisciplinary approaches, could be

funded by NIH, NSF, or DOE, acting together or independently.
6. Innovative and interdisciplinary research proposals in both
theoretical and experimental aspects of structural biology should be

directly encouraged through the use of existing funding mechanisms.
7. We see a special role for the national laboratories, which should
interact at every level of these recommendations. The
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS158
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.national laboratories should compete for the National Sequence
Data Bank. The national laboratories and DOE have leadership

status in the national computer network. They should increase

efforts to make supercomputers available to the scientific

community. Research efforts are going forward in molecular

calculations and structural biology, with major programs at a few
locations. Strengthening these efforts will assist the department's
Office of Health and Environmental Research to assess the

potential health and environmental effects of chemicals involved in

energy processes.
Each of our recommendations involves developing some centralized
activity. The issues in each area are quite different, however, and should not be

taken as a general call for more biotechnology centers.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS159
Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferencesAbarbanel, R. 1984 . Protein Structural Knowledge Engineering . Ph.D. Thesis , University of
California , San Francisco . 422 pp.
Abarbanel, R. 1986 . Pattern matching applications in protein secondary structure . Pp. 18-27 in
Artificial Intelligence and its Impacts in Biology and Medicine . Proceedings of the I. A.
Biomed. September 1986 .
Adelman, S. A. 1982 . Generalized Langevin models and condensed-phase chemical reaction
dynamics . J. Phys. Chem. 86 : 1511-1524 .
Alber, T. , S. Dao-Pin , J. A. Nye , D. C. Muchmore , and B. W. Matthews . 1987 . Temperature-
sensitive mutations of Bacteriophage T4 Lysozyme occur at sites with low mobility and

low solvent accessibility in the folded protein . Biochemistry 26:3754-3758 .
Altman, R. B. , and O. Jardetzky . 1986 . New strategies for the determination of macromolecular
structure in solution . J. Biochem. 100:1403-1423 .
Anfinsen, C. B. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1975 . Experimental and theoretical aspects of protein
folding . Adv. Protein Chem. 29:205-300 .
Anfinsen, C. B. , E. Haber , M. Sela , and F. H. White, Jr. 1961 . The kinetics of formation of native
ribonuclease during oxidation of the reduced polypeptide chain . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 47:1309-1314 .
Anonymous . 1986 . Renin inhibitors show early promise as antihypertensive agents . Chem. Eng.
News . 64:23-24 .
Arseniev, A. S. , V. I. Kondakov , V. N. Maiorov , and V. F. Bystrov . 1984 . NMR solution spatial
structure of 'short' scorpion insectoxin I
5A . FEBS Lett. 165:57-62 .
REFERENCES160Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Barker, W. C. , L. T. Hunt , D. G. George , L. S. Yeh , H. R. Chen , M. C.Blomquist , I. Seibel-
Ross , A. Elzanowski , M. K. Hong , D. A. Ferrick , J. K. Bair , S. L. Chen , and R. S.

Ledley . 1986 . Protein sequence database, protein identification resource . Natl. Biom.

Res. Found . Release 11.0 , Washington, D.C.
Bash, P. , U. C. Singh , R. Langridge , and P. A. Kollman . 1987 . Free energy calculations by
computer simulation . Science 236:564-568 .
Bash, P. A . , U. C. Singh , S. K. Brown , R. Langridge , and P. A. Kollman . 1987 . Calculation of
the relative change in binding free-energy of a protein-inhibitor complex . Science

235:574-576 .
Beddell, C. R. 1984 . Designing drugs to fit a macromolecular receptor . Chem. Soc. Rev.
13:279-319 .
Bennett, W. S. , and R. Huber . 1984 . Structural and functional aspects of domain motions in
proteins . CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem. 15:291-386 .
Berendsen, H. J. C. , W. F. van Gunsteren , H. R. J. Zwinderman , and R. G. Geurtsen . 1986 .
Simulations of proteins in water . Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 482:269-286 .
Bernal, J. D. , and D. C. Crowfoot . 1934 . X-ray photographs of crystalline pepsin . Nature
(London) 133:794 .
Beveridge, D. L. , and W. L. Jorgensen , eds. 1986 . Computer Simulation of Chemical and
Biological Systems . Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. , Vol. 482 .
Blaney, J. M. , C. Hansch , C. Silipo , A. Vittoria . 1984 . Structure-activity relationships of
dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors . Chem. Rev. 84:333-407 .
Blaney, J. M. , P. K. Weiner , A. Dearing , P. A. Kollman , E. C. Jorgensen , S. J. Oatley , J. M.
Burridge , C. C. F. Blake . 1982 . Molecular mechanics simulation of protein-ligand

interactions: Binding of thyroid hormone analogues to prealbumin . J. Am. Chem. Soc.

104:6424-6434 .
Bock, K. 1983 . The preferred conformation of oligosaccharides in solution inferred from high
resolution NMR data and hard sphere exo-anomeric calculations . Pure Appl. Chem.

55:605-622 .
Boger, J. 1986 . Renin inhibitors: Drug design and molecular modelling . Third SCR-RSC
Medicinal Chemistry Symposium . 271-292 .
Brady, J. , and M. Karplus . 1985 . Configuration entropy of the alanine dipeptide in vacuum and
solution: A molecular dynamics study . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107:6103-6105 .
Braun, W. , C. Bosch , L. R. Brown , N. G
 and K. W
üthrich . 1981 . Combined use of proton-
proton overhauser enhancements and a distance geometry algorithm for determination of

polypeptide conformations: Application to micelle-bound glycagon . Biochim. Biophys.

Acta 667(2):377-396 .
Braun, W. , G. Wagner , E. Worgotter , M. Vasak , J. H. R. Kagi , and K. W
üthrich . 1986 .
Polypeptide fold in the two metal clusters of metallothionein-2 by nuclear magnetic

resonance in solution . J. Mol. Biol. 187:125-129 .
Bremer, E. G. , J. Schlessinger , and S. Hakomori . 1986 . Ganglioside-mediated modulation of cell
growth . J. Biol. Chem. 261:2434-2440 .
Brisson, J. R. , and J. P. Carver . 1983 . Solution conformation of 
-D(1-3)-linked and 
-D(1-6)-linked oligomannosides using proton nuclear magnetic-resonance . Biochemistry

22:1362-1368 .
REFERENCES161Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Brooks, C. L. III , and M. Karplus . 1986 . Theoretical approaches to solvation of biopolymers .
Methods Enzymol . 127:369-400 .
Browne, W. J. , A. C. T. North , D. C. Phillips , K. Brew , T. C. Vanaman , and R. L. Hill . 1969 . A
possible three-dimensional structure of bovine 
-Lactalbumin based on that of hen's egg-
white lysosyme . J. Mol. Biol. 42:65-86 .
Brunger, A. , R. L. Campbell , G. M. Clore , A. M. Gronenborn , M. Karplus , G. A. Petsko , and M.
M. Teeter . 1986a . Solution of a protein crystal structure with a model obtained from

NMR interproton distance restraints . Science 235:1049-1053 .
Brunger, A. T. , G. M. Clore , A. M. Gronenborn , and M. Karplus . 1986b . Three-dimensional
structure of proteins determined by molecular dynamics with interproton distance restraint:

Application to crambin . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:3801-3805 .
Brunger, A. T. , J. Kuriyan , and M. Karplus . 1987 . Crystallographic R Factor Refinement by
Molecular Dynamics . Science 235:458-460 .
Bush, C. A. , Z.-Y. Yan , and B. N. N. Rao . 1986 . Conformational energy calculations and proton
Nuclear Overhauser Enhancements reveal a unique conformation for blood group A

oligosaccharides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 108:6168-6173 .
Carver, J. P. , and J. R. Brisson . 1984 . The Three-Dimensional Structure of N-Linked
Oligosaccharides . Pp.209-331 in V. Ginsburg and P. W. Robbins , eds. Biology of

Carbohydrates . Vol. 2 . John Wiley & Sons , New York.
Carver, J. P. , and D. A. Cumming . 1987 . Site-directed processing of N-linked oligosaccharides.
The role of three-dimensional structure. Proc. Intl. Symp. Carbohydr. Chem. , Ithaca , New

York .Case, D. A. , and A. J. McCammon . 1986 . Pp. 222-233 in D. L. Beveridge and W. L. Jorgensen ,
eds. Computer Simulation of Chemical and Biological Systems . Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. ,

Vol. 482 .
Cech, T. R. 1987 . The chemistry of self-splicing RNA and RNA enzymes . Science 236:1532-1537 .

Cech, T. R. , N. K. Tanner , I. Tinoco , Jr. , B. R. Weir , M. Zuker , and P. S. Perlman . 1983 .
Secondary structure of the
Tetrahymena ribosomal RNA intervening sequence: Structural
homology with fungal mitochondrial intervening sequences . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

80:3903-3907 .
Chou, P. Y. , and G. D. Fasman . 1974 . Prediction of protein conformation . Biochemistry
13:222-245 .
Clore, G. M. , and A. M. Gronenborn . 1983 . Theory of the time dependent transferred nuclear
overhauser effect: Applications to structural analysis of ligand-protein complexes in

solution . J. Magn. Reson . 53:423-442 .
Cohen, F. E. , R. M. Abarbanel , I. D. Kuntz , and R. J. Fletterick . 1983 . Secondary structure
assignment for
/ proteins by a combinatorial approach . Biochemistry 22:4894-4904 .
Cohen, F. E. , R. M. Abarbanel , I. D. Kuntz , and R. J. Fletterick . 1986a . Turn prediction in
proteins using a pattern-matching approach . Biochemistry 25: 266-275 .
Cohen, F. E. , P. A. Kosen , I. D. Kuntz , L. B. Epstein , T. L. Ciardelli , and K. A. Smith . 1986b .
Structure-activity studies of Interleukin-2 . Science 234:349-352 .
REFERENCES162Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Corongiu, G. , and E. Clementi . 1981 . Simulations of the solvent structure for macromolecules II.
Structure of water solvating Na
+-B-DNA at 300K and a model for conformational
transitions induced by solvent variations . Biopolymers 20:2427-2483 .
Crippen, G. M. 1984 . Conformational analysis by scaled energy embedding . J. Comput. Chem.
5:548-554 .
Dabrowski, J. , U. Dabrowski , P. Hanfland , M. Kordowicz and W. E. Hull . 1986 . Structure
determination of peracetylated glycosphingolipids by one-and two-dimensional
1H NMR at
360 and 500 MHz . Magn. Reson. Chem. 23:59-69 .
Dayhoff, M. O. 1978 . Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure . Vol. 5,suppl.3 . National
Biomedical Research Foundation , Washington, D.C.
Diamond, R. 1966 . A mathematical model-building procedure for proteins . Acta Crystallograph .
A21:253-266 .
Dixon, R. A. F. , B. K. Kobilka , D. J. Strader , J. L. Benovic , H. G. Dohlman , T. Frielle , M. A.
Bolanowski , C. D. Bennett , E. Rands , R.E. Diehl , R. A. Mumford , E. E. Slater , I. S.

Sigal , M. G. Caron , R. J. Lefkowitz , and C. D. Strader . 1986 . Cloning of the gene and

cDNA for mammalian B-adrenergic receptor and homology with rhodopsin . Nature

(London) 321:75-79 .
DOE (U.S. Department of Energy) . 1987 . Summary report of a workshop on a carbohydrate
structure data Base . DOE/ER-0310 . Washington, D.C.
Doolittle, R. F. 1985 . The genealogy of some recently evolved vertebrate proteins . Trends in
Biochemical Sciences 10:233-237 .
Drew, H. R. , and R. E. Dickerson . 1981 . Structure of a B-DNA dodecamer III. Geometry of
hydration . J. Mol. Biol. 151:535-556 .
Eisenberg, D. , R. M. Weiss , and T. C. Terwilliger . 1984 . The hydrophobic moment detects
periodic periodicity in protein hydrophobicity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:140-144 .
Elber, R. , and M. Karplus . 1987 . Multiple conformational states of proteins: A molecular
dynamics analysis of myoglobin . Science 235:318-321 .
Ermak, D. L. , and J. A. McCammon . 1978 . Brownian dynamics with hydrodynamic interactions .
J. Chem. Phys. 69:1352-1360 .
Ernst, R. , G. Bodenhausen , and A. Wokaun . 1987 . Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance in
One and Two Dimensions . Clarendon Press , Oxford . 610 pp .
Feldmann, R. J. , D. H. Bing , M. Potter , C. Mainhart , B. Furie , B. C. Furie , L. H. Caporale .
1985 . On the construction of computer models of proteins by the extension of

crystallographic structures . Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 439:12-43 .
Finer-Moore, J. , and R. M. Stroud . 1984 . Amphipathic analysis and possible formation of the ion
channel in an acetylcholine receptor . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:155-159 .
Fitzwater, S. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1982 . Combined-information protein structure refinement:
Potential energy-constrained real-space method for refinement with limited diffraction

data . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79:2133-2137 .
REFERENCES163Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Freier, S. M. , R. Kiersek , J. A. Jaeger , N. Sugimoto , M. H Caruthers , T. Neilson , and D. H.
Turner . 1986 . Improved free energy parameters for prediction of RNA duplex stability .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:9373-9377 .
Friedman, H. L. , C. V. Krishnan , and C. Jolicoeur . 1973 . Ionic interactions in water . Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci. 204:79-99 .
Fujinaga, M. , A. R. Sielecki , R. J. Read , W. Ardelt , M. Laskowski, Jr. , and M. N. G. James .
1987 . Crystal and molecular structures of the complex of 
 Chymotrypsin with its
inhibitor Turkey Ovomucoid third domain at 1.8 
Å resolution . J. Mol. Biol. 195:397-418
Ghose, A. K. , and G. M. Crippen . 1985 . Geometrically feasible binding modes of a flexible ligand
molecule at the receptor site . J. Comput. Chem. 6:350-359 .
Ghosh, I. , and J. A. McCammon . 1987 . Sidechain rotational isomerization of proteins. Dynamics
simulation with solvent surroundings . Biophys. J. 51:637-641 .
Gibson, K. D. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1967 . Minimization of polypeptide energy. I. Preliminary
structures of bovine pancreatic ribonuclease S-peptide . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .

58:420-427 .
Gibson, K. D. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1988 . The multiple-minima problem in protein folding . In M.
H. Sarma and R. H. Sarma , eds. Structure and Expression: Vol. 1. From Proteins to

Ribosomes . Adenine Press , Guilderland, N.Y.
Gilson, M. , A. Rashin , R. Fine , and B. Honig . 1985 . On the calculation of electrostatic
interactions in proteins . J. Mol. Biol. 184:503-516 .
G, M. 1981 . Correlation of DNA exonic regions with protein structural units in haemoglobin .
Nature (London) 291:90-92 .
G, M. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1984 . Molecular theory of the helix-coil transition in polyamino
acids. V. Explanation of the different conformational behavior of valine, isoleucine, and
leucine in aqueous solution . Biopolymers 23:1961-1977 .
Goodford, P. J. 1984 . Drug design by the method of receptor fit . J. Med. Chem. 27:557-564 .

Goodford, P. J. 1985 . A computational procedure for determining energetically favored binding
sites on biologically important macromolecules . J. Med. Chem. 28:849-857 .
Green, D. W. , V. M. Ingram , and M. F. Perutz . 1954 . The structure of haemoglobin. IV. Sign
determination by the isomorphous replacement method . Proc. Roy. Soc. A 225:287 .
Greer, J. 1985 . Protein structure and function by comparative model building . Ann. N.Y. Acad.
Sci. 439:44-63 .
Hagler, A. T. , J. Moult , and D. J. Osguthorpe . 1980a . Monte Carlo simulation of the solvent
structure in crystals of a hydrated cyclic peptide . Biopolymers 19:395-418 .
Hagler, A. T. , D. J. Osguthorpe , and B. Robson . 1980b . Monte Carlo simulation of water
behavior around the dipeptide N-Acetylalanyl-Methylamide . Science 208:599-601 .
Hakomori, S. 1986 . Glycosphingolipids . Sci. Amer. 254(5):44-53 .

Hare, D. R. , and B. R. Reid . 1986 . Three dimensional structure of a DNA hairpin in solution: Two-
dimensional NMR studies and distance geometry calculations on d(CGCGTTTTCGCG) .

Biochemistry 25:5341-5350 .
REFERENCES164Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Harrison, S. C. , A. J. Olson , C. E. Schutt , F. K. Winkler , and G. Brigogne . 1978 . Tomato bushy
stunt virus at 2.9 
Å resolution . Nature (London) 276:368-373 .
Havel, T. F. , G. M. Crippen , and I. D. Kuntz . 1979 . Effects of distance constraints on
macromolecular conformation. II. Simulation of experimental results and theoretical

predictions . Biopolymers 18:73-81 .
Havel, T. F. , and K. W
üthrich . 1985 . An evaluation of the combined use of nuclear magnetic
resonance and distance geometry for the determination of protein conformation in

solution . J. Mol. Biol. 182:281-294 .
Hayes-Roth, B. , B. Buchanan , O. Lichtarge , M. Hewett , R. Altman , J. Brinkley , C. Cornelius ,
B. Duncan , O. Jardetzky . 1986 . Protein: Deriving protein structure from constraints . Pp.

904-909 in Proceedings of AAAI-86, Fifth National Congress on Artificial Intelligence

Vol. 2 . Morgan Kaufman , Los Altos, CA.
Henderson, R. 1979 . The structure of Bacterorhodopsin and its relevance to other membrane
proteins . Soc. Gen. Physiol. Ser. 33:3-15 .
Hendrickson, W. A. , and J. H. Konnert . Incorporation of stereochemical information into
crystallographic refinement . 1980 . Pp. 13.01-13.26 in Diamond, R. , S. Rameseshan , and

K. Venkatesan , eds. Computing in Crystallography . Indian Academy of Sciences ,

Bangalore, India .
Hendrickson, W. A. 1985 . Stereochemically restrained refinement of macromolecular structures .
Pp. 252-270 in H. W. Wyckoff , C. W. Hirs , and S. N. Timasheff , eds. Methods in

Enzymology 115 . Academic Press , New York .
Henry, E. R. , M. Levitt , and W. A. Eaton . 1985 . Molecular dynamics simulation of
photodissociation of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

82:2034-2038 .
Hermans, J. , ed. 1985 . Molecular Dynamics and Protein Structure . Proceedings of a workshop
held 13-18 May 1984 at the University of North Carolina . Polycrystal Book Service ,

Western Springs, Ill. 194 pp.
Hermans, J. and S. Shankar . 1987 . The free energy of xenon binding to myoglobin from molecular
dynamics simulation . Isr. J. Chem 27:225-227 .
Hesselink, F. T. , T. Ooi , and H. A. Scheraga . 1973 . Conformation energy calculations.
Thermodynamic parameters of the helix-coil transition for poly(L-lysine) in aqueous salt

solution . Macromolecules 6:541-552 .
Hingerty, B. , and S. Broyde . 1982 . Conformation of the deosydinucleoside monophosphate
dCpdG modified at carbon 8 of guanine with 2-(acetylamino)fluorene . Biochemistry

21:3243-3252 .
Hodes, Z. I. , G. N
émethy , and H. A. Scheraga . 1979a . Model for the conformational analysis of
hydrated peptides. Effect of hydration on the conformational stability of the terminally

blocked residues of the 20 naturally occurring amino acids . Biopolymers 18:1565-1610 .
Hodes, Z. I. , G. N
émethy , and H. A. Scheraga . 1979b . Influence of hydration on the
conformational stability and formation of bends in terminally blocked dipeptides .

Biopolymers 18:1611-1634 .
Hogle, J. , M. Chow , and D. Filman . 1985 . Three-dimensional structure of poliovirus at 2.0 
Åresolution . Science 229:1359 .
Hol, W. G. 1986 . Protein crystallography and computer graphics 
Š Toward rational drug design .
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 25:767-778 .
REFERENCES165Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Homans, S. W. , R. A. Dwek , and T. W. Rademacher . 1987 . Solution conformations of N-linked
oligosaccharides . Biochemistry 26:6571-6578 .
Hopfinger, A. J. 1985 . Computer-assisted drug design . J. Med. Chem. 28:1133-1139 .

Humber, L. G. , A. H. Philips , F. T. Bruderlein , M. Gotz , K. Voith . 1979. Mapping the dopamine
receptor: Some primary and accessory binding sites . Pp. 227-242 in E. C. Olson and R. E.

Christofferson , eds. 1979 . Computer-assisted Drug Design . ACS Symposium Series

112 , American Chemical Society , Washington, D.C.
Humblet, C. , and G. R. Marshall . 1981 . Three-dimensional computer modeling as an aid to drug
design . Drug Dev. Res. 1:409-434 .
Hwang, J. K. , and A. Warshel . 1987 . Semiquantitative calculations of catalytic free energies in
genetically modified enzymes . Biochemistry 26:2669-2670 .
Ingolia, T. D. , and E. A. Craig . 1982 . Four small drosophila heat shock proteins are related to each
other and to mammalian alpha crystallin . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79:2360-2364 .
Jack, A. , and M. Levitt . 1978 . Refinement of large structures by simultaneous minimization of
energy and R factor . Acta Crystallogr . A34:931 .
James, M. N. G. , L. T. J. Delbaere , and G. D. Brayer . 1978 . Amino acid sequence alignment of
bacterial and mammalian pancreatic serine proteases based on topological equivalences .

Can. J. Biochem. 56:396-402 .
Jardetzky, O. 1980 . Nature of molecular-conformations inferred from high-resolution NMR ,
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 621:227-232 .
Jones, T. A. 1985 . Interactive computer graphics: FRODO . Pp. 157-170 in Wyckoff, H. W. , C. W.
Hirs , and S. N. Timashoff , eds. Methods in Enzymology 115 . Academic Press , New
York .Jorgensen, W. L. 1982 . Monte Carlo simulation of n-butane in water. Conformational evidence for
the hydrophobic effect . J. Chem. Phys. 77:5757-5765 .
Jorgensen, W. L. In press . Energy profiles for organic reactions in solution . R. D. Levine , J.
Jortner , and S. A. Rice , eds. Adv. Chem. Phys. , special volume. Evolution of Size

Effects in Chemical Dynamics . John Wiley & Sons , New York .
Jorgensen, W. L. , J. Chandrasekhar , J. D. Madura , R. W. Impey , and M. L. Klein . 1983 .
Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water . J. Chem. Phys.

79:926-935 .
Jorgensen, W. L. , and C. Ravimohan . 1985 . Monte Carlo simulation of differences in free energies
of hydration . J. Chem. Phys. 83:3050-3054 .
Kabsch, W. , and C. Sander . 1983 . How good are predictions of protein secondary structure? FEBS
Lett. 155:179-182 .
Kainosho, M. , and T. Tsuji . 1982 . Assignment of the three methionyl carbonyl carbon resonances
inStreptomyces subtillsin inhibitor by a Carbon-13 and Nitrogen-15 double-labeling
technique. A new strategy for structural studies of proteins in solution . Biochemistry

21:6273-6279 .
Kainosho, M. , H. Nagao , and T. Tsuji . 1987 . Local structural features around the c-terminal
segment of
Streptomyces subtilisin inhibitor studied by carbonyl carbon nuclear magnetic
resonances of three phenylalanyl residues . Biochemistry 26:1068-1075 .
REFERENCES166Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kaiser, E. T. , and F. J. K
ézdy . 1984 . Amphiphilic secondary structure: Design of peptide
hormones . Science 223:249-255 .
Kang, Y. K. , G. N
émethy , and H. A. Scheraga . 1987 . Free energies of hydration of solute
molecules . J. Phys. Chem. 91:4105-4120 .
Kaptein, R. , E. R. P. Zuiderweg , R. M. Scheek , R. Boelens , and W. F. van Gunsteren . 1985 . A
protein structure from nuclear magnetic resonance data . Lac repressor headpiece . J. Mol.

Biol. 182:179-182 .
Karplus, M. , and J. A. McCammon . 1983 . Dynamics of proteins: Elements and function . Ann.
Rev. Biochem. 52:263-300 .
Kauzmann, W. 1959 . Some factors in the interpretation of protein denaturation . Advan. Prot.
Chem . 14:1-64 .
Kendrew, J. C. , R. E. Dickerson , B. E. Strandberg , R. G. Hart , D. R. Davies , D. C. Phillips , and
V. C. Shore . 1960 . Structure of Myoglobin . Nature (London) 185:422-427 .
Klapper, I. , R. Hagstrom , R. Fine , K. Sharp , and B. Honig . 1986 . Focussing of electric fields in
the active site of Cu-Zn superoxide dismutose: Effects of ionic strength and amino-acid

modification . Proteins 1:47-59 .
Klein, B. J. , and G. R. Pack . 1983 . Calculations of the spatial distribution of charge density in the
environment of DNA . Biopolymers 22:2331-2352 .
Klein, T. E. , C. Huang , T. E. Ferrin , R. Langridge , C. Hansch . 1986 . Computer-assisted drug
receptor mapping analysis . Pp. 147-158 in T. H. Pierce , and B. A. Mohne , eds. Artificial

Intelligence Applications in Chemistry . ACS Symposium Series 306 . American Chemical

Society , Washington, D.C.
Kopka, M. L. , P. Pjura , C. Yoon , D. Goodsell , R. E. Dickerson . 1985a . The bigning of netropsin
to double-helical B-DNA of sequence C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-
BrC-G-C-G: Single crystal x-ray
structure analysis . Pp. 461-483 in E. Clementi , G. Corongiu , M. H. Sarma , and R.

Sarma , eds. Structure and Motion: Membranes, Nucleic Acids and Proteins . Adenine

Press , New York .
Kopka, M. L. , C. Yoon , D. Goodsell , P. Pjura , R. E. Dickerson . 1985b . The molecular origin of
DNA-drug specificity in netropsin and distamycin . Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA

82:1376-1380 .
Kopka, M. L. , C. Yoon , D. Goodsell , P. Pjura , R. E. Dickerson . 1985c . The binding of an
antitumor drug to DNA; Netropsin and C-G-C-G-A-A-T-T-
BrC-G-C-G . J. Mol. Biol.
183:553-563 .
Kosen, P. A. , R. M. Scheek , H. Naderi , V. J. Basus , S. Manogaran , P. G. Schmidt , N. J.
Oppenheimer , and I. D. Kuntz . 1986 . Two-dimensional
1H NMR of three spin-labeled
derivatives of BPTI . Biochemistry 25:2356-2364 .
Krüger, P. , W. Strassburger , A. Wollmer , and W. F. van Gunsteren . 1985 . A comparison of the
structure and dynamics of avian pancreatic polypeptide hormone in solution and in the

crystal . Eur. Biophys. J. 13:73-88 .
REFERENCES167Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kubo, T. , K. Fukuda , A. Mikami , A. Maeda , H. Takahashi , M. Mishina , T. Haga , K. Haga , A.
Ichiyama , K. Kangawa , M. Kojima , H. Matsuo , T. Hirose , and S. Numa . 1986 .

Cloning, sequencing and expression of complementary DNA encoding the muscarinic

acetylcholine receptor . Nature (London) 323:411-416 .
Kuntz, I. D. 1972 . Protein Folding . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 94:4009-4012 .

Kuntz, I. D. 1975 . Approach to the tertiary structure of globular proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc.
97:4362-4366 .
Kuntz, I. D. , J. M. Blaney , S. J. Oatley , R. Langridge , and T. Ferrin . 1982 . A geometric
approach to macromolecule-ligand interactions . J. Mol. Biol. 161:269-288
Kyte, J. , and R. F. Doolittle . 1982 . A simple method for displaying the hydropathic character of a
protein . J. Mol. Biol. 157:105-132 .
Laue, E. D. , J. Skilling , J. Staunton . 1985 . Maximum entropy reconstruction of spectra containing
antiphase peaks . J. Magn. Reson. 63:418-424 .
LeMaster, D. M. , and F. M. Richards . 1985 . 
1H15N Heteronuclear NMR studies of E. coli
thioredoxin in samples isotopically labeled by residue type . Biochemistry 24:7263-7268 .
Lemieux, R. U. , and K. Bock . 1983 . The conformational analysis of oligosaccharides by H-NMR
and HSEA calculation . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 221:125-134 .
Lemieux, R. U. , A. P. Venot , U. Spohr , P. Bird , G. Mandal , N. Morishima , O. Hindsgaul , and
D. R. Bundle . 1985 . Molecular recognition. V. The binding of the human B blood group

determinant by hybridoma monoclonal antibodies . Can. J. Chem. 63:2664-2668 .
Levinthal, C. 1966 . Molecular model-building by computer . Sci. Am. 214(6):42-52
Levitt, M. 1969 . Detailed molecular model for transfer ribonucleic acid . Nature (London)
224:759-763 .
Levitt, M. 1982 . Protein conformation, dynamics and folding by computer simulation . Annu. Rev.
Biophys. Bioeng . 11:251-271 .
Levitt, M. , and C. Chothia . 1976 . Structural patterns in globular proteins . Nature (London)
261:552-558 .
Levy, R. M. , M. Karplus , and J. A. McCammon . 1979 . Diffusive Langevin dynamics of model
alkanes . Chem. Phys. Lett. 65:4-11 .
Levy, R. M. , M. Karplus , and P. G. Wolynes . 1981 . NMR relaxation parameters in molecules
with internal motion: Exact Langevin trajectory results compared with simplified
relaxation models . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103:5998-6011 .
Lewis, P. N. , F. A. Momany , and H. A. Scheraga . 1971 . Folding of polypeptide chains in
proteins: A proposed mechanism for folding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68:2293-2297 .
Lipman, D. , and W. Pearson . 1985 . Rapid and sensitive protein similarity searches . Science
227:1435-1441 .
Lybrand, T. , J. A. McCammon , and G. Wipff . 1986 . Theoretical calculation of relative binding
affinity in host-guest systems . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:833-835 .
Manning, G. S. 1978 . The molecular theory of polyelectrolyte solutions with applications to the
electrostatic properties of polynucleotides . Q. Rev. Biophys. 11:179-246 .
REFERENCES168Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Markley, J. L. 1987 . One-and two-dimensional NMR investigations of the consequences of amino
acid replacements in proteins . Pp. 15-33 in D. L. Oxender , and C. F. Fox , eds. Protein

Engineering . A. R. Liss , Inc. , New York .
Marshall, G. R. , C. D. Barry , H. E. Bosshard , R. A. Dammkoehler , D. A. Dunn . 1979 . The
conformational parameter in drug design: The active analog approach . Pp. 205-226 in E.

C. Olson , and R. E. Christofferson , eds. Computer-assisted Drug Design . ACS

Symposium Series 112 , American Chemical Society , Washington, D.C.
Martin, Y. C. 1981 . A practitioner's perspective of the role of quantitative structure activity analysis
in medicinal chemistry . J. Med. Chem. 24:229-237 .
McCammon, J. A. , S. H. Northrup , M. Karplus , and R. M. Levy . 1980 . Helix-coil transitions in a
sample polypeptide model . Biopolymers 19:2033-2045 .
McIntosh, L. P. , R. H. Griffey , D. G. Muchmore , C. P. Nielson , A. G. Redfield , and F. W.
Dahlquist . 1987 . Protein NMR measurements of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme aided by
15Nisotopic labeling: Structural and dynamic studies of large proteins . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 84:1244-1248 .
Mezei, M. , P. K. Mehrotra , and D. L. Beveridge . 1985 . Monte Carlo determiniation of the free
energy and internal energy of hydration for the ala dipeptide at 25
°C . J. Am. Chem. Soc.
107:2239-2245 .
Michel, H. 1982 . Three-dimensional crystals of a membrane protein complex. The photosynthetic
reaction centre from
Rhodopseudomonas viridis
 . J. Mol. Biol. 158:567-572 .
Miller, M. H. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1976 . Calculation of the structure of collagen models. Role of
inter-chain interactions in determining the triple-helical coiled-coil conformation. I. Poly
(Glycyl-Prolyl-Prolyl) . J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Syrup . 54:171-200 .
Mishina, M. , T. Kurosaki , T. Tobimatsu , Y. Morimoro , M. Noda , T. Yamamoio , M. Terao , J.
Lindstrom , T. Takahashi , M. Kuno , and S. Numa . 1984 . Expression of functional

acetylcholine receptor from cloned cDNAs . Nature (London) 307:604-613 .
Moult, J. , and M. N. G. James . 1986 . An algorithm for determining the conformation of
polypeptide segments in proteins by systematic search . Proteins 1:146-163 .
Murthy, C. S. , R. Bacquet , and P. J. Rossky . 1985 . Ionic distribution near polyelectrolytes. A
comparison of theoretical approaches . J. Phys. Chem. 89:701-710 .
Némethy, G. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1977 . Protein folding . Q. Rev. Biophys. 10:239-352 .
Némethy, G. Z. I. Hodes , and H. A. Scheraga . 1978 . A model for hydration of peptides and its
application to the conformational analysis of terminally blocked amino acids and

dipeptides . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75:5760-5764 .
Neumann, M. 1985 . The dielectric constant of water. Computer simulation with MCY potential .
82:5663-5672 .
Neumann, M. 1986 . Dielectric relaxation in water. Computer simulations with the TIP4P potential .
J. Chem. Phys. 85:1567-1580 .
REFERENCES169Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Nilsson, L. , G. M. Clore , A. M. Gronenborn , A. T. Brunger , and M. Karplus . 1986 . Structure
refinement of oligonucleotides by molecular dynamics with NOE interproton distance

restraints: Application to 5' d(CGTACG)
2ﬁ . J. Mol. Biol. 188:455-475 .
Nirenberg, M. , P. Leder , M. Bernfield , R. Brimacombe , J. Trupin , F. Rottman , C. O'Neal .
1965 . RNA codewords and protein synthesis, VII. On the general nature of the RNA

code . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 53:1161-1168 .
Nishikawa, K. 1983 . Assessment of secondary-structure prediction of proteins. Comparison of
computerized Chou-Fasman method with others . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 748:285-299 .
Noguti, T. , and N. G
 . 1985 . Efficient Monte Carlo method for simulation of fluctuating
conformations of native proteins . Biopolymers 24:527-546 .
Okuyama, K. , N. Tanaka , T. Ashida , and M. Kakudo . 1976 . Structure analysis of a collagen
model polypeptide, (Pro-Pro-Gly),
10 . Bull . Chem. Soc. Jpn. 49:1805-1810 .
Olson, E. C. , and R. E. Christoffersen , eds. 1979 . Computer-assisted Drug Design . ACS
Symposium Series 112 , American Chemical Society , Washington, D.C. 619 pp.
Paine, G. H. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1987 . Prediction of the native conformation of a polypeptide by
a statistical-mechanical procedure. III. Probable and average conformations of enkephalin .
Biopolymers 26:1125-1162 .
Palmer, K. A. , H. A. Scheraga , J. F. Riordan , and B. L. Vallee . 1986 . A preliminary three-
dimensional structure of angiogenin . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:1965-1969 .
Pauling, L. , R. B. Corey , and H. R. Branson . 1951 . The structure of proteins: Two hydrogen-
bonded helical configurations of the polypeptide chain . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
37:205-211 .
Perutz, M. F. 1965 Structure and function of hemoglobin. I. A tentative atomic model of horse
oxyhemoglobin . J. Mol. Biol. 13:646-668 .
Perutz, M. F. , G. Fermi , D. J. Abraham , C. Poyart , and E. Bursaux . 1986 . Hemoglobin as a
receptor of drugs and peptides: X-ray studies of the tereochemistry of binding . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 108:1064-1078 .
Perutz, M. F. , J. C. Kendrew , and H. C. Watson . 1965 . Structure and function of hemoglobin. II.
Some relations between polypeptide chain configuration and amino acid sequence . J. Mol.

Biol. 13 : 669-678 .
Perutz, M. F. , M. G. Rossman , A. F. Cullis , H. Muirhead , G. Will , and A. C. T. North . 1960 .
Structure of hemoglobin . Nature (London) 185 : 416-421 .
Petrillo, E. W. , and M. A. Ondetti . 1982 . Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: Medicinal
chemistry and biological activity . Med. Res. Revs. 2: 1-41 .
Petsko, G. A. , and D. Ringe . 1984 . Fluctuations in protein structure from x-ray diffraction . Annu.
Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 13: 331-371 .
Pettitt, B. M. , and M. Karplus . 1985 . The potential of mean force surface for the alanine dipeptide
in aqueous solution: A theoretical approach . Chem. Phys. Lett. 121: 194-201 .
Pettitt, B. M. , and P. J. Rossky . 1986 . Alkali halides in water: Ion-solvent correlations and ion-ion
potentials of mean force at infinite dilution . J. Chem. Phys. 84:5836-5844 .
REFERENCES170Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Pettitt, B. M. , M. Karplus , and P. J. Rossky . 1986 . Integral equation model for aqueous solvation
of polyatomic solutes: Application to the determination of the free energy surface for the

internal motion of biomolecules . J. Phys. Chem. 90:6335-6345 .
Pfandler, P. , and G. Bodenhausen . 1986 . Automated analysis of two-dimensional NMR spectra of
mixtures by pattern recognition . J. Magn. Reson . 70:71-78 .
Phillips, D. C. 1967 . Lysozyme and the development of protein crystal chemistry . Proc. Int. Cong.
Biochem. ( Tokyo) 7:63-82 .
Pincus, M. R. , and H. A. Scheraga . 1979 . Conformational energy calculations of enzyme-substrate
and enzyme-inhibitor complexes of lysozyme. 2. Calculation of the structures of

complexes with a flexible enzyme . Macromolecules 12:633-644 .
Plattner, J. J. , J. Greer , A. K. L. Fung , H. Stein , H. D. Kleinert , H. L. Sham , J. R. Smital , and T.
J. Perun . 1986 . Peptide analogs of angeniotensinogen. Effect of peptide chain length on

renin inhibition . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 139: 982-990 .
Postma , J. P. M. , H. J. C. Berendsen , and J. R. Haak . 1982 . Thermodynamics of cavity formation
in water: A molecular dynamics study . Faraday Symp. Chem. Soc. 17:55-67 .
Rao, N. R. , U. C. Singh , P. A. Bash , and P. A. Kollman . 1987 . Free energy perturbation
calculations on binding and catalysis after mutating Asn 155 in subtilisin . Nature

(London) 328:551-553 .
Rao, S. T. , and M. G. Rossmann . 1973 . Comparison of super-secondary structures in proteins . J.
Mol. Biol. 76:241-256 .
Richards, F. M. , 1968 . The matching of physical models to three dimensional electron density
maps: A simple optical device . J. Mol. Biol. 37:225-230 .
Richards, F. M. 1986 . Protein Design: Are We Ready? Pp. 171-196 in D. L. Oxender , ed. Protein
Structure, Folding and Design . Alan R. Liss , New York .
Richardson, J. S. 1981 . The anatomy and taxonomy of protein structure . Pp. 168-340 in C. B.
Anfinsen , J. T. Edsall , and F. M. Richards , eds. Advances in Protein Chemistry . Vol. 34.
Academic Press , New York .
Robson, B. and D. J. Osguthorpe . 1979 . Refined models for computer simulation of protein
folding . J. Mol. Biol. 132:19-51 .
Robson, B. 1986 . The prediction of peptide and protein structure . Pp. 567-607 in A. Darbre , ed.
Practical Protein Chemistry - A Handbook . John Wiley & Sons , New York .
Rose, G. D. 1985 . Automated recognition of domains in globular proteins . Methods Enzymol .
115:430-440 .
Rose, G. D. , L. M. Gierasch , and J. A. Smith . 1985 . Turns in peptides and proteins . Pp. 1-109 in
Advances in Protein Chemistry . Vol. 37 . Academic Press , New York .
Rosenberg, R. O. , M. Rao , and B. J. Berne . 1982 . Hydrophobic effect on chain folding. The trans
to gauche isomerization of n-Butane in water . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104:7647-7649 .
Rossmann, M. G. , ed. 1972 . The Molecular Replacement Method . Gordon & Breach Publishers ,
New York .
Rossmann, M. G. , and P. Argos . 1977 . The taxonomy of protein structure . J. Mol. Biol.
109:99-129 .
REFERENCES171Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Rossmann, M. G. , E. Arnold , J. W. Erickson , J. E. Johnson , G. Kamers , M. Luo , A. G. Mosser ,
R. R. Rueckert , B. Sherry , and G. Friend . 1985 . Structure of a human common cold

virus and functional relationship to other picornaviruses . Nature (London) 317:145-153 .
Scarsdale, J. N. , P. Ram , and J. H. Prestegard . In press . A molecular mechanics NMR
pseudoenergy approach to the solution conformation of glycolipids . J. Comp. Chem.
Scheraga, H. A. 1984 . Protein structure and function from a collodial to a molecular view .
Carlsberg Rev. Commun . 49:1-55 .
Schiffer, J. , and A. B. Edmundson . 1967 . Use of helical wheels to represent the structures of
proteins and to identify segments with helical potential . Biophys. J. 7:121-135 .
Schussheim, A. E. , and D. Cowburn . 1987 . Deconvolution of high resolution 2D-NMR signals by
digital signal processing with linear predictive singular value decomposition . J. Magn.

Reson . 71:371-378 .
Seibel, G. L. , U. C. Singh , and P. A. Kollman . 1985 . A molecular dynamics simulation of double
helical B-DNA including counterions and water . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .
Sekharudu, Y. C. , M. Biswas , and V. S. R. Rao . 1986 . Complex carbohydrates. 2 . The modes of
binding of complex carbohydrates to concanavalin A - A computer modeling approach .

Int. J. Biol. Macromol . 8:9-19 .
Sela, M. , F. H. White , Jr. , and C. B. Anfinsen . 1957 . Reductive cleavage of disulfide bridges in
ribonuclease . Science 125:691 .
Sheriff, S. , E. W. Silverton , E. A. Padlan , G. H. Cohen , S. J. Smith-Gill , B. C. Finzel , and D. R.
Davies . In press . Three-dimensional structure of an antibody antigen complex . Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .
Singh, U. C. , F. Brown , P. A. Bush , and P. A. Kollman . 1987 . An approach to the application of
free energy perturbation methods using molecular dynamics: Applications to the

transformation of CH
3OHCH3CH3, H3O+NH4+, Gly
Ala, Ala
Phe in Aqueous
Solution and to H
3O+ (H
2O)3NH4+(H2O)3 in the gas phase . J. Am. Chem. Soc.
109:1607-1614 .
Smith, J. L. , W. A. Hendrickson , R. B. Honzatko , and S. Sheriff . 1986a . Structural heterogeneity
in protein crystals . Biochemistry 25:5018-5027 .
Smith, T. J. , M. J. Kremer , M. Luo , G. Vriend , E. Arnold , G. Damer , M. G. Rossmann , M. A.
McKinlay , G. D. Diana , and M. J. Otto . 1986b . The site of attachment in human

rhinovirus 14 for antiviral agents that inhibit uncoating . Science 233:1286-1293 .
Smith-Gill , S. J. , J. A. Rupley , J. R. Princes , R. P. Ceerty , and H. A. Scheraga . 1984 .
Experimental identification of a theoretically-predicted 
ﬁleft-sidedﬂ binding mode for
(GlcNAc)6 in the active site of liponyml . Biochemistry 23:993-997 .
Snider , M. D. 1984 . Biosynthesis of glycoproteins . Formation of N-linkedoligosaccharides . Pp.
163-198 in V. Ginsburg and P. W. Robbins , eds. Biology of Carbohydrates . Vol. 2 . John

Wiley & Sons , New York .
Soumpasis, D. 1984 . Statistical mechanics of the B
Z transition of DNA: Contribution of diffuse
ionic interactions . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81:5116-5120 .
Steinhauser, O. 1983 . On the dielectric theory and computer simulation of water . Chem. Phys.
79:465-482 .
REFERENCES172Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stillinger, F. H. 1975 . Theory and molecular models for water . Adv. Chem. Phys. 31:1-101 .
Stroud, R. M. , and J. Finer-Moore . 1985 . Acetylcholine receptor structure, function, and
evolution . Annu. Rev. Cell. Biol. 1:317-351 .
Sussman, J. L. 1985 . Constrained-restrained least squares refinement of proteins and nucleic acids .
Pp. 271-302 in Wyckoff, H. W. , C. W. Hirs ,and S. N. Timasheff , eds. Methods in

Enzymology , 115 . Academic Press , New York .
Suzuki, E. , N. Pattabiraman , G. Zon , and T. L. James . 1986 . Solution structure of [d(A-T)5]2 via
complete relaxation matrix analysis of two dimensional NOE spectra and molecular
mechanics calculations: Evidence for a hydration tunnel . Biochemistry 25:6854-6865 .
Swenson, M. K. , A. W. Burgess and H. A. Scheraga . 1978 . Conformational analysis of
polypeptides: applications to homologous proteins . Pp. 115-142 in B. Paullaman , ed.

Frontiers in Physical Chemical Biology . Academic Press , New York .
Taylor, W. R. , and J. M. Thornton . 1983 . Prediction of super-secondary structure in proteins .
Nature (London) 301:540-542 .
Teleman, O. 1986 . Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Polyatomic Molecules in Aqueous
Solution . Thesis . University of Lund , Sweden . 180 pp .
Tembe, B. L. , and A. McCammon . 1984 . Ligand-receptor interactions . Comp. Chem. 8:281-283 .

Tidor, B. , K. K. Irikura , B. R. Brooks , and M. Karplus . 1983 . Dynamics of DNA oligomers . J.
Biomol. Struc. Dyn. 1:231-252 .
Tilton, R. F. , U. C. Singh , I. D. Kuntz , and P. A. Kollman . In press . Protein ligand dynamics: A
96 picosecond simulation of a myoglobinxenon complex . J. Mol. Biol.
Tinoco, I., Jr. , O. C. Uhlenbeck , and M. D. Levine . 1971 . Estimation of secondary structure in
ribonucleic acids . Nature (London) 230:362-367 .
Tully, J. C. 1981 . Computer simulation of the dynamics of chemical processes . Comp. Chem.
5:159-165 .
Tvaroska, I. , and S. Perez . 1986 . Conformation energy calculations for oligosaccharides: A
comparison of methods and a strategy of calculation . Carbohydr. Res. 149:389-410 .
Ultsch, M. H. , A. A. Kossiakoff , J. Burnier , J. A. Wells , D. P. Powers , B. A. Katz , R. R. Bolt ,
B. C. Cunningham , and S. S. Power . 1985 . Industrial applications of enzyme

engineering . World Biotech . Rep. 1:611-616 .
Unwin, P. , and P. D. Ennis . 1984 . Two configurations of a channel-forming membrane protein .
Nature (London) 307:609-612 .
van Gunsteren , W. F. , and H. J. C. Berendsen . 1984 . Computer simulations as a tool for tracing
the conformational differences between proteins in solution and in the crystalline state . J.

Mol. Biol. 176:559-564 .
van Gunsteren , W. F. , and M. Karplus . 1982 . Protein dynamics in solution and in a crystalline
environment: A molecular dynamics study . Biochemistry 21:2259-2274 .
van Gunsteren , W. F. , H. J. C. Berendensen , J. Hermans , W. G. J. Hol , and J. P. M. Postma .
1983 . Computer simulation of the dynamics of hydrated protein crystals and its

comparison with X-ray data . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80:4315-4319 .
REFERENCES173Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.van Gunsteren , W. F. , H. J. C. Berendsen , R. G. Geurtsen , and H. R. J. Zwinderman . 1986 . A
molecular dynamics computer simulation of an eight base pair DNA fragment in aqueous

solution: Comparison with experimental two-dimensional NMR data . Ann. N.Y. Acad.

Sci. 482:287-303 .
Wagner, G. , and D. Bruhwiler . 1986 . Toward the complete assignment of the carbon NMR
spectrum of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor . Biochemistry 25:5839-5843 .
Wallis, M. , S. L. Howell , and K. W. Taylor . 1985 . The Biochemisty of the Polypeptide
Hormones . J. Wiley & Sons , New York .
Wand, A. J. , H. Roder , and S. W. Englander . 1986 . Two-dimensional
1H NMR studies of
cytochrome c: Hydrogen exchange in the N-terminal helix . Biochemistry 25:1107-1114 .
Warme, P. K. , F. A. Momany , S. V. Rumball , R. W. Tuttle , and H. A. Scheraga . 1974 .
Computation of Structures of Homologous Proteins. 
-Lactalbumin from Lysozyme .
Biochemistry 13:768-782 .
Warshel, A. 1981 . Electrostatic basis of structure-function correlation in proteins . Acc. Chem. Res.
9:284-290 .
Warshel, A. , and F. Sussman . 1986 . Toward computer-aided site-directed mutagenesis of
enzymes . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:3806-3810 .
Watson, J. D. , and F. H. C. Crick . 1953 . Molecular structure of nucleic acids . A structure for
deosyribosenucleic acid . Nature (London) 171:737-738 .
Weiner, S. J. , P. A. Kollman , D. A. Case , U. C. Singh , C. Ghio , G. Alagona , S. Profeta, Jr. , and
P. Weiner . 1984 . A new force field for molecular mechanical simulation of nucleic acids

and proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106:765-784 .
Wetlaufer, D. B. 1973 . Nucleation , rapid folding , and globular intrachainregions in proteins . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 70:697-701 .
Wilbur, W. J. , and D. J. Lipman . 1984 . The context of dependent compari son of biological
sequences . SIAM J. Appl. Math. 44:557-567 .
Williams, A. L., Jr. , and I. Tinoco, Jr. 1986 . A dynamic programming algorithm for finding
alternative RNA secondary structures . Nucleic Acids Res. 14:299-315 .
Williamson, M. P. , T. F. Havels and K. W
üthrich . 1985 . Solution conformation of proteinase
inhibitor IIA from bull seminal plasma by
1H nuclear magnetic resonance and distance
geomety . J. Mol. Biol. 182:295-315 .
Wise, M. , R. D. Cramer , D. Smiths and I. Exman. 1983 . Progress in three-dimensional drug
design: The use of real-time colour graphics and computer postulation of bioactive

molecules in DYLOMMS . Pp. 145-146 in J. C. Deardon , ed. Quantitative Approaches to

Drug Design . Elsevier , Amsterdam .
Wong, C. F. , and J. A. McCammon . In press . Computer simulation and the design of new
biological molecules . Isr. J. Chem.
Wüthrich, K. 1986 . NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids . John Wiley & Sons , New York . 292 pp .
Xuong, N. G. , S. T. Freer , R. Hamlin , C. Nielsen , and W. Vernon . 1978 . The electronic
stationary picture method for high speed measurement of reflection intensities from

crystals with large unit cell dimensions . Acta Crystallogr . A34:289-296 .
REFERENCES174Computer Assisted Modeling: Contributions of Computational Approaches to Elucidating Macromolecular...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Yu, R. K. , T. A. W. Koerner , J. N. Scarsdale , and J. H. Prestegard . 1986 . Elucidation of
glycolipid structure by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy . Chem. Phys.

Lipids 42:27-48 .
Zaug, A. J. , and T. R. Cech . 1986 . The intervening sequence of
Tetrahymena is an enzyme .
Science 231:470-475 .
Zichi, D. A. , and P. J. Rossky . 1986 . Molecular conformational equilibria in liquids . J. Chem.
Phys. 84:1712-1723 .
Zuker, M. , and P. Steigler . 1981 . Optimal computer folding of large RNA sequences using
thermodynamics and auxiliary information . Nucleic Acids Res. 9:133-148 .
REFERENCES175