DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11413(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art:Modern Techniques in Conservation and Analysis252 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-09625-6 | DOI 10.17226/11413Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN TECHNIQUES IN CONSERVATION AND ANALYSIS
Scientific Examination of Art
Washington, D.C.March 19Ð21,2003(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, D.C.  20001
This work includes articles from the Arthur M. Sackler Colloquium on the ScientificExamination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and Analysis held at the NationalAcademy of Sciences Building in Washington, D.C., March 19-21,  2003.  The articles

appearing in these pages were contributed by speakers and attendees at the colloquium andwere anonymously reviewed, but they have not been independently reviewed by theAcademy.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this

work are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NationalAcademy of Sciences.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the U.S. Congress in 1863, the Academy has amandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technicalmatters.International Standard Book Number: 0-309-09625-1 (Book)Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street,N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C.  20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 in the
Washington metropolitan area; Internet, http: // www.nap.edu.Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaCover: ÒCorner of the StudioÓ by Antonio Ciocci. Courtesy of Catherine and Wayne
Reynolds(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the

authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior
achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of
Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the respon-
sibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an
adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of
Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  Functioning in

accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the
scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both
Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are
chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.org(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vBorn in Brooklyn, New York, Arthur M. Sackler waseducated in the arts, sciences, and humanities at New
York University. These interests remained the focus of
his life, as he became widely known as a scientist, art
collector, and philanthropist, endowing institutions of
learning and culture throughout the world.He felt that his fundamental role was as a doctor,a vocation he decided upon at the age of four. After
completing his internship and service as house physi-
cian at Lincoln Hospital in New York City, he became
a resident in psychiatry at Creed-moor State Hospital.
There, in the 1940s, he started research that resulted in
more than 150 papers in neuroendocrinology, psychiatry, and experimental medi-

cine. He considered his scientific research in the metabolic basis of schizophrenia
his most significant contribution to science and served as editor of the Journal ofClinical and Experimental Psychobiology from 1950 to 1962. In 1960 he startedpublication of Medical Tribune, a weekly medical newspaper that reached overone million readers in 20 countries. He established the Laboratories for Thera-
peutic Research in 1938, a facility in New York for basic research that he directed
until 1983.As a generous benefactor to the causes of medicine and basic science, ArthurSackler built and contributed to a wide range of scientific institutions: the Sackler

School of Medicine established in 1972 at Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel;
the Sackler Institute of Graduate Biomedical Science at New York University,
founded in 1980; the Arthur M. Sackler Science Center dedicated in 1985 at
Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts; and the Sackler School of Graduate
Biomedical Sciences, established in 1980, and the Arthur M. Sackler Center for
Health Communications, established in 1986, both at Tufts University, Boston,
Massachusetts.His pre-eminence in the art world is already legendary. According to his wifeJillian, one of his favorite relaxations was to visit museums and art galleries and
pick out great pieces others had overlooked. His interest in art is reflected in hisArthur M. Sackler, M.D.
1913-1987(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.philanthropy; he endowed galleries at the Metropolitan Museum of Art andPrinceton University, a museum at Harvard University, and the Arthur M. Sackler
Gallery of Asian Art in Washington, D.C. True to his oft-stated determination to
create bridges between peoples, he offered to build a teaching museum in China,
which Jillian made possible after his death, and in 1993 opened the Arthur M.
Sackler Museum of Art and Archaeology at Peking University in Beijing.In a world that often sees science and art as two separate cultures, ArthurSackler saw them as inextricably related. In a speech given at the State University
of New York at Stony Brook, Some reflections on the arts, sciences and humanities,a year before his death, he observed: ÔÔCommunication is, for me, the primummovens of all culture. In the arts. . . I find the emotional component most moving.In science, it is the intellectual content. Both are deeply interlinked in the hu-
manities.ÕÕ The Arthur M. Sackler Colloquia at the National Academy of Sciences
pay tribute to this faith in communication as the prime mover of knowledge and
culture.vi(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZING COMMITTEEBARBARA BERRIE, Senior Conservation Scientist, National Gallery of Art,Washington, D.C.E. REN… DE LA RIE, Head of Scientific Research, National Gallery of Art,
Washington, D.C.ROALD HOFFMANN (NAS) (Chair), Frank H. T. Rhodes Professor ofHumane Letters, Cornell UniversityJANIS TOMLINSON (NAS), Director of University Museums at the Universityof DelawareTORSTEN WIESEL (NAS) (Chair), President Emeritus, The RockefellerUniversityJOHN WINTER, Conservation Scientist, Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M.Sackler Gallery, Washington, D.C.StaffKENNETH R. FULTON, Executive DirectorALYSSA CRUZ, Program Administrator (from October 2005)
MIRIAM GLASER HESTON, Program Officer (until October 2005)vii(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
The study of works of art using scientific methods dates back to the late 18thcentury but expanded exponentially in the late 20th century. The Sackler confer-

ence held March 19-21, 2003, assembled a group of leading conservators and
conservation scientists to present and assess recent initiatives providing a unique
overview of this important field. Six of the following fourteen papers begin with

a key material for cultural artifacts (Venetian pigments, works of art on paper,
photographs, stone sculpture, modern paints, and early Chinese jade) and enu-
merate various means of identification and analysis. Four of the papers start with

an advanced analytical method and discuss its applications: infrared
reflectography, multi-spectral imaging, Raman microspectroscopy, and quantita-
tive gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Two papers focus on mechanisms

of deteriorationÑbiodeterioration of outdoor stone and disruptions in the sur-faces of aged paint films. The breadth of the discourse is well illustrated by the

topics listed above and by three summary papers: an overview of the concept of
conservation science, a brief history of the evolution of practical conservation
techniques and attitudes in the 20th century, and a discussion of the impact of
collaborative research among conservators, scientists, and art historians. These

fourteen contributions exemplify the wide variety of art materials that challenge
the investigative scientist and the increasing sophistication of an array of scientific
tools that now aid in the decision making for the important task of the preserva-
tion of works of art and cultural heritage.Dr. Joyce Hill Stoner, Professor and Paintings ConservatorWinterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservationix(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents
xiTHE STATE OF THE FIELDOverview3
John WinterMaterial Innovation and Artistic Invention: New Materials andNew Colors in Renaissance Venetian Paintings12
Barbara H. Berrie and Louisa C. MatthewThe Scientific Examination of Works of Art on Paper27
Paul M. WhitmoreChanging Approaches in Art Conservation: 1925 to the Present40
Joyce Hill StonerAn Overview of Current Scientific Research on Stone Sculpture58
Richard NewmanBiodeterioration of Stone72
Thomas D. Perry IV, Christopher J. McNamara, and Ralph Mitchell(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSTECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONSAnalytical Capabilities of Infrared Reflectography:An Art HistorianÕs Perspective87
Molly FariesColor-Accurate Image Archives Using Spectral Imaging105
Roy S. BernsMulti-Spectral Imaging of Paintings in the Infrared to Detect andMap Blue Pigments120
John K. Delaney, Elizabeth Walmsley, Barbara H. Berrie,
and Colin F. FletcherModern Paints137
Tom LearnerMaterial and Method in Modern Art: A Collaborative Challenge152
Carol Mancusi-UngaroRaman Microscopy in the Identification of Pigments on Manuscriptsand Other Artwork162
Robin J. H. ClarkPaint Media Analysis186
Michael R. SchillingA Review of Some Recent Research on Early Chinese Jades206
Janet G. DouglasAPPENDIXESAContributors217
BProgram225

CParticipants228
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The State of the Field
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3This paper introduced a colloquium whose theme was the study of works of art byscientific methods. To present a brief overview of a field where all kinds of works
might be studied by any applicable kind of scientific technique is hardly a practi-
cal possibility. Rather, I would like to try to give a little more depth to all of this,
in terms of both the history and the diversity to be found in studies of these types.One basic problem lies in the conceptual magnitude and diversity of such afield. A Òwork of artÓ can mean a human artifact designated as such and made
from an enormous variety of materials. Implicitly we are attempting to bring
together objects made from rocks and minerals, metals of all kinds, ceramics,
organic materials derived from plants and animals, or synthetically createdÑthe
list goes on. An artifact may be a complex, partially ordered system with compo-
nents of diverse chemical nature, as is true of most paintings and many other
things, or it may comprise only one type of component. The scale can vary from
thumbnail size to that of architecture and monuments. Even the word ÒartÓ does
not help much, since any familiarity with the field reveals people working with
what is usually termed self-conscious art, with decorative art, or with functional
objects regarded for the purpose as art. For the most part, scientists who choose to
do this kind of research do not seem to trouble themselves overmuch with how
artistic the art is. The field overlaps that of archaeological science, which studies
archaeological, usually excavated artifacts, although much archaeological science
is not concerned with artifacts at all. All these things might be examined using any
method from any branch of science that holds the promise of yielding some kind
of result. This colloquium will be covering large segments of this whole area,Overview
John WinterFreer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler GallerySmithsonian InstitutionWashington, D.C.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTthough it would be optimistic to suppose that all possible types of work and kindsof artifacts could possibly be covered in two days.PEOPLEA word should be entered concerning the scientists who choose to do this kind ofwork and where they do it. The field can scarcely be said to be overpopulated by
practitioners, at least in relation to its overall conceptual scale. Tennent (1997)
saw the organizational structure as being in four parts: laboratories in museums,
those university departments that take an interest, research institutes (often na-
tional research institutes) that have departments established for this purpose, and
to a lesser extent the private sector. Many people in the field nowadays are profes-
sional research scientists fully committed to this branch of research in the same
sense that other scientists will consider themselves fully committed to a particular
branch of science. These tend to be found working in the research institutes and
in departments of the larger museums, occasionally in universities. The majority
of them are scientists who started out in some branch of the mainstream sciences,
typically a branch of chemistry or physics or materials science, before moving into
the present field. There are now a few, though only a few, who were able to do
graduate studies in the field itself. A smaller group of research scientists have their
primary interests elsewhere but also take part in cultural properties studies. They
tend to be in academic institutions and may work on projects of interest for a
short or extended period and then move out of the field again. Then there is a less
easily defined group of scholars and professionals who are trained in fields other
than the sciences but who perform and apply research to problems in their own
field: art historians, conservators, and archaeologists may fall into this category.Most major branches of physical science have much higher numbers of re-searchers than is the case with us, and modern science has as a consequence a
considerable social structure, for want of a better term. Leading scientists form
groups and schools of research that interact with one another, perhaps in collabo-
ration, perhaps in competition. This can be on a relatively large scale and may
sometimes last for extended periods. It includes direct, informal contact as well as
more formalized kinds. In our field this intensity of interaction, which depends
on a kind of critical mass of people, is much less. The number of practicing
researchers is too small in relation to the number of kinds of things that they
might be doing, that is the number and variety of research topics that exist. Since
it is at least arguable that the immense success of the twentieth-century scientific
endeavor in general was to some extent a result of such social structuring, prob-
lems are implied for our own comparatively diluted areas for which it might be
difficult to find answers.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW5TECHNIQUES AND TERMINOLOGYThe scientific methods that we use deserve some comment, though it is difficultto generalize. They have usually been methods of studyÑof analysis, imaging,accelerated testing, and so forthÑtaken quite directly from other areas of scienceand technology. They tend, as a result, to have been optimized for work within
some other field. With a few important exceptions, such as one or two dating
methods, most techniques were not developed specifically within our own field.
This state of affairs, of a conceptually large research field populated by relatively
small numbers of researchers using techniques borrowed from elsewhere, led one
colleague, Irwin Scollar, (actually with reference to archaeological science) to
suggest that this was equivalent to conducting guerrilla warfare using captured
weapons (Olin, 1982, p. 102).One of the consequences of the rather complex situation that I have justsketched is terminological: There is no general agreement on what to call this
field of study, taken as a whole. There is not even total agreement on what
general term to use for the objects of study. Since they may or may not be
archaeological, may or may not be historical, and may or may not always be
artistic (according to somebodyÕs definition), such phrases as Òcultural heri-tage,Ó Òcultural property,Ó and 
Òcultural assetsÓ have come into use but are
clumsy when an extension of the terms into studies using scientific methods is
required. For the field of study itself we have on the archaeological side,
Òarchaeometry,Ó Òarchaeological science,Ó and 
Òscience in archaeology,Ó which
have all been used, and sometimes criticized. These terms are not usually ex-
tended to research on works of artistic or historical importance unrelated to
archaeology. Here Òconservation scienceÓ has become prevalent, especially in the
United States, though the work may or may not be related to efforts to conserve
the objects concerned. ÒTechnical studies of works of artÓ was in use in the 1930s
but is seldom found now. ÒTechnical art historyÓ has appeared, and the parallel
to archaeological science would appear to be Òart historical science.Ó All these
terms, however, seem to imply subsets of the field as a whole, which awaits its
definitive title and therefore perhaps its precise definition.HISTORYIt might help give some depth to the discussions to look briefly at the history ofthe field. Even an extended look would be partial, since to the best of my knowl-
edge no definitive account is available: Much of the historical spadework remains
to be done. We do know that scientific study of antiquities and works of art goes
back to the late eighteenth century. Earle Caley (1951) located almost 100 publi-
cations dated before 1875 (of which the earliest was late eighteenth century)
mostly concerned with archaeological materials, and especially with the analysis
of metals. Through the nineteenth century, work on this kind of material was(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTsporadic and mostly conducted by a few individuals concerned with identifyingand analyzing archaeological and similar material on the side in laboratories pri-
marily devoted to other purposes. Thus were the origins of one kind of research
that continues to the present day: the study of artifacts that we consider archaeo-
logical, whether or not systematically excavated. It is now regarded as one seg-
ment of archaeological science, the segment concerned with artifacts. Much of
this research seems to be done in academic institutions. The driving force is
largely archaeological, and although the objects concerned may also be classified
as fine art, this is largely coincidental. There is typically freedom to take samples
necessary for analysis, and conservation of the objects has not usually been an
issue. We might regard this as the archaeological tributary of the research efforts
that developed during the twentieth century.The examination of paintings and sculpture appears to go back over a similartime period. Since this paper was delivered, Nadolny (2003) has published a
historical study of early analytical work on paintings, which appears to date from
ca 1780. We know of analyses of pigments in mural painting by Haslam in 1800
and Humphrey Davy in 1815 (Rees-Jones, 1990), and of work in Munich on easel
paintings from 1825 (Miller, 1998). It can be regarded as forming another line of
development leading to where we are now. Two of the better-known practitioners
were A. H. Church in the late nineteenth century and A. P. Laurie in the earlier
part of the twentieth century; both served as professors at the Royal Academy of
Arts in London. Much of the motivation for this type of work seems to have been
historical interest, with reference being made also to various historical texts. Both
connoisseurship and a desire to encourage contemporary artists to use appropri-
ate and durable materials may also have played a part. This kind of research seems
mostly to have taken place in the larger museums and in research institutes set up
to work with them, occasionally in academic departments. Here conservation of
the object is much more of an issue; the taking of samples is more restricted,
especially in recent times, and may be forbidden outright. Consequently
noninvasive methods have become important.Scientific research devoted to making conservation itself more rational andeffective came along a little later than the preceding two tributaries of develop-
ment, though it can also be traced back to the nineteenth century. The National
Gallery in London commissioned reports on the condition of its paintings in the
1850s (Brommelle, 1956), and the British Museum consulted outside scientists on
conservation problems well before setting up its own facilities (Watkins, 1997). In
1888 Friedrich RathgenÕs laboratory was set up in the Kıniglichen Museen inBerlin (Plenderleith, 1998). The years following the First World War saw the
founding of conservation departments in a number of places: the British Museum
and the National Gallery in London, Le Louvre in Paris, the Fogg Museum at
Harvard University, among others. This kind of research has come to overlap
extensively the research in the preceding category, the historical investigation of(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW7the fine arts. It tends to be done in similar places and often by the same people,and similar restrictions on methods of investigating an object usually apply.There is much complexity in the ways that these historical streams haveflowed down to contribute to the present state of affairs. There is overlap of major
categories, both conceptually and in the sense that the same people may conduct
kinds of research that might be looked upon as logically different. Different classes
of cultural property also impose their own characteristics on any studies that are
conducted on them. Research on large-scale entities (for example, buildings,
monuments, and sites) is probably driven very largely by conservation needs,
including protection and restoration, but its practitioners might see little in com-
mon with the conservation of museum objects.AESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONSGiven this complexity in the study of anything held to be of cultural significance,using many techniques from the sciences, with a number of reasons and motiva-
tions driving us, what are the common threads? What kind of conceptual frame-
work is it possible to discern in all this? Before making any attempt to answer we
must refer to yet another aspect of the situation. When we say we want to study
works of art using the methods of science, we imply that these works have signifi-
cance quite outside any scientific considerations, and that this significance is the
reason for finding them important enough to study. This aspect cannot be ig-
nored. Obviously the practicing conservator can never ignore it, but I suggest that
the scientist doing research on works of art cannot ignore it either, even when the
research appears to consist entirely of, say, solving problems of analysis and to be
quite matter of fact in nature. The distinction to be seen here has been drawn
before, perhaps many times.Anything that we call a work of art is being seen by definition from at leasttwo points of view. One point of view sees it as a physical object, the other looks
at whatever properties the object has that lead us to say that it is a work of art, and
to attach value to it on this basis. Joseph Margolis (1980) defined a work of art as
a token embodied in a physical object. Referring to a work as an image conveys
much the same idea. When we speak of such aspects of the work as expressiveness,
style, symbolism, the meaning of the whole work or parts of it, any emotional
feelings (positive or negative) that may be aroused, we are adopting the token or
image point of view. Seeing the work as a physical object is, I believe, self-evident
in meaning, and doing so is not confined to the research scientist or conservator;
however, to study a work of art using scientific methods means scrutinizing it as
a physical object to a greater depth and from more points of view than would be
done with any other approach. The specification of what should be studied springs
from other parts of human culture.Traditional art history adopts the token or image point of view largely, though(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTnot entirely. Around the late nineteenth to early twentieth century we see ex-amples of art historians, such as Konrad Fiedler, who saw the final form and the
style of a work as the product of the interaction of artists with their materials, and
Gottfried Semper, who appeared to see art as the byproduct of handicraft (Hauser,

1985). Although this kind of thing does not represent very much that has endured
in art historical concepts, the physical object that embodies the art as a token has
meant something in traditional art history. For example, art historians have from
time to time taken an interest in workshop organization and procedures in the
production of paintings (e.g., Phillips, 2000; Shimizu, 1981). For all this, the
conceptual framework of art history has been established very largely in aesthetics
and similar considerations. It is reasonable to ask how far this can affect our own
interest in the same objects of study and how far there can be intersections in the
frames of reference.ART AND TIMEApart from the fact that we study works of art rather intensively as physicalobjects, what other commonality can be discerned to make us think that the
scientific study of this huge mass of disparate cultural assets can form a coherent
subject? One way of looking at it is to say that we study those products of human-
kind, defined as cultural assetsÑor artÑalong each objectÕs time axis. Such aconcept can be divided into three phases. At one end of the time axis we look at
the materials the creator (or creators) of an artifact used and how they used them.
Then we can consider what changes have occurred in the product. Finally we
assess what is the situation for the artifact in question now and how we can
predict and influence its life into the future.We start with the production of the work of art. Art historians talk about theinspiration of the artist, that artistÕs vision, the influence of other artists or schools,and so on that results in the creation of the particular thing that we now admire
and discuss. The fact remains that no painting or sculpture or anything else
springs from somebodyÕs mind in the fashion of a ÒthinksÓ bubble in a cartoon
strip. It has to be fashioned from whatever materials were available, using what-
ever techniques were in use, and these aspects are among the things we are trying
to discover about that object. The identity of the artist may or may not be known,
and commonly more than one person was involved. We could look on this as
investigating the ethnology of the creation of a surviving work. We take account
of the historical context and the cultural context in which this process occurred,
both of which inevitably had their influences on what was created, which raw
materials were used, and on how it all happened. We have a link with human
beings who lived in the pastÑperhaps the recent past, perhaps a more remotepastÑnot just in the sense of the aesthetic concepts or visions they possessed(important as these were) but also in the sense of how they got their hands dirty to
make something; ultimately we are investigating not just interesting assemblies of(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW9pigments, binders, stone, ceramic, wood, or whatever it may be but the real peoplewho created things.On to the second phase: What has happened to our cultural asset since it wasmade. Any artifact, whether artistic or not, starts to change from that moment.
The kinetics of such changes vary rather a lot, but on some time scale changes are
happening. We call these deterioration mechanisms, and to me as a chemist they
are both extremely interesting and quite difficult to study. An understanding of
deterioration mechanisms is important from at least two opposite-facing points
of view. If we are concerned with the production of an artifact by bygone persons,
we are presumably concerned with what they actually produced, which will have
changed to a greater or lesser extent in the meantime. There are some areas where
such changes are small enough to be ignored but a great many more where they
are not. To project our understanding back to the start of the objectÕs time axis,we need to talk about what has happened to it. This is true even though many
artists may have known well that their creations would change over time and they
may have been perfectly content with that. The second reason for understanding
deterioration mechanisms is conservation, which one may think of as facing for-
ward rather than backward. Conservators are given the responsibility for stabiliz-
ing, treating, and perhaps restoring something that has survived in better or
worse condition, and trying to ensure its continued survival into the future. To
deal with this rationally they need to know what has been happening chemically
and physically to the assembly of materials constituting each object.This links directly to the third phase of our time axis: how to extend itforward as far as possible. The conservator needs to know not only what is there
in a material sense but also what is likely to happen with it chemically and physi-
cally, possibly after some treatment has been applied. Knowledge of such pro-
cesses is also needed for any present-day materials that may be used for treatment
in the context of the ways in which they are used. Investigations of these complex
issues in conservation have become of primary interest in recent years.IMPLICATIONS FOR THE SCIENTISTTo the researcher in this field who was brought up, as many of us were, in somebranch of the mainstream sciences, the demands can be challenging. Typically,
work to obtain a scientific research degree, possibly followed by a year or two of
postdoctoral research, will lead to proficiency in some branch of science taught in
universities, probably a subdiscipline of chemistry or physics. The science thus
mastered may be applied to situations arising possibly over many types of works
of art and cultural heritage generally. Committed professionals in our field may
soon find themselves with some research specialty defined in terms of the works
of art themselves; my own, for example, happens to be East Asian paintings. The
professional researcher then finds that studying the works of art as physical ob-
jects within his chosen area, whether limited or broad, requires the application of(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTscientific knowledge and understanding from a number of scientific disciplines,which may be removed from his original area of proficiency. There has been a
kind of orthogonal transposition of concepts; rather than specializing in a single
scientific discipline in depth, the researcher needs to take a range of basic disci-
plines and apply them to a class of objects that will themselves be studied in
depth. No doubt this happens in other fields of research too, and it is certainly
intellectually stimulating. It can also be alarming. Most scientists, I think, are
sensitive to the implications of specialization, to the probability of wandering into
error when they venture into branches of science other than their own. The
physicist John Ziman published a book (1987) some years ago dealing with ques-
tions of mobility and career change in the sciences, including the reasons why
most scientists tend to be reluctant to change areas of research in which they
work. The problem of how to apply selected, specialized areas of science to a
further understanding of things that ultimately have to be understood on their
own terms is also an intellectual challenge of the field.CONCLUSIONI conclude with a few words about the colloquium that followed. For reasons thatI mentioned earlier, describing all aspectsÑor all important aspectsÑof the sci-entific examination of art is impractical. We hope to have organized a fair sam-
pling of what the field is about, in all its variety and complexity. This first day was
intended to give fairly broad reviews of progress in at least some of the major
areas of work. The second day saw accounts of significant progress in more spe-
cific topics. This was intended to give us some realistic perspectives on what has
been achieved and what has not been achieved in research, particularly that of the
past few years. I think that most of the presentations will fit on the time axis of an
object that I suggested as describing the kinds of work done. Some may look at
questions of the materials and methods used by the creators of artifacts that we
choose to call Òart,Ó some at research on deterioration mechanisms, and others at
questions of an objectÕs present status and the prognostications we may have forits future.In this introductory paper, rather than discussing modern techniques orrecent progress, which others will discuss later, I have tried to give some sugges-
tion of depth, even (in a sketchy kind of way) historical depth to the subject. I
would like to be able to give it some coherence, but I fear that would be claiming
altogether too much. Do we really have just one field here, or several smaller fields
that happen to overlap here and there? What are the connections between scien-
tific studies and considerations of aesthetics, the original intent behind creating
something, and the connections to questions of intended use? This colloquium
was never intended to cast light on problems of this nature, but if we have a
serious intellectual discipline underpinning what we do, the more fundamental
questions implied by its pursuit should at least be recognized to exist.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW11REFERENCESBrommelle, N. 1956. Studies in Conservation 2:176-187.Caley, E. R. 1951. Journal of Chemical Education 28:64-66.Hauser, A. 1985. The Philosophy of Art History. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press. Englishversion of Philosophie der Kunstgeschichte, Oscar Beck, Munich, 1958, pp. 216, 232-234.Margolis, J. 1980. Art and Philosophy: Conceptual Issues in Aesthetics. Brighton, Sussex: Harvester
Press.Miller, B. F. 1998. In Painting Techniques. History, Materials and Studio Practice. Contributions to theDublin Congress 7-11 September 1998, eds. A. Roy and P. Smith, pp. 246-248. London: Interna-tional Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works.Nadolny, J. 2003. Reviews in Conservation 4:39-51.
Olin, J. S., ed. 1982. Future Directions in Archaeometry. A Round Table. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution.Phillips, Q. E. 2000. The Practices of Painting in Japan, 1475-1500. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer-
sity Press.Plenderleith, H. J. 1998. Studies in Conservation 43:129-143.Rees-Jones, S. 1990. Studies in Conservation 35:93-101.Shimizu, Y. 1981. Archives of Asian Art 34:20-47.Tennent, N. 1997. In British Museum Occasional Papers, 116: The Interface between Science and Con-servation, ed. S. Bradley, pp. 15-23. London: The British Museum.Watkins, S. C. 1997. In British Museum Occasional Papers, 116: The Interface between Science andConservation, ed. S. Bradley, pp. 221-226. London: The British Museum.Ziman, J. 1987. Knowing Everything about Nothing. Specialization and Change in Scientific Careers.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12Material Innovation and Artistic Invention:
New Materials and New Colors in
Renaissance Venetian Paintings
Barbara H. BerrieNational Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.andLouisa C. MatthewDepartment of Visual Arts, Union College, Schenectady, N.YSixteenth-century Venetian painters have been regarded as ÒcoloristsÓ since theirown time. The phrase ÒVenetian paletteÓ is used today by art historians to de-
scribe the colors used by Renaissance painters of Venice, among whom Titian,
Giovanni Bellini, and Tintoretto are the most famous. There is in fact little writ-
ten consensus about how to define this so-called Venetian palette, but our knowl-
edge is continually expanding thanks to scientific research on these artistsÕ paint-
ings. One color has always been mentioned as being particularly Venetian: a rich
deep orange, used generously by Venetian painters from about 1490. These artists
used the arsenical sulfides yellow orpiment (As2S3) and orange realgar (As4S4) toachieve this color. Until the end of the fifteenth century this pair of minerals had
been largely confined to the miniaturistsÕ palette, but they became so popular in
sixteenth century Venetian painting that G. P. Lomazzo remarked in his 1584
treatise Òburnt orpiment is the color of gold and it is the alchemy of the Venetian
paintersÓ [1]. Artists such as Giovanni Bellini used it abundantly in their paint-
ings; for example, Bellini used it for SilenusÕ robe in The Feast of the Gods (1514;
reworked by Titian, 1524) (Figure 1). The analytical data we discuss here, while
still fragmentary, points to a richness of materials and their innovative use by
Venetian artists that is greater than imagined heretofore, and much more than
simply the addition of the arsenical minerals.Recently discovered evidence has established that professional color-sellersplied their trade in Venice from the end of the fifteenth century. It appears that
they existed here as much as a century earlier than in any other Italian city. These
color-sellers were neither apothecaries (ÒspezialiÓ) nor general grocers from whom
artists had purchased their painting supplies throughout the middle ages and(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION13FIGURE 1The Feast of the Gods, Giovanni Bellini and Titian, 1514/1529, oil on canvas,
(National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. 1942.9.1).early Renaissance. They were sources who specialized in materials used in the artsand trades that dealt with color and color manufacturing. Some of the most
interesting and useful evidence for the existence of professional color-sellers takes
the form of inventories of the contents of their shops. The earliest found so far
dates to 1534 [2]. Another, longer inventory of a color-sellerÕs shop dated 1596has been found and published [3]. Examination of the materials in the 1534
inventory and investigation of their uses, particularly in glass-making and ceram-
ics, coupled with our new analyses, reveal relationships that encompass both
tradition and innovation. There is evidence for more cross-fertilization of tech-
nological know-how and taste among artisan industries than previously sup-
posed. In this paper we will show how the information from the inventories
combined with new analytical data has been used to expand our knowledge and
understanding of the materials used by painters in Venice and add to the com-
plexity of the definition of the Venetian Renaissance palette.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTThe 1534 inventory lists 102 items; weights or amounts are given but nomonetary values. Many of the materials on the inventory have an established
connection with the easel paintersÕ art, including, for example, the pigments azur-
ite, vermilion, lead white, and orpiment. Kermes and brazilwood, organic extracts
which were used to make red dyes as well as red paints, are listed. Other items in
the ÒvendecoloreÓ shop that relate to the dyers
Õ craft include alum for mordanting
dyes, galls (for making black dyes), and various resins.The first printed book on dyeing on a commercial scale was published inVenice in 1548, titled The Plichto of Gioanventura Rosetti [4]. It was written not
by a dyer but by a technologist, Gioanventura Rosetti, whose intention was to
provide information on what might be termed Òbest practicesÓ to benefit the
Venetian Republic. The recipes in the Plichto contain many of the items on boththe 1534 and the 1596 inventories, including some usually considered by histori-
ans as pigments, including orpiment, vermilion and azurite, which are described
in one recipe as mineral dyes (Figure 2). The overlap between paintersÕ and
dyersÕ colorants continues to become more apparent.
FIGURE 2Extract from 
ÒThe Plictho of Gioanventura RossettiÓ first published in Venice
in 1548. Translated by Sidney M. Edelstein and Hector C. Borghetty, The MIT Press (1969).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION15The Venetian glass industry, centered on Murano, one of the islands in theVenetian lagoon, was burgeoning in the late fifteenth century. By this time the
glassmakers had produced a clear glass called ÒcristalloÓ after the rock crystal that
had inspired its invention. Large quantities of clear and colored glass were pro-
duced for making a wide variety of objects, including tableware, goblets, glasses,
and mosaic tesserae. Recipes for richly colored glass, both single-toned and multi-
colored to imitate opal and chalcedony, were developed. Special, deeply-colored
glass was produced for making false rubies, sapphires, and emeralds that were as
intensely and beautifully colored as the real gems. In the first decades of the
sixteenth century recipes for glassmaking were being compiled [5]. The Darduin
manuscript provides important information on Renaissance glassmaking, and
the work of the Florentine, Antonio Neri (died 1614), who wrote LÕArte Vetraria(1612), a compilation of recipes including many of sixteenth-century origin, is an
invaluable source. [This recipe book was translated into English by Christopher
Merrett in 1662.] For our knowledge of the Venetian glassmaking industry we
also owe much to the work of the Muranese, Luigi Zecchin [6].Materials necessary for glassmaking are found on the 1534 inventory. Recipesfor glass indicate that tin and lead were required in large quantities; both of these
are on the inventory. Other ingredients include tartar, mercuric chloride, borax,
alum, salt, and ÒtuziaÓ (zinc oxide), as well as orpiment. These materials are also
used by dyers and some by painters.The wide range of materials available at the color-sellerÕs shop suggests thatartisans from many trades that used color went there to obtain their raw materi-
als. The variety available in this one place prompted us to consider whether there
was more cross-fertilization among artisans than previously assumed and if we
might find some evidence for this in the painting practice of the Venetian artists.We reanalyzed samples from paintings in this light, looking for materials notpreviously recognized. Samples from several paintings by Venetian Renaissance
artists were available from prior studies. They are preserved as cross-sections of
the paintings mounted in bioplastic polyester/acrylate resin. For optical micros-
copy, a Leica DMRX polarizing light (PL) microscope was used with PL fluotar
objectives. For fluorescence microscopy the light source was a mercury lamp
(100W) and the D and I3 filter packs. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was
undertaken using a JEOL 6300 equipped with an Oxford Instruments Tetra back-
scatter detector. For energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) the SEM was fitted
with an Oxford Si(Li) ATW detector (capable of detecting low-energy x-rays)
with a resolution at the Mn k line greater than 130 eV. The cross-sections were
usually carbon-coated, but sometimes gold-palladium coatings were used. X-ray
powder diffraction patterns were obtained using Philips XRG 3100 x-ray genera-
tor with a copper tube. Data were collected on photographic film in a Gandolfi
camera (radius 57.3 mm). Line spacings were measured against a calibrated rule
and relative intensities estimated by eye.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTSamples from paintings by the Venetians Lorenzo Lotto (1480-1556) andJacopo Tintoretto (1519-1594) were among the first to be re-examined. Although
the samples are limited in number they already show that the range of materials
used to make paint is wider than previously known.Lotto was ÒrediscoveredÓ in the late nineteenth century, but it took most of
the twentieth century for him to become acknowledged as a Venetian painter.
Recent research on his painting technique and color palette has helped define his
place in the Renaissance [7, 8]. There is little documentary information on LottoÕsearly career as an artist, but it is believed that he trained in Venice and spent his
first years as an independent artist there. Later, he painted in Bergamo and the
Marches. He traveled a good deal, usually within the economic and political orbit
of the Venetian Republic, and he returned to the city itself for several periods. Our
knowledge of LottoÕs working methods is augmented by the survival of one of hisaccount books in which he documented commissions and expenditures during
the years 1538 to 1556 [9]. One particularly valuable section of the account books is
an appendix of spese per lÕarte (expenditures for art), where he recorded the purchase
of painting supplies, among which are notes on pigments he purchased in Venice.Among LottoÕs paintings at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.is St. Catherine, signed and dated 1522 (Figure 3). St. CatherineÕs dress is a glori-ous red, perhaps reminiscent of the color of expensive red cloth worn by some
Venetian brides at this time. A cross-section from the sleeve (Figure 4) shows the
complicated layering Lotto used to create this color. In the cross-section, we see,
from the bottom, the preparatory layer of gesso (CaSO4.2H2O in glue), used toprovide a smooth surface for painting, over which many layers of paint were
applied. The first layers of paint are pinks prepared from a mixture of vermilion
and lead white. Lying over these are layers of transparent red paint. From fluores-
cence microscopy (Figure 5) it can be discerned that what appears to be a thick
homogeneous paint film is in fact many layers of thin glazes of paint; there appear
to be at least six layers. The same painting technique was found in two versions of
another composition painted by Lotto in the same year, The Virgin and Child withSaints Jerome and Nicholas of Tolentino [8]. It was shown, using high-perfor-
mance liquid chromatography, that for the version at the National Gallery, Lon-
don, Lotto used both madder and insect lakes. The fluorescence of the lakes in St.
CatherineÕs dress implies that he used two different lakes here also.Digital dot maps of the distribution of the elements in a sample from St.Catherine obtained using SEM-EDS are shown in Figure 6. The lowest layer of
paint contains mercury, confirming that Lotto used vermilion for mixing the
light red underpaint. Aluminum is present throughout most of the upper layers
of transparent paint glazes. This strongly suggests that the pigment is a dye laked
on alumina, the traditional way to prepare insoluble pigments from dyes made
from lakes. Unexpectedly, several of the layers of transparent paint contain small,
rounded particles, ca. 4-8 microns in diameter. These particles appear to be very
pure silica. It is difficult to obtain information on individual particles embedded(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION17FIGURE 3St. Catherine, Lorenzo Lotto, oil on panel, Samuel H. Kress Collection,1939.1.117.in paint, owing to the comparatively large interaction volume (the volume beinganalyzed) in a low-density matrix such as paint made using lake pigments. EDS
spectra were obtained at 20 kV and 15 kV accelerating voltage; lowering the
voltage was designed to decrease the analysis volume. The spectra (Figure 7)
indicate a (rather) pure form of silica; only aluminum is present, and its origin is
likely the surrounding particles of red lake. Only silicon and oxygen are signifi-
cant elements in line scans through the particles. Elements that would indicate
this material is a glass, for example, the fluxes sodium and potassium or the
stabilizers, calcium and lead, are below detectable limits. Venetian glassmaking
required pure silica, which was, in this period, provided by quartzite pebbles from
the Ticino River.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 4Cross section from a dark fold in the sleeve of St. Catherine (Figure 3) near the
bottom edge, photographed in reflected light.FIGURE 5The cross-section illustrated in Figure 4, observed using fluorescence micros-
copy (filter cube:  Leitz I3).
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION19Fifteenth and sixteenth century treatises suggested using crushed marble orcrushed travertine as additives to give body to paints [10]. Glass has been de-
scribed as a drier for paint in Renaissance treatises and has been found in some
artistsÕ red lake paint [11]. However, the presence of silica is unexpected, and this
occurrence appears to be the first finding of this material used by Italian Renais-
sance painters as an extender or an agent to give body in red lake paints. The
major ingredient in Antonio NeriÕs recipe for ÒcristalloÓ is pebbles 
Òpoundedsmall, serced as fine as flowerÓ [12] (serce is probably a variant of sarce, to sieve
through a cloth). This description corresponds to the material in LottoÕs redpaint, which was a ground silica.FIGURE 6Digital dot maps of the cross-section shown in Figures 4 and 5.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 7Energy dispersive spectrum of small rounded particles in the translucent red
paint; obtained at 20 kV.The artist Jacopo Robusti, called Tintoretto, worked in Venice a few decadeslater than Lorenzo Lotto. Tintoretto was born in that city in 1519; his father was
a member of the ÒcittadiniÓ class, involved in the dyeing profession. Tintoretto
lived and worked in the city throughout his career, and rarely traveled. He estab-
lished a family workshop that outlived him, and he worked for a wide variety of
Venetian patrons. Arguably his most famous surviving work is a series of paint-
ings executed for the Scuola Grande di San Rocco over several decades [13].The painting Christ at the Sea of Galilee (Figure 8) is attributed to Tintorettoand dated to 1575/80. This picture presents complicated issues in understanding
its structure and the artistÕs painting technique since the canvas support wasassembled from several pieces of fabric that had been used for painting images
different from the one we see now. The infrared reflectogram of the painting(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION21reveals that at some point the largest, central piece of canvas had been used tobegin a portrait. The portrait had been sketched out using a wash of dark paint,
clearly imaged in the infrared. The x-radiograph reveals that the canvas had also
been used for a landscape that is of a different scale from both the portrait and the
current image.TintorettoÕs painting techniques have been well studied [14, 15]. An investi-gation into the materials used for the Gonzaga cycle (1577-1578) showed that the
artist employed a diverse palette [16].Here we restrict the discussion to two pigments found in Christ at the Sea ofGalilee that have special relevance to the use of glassy materials for pigments. Across-section obtained from the sea at the right-hand side of the boat is shown in
Figure 9. The bottom layer of the section appears to relate to the landscape
observable in the x-radiograph. The pigment is a green, transparent, glassy-
appearing pigment. The particle shape and size is similar to that of the blue glass
pigment smalt (a potassium silicate colored by small amounts of cobalt). Al-
though the term ÒsmaltÓ is used in English today to describe only a blue glass
pigment, reading the contemporary documents shows that artists of the six-
teenth century used this term to describe not only blue but also numerous otherFIGURE 8Christ at the Sea of Galilee, Jacopo Tintoretto 1575/1580, oil on canvas, SamuelH. Kress Collection,1952.5.27.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 9Cross section from the sea near the right hand side edge of the boat.  The
bottom layer contains a green glassy pigment.colored glasses, including yellow, white, and green, at least some of which mayhave been used by painters [17, 18].The backscatter image of this section is shown in Figure 10. The greenishpigment in the bottom layer appears dark gray, and therefore we can infer it is of
low atomic weight. The EDS spectrum of the pigment shows that it has a compo-
sition very similar to blue smalt (Figure 11). An anonymous Venetian glassmakerÕsrecipe book dating to early-mid sixteenth century has recipes for green glass that
have the same general composition as blue smalts: ÒPer fare smalto verdebellissimo. Prendi della zaffera e un poÕ di manganese, pestati sottili e ben lavati e
di questi prendi 2 libbre, aggiungi 3,5 libbre di pani cristallini e fa fondere in
forno.Ó [To make a beautiful green glass. Take some zaffre (an impure cobalt
ore), grind it fine and wash well and of this take 2 lbs, add 3.5 lbs of crystal frit (a
potash glass) and melt in the furnaceÓ [5].
This green smalt in Christ at the Sea of Galilee contains an impurity of bis-muth. Bismuth has been found in late-fifteenth and early-sixteenth Venetian
enamels and in fifteenth century cobalt blue enamels and smalt in a south Ger-
man painting [19]. Bismuth is an impurity in the cobalt ore from Germany, and
its presence in this pigment suggests that the source of the raw cobalt-containing
material, Òzaffera,Ó used for making this glass was from north of the Alps. The
spectrum shows that the glass contains iron. Iron can give rise to a yellow glass.
Therefore the green color of this pigment might arise from a mixture at the
microscopic level of blue and yellow glasses.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION23FIGURE 10Backscatter electron image of the sample in Figure 9.
FIGURE 11Energy dispersive spectrum of the green pigment in the bottom layer of the
section illustrated in Figure 9.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTA yellow pigment is used widely in Christ at the Sea of Galilee. In a cross-section from ChristÕs drapery it can be seen mixed with green earth for the seapainted under ChristÕs red robe and as an intense yellow layer under the greenishpaint of the sea. It was also used, well mixed with green earth and azurite, for the
hills in the background. At first glance the pigment appears to be lead tin yellow
type II (Pb(Sn,Si)O3). SEM-EDS clearly indicates that the colorant is an opaqueyellow glass composed of particles of lead tin oxide suspended in a glassy matrix.
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) reveals that the yellow opacifier is similar but
not identical to the material usually characterized in paintings. The XRD pattern
of the pigment is given in Table 1. Although the pattern is very close to that
published for PbSnO3, there are some subtle differences and additional lines notattributable to expected impurities. The compendia of recipes for making glass
give several variations for the yellow colorant, which likely cause different hues. It
would be interesting to compare the XRD pattern of the colorant and the compo-
sition of the glassy matrix of the pigment in this painting with those of enamels on
metals and glazes on majolica and relate the results to the contemporary recipes.
By comparing the details of these materials we may be able to shed further light
on the variety of yellows that was available for the ceramic decorators and used by
easel painters to increase the range of their palette. A recent paper differentiates
between the production of lead tin yellow pigment and the ÒrawÓ material for the
production of yellow glass [20]. This difference might be found among the mate-
rials used by Venetian artists and craftsmen. Thus the glassy matrix might be
important, and this and other differences between glasses and pigments might be
the source for the variety of materials and colors that painters used.Many of the materials we find on the 1534 (and the 1596) inventory arematerials used by dyers, glassmakers, and glass and maiolica painters. Some of
these, including vermilion, kermes, brazilwood, orpiment, and lead white, are
expected in paintings by Bellini, Giorgione, and Titian. The re-analysis of samples
from pictures by these and other Venetian artists has begun to indicate that the
palette they used was enriched by materials that until then had only been used by
artisans and artists working in other media. Venetian painters (and others influ-
enced by them) boldly incorporated into their work, to vivid effect, colorants not
specifically designed for use in oil paint. We see that artists were using glassy
materials and/or ÒsmaltiÓ more often and in greater diversity than we previously
thought. Among these materials there appear to be frits and colorants designed
for glass-painters and majolica decorators, in addition to the powdered glass, blue
smalt and lead tin yellow type II, which have been identified previously. The presence of the professional color-seller in Venice might have been the
catalyst and the conduit for the transfer of materials among the arts and contrib-
uted to the emergence of the Venetian palette, a palette that cannot be precisely
defined, but is characterized by its complexity and diversity of colorants.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL INNOVATION AND ARTISTIC INVENTION25TABLE 1d-Spacings and Estimated Intensities of Lines in the DiffractionPattern of the Glassy Yellow Pigment in TintorettoÕs Christ at the Sea of Galileeand patterns for PbSnO3 and SnO.
YellowPbSnO
3SnOPigmentICDD 17-607ICDD 24-1342
dI/ImaxdI/ImaxdI/ImaxAngstroms6.1718
4.654.5*4.324.20*
3.933.63*3.50w

3.30*3.253.2212
3.101003.09100

2.98202.980
2.852.77202.7880

2.6980

2.61*502.63100
2.462.452.4512

2.30*2.21102.2410
2.1052.1210

2.052.066
1.95101.9530
1.90801.8975

1.864651.8325
1.61801.61801.6120
1.541.5216

1.231.22729
1.1951.19616
*These lines can be attributed to lead white (International Committee for Diffraction Data 13-131).ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe are grateful to the Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts (NationalGallery of Art, Washington, D.C.) where we held a Samuel H. Kress Paired Fel-
lowship. We benefited from discussions with members of the scientific research
department of The National Gallery, London, and particularly acknowledge
stimulating discussions with Jo Kirby-Atkinson.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTREFERENCES1.Lomazzo, G.P., 
Trattato dellÕarte della pittura. 1590, Milan: Paolo Gottardo Ponto.2.Matthew, L.C., 
ÔVendecolori a VeneziaÕ: the reconstruction of a profession. The Burlington Maga-
zine, 2002. CXLIV (1196): pp. 680-686.3.Krischel, R., 
Zur Geschichte des Venezianischen Pigmenthandels - Das Sortiment des Jacobus deBenedictus a Coloribus, in Sonderuch aus dem Wallraf - Richartz - Jahrbuch Band LXIII 2002. 2002,Cologne: Dumont Literatur und Kunst Verlag. pp. 93-158.4.Rosetti, G., 
Plictho de lÕarte de tentori. 1548. Translated by Sidney M. Edelstein and Hector C.Borghetty, 1969. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The M.I.T. Press.5.Moretti, C. and T. Toninato, 
Ricette vetrarie del Rinascimento: Trascrizione da un manoscrittoanonimo veneziano. 2001, Venice: Marsilio.6.Zecchin, L., 
Vetro e Vetrai di Murano. Vol. 1-3. 1987-1989, Venice: Arsenale.7.Lazzarini, L., et al., 
Pittura veneziana: materiali, techniche, restauri. Bollettino d
ÕArte, 1983. 5:pp. 133-166.8.Dunkerton, J., N. Penny, and A. Roy, 
Two paintings by Lorenzo Lotto at the National Gallery.National Gallery Technical Bulletin, 1998. 19: pp. 52-63.9.Lotto, L., 
(Libro di spese diverse [1538-1556] con aggiunta di lettere e dÕaltri documenti.), P.Zampetti, editor. 1969, Venice, Rome. See also Bensi, P., Studi di storia dellÕarte, 5 1983-1985, 63.10.Merrifield, M.P., 
Medieval and Renaissance Treatises on the Arts of Painting. 1999, Mineola,NY: Dover. p. clii.11.The Painting Technique of Pietro Vanucci, Called Il Perugino Editors. B. G. Brunetti, C.
Seccaroni, A. Sgamellotti, Nardini Editore, 2003. Papers from the conference, 14-15 April, 2003.
12.Merrett, C., 
The WorldÕs Most Famous Book on Glassmaking ÔThe Art of GlassÕ by Antonio Neri,M. Cable, editor. 1662, Sheffield: The Society of Glass Technology reprint 2003. (NeriÕs book hadbeen first published in Italian in 1612.)13.Krischel, R., 
Jacopo Tintoretto. 2000, Cologne: Kınemann.14.Plesters, J. and L. Lazzarini. 
Preliminary Observations of the Technique and Materials ofTintoretto in 
Conservation of Paintings and the Graphic Arts. 1972, Lisbon Congress: InternationalInstitute for Conservation.15.Plesters, J. and L. Lazzarini. 
I materiali e la tecnica dei Tintoretto della scuola di San Rocco, inJacopo Tintoretto nel quarto centenario della morte. 1994, Venice: Il Polygrafo.16.Burmester, A. and C. Krekel, 
ÒAzurri oltramarini, lacche et altri colori finiÓ: the quest for the lostcolours, in Tintoretto: The Gonzaga Cycle, C. Syre, editor. 2000, Munich: Hatje Cantz Publishers. pp.193-211.17.Venturi, A., 
I due Dossi documenti - prima serie. Archivio Storico dell
ÕArte Nuovi Documenti,1892. Anno 5 (Fase VI): pp. 440-443.18.S. Pezzella, 
Il trattato di Antonio da Pisa sulla fabricazione delle vetrate artitiche, 1976. Perguia:
Umbria Editrice.19.Darrah, J.A. 
Connections and Coincidences: Three Pigments. in Historical Painting Techniques,Materials, and Studio Practice. 1995, University of Leiden, the Netherlands: The Getty ConservationInstitute.20.Heck, M., T. Rehren, and P. Hoffmann, 
The Production of Lead-Tin Yellow at MerovingianSchleitheim (Switzerland). Archaeometry, 2003. 45(1): pp. 33-44.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27The Scientific Examination of
Works of Art on Paper
Paul M. WhitmoreResearch Center on the Materials of the Artist and ConservatorCarnegie Mellon UniversityPittsburgh, PennsylvaniaABSTRACTThe scientific examination of works of art on paper utilizes tools from thevery simple to state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation, depending in
large part on the question that is the objective of the investigation. Identify-
ing pigments or paper fibers is straightforward, constrained only by the size
of the samples that can be removed for destructive analysis. Inks are more
difficult because of the lack of pronounced chemical differentiation between
the ink types and because of possible interferences in the analyses from the
paper substrate. Paper can be characterized easily to an extent, in identify-
ing a watermark or the risk of deterioration from a high acid content, but
the monitoring of the condition and degradation of paper remains an ex-
tremely difficult challenge. The assessment of light sensitivity, which is not
easy to determine by merely identifying material composition, has been
made straightforward by the development of a device that allows rapid,
essentially nondestructive fading tests. Those tests are now being exploited
to survey groups of objects to determine whether one may make generaliza-
tions about their exhibition needs. The further adaptation of nondestructive
or micro-scale destructive analytical tools in the study of works of art on
paper promises to allow even more extensive investigations of the creation
and preservation of these objects.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTINTRODUCTIONThe scientific study of works of art on paper shares common objectives with thetechnical studies of any work of art. Artifacts are examined in order to answer art
historical questions about the origin of a work, namely, where, when, and by
whom a work was created. The scientific examinations seeking to answer these
questions generally require identification of the materials and working methods
used to craft the object. Other studies seek to answer basic questions about the
care of the artifact: its physical and chemical condition, causes for deterioration,
and vulnerability to storage or exhibition conditions.Technical studies of paper-based artifacts tend to resemble the study ofpaintings, because many paper objects actually are paintings that just happen to
be executed on a paper support. Manuscript illuminations, watercolors, litho-
graphic printsÑthese objects could easily be viewed as paintings, amenable to
analyses of the colorants, paint media, or layer structure of paints observable in
cross-sections. Apart from the occasional thinness of the paint layer itself, as in
watercolor paintings, or binder-poor paint layers, such as in pastels, these paper-
based paintings can often be studied as one would study any other painting.Despite this similarity, many works of art on paper present special circum-stances that constrain analyses or warrant unusual examination techniques. Paper
artifacts tend to be small: The sheets were traditionally made in molds that could
be manipulated by people, and these sheets were then cut down for use. Thus,
books, prints, watercolors, and other paper-based art are relatively small, meant
for close-up viewing within an armÕs length. For this reason, analytical methods
that require removal of paint samples are often not feasible, for the damage to the
artifact can sometimes be visible upon close inspection. Nondestructive tools,
particularly optical spectroscopic or imaging techniques, are more widely used to
study these objects.Another distinction between paper-based objects and traditional paintings isthe use of the paper substrate as part of the image itself. Particularly with such
graphic art as drawings and prints but also with printed text or even thinly painted

watercolors, the paper substrate is exposed and is part of the image. Thus, the
color of the paper and its surface texture are important contributors to the ap-
pearance and visual appeal of the object, and study of the paper and its preserva-
tion is of great importance. (Occasionally in historical times and more frequently
in the twentieth century, paintings too have been created with unpainted canvas
as part of the image. For these objects the concern about the appearance and
stability of the canvas is of course shared.) A complication in studying objects in
which the paper is so intimately associated with the drawing media is the dis-
crimination between the two, so that many analyses must have very small spatial
or depth resolution, or contributions to the detected signal from the paper must
be subtracted.Paper-based collections in museums are known to pose some of the most(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER29common preservation problems because many of the artifacts that are now prizedwere not created as lasting works of art but as more utilitarian objects. Because
paper was inexpensive and widely available through much of history, it has seen
use for many purposes, a primary one being for communication and recording of
information. Some of these artifacts, such as books, were meant to last for a long
time, but others, such as newspapers, announcements, or letters, were often not
created with posterity in mind. Thus, it is not uncommon for museums and
archives to have paper artifacts that are delicate or deteriorating because of their
creation with impermanent materials or techniques. Preservation problems are
common, particularly with those objects that were not made as art objects.This review will survey the examination techniques of paper-based objectsthat are used both for art historical investigations as well as for preservation
studies. Some of those techniques are routine and can be found in many well-
equipped museum laboratories; others are less widely available and have not
found widespread use. This survey will conclude with a description of a relatively
new tool developed to detect a particular vulnerability, the susceptibility of col-
ored materials to fade from light exposure, and illustrate its use for the study of
Japanese woodblock prints.SURVEY OF EXAMINATION AND MATERIALIDENTIFICATION TECHNIQUESThe most common technical investigation for paintings or colored prints onpaper involves identification of the pigments in the paint. For this, the routine
analytical tools of polarizing-light microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and elemental
analyses by X-ray fluorescence are commonly employed, usually on samples of
the paint that have been removed from the artifact. Descriptions of these tools can
be found in accounts of painting examinations, or in reference books devoted to
pigment identification (Feller, 1986; Roy, 1993; FitzHugh, 1997). Nondestructive
techniques can also sometimes be used to identify pigments on paper objects.
Open-air X-ray fluorescence is used for elemental analyses of pigments, and
Raman spectroscopy and Raman microscopy have been found useful for examin-
ing both pigments in paints and dyes in colored paper (Bell et al., 2000; Best et al.,
1995). Some pigments have distinctive features in the visible spectrum (Schweppe
and Roosen-Runge, 1986; Leona and Winter, 2001), while others, like Indian
yellow, can be detected by their peculiar fluorescence observable under ultraviolet
light illumination (Baer et al., 1986).Drawing materials can also be studied, although they present some difficul-ties. Early drawings were created using metal tools or wires as drawing imple-
ments (thus the name ÒmetalpointsÓ for these drawings), and they can be ana-
lyzed by measuring the elemental composition of the metals in the lines (by X-ray
fluorescence, typically). Inks are more problematic, with the exception of iron gall
inks, which can be distinguished by the presence of iron in X-ray fluorescence or(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTin more unusual techniques such as Mıssbauer spectroscopy (Rusanov et al.,2002) or PIXE (Budnar et al., 2001). Inks can also be analyzed for the trace
elements they contain, introduced in the ink ingredients or as residues from the
printing process. Inks in early books (such as a Gutenberg Bible) have been exam-
ined for these trace elements by synchrotron-excited X-ray fluorescence in the
hope of distinguishing books produced in the early German printing shops
(Mommsem et al., 1996). Other organic inks, such as sepia (cuttlefish ink), bistre
(from soot), or such black drawing media as charcoal, bone black, lamp black,
ivory black, or graphite cannot usually be distinguished by their elemental com-
position (although bone black is often detected by the presence of phosphorus),
nor do the infrared spectra of these inks usually present characteristic features
useful for their identification. Polarizing-light microscopy remains a common
tool to discriminate between inks on the basis of their particle morphologies. The
media used as pigment binders for drawing and painting materials can be identi-
fied by analyzing the organic composition of micro-samples. Of the various meth-
ods available the most useful are the gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
analyses that have been developed for oils and resins used as paint binders (Mills
and White, 2000; Schilling and Khanjian, 1996) and more recently adapted for the
study of gums used in watercolors or gouaches (Vallance et al., 1998).In addition to the study of the image-forming materials, the examination ofthe paper itself is also often a clue to the artifactÕs origin. Paper is usually differen-tiated by its fiber composition, its physical characteristics, and its manufacturing
method. The fibers can be studied with optical microscopy, and the plant origin
of the component fibers can be determined by appearance or by reaction to
certain stains, such as Hertzberg or Graff C stains. The fiber type, length, and
heterogeneity can all be distinctive, as can such physical dimensions as sheet
thickness. The evidence of manufacture is most easily detected in the pattern left
by the papermaking mold, typically a pattern of lines called chain and laid lines in
so-called ÒlaidÓ paper. Watermarks, the decorative patterns often woven into the
wire molds or embossed on the cast sheets, are also the most obvious characteris-
tic patterns of the paper manufacture. The evidence of chain and laid lines and
watermarks can be captured in any of a number of ways, with transmitted light
photography or with beta or soft X-ray radiography, and various image process-
ing tools have been applied to enhance such records (erasing interferences from
the printing, for example) and making them more useful for indexing and re-
trieval for comparison in a reference database (Brown and Mulholland, 2002).
The presence of sizing (a water-resistant finish on the surface of the paper) can be
determined by infrared spectroscopy or colorimetric methods (Barrett and
Mosier, 1995), and fillers (typically finely ground minerals or clays added for
increased opacity of the sheet) can be identified by optical or electron microscopies
(Browning, 1969). The fiber, finish, or watermark, along with other historical
evidence, can assist in tracing a paperÕs origin (Hunter, 1978), yet many chal-lenges remain (Slavin et al., 2001).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER31EXAMINATIONS TO ASSESS CONDITIONAND PRESERVATION PROBLEMSAs with all works of art, preserving works of art on paper focuses on main-taining both the physical integrity of the artifact and its appearance. The physical
integrity is derived mainly from the paper sheet itself, and preservation of the
sheetÕs cohesive strength is of paramount importance. (For books and archivalmaterials that are handled by users, other sheet properties, such as flexibility, are
also important, but for works of art that are usually mounted in a frame, the
physical stresses are usually merely the tensile stresses from the paperÕs weightand from its reaction to temperature and humidity.)The cohesive strength of a sheet of paper is derived from the strength of itsconstituent fibers and of the bonds between the fibers. Aging tends to reduce the
fiber strength, and old weak papers are usually seen to fail from broken fibers
rather than by unraveling from weakened interfiber bonds. The reduction of fiber
strength is in turn a result of the breakdown of cellulose, the natural polymer of
glucose that composes plant fibers. Chemical degradation breaks cellulose chains,
which reduces the average molecular weight but more importantly also breaks the
connections between the highly crystalline cellulose zones. This progressive rup-
ture of the tie chains, the amorphous cellulose chains connecting the crystallites
and imparting the cohesive strength to the fiber, is the underlying aging chemistry
leading to physical failure of the paper sheet.Unfortunately, there are no analytical tools that can allow detection of suchdeterioration in a paper artifact without destructive analysis of unacceptably large
portions of paper. Typically for degrading polymers, nondestructive tools such as
infrared spectroscopy do not have the sensitivity to detect the production of the
very small concentrations of new chain ends in the degrading cellulose. Recent
studies suggest that production of glucose or xylose residues (Erhardt and
Mecklenberg, 1995) or low molecular weight acids (Shahani and Harrison, 2002)
may be easier to track as some measure of cellulose reaction, but these techniques
have not yet been applied to artifacts. Other efforts to develop micro-scale mo-
lecular weight analyses for cellulose have reduced the amount of paper needed
(Rohrling et al., 2002), but a recent molecular weight analysis of cellulose in a
single paper fiber, while successful, also suggests that such small sample sizes may
not be typical of the other fibers or representative of the average molecular weight
of larger samples (Stol et al., 2002). Thus, even if the analytical procedure can be
adapted, the slow deterioration of the cellulose may not be easily tracked by
successive measurements of individual fibers over time.While the deterioration of paper artifacts may be difficult to detect directly,many years of investigation of cellulose degradation have clearly indicated that
there are other materials that may be reliable indicators of instability in the paper.
Acidity is well established as a catalyst for the hydrolytic breakdown of cellulose,
the most important of the known degradation chemistries. Lignin is primarily(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTresponsible for the discoloration of groundwood papers, and iron and copperimpurities can also act both as acid catalysts for hydrolysis and as catalysts for
oxidative breakdown of cellulose. It is much easier to determine the presence of
these sensitizing agents in paper than to track the slow deterioration of the cellu-
lose, so the study of artifact materials often does not go beyond a pH measure-
ment, the detection of lignin with phloroglucinol stain or an infrared spectrum,
or the analysis for iron or copper impurities by a technique such as electron spin
resonance spectroscopy (Attanasio et al., 1995). Iron present not as a paper impu-
rity but as an ink component is also a well-known and easily identifiable risk
factor for the preservation of manuscript and print materials.The maintenance of the image-forming materials, particularly the coloredpaints and inks used to create the image, is another objective of preservation
strategies. Light exposure is the most common hazard to the pigments and dyes
used on art objects. In contrast to preserving the paper support, in which the
deterioration is difficult to monitor and easier to predict by detecting the pres-
ence of destabilizing components, the loss of color is easy to monitor by periodic
color measurements but difficult to predict. The light stability of a pigment de-
pends not only on the material but also on its preparation, particle size, and prior
fading history. None of these is easy to determine from study of the pigments, and
until recently the only means to detect light sensitivity was to monitor the damage
inflicted by light exposure.Recently a new device has been developed to determine the risk of futurefading from light exposure (Whitmore et al., 1999). That device operates as a
reflectance spectrophotometer using a very intense focused beam from a xenon
lamp as the illumination for the measurement (see Figure 1). By making rapid
repeated spectral measurements while the material is illuminated by the intense
light, very slight degrees of fading can be detected in light-sensitive materials in
only a few minutes (see Figure 2). Because of the high precision of the spectrum
acquisition, extremely small amounts of fading are easily recorded, and the test
can be stopped before perceptible changes to the art object have been produced.
All of the different color areas on a work of art can be tested, and the overall
sensitivity of the object can be judged by the fading rate of the most light-sensitive
color (see Figure 3). These tests can be used to develop exhibition requirements
that are tailored to the needs of the object, with the very light-sensitive objects
receiving greater care (less frequent exhibition at lower light levels) so that they
do not suffer from fading damage caused by inappropriate display. These same
tests, done with filtered illumination, can also be used to test the effectiveness of
different lighting in reducing fading rates. By performing the tests in air or under
an inert gas, the efficacy of oxygen-free housings for slowing the fading of works
of art can also be assessed (see Figure 4).It has been found that this fading test can also be used to identify pigments,not by their elemental or chemical constitution but rather on the basis of their
photochemical reaction. Prussian blue, a ferric ferrocyanide complex used in art(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER33FIGURE 1 Schematic of fading tester. Reprinted from the Journal of the American Institutefor Conservation, vol. 38, no. 3, with the permission of the American Institute for Conser-vation of Historic and Artistic Works, 1717 K St., NW, Suite 200, Washington, D.C.
20006.FIGURE 2 Fading test results for selected Winsor & Newton gouache paints. ÒBlue Wool1Ó designates fading test results for the ISO Blue Wool no. 1, the most light-sensitive of
the standard cloths. Reprinted from the Journal of the American Institute for Conservation,vol. 38, no. 3, with the permission of the American Institute for Conservation of Historic
and Artistic Works, 1717 K St., NW, Suite 200, Washington, D.C. 20006.0510152025012345Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, ERose TyrienBengal RoseMagentaRose MalmaisonGeraniumBlue Wool 1(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTsince the early eighteenth century, is known to fade reversibly during light expo-sure, with the blue color being recovered in a subsequent dark reaction (Ware,
1999). The fading tests of Prussian blue using the tester described above demon-
strated this peculiar reversible fading behavior on a cyanotype, an early photo-
graphic process used to create blueprints (see Figure 5) (Whitmore et al., 2000).In addition to these fading tests designed to evaluate individual artifacts,current studies are measuring the fading rates of particular colorants in Japanese
woodblock prints from different eras, printed at different depths of color, and of
varying degrees of prior fading. Results of such a population study will reveal
whether there is general consistency or a wide variation in light sensitivity for
particular materials. If there is widely varying behavior, fading tests must be
performed on each object in order to determine the sensitivity and light exhibi-
tion needs. If there are very similar fading rates among the different applications
of a pigment, one need not test every object and can instead safely use a rule of
thumb to make such judgments of the objectÕs required care. This formulation ofnew rules of thumb, based on actual fading sensitivities observed in a large popu-
lation of objects, will bring a new level of intuition about how to preserve objects.
The results of tests on a large number of Japanese woodblock prints indicate that
the fading of the colorant dayflower blue (aobana) is very regular, and its sensitiv-
ity can probably be safely estimated without individual fading tests (see Figure
6a). By contrast, yellow passages on the Japanese prints vary greatly in their light012345012345Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, EBW2
BW3
FIGURE 3 Fading test results for all the different color areas on a Japanese woodblockprint (Yoshitoshi, Carnegie Museum of Art No. 89.28.1516). ÒBW2Ó and 
ÒBW3Ó desig-
nate the degree of color difference produced after five minutes in fading tests of ISO BlueWool fading standards nos. 2 and 3.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER3502
4681012
14
16
180246810
Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, E
01
2
3
4
5
60246810
Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, E
FIGURE 4 Fading test results in air (solid lines) and under nitrogen (dashed lines). (a)Results for a gouache paint (Winsor & Newton Rose Bengal), showing slower fading inanoxic environment. (b) Results for ISO Blue Wool cloth no. 1, showing no difference infading rate in anoxic environment. Reprinted from the Journal of the American Institutefor Conservation, vol. 38, no. 3, with the permission of the American Institute for Conser-vation of Historic and Artistic Works, 1717 K St., NW, Suite 200, Washington, D.C.20006.(a)(b)(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ART02
4
6810
120.00.20.40.60.81.0
Cumulative Dose (Million Lux-hours)CIE Color Difference, E
FIGURE 5 Reversible fading of Prussian blue under exposure in fading tester. Solid linesare fading measured during light exposure; dashed lines represent period of recovery, andreturn of blue color (smaller color difference) in the dark. Reprinted from Tradition andInnovation: Advances in Conservation, eds. A. Roy and P. Smith, with the permission of theInternational Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 6 Buckingham St.,London WC2N 6BA, UK.sensitivity, probably because many different kinds of natural colorants were usedin the printing (see Figure 6b). These materials will require individual testing in
order to assess their fading risks.CONCLUSIONThe scientific examination of works of art on paper utilizes tools from the verysimple to state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation, depending in large part on
the question that is the objective of the investigation. Identifying pigments or
paper fibers is relatively easy, while inks are more challenging because of the lack
of pronounced chemical differentiation between the ink types and because of
possible interferences in the analyses from the paper substrate. Paper can be
characterized easily to an extent, in identifying a watermark or the risk of deterio-
ration from a high acid content, but the monitoring of the condition and degra-
dation of paperÑor for that matter, any polymeric materialÑremains an ex-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER3701
234
5012345Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, E
BW2BW3012345012345Time (minutes)CIE Color Difference, E
BW2BW3FIGURE 6 Fading test results for (a) 36 dayflower blue (aobana) passages on 25 differentJapanese woodblock prints in the collection of the Carnegie Museum of Art; and (b) 55yellow passages on 48 prints from that collection. ÒBW2Ó and 
ÒBW3Ó denote the color
change produced in ISO Blue Wool fading standards nos. 2 and 3, respectively, after afive-minute exposure in the fading tester.(a)(b)(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTtremely difficult challenge. The assessment of light sensitivity, which is not easy todetermine by merely identifying material composition, has been made straight-
forward by the development of a device that allows rapid, essentially nondestruc-
tive fading tests. Those tests are now being exploited to survey groups of objects to
determine whether one may make generalizations about their exhibition needs.
The further adaptation of nondestructive or micro-scale destructive analytical
tools in the study of works of art on paper promises to allow even more extensive
investigations of the creation and preservation of these objects.REFERENCESAttanasio, D., D. Capitani, C. Federici, and A. L. Segre. 1995. Archaeometry 37:377-384.
Baer, N. S., A. Joel, R. L. Feller, and N. Indictor. 1986. In ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 1, ed. R. L. Feller, pp.17-36. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.Barrett, T., and C. Mosier. 1995. Journal of the American Institute for Conservation 34:173-186.
Bell, S. E. J., E. S. O. Bourguignon, A. C. Dennis, J. A. Fields, J. J. McGarvey, and K. R. Seddon. 2000.Analytical Chemistry 72:234-239.
Best, S. P., R. J. H. Clark, M. A. M. Daniels, C. A. Porter, and R. Withnall. 1995. Studies in Conserva-tion 40:31-40.
Brown, A. J. E., and R. Mulholland. 2002. In Works of Art on Paper, Books, Documents, and Photo-graphs: Techniques and Conservation, eds. V. Daniels, A. Donnithorne, and P. Smith, pp. 21-26.London: International Institute for Conservation.Browning, B. L. 1969. Analysis of Paper. New York: Marcel Dekker.Budnar, M., J. Vodopivec, P. A. Mando, F. L. G. Casu, and O. Signorini. 2001. Restaurator 22:228-
241.Erhardt, D., and M. F. Mecklenberg. 1995. In Materials Issues in Art and Archaeology IV, eds. P. B.Vandiver, J. R. Druzik, J. L. G. Madrid, I. C. Freestone, and G. S. Wheeler, pp. 247-270. Pitts-burgh: Materials Research Society.Feller, R. L., ed. 1986. ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 1. Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge University Press.FitzHugh, E. W., ed. 1997. ArtistsÕ Pigments
, vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art.Hunter, D. 1978. Papermaking: The History and Technique of an Ancient Craft. New York: Dover.
Leona, M., and J. Winter. 2001. Studies in Conservation 46:153-162.
Mills. J. S., and R. White. 2000. The Organic Chemistry of Museum Objects, 2nd ed. London:Butterworth-Heinemann.Mommsem, H., T. Beier, H. Dittmann, D. Heimermann, A. Hein, A. Rosenberg, M. Boghardt, E.-M.Hanebutt-Benz, and H. Halbey. 1996. Archaeometry 38:347-357.
Rohrling, J., A. Potthast, T. Rosenau, T. Lange, G. Ebner, H. Sixta, and P. Kosma. 2002.Biomacromolecules 3:959-968.
Roy, A., ed. 1993. ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 2. Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art.Rusanov, V., K. Chakarova, and T. Madolev. 2002. Applied Spectroscopy 56:1228-1236.
Schilling, M. R., and H. P. Khanjian. 1996. In Preprints of the 11th Triennial Meeting of the ICOM(International Council of Museums) Committee for Conservation, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 220-227.London: James & James Ltd.Schweppe, H., and H. Roosen-Runge. 1986. In ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 1, ed. R. L. Feller, pp. 17-36.Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.Shahani, C. J., and G. Harrison. 2002. In Works of Art on Paper, Books, Documents, and Photographs:Techniques and Conservation, eds. V. Daniels, A. Donnithorne, and P. Smith, pp. 189-192. Lon-don: International Institute for Conservation.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF WORKS OF ART ON PAPER39Slavin, J., L. Sutherland, J. OÕNeill, M. Haupt, and J. Cowan, eds. 2001. Looking at Paper: Evidence andInterpretation. Ottawa: Canadian Conservation Institute.
Stol, R., J. L. Pedersoli, Jr., H. Poppe, and W. T. Kok. 2002. Analytical Chemistry 74:2314-2320.
Vallance, S. L., B. W. Singer, S. M. Hitchen, and J. H. Townsend. 1998. Journal of the AmericanInstitute for Conservation 37:294-311.
Ware, M. 1999. Cyanotype: The History, Science, and Art of Photographic Printing in Prussian Blue.London: Science Museum; Bradford, West Yorkshire, U.K.: National Museum of Photography,Film, and Television.Whitmore, P. M., C. Bailie, and S. Connors. 2000. In Tradition and Innovation: Advances in Conserva-tion, eds. A. Roy and P. Smith, pp. 200-205. London: International Institute for Conservation.Whitmore, P. M., X. Pan, and C. Bailie. 1999. Journal of the American Institute for Conservation38:395-409.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40Changing Approaches in Art Conservation:
1925 to the Present
Joyce Hill StonerProfessor, Winterthur/University of DelawareProgram in Art ConservationWinterthur MuseumWinterthur, DelawareABSTRACTThe years between 1925 and 1975 in the United States marked a period ofpioneering progress and expansion in the field of art conservation: museums
established conservation departments and analytical laboratories; the first
art technical journals were published; and professional societies and train-
ing programs were established. From 1975 to the present, processes were
refined, choices multiplied, and procedures that had once seemed black and
white became gray and variable. There was also a hands-off or minimalist
movement, increased attention to preventive conservation, and a new role
for the conservator as a high-level collaborator.The twenty-first-century conservator should work with museum scien-tists to understand the strengths and limitations of a vast array of possibili-
ties for instrumental analysis, should collaborate with curators, archivists,
archaeologists, architects, and artists, and should understand a vocabulary
of technology and connoisseurship that may range from the contents of a
shipwreck to Indian miniature paintings. TodayÕs conservator should un-
derstand integrated pest management, light levels, heating, ventilation, and
air-conditioning systems, and should be able to speak articulately about the
field to audiences ranging from grade school groups to museum and univer-
sity trustees. Rules are flexing with regard to use and handling of Native
American materials in museums, removal of ceremonial substances, and
collaboration with living artists. Conservators, who were once lonely advo-
cates for the physical materials of art works and their long-term survival,(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION41now must look at preservation in a much larger arena, including the cul-tures of origin and economic survival in the twenty-first century. EVOLUTION OF THE FIELD OF CONSERVATION FROM 1925 TO 1975
The nineteenth century witnessed a growing collaboration between the fields ofart and science. Michael Faraday made analytical and deterioration studies for the
National Gallery in London, motivated by an official inquiry into the methods of
cleaning paintings. He demonstrated the damaging effect on works of art of sul-
phur compounds liberated by coal smoke and gas lighting and showed that dete-
rioration increased during London fogs and high humidity. Louis Pasteur carried
out analytical studies of paint in the 1870s. A scientific department was estab-
lished at the Staatliche Museen in Berlin in 1888, and the British Museum fol-
lowed suit in 1921.The years between 1925 and 1975 in the United States marked a period ofpioneering progress and expansion in the field of art conservation. A special
climate of cooperation among scientists, art historians, and restorers developed at
the Fogg Art Museum in the late 1920s. One pivotal figure was Edward Waldo
Forbes, the director of the Fogg from 1909 to 1944. He realized how misleading
the contemporary practice of wholesale retouching of paintings could be. He
encouraged technical investigation and X radiography. He was the chairman of
the Advisory Committee for the first technical journal, Technical Studies in theField of the Fine Arts, published by the Fogg from 1932 to 1942. Forbes had
approached Francis P. Garvin, the president of the Chemical Foundation, for a
donation to finance the publication of Technical Studies.Two significant ÒFogg founding fathersÓ of art conservation were RutherfordJohn Gettens, the first chemist in the United States to be permanently employed
by an art museum, and George L. Stout, the founder and first editor of TechnicalStudies. Gettens and Stout coauthored 
Painting Materials: A Short Encyclopaedia,first published in 1942 and reprinted in 1966. This useful compendium is still
cited regularly, up to and including our most recent University of Delaware Ph.D.
dissertation of 2002 on paint analysis in historic buildings by Susan Buck. Only a
few dates and descriptions in the little Gettens and Stout book are now outdated.In 1974 Gettens presented a paper suggesting that we begin a conservationhistory initiative, and Stout helped launch (after GettensÕs sudden death) our
Foundation of the American Institute for Conservation (FAIC) oral history
project. We now have more than 150 transcribed interviews with pioneer conser-
vation professionals. Stout lectured about the history of the field from 1925 to
1975 at our American Institute for Conservation meeting in Dearborn, Michigan,
in 1976, illustrating his remarks with his own watercolors presenting the evolving
profession (see Figure 1).Stout noted that before the Fogg launched its technical laboratory in 1928featuring the collaboration of art historians, scientists, and practicing conserva-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 1 Watercolor by George L. Stout illustrating the state of the field of art conserva-tion and restoration in 1925.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION43tors that he dubbed Òthe three-legged stool,Ó there had been lone 
ÒtechnologicalinvestigatorsÓ in some museums (see Figure 2). Alan Burroughs (1897-1965) of
the Fogg traveled to major museums in Europe with an old Picker X-ray machine
in 1926, making landmark X radiographs of Old Master paintings. Burroughs
published his findings in 1938 as Art Criticism from a Laboratory. X radiographsrepresented the paragon of technical investigation for paintings and sculpture for
the first half of the twentieth century, accompanied by examination with ultravio-
let light. X rays had been discovered in 1895 by Roentgen, and paintings were first
x-rayed within a year. Christian Wolters, one of the pioneer conservators of Ger-
many, wrote his dissertation on the importance of radiography for art history in
1936. One issue of the Philadelphia Museum Bulletin of 1940 featured a solemn,
worshipful photograph of an X-ray unit as its cover image. By 1931 James Joseph
Rorimer (1905-1966) of the Metropolitan Museum of Art had published Ultra-violet Rays and Their Use in the Examination of Works of Art.Stout described the 1920s asthe great days of Berenson. There was contempt for concern about condition.That was as naughty as to inquire about the digestive system of an opera singer.
You didnÕt look into those thingsÑit wasnÕt proper. And that was very good forthe trade. When a dealer sold a picture, he didnÕt like to have anyone considerfor a moment that the condition of that picture had anything to do with the
case. This was something of beauty and your sensitivities for the quality of thebeauty were the important matter. Whether it was about to buckle up and beginto give you hell in another couple of years was something never to be considered
(see Figure 3).1There was no luxury of specialization during the early days of the three-legged-stool collaboration at the Fogg. Everyone worked on everything; the con-
servators and scientists brainstormed, took notes, documented, collected pig-
ments, and painted out samples of paints on the walls. No one was full time; they
even did hit-and-run paint chip analysis for the Harvard police. Forbes and later
Stout taught young art historians about historical artistsÕ techniques, insisting
that they paint in egg tempera and fresco themselves; these students went off to
become curators and directors in museums throughout the United States, bring-
ing with them a unique concern for connoisseurship and the physical presence of
works of art.In the early 1950s members of the original Fogg team of conservators andconservation scientists were dispersed, largely because of funding issues and the
attitude of the administration at that time, according to Richard Buck.2 Gettens
next founded the technical laboratory at the Freer Gallery of Art at the
Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., in a humble space once used for
packing crates, and Richard Buck helped to design the first Regional Conserva-
tion Laboratory, the Intermuseum Conservation Association (ICA) at the Allen
Art Museum in Oberlin, Ohio, which opened in 1953. The ICA was founded by
six major Midwest museums to provide professional and cost-effective art con-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2 Watercolor by George L. Stout illustrating the Òtechnological investigatorÓ in
museums in the early twentieth century. At the Fogg Art Museum it was Alan Burroughs.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION45FIGURE 3 Watercolor by George L. Stout illustrating the ÒBerensonianÓ dealer/merchant
figure of the 1920s.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTservation services. There are now 12 regional centers, and in 1997 this groupbegan a consortium known as RAP (Regional Alliance for Preservation) with a
website (http://www.rap-arcc.org).Major professional societies and training programs also appeared between1925 and 1975. The International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Ar-
tistic Works (IIC) was incorporated under British law in 1950 as Òa permanentorganization to co-ordinate and improve the knowledge, methods, and working
standards needed to protect and preserve precious materials of all kinds.Ó Since
1967 when the first meeting on climate control was held in London (see Figure 4),
triennial or biennial congresses have been held in international locations on spe-
cial topics ranging from archaeological conservation (in Stockholm, Sweden, in
1975, with attention to the recovery of the warship Wasa) to library and archiveconservation (Baltimore, Maryland, in 2002, with accompanying visits to the
paper conservation department of the Library of Congress). Harold Plenderleith
(1898-1997), founding member and author of what was once considered the
conservation ÒBible,Ó The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art: Treat-ment, Repair, and Restoration (1956) noted, 
ÒWe never envisaged more than 50FIGURE 4 The first triennial meeting of the International Institute for Conservation, infront of Albert Hall, London, 1967.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION47fellows because there werenÕt 50 fellows in existence who shared our ideas or wereadequately experienced in scientific conservation.Ó As of June 2002 there were
almost 2,400 individual members of this international body, including 301 fel-
lows. (This figure does not fairly represent the international population of con-
servators, as many now elect to join only their regional groups because of eco-
nomic concerns and ready availability of key professional information on the
World Wide Web; more information about IIC can be found at http://
www.iiconservation.org/.)IIC began publication of its quarterly journal Studies in Conservation
 in 1952
and sponsored an international abstracting periodical IIC Abstracts in 1955. 
Tech-nical Studies published by the Fogg from 1932-1942 had also contained abstracts
of the international literature, and Gettens compiled Abstracts of Technical Studiesin Art and Archaeology (published by the Freer in 1955), a fairly slender volume
covering literature published between 1943 and 1952. (Stout and other conserva-
tors had been active elsewhere during World War II as officers in the Arts and
Monuments initiative to identify and protect cultural heritage.) IIC Abstractsmoved to the New York University (NYU) Conservation Center in 1966, and the
name of the publication was changed to Art and Archaeology Technical Abstracts(AATA). AATA moved to the Getty Conservation Institute in 1985 (see Figure 5),and became available online in 2002 (http://aata.getty.edu/NPS). The conserva-
tion literature vastly expanded between 1975 and 1990. When this author was aFIGURE 5 The Editorial Board of Art and Archaeology Technical Abstracts, semiannual
meeting in 1988, held at the Canadian Conservation Institute.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTgraduate conservation student at the NYU Conservation Center in the 1960s, veryfew books were available on the topic of art conservation. Current conservation
graduate students can readily spend our new Gutmann Foundation grants of
$3,000 on books in their specialties; I doubt I could have spent $300 in 1968.The American Group of the IIC began in 1960 (see Figure 6) and became theAmerican Institute for Conservation (AIC) in 1972, publishing a journal and anewsletter and establishing a 501(c)(3) foundation (FAIC). The AIC now has
about 3,000 members, including 860 fellows or professional associates (http://
aic.stanford.edu). The National Conservation Advisory Council (NCAC) was or-
ganized in 1973, funded by the National Museum Act of the Smithsonian Institu-
tion. The NCAC surveyed needs of the field and published useful and colorful
booklets and became the National Institute for the Conservation of Cultural Prop-
erty (NIC) in 1982. Whereas individual conservators are members of the AIC, the
NIC is composed of conservation associations that meet to discuss overarching
issues, such as preservation of outdoor sculpture throughout the United States
and historic houses and their contents. In 1997 the NIC changed its name to
Heritage Preservation and now has 156 institutional members (http://
www.heritagepreservation.org/).FIGURE 6 The first meeting of the International Institute for Conservation-AmericanGroup at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in 1960.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION49Major conservation research laboratories were also founded during this pe-riod. William J. Young sponsored seminars in 1958, 1965, and 1970 on ÒTheApplication of Science in Examination of Works of ArtÓ at the Museum of Fine
Arts, Boston; the laboratory there had begun in 1930. In 1950 the National Gal-
lery of Art in Washington, D.C. established a fellowship at the Mellon Institute in
Pittsburgh. Robert Feller focused on natural and synthetic picture varnishes, color,

and the damaging effects of light exposure. In 1976 the research project was
reorganized as the Research Center on the Materials of the Artist and Conservator
at Carnegie Mellon University. In 1988 Feller retired and Paul Whitmore came to
the center to become the director. Whitmore edited an excellent compilation of
FellerÕs research, Contributions to Conservation Science, published in 2002. Origi-nally established in 1963, principally to provide technical support to the
Smithsonian museums in the analysis and conservation needs of the collections,
the Conservation Analytical Laboratory (CAL) moved in 1983 to the Museum
Support Center in Suitland, Maryland (see Figure 7). In January 1998 the Board
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution voted to rename CAL the Smithsonian
Center for Materials Research and Education (SCMRE). The Getty Trust and its
various branches is our most significant recent addition; major activities were
defined in 1982. In the summer of 1985 the Getty Conservation Institute took upFIGURE 7 The Conservation Analytical Laboratory building of the Smithsonian Institu-tion (now known as SCMRE, Smithsonian Center for Materials Research and Education).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTquarters in rented warehouse space at the Marina del Rey, and in 1997 joinedother Getty branches at the Getty Center in California, an acropolis in travertine
on the hills of Brentwood, representing the apotheosis of the architecture with
dedicated space for conservation.Conservation training evolved from apprenticeship to formal education andtraining programs in London in 1934, Vienna in 1936, Munich in 1938, Rome in
1943, and New York in 1960. The other two U.S. fine arts graduate programs
opened in 1970 and 1974. As of 1994 there were at least 50 programs in 30
countries in the fine arts and another 50 in archaeological materials, books, deco-
rative arts, and musical instruments according to a directory co-published by the
Getty Conservation Institute. The Conservation Center at the Institute of Fine
Arts of New York University accepted its first four graduate students in 1960; we
students studied in the basements of the Duke mansion at One East 78th Street. In
1983 the program moved across the street to a converted brownstone with 11
floors of conservation laboratories, classrooms, and libraries; eight students are
now accepted each year. Ten students were accepted annually into the
Cooperstown Graduate Program in the conservation of historic and artistic works
beginning in 1970. This program relocated to Buffalo State College in 1987. In
1974 a third graduate program was sponsored jointly by the University of Dela-
ware and the Winterthur Museum. Both the University of Delaware and Buffalo
State College have awarded space to their art conservation departments in the
flagship buildings of their institutions, another encouraging sign of the architec-
tural status now granted our profession. George Stout summarized the state of
conservation in 1975 with another collage of a fence (see Figure 8). The Conserva-
tion Education Program at Columbia University accepted students in 1981 for
training in library and archives conservation; this program moved to the Univer-
sity of Texas in 1992. The conservation training programs also have an associa-
tion, ANAGPIC (Association of North American Graduate Programs in Conser-
vation), including the Master of Art Conservation Program at QueenÕs Universityin Kingston, Ontario, and the Center for Conservation and Technical Studies at
Harvard. The students from the programs convene annually and present papers.3CHANGING STYLES OF CONSERVATION: 1975 TO THE PRESENTThe Fogg conservators noted in their interviews that they rarely specialized; thereare now nine specialty groups listed by material in each AIC Newsletter: architec-ture, book and paper, electronic media, objects, paintings, photographic materi-
als, RATS (research and technical studies), textiles, and wooden artifacts. Another
group represents the particular concerns of conservators in private practice. There
is also an independent group, the Society of the Preservation of Natural History
Collections (SPNHC). The International Council of Museums-Committee for
Conservation (ICOM-CC) (http://www.icom-cc.org) has at least 18 working
groups, including an active group on preventive conservation for conservators(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION51FIGURE 8 Watercolor by George L. Stout illustrating the state of the field of art conserva-tion in 1975.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTwho specialize in climate and pest control, changing exhibition, loans, and ship-ment. All these spin-off groups are publishing, conducting meetings and work-
shops, and collaborating with scientists or curators, architects, librarians, and
artists.Methods of analysis have become far more sophisticated than just X radiog-raphy or examination with ultraviolet light; the Sackler conference of 2003 at the
National Academy of Sciences elaborated on many of these excellent resources. I
will note that for my own specialty, a professional paper on paintings conserva-
tion is now rarely without cross-sections indicating the layered buildup of paint
films, dirt, and varnishes shown in normal and in ultraviolet illumination, often
with supporting Fourier transform infra red (FTIR) or x-ray diffraction (XRF)
data. The landmark article launching this work was Joyce PlestersÕs article forStudies in Conservation, ÒCross-sections and Chemical Analysis of Paint Samples.ÓAshok Roy of the National Gallery, London, noted in his Forbes lecture for the
IIC that this 1956 paper is the single most cited reference in the whole of theliterature of conservation.By the middle 1970s a hands-off, minimalist, or Òless is moreÓ approach
appeared, subsequent to our initial excitement regarding many new tools and
techniques. For example, in paintings conservation the heat table was first intro-
duced in 1948 in Germany and the United Kingdom, and vacuum pressure was
added in 1955 (see Figure 9). About 20 years later, in 1974, a lining moratorium
was suggested at a conference in Greenwich, England, reinforced at ICOM-CCFIGURE 9 The use of a vacuum heat table, a typical treatment of the late 1960s and 1970s(Michael Heslip, paintings conservator at Winterthur Museum in the late 1970s).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION53meetings in Venice in 1975 and again at a special 1976 meeting in Ottawa. Theproblems caused by old and new lining technologies were reexamined. In 1992 I
surveyed practicing paintings conservators in the United States; conservators who
once said they had formerly lined nearly every painting they treated now reported
lining only about 10 percent of their current treatments.4 Teaching treatments
became more difficult, as there was now a complex menu of choicesÑloose lin-ings, drop linings, edge linings, hand linings, humidity treatments, suction tables,
local suction platforms, and more highly controlled vacuum tablesÑand lining isonly one of many types of treatments used for paintings. We also have a complex
menu of new adhesives and new electronic tools; we have Òpharmacists of conser-vationÓ who specialize in supplying new spatulas, sampling kits, retouching sup-
plies, and cleaning gel ingredients. There are many new approaches to removing
varnishesÑnew enzymes, gels, and aqueous materialsÑless toxic and more spe-cific in what they remove, thanks to changes made by conservation scientists or
science-friendly conservators such as Richard Wolbers.5 My 1992 survey also
revealed that many paintings conservators who used to remove varnishes entirely
now may simply thin or reduce them instead, another more conservative ap-
proach.A minimally interventive philosophy has now been adopted by most conser-vators, especially as we revisit our own treatments from 25 years ago and as we
watch our materials along with ourselves and our attitudes age. Marjorie Cohn,
formerly a conservator of prints and drawings and now a curator and director at
the Fogg, noted in the 2001 history issue of the Journal of the Institute of PaperConservation, ÒThink first of the high value, both aesthetic and commercial, nowattached to the unvarnished or unlined canvas. But ÔunwashedÕ is now also a sales
point in the catalogue descriptions of old master prints.Ó6 Our Art Conservation
Program faculty members all generally adhere to this minimally interventive phi-
losophy. In furniture conservation new approaches aim to preserve every bit of
original material.7We are now more aware of health hazards for the conservator and for thegood health of the environment. Marjorie Cohn continued in her paper with a
succinct summary of some other changes:One by one over the past three decades options for fumigation have beendeemed too hazardous, until now there are no facilities remaining at my institu-
tion, Harvard University, and good housekeeping rather than extermination isthe mode. Likewise, carcinogenic solvents have been minimized in the conserva-torsÕ repertory, and ventilation and disposal are now the first engineering prior-ity in the design of facilities.8More interdisciplinary research and publications have appeared in recentyears. Cohn was asked by Agnes Mongan of the Fogg to write what she now notes
was an Òunprecedented essayÓ for an Ingres catalogue in 1967 and continued that
since then more art historians have come to appreciate the potential of technical(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTexamination and scientific analysis, and Òconservators themselves have realizedthe essential importance of historical evidence on and in the works of art them-
selves.Ó9 George Stout
Õs three-legged-stool approach is embodied in an increasingnumber of publications authored by teams of conservators with art historians and
scientists, such as Art and Autoradiography: Insights into the Genesis of Paintings byRembrandt, Van Dyck, and Vermeer from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in
1982 and Examining Velasquez in 1988. There are now paired fellowships spon-sored by the National Gallery and the Getty encouraging similar teams to create
future publications. Textile conservators may now embrace a ÒconnoisseurshipbiasÓ while choosing treatment options.
10 Objects conservators may now elect to
retain ritual substances such as yak butter that were applied to Tibetan sculptures.
We have become more aware of respecting and retaining age value, historical
value, and commemorative value, such as the proverbial blood on LincolnÕs shirt.Susan Heald, a textile conservator of the National Museum of the American
Indian, gave a memorable talk for our graduate students. Heald worked with the
Siletz regalia makers to stabilize pieces before the dance and get them ready for
dancing during the dance house dedication ceremony. She noted, ÒFor me thiswas a career altering experience to see these pieces danced on the night of the
dance house dedicationÑit was very emotional for me and many others.Ó She
described the smoky night atmosphere of the night of the dance she was allowed
to observe (see Figure 10).FIGURE 10 Susan Heald with members of the Siletz community at the National Museumof the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION55Other issues and concerns that would probably have never occurred to con-servators in the 1950s and 1960s emerged following NAGPRA, the Native Ameri-
can Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990, which was discussed exten-
sively by Miriam Clavir, senior anthropological conservator at the University of
British Columbia, in her book Preserving What Is Valued: Museums, Conservation,and First Nations (UBC Press, 2002). People from First Nations may be reclaim-
ing their sacred materials and reburying them; however, these materials may now
have indelible museum registration numbers that must be removed from fragile
surfaces or, even more important, be dangerously full of toxic pesticides that were
state-of-the-art treatments in museums several decades ago.Glenn Wharton, objects conservator who wrote his dissertation for the Uni-versity College London on ÒHeritage Conservation as Social Intervention,Ó re-
ported in the International Council of MuseumsÐCommittee for ConservationPreprints on the case of the royal Hawaiian monument Kamehameha the First.
The state of Hawaii asked Wharton to remove the brightly colored paints that had
been applied to the surface, returning the gilded bronze monument to its original
state as part of the NICÕs Save Outdoor Sculpture. He soon learned that the localpeople intentionally paint Kamehameha in lifelike colors and hold annual cel-
ebrations with chants and parades. He convinced the state to support a commu-
nity-based, two-and-one-half-year participatory conservation project that essen-
tially gave the community a seat at the table in deciding how to conserve the
monument. Wharton brought current theory from material culture studies, eth-
nography, and a reflexive stance to the study. He noted, ÒThe recognition ofcultural relativism and contested meanings embedded in material objects has
begun to enter conservation literature.Ó11In a landmark conservation conference in 1980 at the National Gallery ofCanada, conservators, artists, scientists, and curators discussed issues relevant to
the conservation of contemporary art. Several conservators spoke about their
collaborations with living artists and the importance of interviewing artists to
ascertain their views about materials and addressing damages to their pieces.
Consulting and working with artists or collaborating with native Americans have
been categorized together as acknowledging the cultures of origin, yet another
important new direction for conservation.CONSERVATION SCIENCE IN THE LAST DECADEThe number of conservation scientists and scientific research and analytical labo-ratories in the United States has increased substantially since the early 1990s. The
inclusion of sophisticated scientific data in scholarly conservation conference
papers and publications has become standard, enhanced by the students and
graduates of active U.S. and U.K. doctoral programs. Conservation methods have
been improved by jointly sponsored conservation science research, demonstrat-
ing such factors as the impact of solvents on paint films, the absorption of dirt by(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTacrylic paint, and the impact of temperature and humidity changes, with teammembers from the Getty Conservation Institute, the National Gallery of Art, the
Canadian Conservation Institute, and the Tate in Britain.Since the year 2000, Angelica Rudenstine and the Mellon Foundation havetaken conservation science another quantum leap forward. In the mid-1990s Mrs.
Rudenstine interviewed conservation leaders to determine areas of need within
the profession. She identified both conservation of photographic materials and
conservation science and has made carefully considered grants available for train-
ing, workshops, and internships in those areas. Mrs. Rudenstine embodies a
unique case of highly directed and hands-on improvement by the leader of a
granting organization. She has funded and thereby created new conservation
science positions in graduate training programs and major museum conservation
laboratories. She has also imaginatively provided underwriting for talented
younger conservation professionals, such as Philip Klausmeyer, who has returned
to graduate study in order to enhance the scientific capabilities and instrumenta-
tion at his home institution, the Worcester Art Museum.The field of conservation science would not have been able to gainfully ab-sorb the MellonÕs munificence in 1975. Mrs. Rudenstine scrupulously investigatesthe staff and capacity of an institution before making a grant. The integration of
scientific understanding and conservation practice within well-trained individu-
als or by cooperating teams is a phenomenon of the last decade, and her programs
have taken advantage of this moment in conservation history.As I mentioned earlier, the multiplication of approaches, sophistication ofscientific research, and explosion of information has not made it easy to be a
professor of art conservation. There are no old and outdated methods that we
can now delete from the curriculum because someone in the past may have used
them on the work we must treat. We now believe that the conservators of the
twenty-first century that we are now training must thoroughly know their spe-
cialties, including current philosophy, history, literature, ethics, and the material
properties and methods of analysis (subjects might range from underwater can-
nonballs to ivory miniatures); collaborate with scientists and be able to under-
stand scientific terms and methods; cooperate with allied professionals, includ-
ing archaeologists, art historians, and the various cultures of origin; understand
proper light levels, indoor pollutants, insect life cycles, climate control, emer-
gency preparedness, and toxicity; be articulate advocates who write papers, give
presentations, and in this time of economic cutbacks, be able to charm politi-
cians, foundation heads, and reporters from ÒSixty MinutesÓ if necessary. Per-
haps we can now say that conservation has evolved from George StoutÕs three-legged stool of the early days of the Fogg Art Museum to a twenty-first-century
version of a ten-legged settee.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGING APPROACHES IN ART CONSERVATION57NOTES1.FAIC oral history interview with George Leslie Stout, Richard Buck, and Katherine Gettens by
W. Thomas Chase and Joyce Hill Stoner, September 4, 1975. (The FAIC oral history archive is housed
at the Winterthur Museum Library, Winterthur, Del.).2.Ibid
.3.ANAGPIC (Association of North American Graduate Programs in Conservation). North
American Graduate Programs in the Conservation of Cultural Property: Histories. Buffalo, N.Y.:2000.4.J. H. Stoner. The impact of research on the lining and cleaning of easel paintings. 
Journal ofthe American Institute for Conservation 33(1994):131-40.5.R. C. Wolbers. 
Cleaning Painted Surfaces: Aqueous Methods. London: Archetype Books, 2000.
6.M. B. Cohn. Change, we hope for the better. 
The Paper Conservator 25(2000):101-105.7.M. J. Anderson and M. S. Podmaniczky. Preserving the artifact: Minimally intrusive conserva-
tion treatment at the Winterthur Museum. In Wooden Artifacts Group, pp. 1-10. Richmond:
 Ameri-can Institute for Conservation, 1990.8.Cohn, op. cit., p. 102.
9.Cohn, op. cit., p. 103.
10.P. Orlofsky and D. L. Trupin. The role of connoisseurship in determining the textile
conservatorÕs treatment options. Journal of the American Institute for Conservation 32(1993):109-118.
11.G. Wharton. Conserving the Kamehameha I monument in Hawai
Õi: A case study in publicconservation. 13th Triennial Meeting, Rio de Janeiro, 22-27 September 2002, ICOM Committee forConservation I(2003): 203-210.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58An Overview of Current Scientific Research
on Stone Sculpture
Richard NewmanScientific Research Lab,Department of Conservation and Collections ManagementMuseum of Fine ArtsBoston, MassachusettsABSTRACTScientific research on stone sculpture is focused on three major categories:determining sources of raw materials, developing methods of authenticat-
ing stone artifacts, and preservation. This paper reviews research in the
first two categories. The goal of source determination is identification of the
quarry for the stone used in a sculpture. In situ analytical techniques are
occasionally applied, but most research involves samples. There are many
approaches, ranging from petrography (study of thin sections and quanti-
tative analysis of mineral compositions, usually on the thin sections) to
elemental and isotopic analyses on drilled samples. Elemental analyses
carried out by instrumental neutron activation, X-ray fluorescence, induc-
tively coupled plasma (ICP) techniques, and others often provide the most
useful information.Authentication of stone sculpture can focus on materials, techniques bywhich the materials were worked, and weathering layers. The alteration of a
sculptural surface and the buildup of alteration products on that surface in
a burial environment can be useful as an indication of age, and as such is
often studied in stone sculpture authentication projects.INTRODUCTIONStone was among the earliest naturally occurring materials to be used to createartifacts because it was readily available and required little processing. The steps(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE59from procurement to desired final product are few and can be very simple. Thecurrent areas of research on stone artifacts to which science has made and contin-
ues to make a major impact fall into a few broad categories: determining sources
of raw materials; developing methods of authenticating stone artifacts; and pres-
ervation. This paper will focus only on the first two categories because of limita-
tions of space. ÒRockÓ is the correct geological term for the raw material. Accord-
ing to a definition used by some, ÒstoneÓ refers to rock that has been intentionally
shaped into an artifact. For the remainder of this paper all the material under
discussion will be called rock.DETERMINING SOURCES OF RAW MATERIALSThe geographical origin of the rock used to make an artifact is a crucial piece ofinformation in fully understanding the artifact. ÒQuarryÓ can be defined as the
precise location from which the rock originated. In most cases the rock used in a
sculpture is taken from an outcrop or exposure of rock, and the location of that
outcrop would be the ultimate desired goal of the source determination. Some
outcrops could be quite small, such as a pit in the ground from which some blocks
to make small sculptures could be taken. In other cases an outcrop could consist
of a very large exposure extending hundreds of yards or more. In the case of a very
large quarry, localization of the source to some smaller area within the larger area
may be desired.It is possible that a boulder or smaller chunks of rock could serve as sourcematerial, and these may have been collected from areas that are distant from the
actual geographical location of the quarry. Examples include boulders moved by
glaciers to pebbles moved down streambeds. One well-known example is
Stonehenge, which some argue was constructed from glacial boulders that were
far removed from their original source site.What is the relationship between the quarry location and the location atwhich the rock was shaped into an artifact? Some artifacts could have been shaped
at the quarry, but blocks of rock could also be transported from a quarry to
workshops, which could be at distant locations. Pebbles or small rocks could, of
course, be easily transported long distances from the points at which they were
collected. This is the case, for example, with some of the jade used in ancient
China to produce small objects. A very widely traded material in many ancient
cultures was obsidianÑvolcanic glassÑto which considerable scientific research
on sources has been devoted. We know in the case of marble sarcophagi in Ro-
man times that blocks were sometimes partially shaped at the quarry and then
shipped to various workshops where the final carving was completed. Determin-
ing workshop locations is an aspect of research on rock sculptures that can draw
on information about quarry sources.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTApproaches to Determining SourcesNondestructive methodologies, carried out directly on artifacts without sam-pling, are particularly valuable in the case of monuments or sculptures on monu-
ments. One technique that has been utilized in recent studies is magnetic suscep-
tibility, which gives a signal based to a great extent on the presence of the mineral
magnetite. Sources for Roman-period gray-granite columns in the Rome region
have been studied (Williams-Thorpe and Thorpe, 1993), and sources for the gray
to yellow-brown sandstone blocks used in different phases of construction of the
eighth- to thirteenth-century complexes at Angkor in Cambodia have also been
identified (Uchida et al., 2003).For the most part, sourcing of projects involves analysis of samples, whichfall into two broad kinds: solid chips and powder. The appropriate type and size
of sample depend on many factors related to the rock type, the geology of the
potential quarry source or sources, and constraints on sampling of the sculpture(s)
being studied.A rock-sourcing project could involve a single artifact or a group of artifacts.Sourcing projects usually begin with a group of artifacts made from a particular
type of rock material. The questions to be answered are typically: Do the artifacts
all come from one quarry source? What is that quarry source?One phase of the research involves characterizing the material used in thegroup of artifacts. The goal is to acquire types of data that can characterize the
rock material in sufficient detail to determine whether the rock from the various
objects in the group being studied can reasonably be concluded to have come
from the same source, or is likely to have come from more than one source. If
more than one specific source is likely, another aspect of this phase of the research
is to group objects that are likely to have come from the different sources sug-
gested by the data.As in sourcing studies of other types of materials used in artifacts (such asceramics), it is common practice today to use multivariate statistical analysis to
evaluate analytical data, thereby establishing potentially related groups of objects
on the basis of this kind of evaluation. There are different approaches to utilizing
statistics for data evaluation, and some may be more appropriate in certain cir-
cumstances than others. Although beyond the scope of this paper, the examples
discussed in this paper include most of the current statistical procedures.Evaluation of data from artifacts can establish hypothetical distinct sourcesor quarries, but at this point in a study it is uncertain whether the groups estab-
lished is this manner actually represent distinctly separate sources, or whether the
artifacts within individual groups actually all originated from a single source.A second phase of research involves characterizing potential quarry sourcesand then comparing these with results from the artifacts. The goal is to determine
the quarries from which the artifact rock came. Assuming that potential quarry
sources can be located, systematic sampling of these is crucial in order to fully(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE61characterize them. In advance it is difficult to establish what would constitutesystematic sampling. The nature of the rock being sampled is one factor that
needs to be considered, and whether the rock type is present in more than one
horizon (or layer) that was formed during distinctly different geological events. A
single rock type usually displays compositional variation, particularly if the out-
crop is quite large. For multivariate statistical analyses, it is usually stated that the
number of source samples should be at least equal to the number of variables
(usually elements) being analyzed in each sample. For rock quarries far more
extensive sampling than this is usually an absolute necessity unless the outcrop is
extremely small.Another aspect that needs to be determined in analytical studies of artifacts(and quarries) is the appropriate sample size. A representative sample of an arti-
fact can be defined as one whose composition reflects the composition of the
artifact as a whole. In the case of a block of rock, samples of 3 to 4 milligrams
taken from several areas may not have identical compositions, while samples of 1
or 2 grams may. What constitutes the minimum acceptable sample size to truly
represent the whole will often vary according to which properties are being ana-
lyzed. In studies that involve elemental analysis, certain elements are often found
to be good discriminators with very small samples, others may be useful but only
if larger samples are studied, and still others may be so unevenly distributed that
they have little utility. Research on stable carbon and oxygen isotope ratios in
carbonate rocks (discussed in more detail below) has shown that a sample of a few
milligrams can be considered to be representative of a large block of the rock.Solid Chip Samples (Petrography)Solid chip samples are utilized mainly for petrographic analysis, the well-established tool used by geologists to characterize and classify rocks. Geologists
typically prepare thin sections that cover most of the surface of a standard petro-
graphic slide (in the United States, 27 x 46 millimeters), but that would require a
sample far larger than could be taken from the vast majority of sculptures. Samples
that can provide a thin section about 1 centimeter across, taken with sculptorsÕchisels or hollow core drills, are often more than adequate for characterizing a
rock, unless the rock is relatively coarse grained (with numerous individual min-
eral grains exceeding about a millimeter in size, for example). The thin sections
provide information on the mineral content of the rock, the grain sizes and shapes,

and the interrelationships of the different mineral grains (the texture).Geologists have long utilized the electron beam microprobe to quantitativelyanalyze individual mineral grains in thin sections of rocks. The microprobe can
provide excellent quantitative analyses of the major and minor elements in min-
eral grains that are at least a few micrometers across. This quantitative informa-
tion further characterizes the mineral in the specific rock being studied.One application of the microprobe focused on a silvery gray schist used in the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTancient Gandharan region (present-day northern Pakistan) from about the firstto third centuries AD. The specific find sites are unknown for virtually all
Gandharan sculptures made from this easily recognized rock. Some small local
sources of this type of rock have been identified, but there are undoubtedly many
more than are currently known. In a pilot project (Newman, 1992) 6 to 8 grains of
chloritoid, a characteristic mineral of the rock, were analyzed in thin sections
from 16 sculptures. After considering relative amounts of magnesium, iron, and
manganese in the mineral, chloritoid in seven of the sculptures was found to have
virtually identical compositions. Separate samples from the top and bottom of
one of these sculptures, a 1.5-meter-tall figure, were analyzed to give some sense
of the variation in chloritoid compositions in a fairly large block of rock. The
spread in the compositions of these grains in the one block was about the same as
the spread shown by grains in individual thin sections. As a working hypothesis, it
is possible that the rock used in the sculptures with virtually identical chloritoid
compositions came from the same quarry, while the other nine sculptures were
made from rock taken from other quarries. Although more sculptures could be
studied by this method and more extensive chloritoid analyses carried out in each
thin section, the conclusions will remain tentative until possible quarry sources
can be identified and studied. The research points out a possible relationship
between the seven sculptures, but the precise significance of the relationship is
uncertain. Were the sculptures produced in the same workshop within a narrow
time frame, or produced in a general area in proximity to a certain quarry but at
different times, or was material exported to several sites from one quarry? Or are
these sculptures even from a single quarry?Another application of microprobe mineral analysis was applied to smallscrapings (0.1-1.0 milligram) from predynastic Egyptian basalt vessels (Mallory et
al., 1999). It has been estimated that nearly one-quarter of stone vessels from this
period were made from basalt. Grains of two minerals were quantitatively ana-
lyzed for major and minor elements: plagioclase feldspar and pyroxene. After
comparing the results with some analyses of samples from major Egyptian basalt
sources, it was concluded that the predynastic sculptural material was all north-
ern Egyptian basalt. Finished objects, or pieces of rock that were shaped in local
workshops, were apparently shipped all over Egypt from the source quarry or
quarries.A more recently developed tool for individual mineral grain analysis in thinsections is laser ablation microprobe ICP mass spectrometry. Currently, the mini-
mum spot size for this technique is about 20-50 micrometers, meaning that it
requires larger grains than does the microprobe, but the technique has the advan-
tage of being able to analyze trace elements more readily than does the micro-
probe. A recent application focused on basalts in ancient Egyptian sculpture
(Mallory-Greenough et al., 1999), using thick polished thin sections. The mineral
analyzed, augite (a type of pyroxene), is a major constituent of most basalts. It was
found that some trace elements, which can easily be analyzed by the laser probe(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE63procedure, are far more useful for discriminating between augites in basalts fromdifferent quarry sources than are major and minor elements. Samples studied
were basalt temper from pottery. A conclusion was that some of the basalt sources
utilized during the pharaonic period in ancient Egypt have yet to be identified,
since the augite compositions in samples from some artifacts did not correlate
well with augite from basalts from the known sources.Both of the techniques just discussed are adjuncts to traditional petrography.There are many rocks, however, that cannot be adequately distinguished by pe-
trography, or that contain minerals that do not show sufficient variations in
major, minor, or trace element compositions in order to be suitable for micro-
probe or laser ablation ICP mass spectrometry.Other analytical techniques that can be applied to solid chip samples, whether
prepared as thin sections or not, include Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
and Raman spectroscopy. The latter shows particular promise as an analytical
tool, for example, in a project that was concerned with Mesoamerican jadeite
sources in Guatemala (Gendron et al., 2002).Powdered SamplesThere is a full battery of analytical techniques that are applied to whole-rocksamples, that is, drilled (powder) samples that include all of the minerals found in
a rock. Most of the analytical techniques currently applied to drilled samples
determine elements (in some cases, isotopes), with the exception of X-ray diffrac-
tion (XRD).XRD is useful for general mineral identification and, by extension, rock iden-tification in some cases. In sourcing research projects XRD can provide a quanti-
tative estimate of the amounts of different major and minor minerals in a rock.
Lacking textural information, XRD is less useful than thin section analysis for
specific rock identification and classification. XRD is probably most useful in
studying certain monomineralic or nearly monomineralic rocks. Many minerals
have variable compositions, and variations in composition can give rise to dis-
tinctive XRD patterns. One interesting project studied chert and chalcedony, two
microcrystalline varieties of quartz used in New England archaeological sites
(Pretola, 2001). XRD patterns were used to identify minor minerals in some of
the source materials. In addition, calculated diffraction patterns from crystal struc-
ture parameters were fit by computer methods to observed diffraction patterns in
order to determine the ratios of quartz to a silica polymorph called moganite in
the samples.Powder samples are most commonly used for elemental analysis. The fullbattery of modern elemental analysis techniques has been applied to rock analy-
sis. Current widely applied techniques include X-ray fluorescence spectrometry,
instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA), ICP optical emission spectros-
copy, and ICP mass spectrometry. Some of these techniques are more appropriate(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTfor certain elements, or abundances of elements, than others. A given rock, ofcourse, will contain dozens of elements, which are present from major to very low
trace levels (parts per billion and less). Not all these elements will be useful in a
sourcing project. Which elements are the most useful is not usually known at the
outset of a project unless previous work on similar rocks has been carried out.Usually the application of a particular technique or techniques in a discreteresearch project can easily produce data that is reliable. More difficult sometimes
is comparing data acquired by other analytical techniques, or even other research
groups using some of the same instrumentation. Use of common standards and
frequent equipment calibrations can help to overcome this kind of difficulty, but
it can prove to be a limitation in comparing data from different research groups
or projects.Both the suite of elements utilized in a sourcing study and the methods bywhich the data is evaluated are obviously crucial to the conclusions.Limestone in Medieval FranceOne of the most outstanding research projects yet to be published on sculp-tural rock sources involves the limestone utilized in French medieval sculptures.
The beginning of this massive undertaking goes back to a modest self-contained
1985 project published on a small group of sculptures (French et al., 1985). Nine
Romanesque sculptures in four American museum collections that shared certain
stylistic features were considered by some scholars to have originated from one
monument in southern France. The goal of the project was to determine whether
this was the case and the location of the rock source(s). Petrographic examination
and neutron activation analysis indicated that the nine were probably made of
rock from the same quarry. As a part of this phase of the project the representative
sample size for the chosen analytical technique and elements being analyzed was
determined, and the fact that a single sample could be considered representative
of an entire block of rock (of the size used in the sculptures) confirmed. Possible
quarry sites in the general region of origin were selected for sampling and analysis
on the basis of the petrographic features of the sculpture samples. Initial neutron
activation analysis of a few samples from several different geological formations
narrowed down the possibility to one area. From this area over 100 samples of the
same geological formation were analyzed, three old quarries in particular being
extensively sampled. The neutron activation analyses coupled with petrographic
data narrowed down the likely source to two quarries that were about 2.5 kilome-
ters apart. Multivariate statistical analysis was carried out on the elemental data.Since that study, the same research group has focused on the characterizationof some of the major limestone quarries in the Paris region, a study that to date
has involved some 2,300 samples from 300 quarries (Blanc et al., 2002). The
research group concluded that 10 to 15 elements were required to best character-
ize the French limestones, as were many samples from each compositional group(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE65(quarry), a number that actually ranged from 8 to 40 for the major Paris basinquarries. The extensive database now makes it possible to determine quarry
sources for museum artifacts made from limestone that came from this general
region of northern France. The database includes samples from some monu-
ments, and this data has enabled the identification of the monument that sculp-
tures in museum collections originally embellished. Examples are the head of an
angel, the head of a Virtue, and a choir screen from three separate collections. The
trace element patterns of these three objects closely matched the trace element
patterns of a group of samples from 25 sculptures on Notre Dame in Paris. The
stone on the cathedral and in the three sculptures may have come from one of the
ancient quarry sites that the research group has extensively studied, Charenton.
This is one of a number of quarries in the Paris region from which one particular
type of fine-grained limestone (Upper Lutetian limestone) was taken. Trace ele-
ment analyses permit rock from many of the different quarries to be distin-
guished, although all are indistinguishable by petrography. About 1 gram of rock
is required for this analysis.White Marble in Classical AntiquityThe most extensively studied general rock type used by any culture or groupof cultures in a region are the white marbles of the Mediterranean. Bronze Age
sculptors in the Cycladic islands of the Aegean used white marble extensively in
Greek and Roman times and well beyond. There are less than a dozen major
quarries that supplied rock that was widely exported at different periods. In addi-
tion, there were dozens of quarries of mainly regional importance.The majority of the white marbles consist entirely or almost entirely of cal-cite. Their textures, grain sizes, and minor and accessory mineral compositions
provide some useful properties for discrimination, but petrographic properties
alone have not been adequate to clearly distinguish most of these marbles.An important breakthrough came in 1972 with a publication by marine
geochemists who applied a tool of their trade, stable isotope analysis, to a few
samples from several of the major ancient Mediterranean marble quarries (Craig
and Craig, 1972). The pilot project showed that simple plots of the ratios of the
stable oxygen isotopes (18O and 16O) versus the stable carbon isotopes (13C and12C), calculated with reference to a standard international reference material, thecarbonate fossil Pee Dee belemnite, separated the marble from different quarries.
Stable isotope analysis, which is comparatively inexpensive to carry out and re-
quires a sample of only a few milligrams, is now perhaps the most frequently
applied technique in sourcing studies of marble sculptures from this part of the
world, but time has clouded the picture considerably. A recent publication showed
how the isotope fields for the quarries have expanded since the 1972 publication
(Gorgoni et al., 2002). It is possible to discriminate between certain quarries with
stable isotope data, but many cannot be distinguished from this data alone. Quarry
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTfields were initially defined by drawing an outline around all data points fromanalyzed samples taken from a quarry, but statistical analysis is now more com-
monly utilized.In studies of ancient quarries it is not always certain that samples taken fromthe quarry as it is known today entirely represent the quarry as it may have been
known during a much earlier period. For example, it is possible that parts of a
quarry may no longer be accessible, or even may have been depleted. In this case,
analyses of sculptures that can reasonably be assumed to have been made from
material originating in that quarry can be used to define the compositional field,
instead of relying solely on newly taken quarry samples. This has recently been
done for some of the major Mediterranean marble quarries. Incorporation of
sculptural data has in fact somewhat expanded some of the fields.Many other analytical procedures have been applied to the study of thesewhite marbles. Some have been championed by particular research groups and
have yet to become widely applied, in spite of their promise. A brief survey of
these techniques serves as an example of how there are diverse, often equally
useful approaches to a sourcing problem, and more important, how data from
more than one technique may be crucial in solving a particular problem.Although petrography was probably not considered a particularly valuabletechnique by most researchers for many years, within the last few years one par-
ticular property that is best determined with a thin section has been shown to be
very useful: maximum grain size. Although a large thin section is required to
accurately determine this, this parameter does enable some quarries whose iso-
tope fields overlap to be distinguished. In a recent publication (Gorgoni et al.,
2002), in fact, isotope maps for fine-grained and coarse-grained marbles were
shown (a maximum grain size of 2 millimeters was the dividing point).Elemental analysis has been applied by a number of research groups, whichhave proposed different elements. Reliable comprehensive databases have yet to
be established for many quarries, and elemental analysis is probably best applied
in small-scale projects. Certain elements have been shown to be useful in certain
either-or questions, where the possible quarries have been narrowed down
to two.Two other techniques that have been employed only by a few researchers todate are quantitative cathodoluminescence and electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR). Qualitative cathodoluminescence carried out with a suitably equipped
optical microscope and recorded on color film distinguishes certain marbles on
the basis of the color they show when bombarded with an electron beam. Quan-
titative cathodoluminescence carried out in a scanning electron microscope with
an attached spectrophotometer is potentially more valuable. In the ultraviolet/
visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum most marbles show only one or
two major peaks: a peak at 620 nanometers, due to manganese (2+) substituting
for calcium in the crystalline matrix and a pair of peaks at about 350 and 377
nanometers due to cerium (3+). Ratios of the two can distinguish many marbles(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE67from one another. The orange color shown by some marbles is related mainly totrace amounts of manganese in the rock.EPR or electron spin resonance (ESR) has been applied for many years by asmall number of researchers but in the last few years has come into its own as a
viable technique. One recent article evaluated a number of features of the EPR
spectra of marbles, features in part attributable to the presence of manganese and
iron in the crystalline lattice of calcite (Polikreti and Maniatis, 2002).The study of Mediterranean white marbles has reached such a level of matu-rity that many important quarries have been well characterized and the strengths
and limitations of a range of analytical techniques that can be focused on a
specific sourcing problem are fairly well understood. In the near future more
work will continue to center on characterizing some of the smaller quarries.
Multivariate statistical analyses incorporating properties or features from two or
more analytical techniques have become common practice in marble provenance
studies.DEVELOPING METHODS OF AUTHENTICATING ROCK ARTIFACTSAuthentication of stone artifacts from a scientific point of view usually focuses onone of two lines of evidence: the original materials and manufacturing proce-
dures, and weathering or alteration of the surface after carving or other finishing.Materials and Working ProceduresIn this category would obviously be the nature of the rock itself. If a suffi-ciently large database of information on the rocks that presumably should have
been utilized were available, detailed rock analysis may help to build a case for or
against the authenticity of a problematic artifact. More often than not, the result
of such an analysis even when a large database is available may lead to the conclu-
sion that the material used in an artifact is consistent with the purported period
and place of origin, which does not imply that the object is definitely authentic,
only that it could be.Working of the rock can also be important. Certain tools or manners of usinga tool may be characteristic of a type of stone artifact. Some researchers have
carefully compared drill marks produced by known ancient drilling procedures
with marks produced by modern drills, and this information could obviously be
used in certain authentication studies. Tool marks on ancient gemstones have
also been extensively studied (Rosenfeld et al., 2003), with the purpose of deter-
mining the tools that were utilized and the way the tools were used. Applications
of this type of information to weathered sculptural surfaces is much more diffi-
cult since many details have been worn away.There may be residues of tools that can be identified, for example, elementsfrom metal chisels or bits of abrasives used in polishing operations. A study of(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTRoman gemstones found residues of lead and tin metal as well as barite, all ofwhich were probably associated with abrasive polishing procedures (Rosenfeld et
al., 2003).It is difficult to quantify the appearance of tool marks on a complex sculpturein such a manner that would allow the data to be readily utilized by other re-
searchers. The use of tool marks in authentication studies may fall more into the
realm of technical connoisseurship, where interpretation of significance depends
on the experienced eye of a researcher who has carefully examined many tool
marks on many artifacts. One example is in a paper published 13 years ago by a
sculptor who has studied tool marks on Roman marble sculptures (Rockwell,
1990). He argued that although a skilled modern forger could use the same tools
as an ancient Roman sculptor, utilizing them in exactly the same manner would
be very difficult, and that the differing manners of use could be distinguished by
careful examination of tool marks, when the appropriate marks are still present
on a sculpture. A very interesting concluding remark of his was, ÒIn readingliterature on fakes and faking I find that no one questions that the faker can, if he
wants to, reproduce the technique of the period being faked. It is taken as a given
that a good technician can reproduce the technique of any period. I think that this
is an assumption about techniques, based on the ignorance of nontechnicians,
that deserves serious questioning.ÓSurface AlterationOne final approach is to look closely at surface alteration. Changes that takeplace on a newly worked rock surface over time can involve physical as well as
chemical factors. Sharp details can become rounded or abraded. Minerals at the
surface can chemically break down due to interaction with the atmosphere or
burial environment. The surface of an ancient rock sculpture may contain mate-
rials that in part arise from interaction of the rock surface with its environment
over some period of time. ÒWeathering layer (layers)Ó will be used to refer to all
such materials.Many ancient rock artifacts will have been buried for some extended periodof time, but few if any details are usually known about the burial environment.
While it is quite possible that there is some correlation between thickness of a
weathering layer and amount of burial time for a given type of rock and given
environment, all the information that would be required to establish this is never
available.The composition and microstructure of a weathering layer are both useful.Possible variation in both composition and structure from place to place on the
surface of an artifact make it prudent to examine multiple samples. Small chips
that can be prepared as cross-sections are the single most useful type of sample,
since compositional and structural features can both be studied on the same(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE69sample utilizing such techniques as scanning electron microscopy with attachedX-ray spectrometers.On rocks that contain more than one mineral the microscopic structure andcomposition of a weathering layer will not be identical on exposed surfaces of the
different minerals. Some minerals, such as quartz, are very resistant to weather-
ing, while others are much less resistant. The processes by which different miner-
als break down and the products of those breakdown processes vary from one
mineral type to another. Even on monomineralic rocks the nature of the weather-
ing layer will not necessarily be uniform over the entire surface of a sculpture.To have confidence in the application of weathering layer data to an authen-tication question, the weathering that takes place on the type of rock in question
in the (burial) environment in which it is likely to have undergone most of its
weathering should be characterized. Geological samples if appropriate or artifacts
(or architectural blocks) if appropriate should be examined. A range of deteriora-
tion, on a single artifact and on different artifacts, can probably be expected.
Rarely can such a database be built, however. Another option is to look for weath-
ering features and by-products that are known to result from the deterioration of
certain minerals or types of rocks under general conditions similar to those of a
sculpture made from the same material.If the question involves the possible faking of weathering layers, specificanalyses that can distinguish the real phenomenon from an artificially produced
emulation need to be carried out. Some researchers search for organic materials
that might have served as binders used to adhere an artificial patina onto the
surface of an artifact. Some organic materials will undoubtedly be present in
authentic weathering layers, but the nature of these and their relative abundance
can reasonably be expected to be quite different. A wide range of very sensitive
techniques for organic analysis are available, such as gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry, which can be applied to characterization of organic residues in rock
weathering layers.The study of weathering layers on an artifact may require analyses of a num-ber of different kinds. To date, the weathering layers that arise on stone sculptures
through long-term burial have not been very extensively studied for many classes
of rocks or rock artifacts. Probably the rock to which the most work has been
applied is again the white marbles of the Mediterranean region. Marble is sensi-
tive to acidic groundwater. Weathering in a burial environment usually involves
solution at the surface, and along grain boundaries, coupled with reprecipitation
of calcium carbonate on the sculpture surface. The reprecipitated calcite often
incorporates bits of rock from the surface and organic and inorganic materials
from the soil. In the case of marble, stable isotope analysis has also been carried
out, since interaction between rock and groundwater will result in a change in
isotope ratios. This technique can sometimes detect extremely thin weathering
layers.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTMarble made of dolomite instead of the much more common calcite canundergo a very different kind of weathering. Dedolomitization is a phenomenon
in which calcite replaces dolomite through interaction with groundwater in some
specific circumstances (Doehne et al., 1992). To date, dedolomitization has not
been able to be induced in a laboratory setting to more than a minor extent. The
presence of a reasonably thick layer of this kind would provide some proof that an
artifact has been buried for an extended period of time, at least given our present
understanding of the phenomenon. In a study of a dolomite sculpture attributed
to the Archaic Greek period, researchers observed a weathering layer that very
closely resembled in structure and composition the layers seen on buried dolo-
mite marble that had undergone weathering for nearly two millennia (Newman
and Herrmann, 1995).Most rocks are not as simple in mineralogy as marble, nor as reactive togroundwater. The weathering layers on these can be more complex to analyze and
interpret. One recent example involves the volcanic tuff utilized in eastern Java
during the Majapahit period (1293 to about 1520). In a study of eight statuettes
researchers concluded that certain minerals form in small depressions on the
sculpture surface during long-term burial (Duboscq, 1989-1990). The depres-
sions are sites where certain minerals that made up the original rock were located
(the depressions were formed in geological time, not during burial). The research
identified several minerals coating the surfaces in these depressions. It was con-
cluded that these minerals (zeolites, clay, and monazite) should be present in
similar depressions on authentic artifacts made from this type of rock. Scanning
electron microscopy with energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence was used to char-
acterize the weathering products, using either cross-sections or, more typically,
scrapings from the insides of depressions on the surface of a sculpture. Although
the conclusions regarding the value of this type of evidence were too stridently
stated given the scope of the project, the research is an example of the use of
detailed compositional and structural information associated with weathering.Weathering layers are certainly one of the best pieces of evidence in authen-tication studies of rock artifacts, but the application of this type of evidence can be
said to be in its infancy for the vast majority of rock types. More extensive re-
search will be required to add certainty to conclusions based on this approach.The study of marble weathering layers can be taken as an example of theincreasing sophistication applied to the problem as time goes by. A little over 30
years ago, when the use of weathering layers on marble as an authentication tool
was first suggested, thin sections examined under a polarizing-light microscope
were the only tool applied to their study.Another type of evidence that for many decades has been taken to indicate anancient weathered surface on a marble artifact are root marks, bits of plant roots
that become cemented to the surfaces of sculptures that have been buried. In
recent years the very important role of biodeterioration in the weathering of rocks
has been the subject of much research, most of it focused on monuments and(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON STONE SCULPTURE71architecture. Some of the molecular characterization techniques that have beenapplied to the study of biodeterioration in aboveground settings may also be of
value in characterizing weathering in burial environments, where biological agents

may also be at work.CONCLUSIONS: THE FUTUREThe major categories of research noted in this paper have long been areas ofresearch and will continue to be very important in the future. As examples in this
paper have shown, sourcing projects that can be expected to produce worthwhile
results are often time consuming. There are many sourcing projects on rock
sculptures that remain to be undertaken, projects that can potentially be of great
importance to art historians and archaeologists. Authentication of rock sculp-
tures has also long been an active area of research, in which advances are continu-
ously made. The future will hold more of the same.REFERENCESBlanc, A., L. L. Holmes, and G. Harbottle. 2002. In Interdisciplinary Studies in Ancient Stone, eds. J. L.Herrmann, N. Herz, and R. Newman, pp. 103-109. London: Archetype Publications.Craig, H., and V. Craig. 1972. Science 176:401-403.
Doehne, E., J. Podany, and W. Showers. 1992. In Ancient Stones: Quarrying, Trade and Provenance,eds. M. Waelkens, N. Herz, and L. Moens, pp. 179-190. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University
Press.Duboscq, B. 1989-1990. In Majapahit. Paris: Beurdeley & Cie (no pagination).French, J. M., E. V. Sayre, and L. van Zelst. 1985. In Application of Science in Examination of Works ofArt, eds. P. A. England and L. van Zelst, pp. 132-141. Boston: The Research Laboratory, Mu-
seum of Fine Arts.Gendron, F., D. C. Smith, and A. Gendron-Badou. 2002. Journal of Archaeological Science 29:837-851.
Gorgoni, C., L. Lazzarini, P. Pallante, and B. Turi. 2002. In Interdisciplinary Studies in Ancient Stone,eds. J. L. Herrmann, N. Herz, and R. Newman, pp. 115-131. London: Archetype Publications.Mallory, L. M., J. D. Greenough, and J. V. Owen. 1999. Journal of Archaeological Science
 26:1261-
1272.Mallory-Greenough, L.M., J. D. Greenough, G. Dobosi, and J. V. Owen. 1999. Archaeometry 41:227-238.Newman, R. 1992. Archaeometry 34:163-174.Newman, R., and J. Herrmann. 1995. In The Study of Marble and Other Stones Used in Antiquity, eds.Y. Maniatis, N. Herz, and Y. Basiakos, pp.103-112. London: Archetype Publications.Polikreti, K., and Y. Maniatis. 2002. Archaeometry 44:1-21.Pretola, J. P. 2001. Journal of Archaeological Science 28:721-739.Rockwell, P. 1990. In Marble: Art Historical and Scientific Perspectives on Ancient Sculpture, pp. 207-222. Malibu, Calif.: J. Paul Getty Museum.Rosenfeld, A., M. Dvorachek, and S. Amorai-Stark. 2003. Journal of Archaeological Science 30:227-238.Uchida, E., O. Cunin, I. Shimoda, C. Suda, and T. Nakagawa. 2003. Archaeometry 48:221-232.Williams-Thorpe, O., and R. S. Thorpe. 1993. Archaeometry 35:185-195.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72Biodeterioration of Stone
Thomas D. Perry IV, Christopher J. McNamara,and Ralph MitchellDivision of Engineering and Applied SciencesLaboratory of Applied MicrobiologyHarvard UniversityCambridge, MassachusettsABSTRACTStone cultural heritage materials are at risk of biodeterioration caused bydiverse populations of microorganisms living in biofilms. The microbial
metabolites of these biofilms are responsible for the deterioration of the
underlying substratum and may lead to physical weakening and discolora-
tion of stone. Air pollutants in urban environments accelerate biodeterio-
ration by serving as an additional nutrient source for the microorganisms.
Current strategies to reduce biodeterioration and repair damage that has
already occurred are discussed. Current techniques for assessing microbial
populations and their effects are evaluated. Additionally, we describe two
new techniques for quantification of these interactions: microcomputer-
assisted tomography (microCT) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The
study of biodeterioration of stone cultural heritage materials is as diverse as
the sites studied. This review also attempts to address some of the issues
facing conservation scientists, including methodology and application.INTRODUCTIONMany cultural heritage materials are at risk of biodeterioration by microorgan-isms, including metals (e.g., Berk et al., 2001), glass (e.g., Schabereiter-Gurtner
et al., 2001), ceramics (e.g., Sand and Bock, 1991), paper (e.g., Fabbri et al.,
1997), paintings (e.g., Rubio and Bolivar, 1997), wood (e.g., Bjordal et al., 1999),
coatings (e.g., Flemming, 1998), synthetic polymers (e.g., Gu et al., 1998a), and(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE73FIGURE 1Photograph of a room in the Quadrangle of the Nuns, Uxmal, Yucat⁄n, Mex-
ico, showing visible microbial growth and staining.mummified bodies (e.g., Arya et al., 2001). Biodeterioration presents conserva-tion challenges that vary as widely as the types of materials themselves, and
discussion of the processes causing degradation of these varied historic materials
is not possible here. Consequently, the scope of this paper is limited to discus-
sion of the mechanisms, analytical techniques, and conservation strategies of
stone biodeterioration.Biodeterioration plays an important role in the degradation of stone in his-toric buildings, monuments, and archaeological sites (e.g., Saiz-Jimenez, 1999).
Microorganisms that have been demonstrated as the causative agents in deterio-
ration of stone include bacteria (Urzi et al., 1991), Archaea (Rılleke et al., 1998),
cyanobacteria, algae (Tomaselli et al., 2000), fungi (Gorbushina et al., 1993), and
lichens (Garcia-Rowe and Saiz-Jimenez, 1991). Additionally, stone objects may
support novel communities of microorganisms (e.g., alkaliphiles, halophiles, and
endoliths) that function in the biodeterioration process (Saiz-Jimenez and Laiz,
2000). Our work focuses on Maya archaeological ruins in the Yucat⁄n, Mexico,
which are heavily colonized by microorganisms (see Figure 1). We have isolated
copiotrophic (capable of growth on a medium containing a high concentration of
organic carbon), alkaliphilic (capable of growing at high pH), oligotrophic (ca-
pable of growth on media containing a low concentration of organic carbon), and
halophilic (salt-tolerant) bacteria, as well as phototrophic microorganisms and(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2Scanning electron micro-
graph (30,000X) of an unidentified mi-croorganism with an unusual morphol-
ogy collected from the surface of aninner room in a temple in the Maya siteat Uxmal, Yucat⁄n, Mexico.fungi from the ruins. Unique organisms that have to date eluded our identifica-tion efforts have also been observed (see Figure 2).Microbial biodeterioration of stone occurs as a result of the formation ofbiofilms (see Figure 3). Biofilms are collections of bacterial cells on surfaces that
are maintained by electrostatic forces and/or adhering exopolymers. Biofilm for-
mation begins with the initial adhesion of microorganisms to a surface. Division
of attached cells produces microcolonies containing large amounts of exopolymer

separated by patchy areas relatively devoid of growth. Production of exopolymer
and other exudates is stimulated in response to cellular density by cell-cell signal-
ing. The exopolymer matrix is composed mainly of polysaccharides and serves a
variety of functions such as providing protection from desiccation, radiation,
erosion, and disinfectants, as well as storage of organic carbon and nutrients
(Flemming and Wingender, 2001; Costerton et al., 1995). The exopolymer matrix
limits the rate of diffusion in microcolonies, resulting in the formation of mi-
croenvironments due to gradients in pH, O2, nutrients, and organic carbon(Rittman et al., 1999).EFFECTS OF MICROBIAL METABOLITESEffects of AcidsMicrobial biodeterioration of stone is widely thought to occur through theaction of organic and inorganic acids produced as metabolic by-products (Gu et(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE75FIGURE 3Diagram of a microbial biofilm growing on a stone surface, which highlights
the environmental heterogeneity present in attached microbial communities.al., 2000). Bacteria isolated from the Maya site of EkÕ Balam, Yucat
⁄n, Mexico, arecapable of producing calcium carbonate-dissolving exudates (Perry et al., 2003).
However, not all organic acids produced by microorganisms cause immediate
dissolution of stone. For example, oxalic acid may have a protective role by the
formation of calcium oxalate on stone surfaces (Di Bonaventura et al., 1999).Effects of ExopolymersIn addition to metabolic acids, biofilm exopolymers may play an importantrole in deterioration of stone because of their proximity to the stone substratum.
Bacteria produce the polymers as biofilm growth is initiated, and adhere directly
to the stone (see Figure 4). Bacterial exopolymers are large macromolecules con-
sisting of varied sugar molecules exhibiting several kinds of functional groups
(Ford et al., 1991), including acidic carbonyls. These functional groups are often
capable of binding cations in solution (Smidsr¿d and Haug, 1965). For example,negatively charged carboxylic and hydroxyl groups of exopolymeric materials,
such as alginic acid, form complexes with the mineral surface and may leach
calcium from limestone matrices (Perry et al., 2004). Other polysaccharides with
different chemistry may inhibit dissolution (Welch and Vandevivere, 1994). The
activity of these molecules and their functional groups in chelation and dissolu-
tion of stone is still not understood because of their variability and complexity.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 4Scanning electron micrograph (30,000X) showing bacteria growing on a mar-
ble surface and producing exopolymer attached to the stone substratum.DiscolorationMicrobial pigments frequently cause discoloration of stone. While these me-tabolites may not cause physical damage, they can cause aesthetic problems.
Monuments are particularly susceptible to this form of discoloration.A typical example is the red stain observed on the U.S. Naval AcademyÕsTripoli Monument in Annapolis, Maryland (see Figure 5a). Two pigment-
producing fungi were isolated from the monument: Epicoccum nigrum and
Drechslera sp. Interestingly, in a growth medium of low salt concentration, 
E.nigrum appeared milky white in color, while in a high calcium concentration
medium, the fungus produced a red pigment (see Figure 5b). The red stain may
have been an exudate produced to protect the fungus from the stresses of its
habitat on the stone, such as ultraviolet radiation or ionic strength (Wheeler and
Bell, 1988).INTERACTION OF MICROORGANISMS WITH AIR POLLUTANTSOne of the most serious causes of stone deterioration is urban air pollution caused(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE77FIGURE 5 (a)Red pigmentation on the Tripoli Monument in Annapolis, Maryland. (b)
Production of pigment by the fungus Epicoccum nigrum in a growth medium containing
marble. The fungus was colorless when grown on the same medium without addition ofmarble.by fossil fuel combustion. In addition to chemical weathering of stone, pollutantsmay stimulate microbial biodeterioration. Urban air pollutants are rich in both
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and sulfur dioxide (SO2). NO2 and SO
2 are mainly de-
rived from fossil fuel combustion and are transported by wind or water to stone
surfaces (Saiz-Jimenez, 1993). Some chemoautotrophic bacteria obtain energy by
oxidizing sulfur and nitrogen compounds to sulfuric and nitric acids. For ex-
ample, Thiobacillus colonizes weathered surfaces of marble in a polluted area
(Mitchell and Gu, 2000). These bacteria, through production of sulfuric acid,
cause degradation of acid-sensitive materials, including limestones and concrete
(Gu et al., 2000; Gugliandolo and Maugeri, 1990; Sand, 1994). The reaction of
stone carbonate with sulfuric acid also causes the formation of gypsum. The
contribution of microorganisms to gypsum formation is unknown. Gypsum crys-
tals combine with dust, aerosols, and other atmospheric particles to form black or
brown sulfated crusts, which can tarnish the monumentÕs aesthetic appearance.The composition of these crusts varies and is dependent on the particular air-
borne pollutants in individual areas (Saiz-Jimenez, 1993). Furthermore, effects of
gypsum formation are not limited to aesthetic problems. While gypsum may
temporarily passivate the limestone, the crust may ultimately exfoliate, causing
extensive deterioration (Gauri and Holdren, 1981).Nitrifying chemoautotrophic bacteria are able to derive energy by oxidizingnitrogen-containing inorganic substrates (Mansch and Bock, 1996), ultimately
resulting in the formation of nitric acid. The effect of biogenic nitric acid attack
on stone was investigated and was compared to the effects of a smoggy atmo-
sphere (Mansch and Bock, 1996). Mansch and Bock (1996) indicated that micro-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTbiologically formed nitric acid corrosion was eight times more harmful than thecorrosion caused by smog.The relative significance of chemical and biological processes in most loca-tions is unknown. It is probable that there is synergism between the two pro-
cesses. There is extensive evidence that in urban environments, a wide range of
hydrocarbons is adsorbed to historic buildings. The growth of hydrocarbon-
utilizing bacteria on these buildings may increase the deterioration rate of the
stone (Mitchell and Gu, 2000).ANALYSIS OF MICROBIAL POPULATIONS AND PROCESSESMicrobial growth on stone has traditionally been analyzed using methods thatrely on the ability of microorganisms to grow on culture media. In recent years,
however, molecular techniques that exploit natural variation in DNA sequences
have been developed to enumerate and identify microorganisms. Culture-based
and molecular methods each have advantages and disadvantages. For example,
despite the simplicity and ease of use of culture-based techniques, they routinely
detect less than 1 percent of microorganisms present in environmental samples
(Pace, 1997). Very often the physiological state observed in culture does not
represent the organismÕs activity in situ (Bonin et al., 2001). Molecular tech-niques avoid the selective bias of culturing but require significant expertise and
may introduce other sources of error especially in natural samples containing
multiple speciesÕ templates (Thompson et al., 2002). The inability to detect the
majority of organisms limits the usefulness of culture-based techniques for stud-
ies in which the goal is an accurate description of the microbial community.
However, in studies where the goal is a comparison between treatments, analysis
of a fraction of the community may be sufficient (Lemke et al., 1997). Further-
more, molecular analyses yield little information about the function of organ-
isms. Molecular methods are insufficient for investigating the production of meta-
bolic products and for investigating the effects of these products on mineral
dissolution. These data are required if we are to understand the underlying pro-
cesses of deterioration.In addition to phylogenetic descriptions, the deterioration of stone has beenexamined using a variety of techniques, which have some utility in the quantifica-
tion of biodeterioration. These methods include depth measurements using cali-
pers, use of reference surfaces, macro-stereophotogrammetry, ion measurements
of water runoff, or acid extraction (Winkler, 1986). Scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM), which is used to observe surface degradation, fails to detect changes
below the surface. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measures changes in pore
size distribution within stone (Alesiani et al., 2000) but gives no information
about the microorganisms. Both SEM and NMR require destruction of the sample.
Acoustic wave velocity provides information about subsurface discontinuities in(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE79stone (Papida et al., 2000). However, results generally must be correlated withother measurements, such as change in stone mass.X-ray computed tomography (CT) has been used extensively for the nonde-structive visualization of objects in medical research (Berland, 1987), paleontol-
ogy (Conroy and Vannier, 1984), soil, and sediments (Phogat and Aylmore, 1989).Recently attempts have been made to adapt CT for use with stone samples from
building materials (Jacobs et al., 1995). These standard CT machines are large andhave poor resolution. A recently developed small desktop micro computed X-ray
tomography (MicroCT) was used to analyze stone samples at high resolution
(Ruegsegger et al., 1996). In addition to being nondestructive, MicroCT provided
images of the interior and exterior of stone objects, as well as three-dimensional
reconstructions of the samples. Marble blocks were exposed to 1 mM sulfuric
acid, which is typically associated with acid rain, and the effect was assessed by
MicroCT according to McNamara et al. (2002). Exposure to 1mM sulfuric acid
caused little change in mass, surface area, or solution pH value. An 18 percent
increase in surface area was observed using MicroCT, possibly indicating the
formation of a gypsum crust protecting the stone from further dissolution. A
three-dimensional reconstruction of horizontal scans can be seen in Figure 6.
MicroCT is a useful technique for quantifying the effects of microorganisms and
their exudates. MicroCT is also of use for long-term studies, because it is nonde-
structive and allows for repeated scans on the same sample. Quantitative density
measurements can be recorded over time.Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has previously been used to study the kinet-ics of calcite dissolution when exposed to water and simple acids (e.g., Shiraki et
al., 2000). Using a time series of AFM micrographs (see Figure 7), a geometric
analysis of surface topographical changes can be used to calculate a microscopic
dissolution rate. The AFM chamber can be concurrently used as a flow-through
reactor to determine macroscopic dissolution rates (Shiraki et al., 2000) withFIGURE 6A three-dimensional reconstruction of microCT planar scans of a marble sam-
ple before (a) and after (b) treatment for four days with 1 mM sulfuric acid. The surface
shows formation of a gypsum layer.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 7An atomic force micrograph of a pit forming in a calcite surface. By monitor-
ing the step velocity of the pit expansion a dissolution rate can be calculated.methods described in Duckworth and Martin (2003). The AFM may prove usefulfor quantifying the effect of bacterially produced acids and polymers on stone
dissolution (Perry et al., 2004).STRATEGIES FOR CONTROL OF BIODETERIORATIONEnvironmental ControlMicroorganisms can persist in dry environments. Active metabolism, how-ever, requires appropriate levels of relative humidity and temperature. A combi-
nation of low humidity and low temperature is the simplest way to control micro-
bial growth, but this treatment may be less effective for control of fungi (Gu et al.,
1998b) and is impractical in outdoor situations. Regular cleaning may be the
most effective treatment for preventing biofilm formation and subsequent
biodeterioration of materials in historic buildings and monuments (Krumbein et
al., 1992).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE81BiocidesThe application of biocides has become a routine practice in the conservationof cultural heritage materials. However, environmental issues have severely lim-
ited the number of available effective biocidal chemicals for use in conservation
(Bingaman and Willingham, 1994). Biofilm bacteria respond differently to bio-
cides and are generally more resistant than unattached cells (McFeters et al.,
1995). Because microorganisms are capable of rapidly acquiring chemical resis-
tance, no one chemical can be relied on for long-term use; frequently several
chemicals need to be combined in order to achieve effective eradication of biofilm
populations. Biocides are a difficult tool for preservation, because many are too
caustic for environmental use, they are not strong enough to discourage micro-
bial growth, or the microorganisms ultimately develop resistance.ConsolidantsConsolidants have been used for some time to conserve archaeological stonefrom biological and chemical weathering (Selwitz, 1992). Consolidation is a means
of generating structural strength in disintegrating material and is an artificial
means of repairing the damage caused by natural processes (Crafts Council, 1992).
The efficacy of consolidants on outdoor stone is controversial, because they can
upset the natural saturation and evaporation of moisture from within the stone,
often resulting in exfoliation and cracking of stone surfaces (Boyes, 1997). Appli-
cation of consolidants is not easily reversible, which is a serious drawback when
dealing with ancient monuments. Some consolidants may also discolor as they
degrade because of aging, photochemical processes, and oxidation (Biscontin et
al., 1976; Gonzalez, 2000).Two of the most common types of consolidants used for monuments andarchaeological stone are ethoxysilanes and acrylic resins. Commercial consolidants
are susceptible to biodegradation (Koestler et al., 1994). A wide range of
consolidants has been tested for effectiveness to protect Maya limestone in Belize
(Kumar and Ginell, 1995), and most of the polymers tested proved to be suscep-
tible to microbial degradation under local environmental conditions of the
Yucat⁄n. However, guidelines are needed for systematic evaluation of candidatepolymers and their suitability in specific applications. Physical conditions for
biodeterioration may be particularly favorable in tropical and subtropical regions
because of high temperatures and humidity.While problems associated with the use of consolidants for the protection ofarchaeological stone are numerous, they are only one of the means of preventing
the disintegration of stone grains due to exposure and weathering. The addition
of biocides to consolidants would help to prevent microbial degradation, increas-
ing the longevity of the treatment. Commercially available and environmentally
acceptable biocides could be used as additives in consolidants.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTCONCLUSIONSStone cultural heritage materials are constantly at risk of deterioration by micro-organisms. This risk is augmented in urban environments, where deposition of
pollutants enhances the rate of deterioration. Microbiologists are actively pursu-
ing the microorganisms responsible for deterioration and attempting to quantify
their effects. The effects of metabolic products, the deterioration processes, and
the responsible microorganisms are all being elucidated. This effort, however,
requires a multidisciplinary examination of the geology, chemistry, and conserva-
tion of these sites.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe authors would like to thank M. Breuker (National Park Service, Lowell,Mass.), M. Muilenberg (School of Public Health, Harvard University, Boston,
Mass.), R. Muller (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Mass.), and J.
Sembrat (Conservation Solutions, District Heights, Maryland.) for their collabo-
ration on aspects of this manuscript. This work was supported in part by a grant
from the National Science Foundation (BES-9906337). T. D. Perry is supported
by a Samuel H. Kress Fellowhip.REFERENCESAlesiani, M., S. Capuani, F. Curzi, and B. Maraviglia. 2000. In International Congress on Deteriorationand Conservation of Stone, ed. V. Fassina, pp. 579-585. Venice, Italy: Elsevier.Arya, A., A. R. Shah, and S. Sadasivan. 2001. Current Science 81:793-799.Berk, S. G., R. Mitchell, R. J. Bobbie, J. S. Nickels, and D. C. White. 2001. International Biodeterioration
and Biodegradation 48:167-175.Berland, L. L. 1987. Practical CT: Technology and Techniques. New York: Raven Press.Bingaman, W. W., and G. L. Willingham. 1994. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation34:387-399.Biscontin, G., S. Frascati, and L. Marchesini. 1976. In The Conservation of Stone, pp. 731-747. Bolo-gna: Centro per la Conservazione delle Sculture allÕAperto.Bjordal, C. G., T. Nilsson, and G. Daniel. 1999. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation
43:63-71.Bonin, P., J.-F. Rontani, and L. Bordenave. 2001. FEMS Microbiology Letters 
194:111-119.Boyes, N. 1997. In Aspects of Stone Weathering, Decay, and Conservation: Stone Weathering and Atmo-spheric Pollution Network Conference (SWAPNET), eds. M. S. Jones and R. Wakefield, pp. 170-
178. London: Imperial College Press.Conroy, G. C., and M. W. Vannier. 1984. Science 226:456-458.
Costerton, J. W., Z. Lewandowski, D. E. Caldwell, D. R. Korber, and H. M. Lappinscott. 1995. AnnualReview of Microbiology 49:711-745.
Crafts Council. 1992. In Adhesives and Coatings, pp. 123-131. London: Conservation Unit of theMuseums and Galleries Commission in conjunction with Routledge.Di Bonaventura, M. P., M. D. Gallo, P. Cacchio, C. Ercole, and A. Lepidi. 1999. GeomicrobiologyJournal 16:55-64.
Duckworth, O. W., and S. T. Martin. 2003.Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 67:1787-1801.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIODETERIORATION OF STONE83Fabbri, A. A., A. Ricelli, S. Brasini, and C. Fanelli. 1997. International Biodeterioration and Biodegra-dation 39:61-65.Flemming, H. C. 1998. Polymer Degradation and Stability 59:309-315.
Flemming, H. C., and J. Wingender. 2001. Water Science and Technology 43:1-8.
Ford, T., J. Black, T. Kelley, R. Goodacre, R. C. W. Berkeley, and R. Mitchell. 1991. Applied Environ-mental Microbiology 57:1595-1601.
Garcia-Rowe, J., and C. Saiz-Jimenez. 1991. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 
28:151-163.Gauri, K. L., and G. C. Holdren, Jr. 1981. Environmental Science and Technology
 15:386-390.
Gonzalez, R. F. 2000. In International Congress on Deterioration and Conservation of Stone, vol. 2, ed.
V. Fassina, pp. 235-243. Venice, Italy: Elsevier.Gorbushina, A. A., W. E. Krumbein, C. H. Hamman, L. Panina, S. Soukharjevski, and U. Wollenzien.1993. Geomicrobiology Journal 11:205-221.
Gu, J.-D., T. E. Ford, and R. Mitchell. 2000. In UhligÕs Corrosion Handbook, 2nd ed., ed. R. W. Revie,
pp. 477-491. New York: John Wiley.Gu, J.-D., D. B. Mitton, T. E. Ford, and R. Mitchell. 1998a. Biodegradation 9:39-45.
Gu, J.-D., M. Roman, T. Eesselman, and R. Mitchell. 1998b. International Biodeterioration and Bio-degradation 41:25-33.
Gugliandolo, C., and T. L. Maugeri. 1990. In The Conservation of Monuments in the MediterraneanBasin, ed. F. Zezza, pp. 221-224. Brescia, Italy: Grafo.
Jacobs, P., E. Sevens, and M. Kunnen. 1995. Science of the Total Environment 167:161-170.Koestler, R. J., E. Santoro, L. Koepp, M. Derrick, J. Druzik, F. Preusser, A. Rodarte, and N. Valentin.1994. In Research Abstracts of the Scientific Program: GCI Scientific Program Report, ed. J. R.
Druzik, pp. 132-133. Marina del Rey, Calif.: Getty Conservation Institute.Krumbein, W., J. Braams, G. Grote, M. Gross, K. Petersen, V. Schostak, and T. Warscheid. 1992. InThe International Conference, ed. R. G. M. Webster, pp. 237-238. Edinburgh: Donhead.
Kumar, R., and W. S. Ginell. 1995. In Methods of Evaluating Products for the Conservation of PorousBuilding Materials in Monuments, pp. 163-178. Rome, Italy: ICCROM.
Lemke, M. J., B. J. Brown, and L. G. Leff. 1997. Microbial Ecology 34:224-231.
Mansch, R., and E. Bock. 1996. In Microbially Influenced Corrosion of Materials,
 eds. E. Heitz, H.-C.
Flemming, and W. Sand, pp. 167-186. Berlin: Springer.McFeters, G. A., F. P. Yu, B. H. Pyle, and P. S. Stewart. 1995. Journal of Industrial Microbiology15:333-338.McNamara, C. J., T. D. Perry, M. Breuker, and R. Mitchell. 2002. In Microbially Influenced Corrosion,CorrosionÑ2002, ed. B. Little, pp. 113-121. Houston: NACE International.
Mitchell, R., and J. D. Gu. 2000. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 46:299-303.
Pace, N. R. 1997. Science 276:734-740.
Papida, S., W. Murphy, and E. May. 2000. In 9th International Congress on Deterioration and Conser-vation of Stone, ed. V. Fassina, pp. 609-617. Venice, Italy: Elsevier.Perry IV, T. D., O. W. Duckworth, C. J. McNamara, S. T. Martin, R. Mitchell. 2004. EnvironmentalScience and Technology 38:3040-3046.
Perry, T. D., C. J. McNamara, G. Hernandez-Duqu”, and R. Mitchell. 2003. In Molecular Biology andCultural Heritage, ed. C. Saiz-Jimenez, pp. 137-140. Lisse: A. A. Balkema.
Phogat, V. K., and L. A. G. Aylmore. 1989. Australian Journal of Soil Research 27:313-323.Rittman, B. E., M. Pettis, H. W. Reeves, and D. A. Stahl. 1999. Water Science and Technology 39:99-105.Rılleke, S., A. Witte, G. Wanner, and W. Lubitz. 1998. International Biodeterioration and Biodegrada-tion 41:85-92.
Rubio, R. F., and F. C. Bolivar. 1997. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 40:161-169.
Ruegsegger, P., B. Koller, and R. Muller. 1996. Calcified Tissue International 58:24-29.
Saiz-Jimenez, C. 1993. Atmospheric Environment, Part BÑUrban Atmosphere 27:77-85.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTSaiz-Jimenez, C. 1999. Geomicrobiology Journal 16:27-37.
Saiz-Jimenez, C., and L. Laiz. 2000. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 46:319-326.
Sand, W. 1994. Werkstoffe und Korrosion 45:10-16.
Sand, W., and E. Bock. 1991. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation 27:175-183.
Schabereiter-Gurtner, C., G. Pinar, W. Lubitz, and S. Rolleke. 2001. Journal of Microbiological Meth-ods 47:345-354.Selwitz, C. M. 1992. In Materials Research Society Symposium, vol. 267, pp. 925-941. Los Angeles:
Getty Conservation Institute.Shiraki, R., P. A. Rock, and W. H. Casey. 2000. Aquatic Geochemistry 6:87-108.
Smidsr¿d, O., and A. Haug. 1965. Acta Chemica Scandinavica 19:329.
Thompson, J. R., L. A. Marcelino, and M. F. Polz. 2002. Nucleic Acids Research 30:2083-2088.Tomaselli, L., G. Lamenti, M. Bosco, and P. Tiano. 2000. International Biodeterioration and Biodegra-dation 46:251-258.Urzi, C., C. Lisi, G. Criseo, and A. Pernice. 1991. Geomicrobiology Journal 9:81-90.
Welch, S. A., and P. Vandevivere. 1994. Geomicrobiology Journal 12:227-238.
Wheeler, M. H., and A. A. Bell. 1988. In 
Current Topics in Medical Mycology, vol. 2, ed. M. R.
McGinnis, pp. 338-387. New York: Springer-Verlag.Winkler, E. M. 1986. APT Bulletin 18:65-70.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Techniques and Applications
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87Analytical Capabilities of
Infrared Reflectography:
An Art HistorianÕs Perspective
Molly FariesInstituut voor Kunst-en ArchitectuurgeschiedenisRijksuniversiteit GroningenGroningen, The NetherlandsDepartment of the History of ArtIndiana UniversityBloomington, IndianaABSTRACTThe technique traditionally known as infrared reflectography (IRR) is to-day only one of many different possibilities for imaging in the infrared.
Some cameras developed recently are focal plane arrays based on materials
that were formerly classified, and they offer the option of using filters for
broad- or narrowband imaging. This paper discusses the application of
both traditional and newer cameras to the imaging and interpretation of
the layered, pictorial stages of paintings. In many cases infrared can Òsee
throughÓ paint layers to the underdrawing, the layout drawing an artist
makes before the application of color; a painting can then be understood in
terms of compositional evolution from the layout to the surface. Layers that
are opaque to infrared can also register, and may provide equally valuable
information about the painting process. The paintings and drawings men-
tioned in this text derive from different art historical periods, from early
Netherlandish paintings of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries to works by
later artists such as Rembrandt and Vincent Van Gogh. Researchers in this
field now need to recognize the expanding capabilities of infrared imaging
and at the same time define more precisely the appropriate parameters of
its use.As an imaging technique, infrared reflectography (IRR) is a method thatallows sophisticated types of visual analysis. It accesses various stages in a
work of art, particularly those that lie beneath the paint surface. Although it
is also possible to obtain different responses of colors at different wave-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTlengths in the infrared, the provisional identification of pigments that thisphenomenon might allow will not be discussed here. Instead, this paper
emphasizes infraredÕs capacity to Òsee throughÓ paint, as well as the oppo-
site: infraredÕs ability to detect paint layers that remain impervious to infra-red light. The interpretation of the infrared imaging of paintings therefore
depends on an informed reading of induced opacities and transparencies of
paint.The infrared vidicon is the device that has been used traditionally forIRR. This is hardly an emerging technology since it has been in continuous
use in art history and conservation for nearly three decades. The method
was developed in the late 1960s by the Dutch physicist, J. R. J. van Asperen
de Boer, to improve upon the results of infrared photography (van Asperen
de Boer, 1970). The advantages of IRR were immediately obvious at the
time: The blues and greens that had remained opaque in infrared photog-
raphy were rendered much more transparent, and underdrawings were
revealed to a much greater extent. To date, almost all the results produced
by this technique have been interpreted in the field of art history. In this
application the IRR equipment rarely stays in the lab, but it is taken into
the field (i.e., to museums, churches, and private collections). The infrared
vidicon, housed in a high-resolution television camera, is portable, as is the
television monitor, where the infrared image called a reflectogram can be
viewed and documented by photography or captured to computer. The
only additional equipment required is a source of illumination and a sturdy
tripod. As a result, what has come to be known as the IRR expedition has
been essential in gathering basic information about the working procedures
of related artists or artistic groups.INFRARED IMAGING DEVICESIn addition to the vidicon used in IRR, there are now perhaps as many as 15 otherpossibilities for imaging in the infrared. These range from inexpensive CCD
(charge-coupled device) cameras with sensitivity close to that of visible light,
some of which have been recommended for use in conservation (Meyer and
Raquet, 2002), to more advanced focal plane arrays based on materials that were
declassified in the 1990s, such as indium gallium arsenide or platinum silicide.
Any of these imaging devices can be used with filters, but since the high-end focal
plane arrays do not usually require as much increase in illumination when using
filters, they can more easily be adapted to study works of art. If required, imaging
can concentrate in narrow-wavelength bands, such as a range near 1100 nanom-
eters (nm) for the visualization of brownish inks that quickly become transparent
in infrared, or around 2 microns for the penetration of particularly opaque paints,
such as malachite green. In practice multispectral imaging already exists, although
it is not clear whether all users of infrared imaging sufficiently distinguish one(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY89range of infrared from another, or exploit different ranges of infrared in the mostappropriate manner. This is hardly surprising, since some of the cameras are so
new that no established patterns of use have been developed.This paper makes reference to infrared results from three different types ofimaging devices. One is a camera that is sensitive closer to the range of infrared
photography or the very near infrared: the MuSIS CCD camera, sensitive to
around 1150 nm. (The MuSIS camera has a CCD sensor with 1024 x 768 resolu-
tion and a spectral response from 320 to 1150 nm, including two selectable ranges
in the near infrared, from 700 to 950 nm and from 950 to 1150 nm.) The second
is the ÒclassicÓ IRR vidicon. (The IRR equipment used in this study is a Grundig
70 H television camera set at 875 lines and outfitted with a Hamamatsu N 214
infrared vidicon that works in a range from 900 to around 1600/2000 nm, a TV
Macromar 1:2.8/36 mm lens, and Kodak 87 A filter, with a Grundig BG 12 moni-
tor. Documentation is done with a Canon A-1 35 mm camera, a 50 mm
Macrolens, and Kodak Plus X film. Currently the reflectogram negatives are digi-
tized and assembled into composites using VIPs and/or Adobe Photoshop.) The
third type of camera is the platinum silicide focal plane array: both the Mitsubishi
M700 thermal imager and the European AEG Infrarot Module camera. (Both
cameras are Stirling-cooled 640  480 platinum silicide focal plane arrays with
digital and video output, outfitted with Nikon f 3.5, 55 mm lenses, so that the
broadband spectral response ranges from 1.1 to 2.5-2.6 m. For the Mitsubishicamera belonging to the Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, images are captured with
Arte software and assembled with Panavue.) More information on the AEG cam-
era has been published elsewhere (van der Weerd et al., 2001).The vidicon and focal plane arrays have a spectral response much further inthe infrared, and they can thus be categorized as devices that meet the specifica-
tions for infrared reflectography. These cameras all work in the region of infrared
that has been determined by theoretical and experimental research to be essential
for the optimum transparency of traditional nonsynthetic pigments. The work of
J. R. J. van Asperen de Boer, as well as that done later by researchers at the
National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., has determined that devices must be
sensitive in the range around 2 mÑand more generally from 1.5 to 2 mÑforoptimum penetration of paint and the visibility of most underdrawings (van
Asperen de Boer, 1970; Walmsley et al., 1994).EXAMPLESThe greatest penetration of paint has always been a prime requirement of IRR,along with high resolution of the imaging device. This was the case when the
technique was developed with the objective of disclosing underdrawings, and this
remains the case today. Although it is to a degree self-evident that these features
would facilitate visual interpretation, several examples can further illustrate the
types of reasoning that become possible when IRR imaging is optimized.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTThe IRR vidicon was used recently to study the painted wings of an earlysixteenth-century altarpiece by Joos van Cleve (now in Warsaw, Museum
Naradowe). (The painting was studied in the context of a Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen research project, Painting in Antwerp Before Iconoclasm: A Socio-
Economic Approach, funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Re-
search.) In this case IRR obtains what can be considered almost ideal results (see
Figures 1 and 2). The different colors and color mixtures of the painted scenes
become almost completely and uniformly transparent. This is true not only of
blues and greens, which sometimes maintain more opacity, but also of whites,
which if painted thickly, can block the penetration of infrared light. The infrared
documents give one the sense of looking directly at the underdrawing without
any interference from the paint. The only paint that continues to register has been
mixed with dark or black pigments. The underdrawing of the altarpiece registers
very clearly, since the underdrawing material, a dark black ink, is able to absorb
infrared radiation strongly through the paint layers, as opposed to the white
ground, which is highly reflective. The other panels in the altarpiece responded to
infrared in a similar way, so that in this case IRR obtained both a complete and
consistent record of the underdrawing in all 11 panels of the entire work. The type
of underdrawing revealed can be considered representative of the masterÕs work-ing method.Many color notations were discovered in the underdrawing and since nocolored area was obscured by paint, all the notations present were made visible,
both for single colors and for color mixtures. These give an insight into the artistÕsshop practice. They may have been directives to assistants and/or used to estimate
how much of a certain color had to be ground and prepared for painting.Because the overall underdrawing was revealed so clearly in terms of its typeand function, it was possible to identify it more as an indicator of workshop
routine than of a given artistÕs personal drawing style. In this instance the masterof the shop took over Albrecht DrerÕs woodcuts as models, probably for thewoodcutÕs more diagrammatic method of rendering form. This woodcut look hasalso been found in the underdrawings of other early sixteenth-century Antwerp
masters, so that scholars in the field now recognize it as a production method that
cuts across different shops. Such a carefully crafted drawing must represent a
considerable investment of time and effort, whether or not it represents the work
of the master of the shop or an assistant, who would have to be trained to reach a
high degree of proficiency. This layout method must have been found useful as a
way of facilitating the painting process, and would fit with the streamlining of
workshop procedure that we know was occurring in Antwerp at the time.A second example can demonstrate how high-resolution imaging can bringout the character of an underdrawing. Platinum silicide focal plane arrays are
capable of very sharp images, equal to and sometimes better than the resolution
of the best IRR vidicons (van der Weerd et al., 2001). A camera of this type was
used to distinguish the very different underdrawings in two identical Madonna(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY91and Child compositions from the workshop of the sixteenth-century Dutchpainter, Jan van Scorel (Faries et al., 2000).In the digital composites of one of the Madonnas a researcher can obtain agood visual sense of the material of the underdrawing, a dry black chalk, and the
artistÕs handling of it, which is remarkably free. The second Madonna displays anunderdrawing that is entirely different: It seems to have been executed in a
hesitant, painstaking manner, and it includes features that are based on fully
realized forms of a preexisting model. When the underdrawings of both paint-
ings are compared in their entirety, it becomes evident that there is a compli-
cated compositional change in the first Madonna that is not repeated in the
second. The pose of the Christ child was changed significantly between the un-
derdrawing and paint stage of the freely underdrawn Madonna, while the Christ
childÕs pose in the second Madonna follows the paint surface of the first. Thesepaintings are both products of the same shop. Nonetheless, the infrared com-
parison provides information about the sequence in which these paintings were
made; the first of the Madonnas exhibits a more creative and idiosyncratic man-
ner of working, while the execution of the second version adheres more tightly to
predetermined motifs.Many more examples of the interpretation of underdrawings can be foundin the several surveys that have been published recently covering the extensive
research that IRR has made possible in the last few decades (Faries, 2001). When
IRR can be shown to provide clearly legible and reliable results, it gives
basic validity to various types of studies. These can range from investigations of
individual painters to more general studies of artistic production and painting
technology.Infrared results are not always as straightforward as the examples just men-tioned, even if the imaging device has optimum resolution and penetration. The
condition of a painting can always influence infrared results, and can greatly
complicate the reading of infrared documents. (Infrared imaging, in fact, usually
provides a great deal of information about the condition of paintings, the types of
fills, and the extent of retouching.) Other factors can also have an effect, such as
colored grounds and different underdrawing and painting materials. During an
infrared examination, underdrawings that are very faint and/or executed in
brownish pigments or other colors can become transparent along with the paint.
This is a fairly well-known phenomenon, and can occur with any one of the
infrared imaging devices currently available. Recent infrared study of a Nativity ofChrist from the workshop of Jacob Cornelisz van Oostsanen (Utrecht, Centraal
Museum) showed that while the underdrawing could be made visible by the
vidicon IRR camera, it was rendered transparent by the broadband imaging of the
Mitsubishi focal plane array (see Figures 3 and 4). Obtaining complete and repre-
sentative material in this case would require a combination or cameras or the use
of filters. If the camera allows the use of a variety of filters, one can work from
broadband imaging back through ranges that come closer and closer to visible(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 1Joos van Cleve and workshop. Detail of Saint John the Evangelist in an altar-
piece wing, Warsaw, Museum Naradowe (Photo: Micha Leeflang).light until the underdrawing can be imaged. The drawback, however, is that thecloser the imaging approaches visible light, the more opaque are greens, blues,
and white, and the more restricted is the view of the underdrawing. Most infrared
imaging, in fact, falls between the two extremes mentioned above and the case
described here. Ideally IRR will render paint completely transparent and allow the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY93FIGURE 2Same detail as Figure 1. Digital composite of IRR reflectograms at 0.9-1.6/2
m, showing elaborately worked out underdrawing (IRR and digital composite: MollyFaries).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 3Workshop of Jacob Cornelisz van Oostsanen. Detail of Joseph in a Nativity
scene (Utrecht, Centraal Museum). Digital composite of IRR reflectograms at 0.9-1.6/2m in which underdrawing appears in the sleeves and robe of Joseph (IRR and digitalcomposite: Molly Faries).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY95FIGURE 4Same detail as Figure 3. Digital composite of IRR reflectograms at 1.1-2.5 
min which the underdrawing becomes partially or totally transparent (IRR and digital com-posite: Molly Faries).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTunderdrawing to register strongly, while in the least responsive cases most of thepaint will remain opaque and it will not be possible to visualize the underdrawing,
if indeed it is present at all. Researchers must therefore always keep in mind that
visibility of the underdrawing depends on a number of variable factors: the mate-
rials and technique of the underdrawing, the overlying pigment, and the spectral
response of the detector (van Asperen de Boer, 1970; Walmsley et al., 1994).Although imaging close to the range of visible light has its obvious draw-backs, there is one recent application that exploits the possibilities of the 700-
1150 nm range. This concerns the infrared study of drawings on paper (and could
apply equally well to archival documents and perhaps to illuminated manuscripts
as well). The development of this examination method has been led by Hans
Scholten of the Dutch company, Art Innovation, and should shortly appear in
print (Havermans et al., 2003). In this type of study the MuSIS CCD camera
captures a high-resolution color image in visible light and an image in the near
infrared. These are then used to generate a false color infrared image using the
color channels of Adobe Photoshop. Inks such as iron gall inks become transpar-
ent in this range of infrared light, but in false color infrared the differences in
drawing materials and changes in condition can still be detected. Carbon black
inks can be distinguished from iron gall ink; retouches can often be made visible
and in some cases the presence of a corrosion product formed by iron gall ink can
be detected. This is a promising area for further research, especially since the
sensitivity of the MuSIS camera allows the low levels of illumination required for
the study of works on paper or parchment. It must be emphasized, however, that
this is an application for drawings that are not covered by paint.There seems to be a prevailing notion that infrared reflectography is onlyuseful for revealing underdrawings in paintings. If a researcher suspects that it
will not be possible to make underdrawing visible, then the technique is simply
ignored. Because infrared can see into the layers making up a painting, it can
frequently reveal other equally valuable information about the painting process.Changes are routinely made during the painting process; they can occurduring the realization of the original image, or they may reflect changes made to
the work after its completion. Many can be detected using such traditional meth-
ods as X-radiography, but many are easier to visualize in infrared. In these cases
infrared imaging can work in exactly the same way it does when revealing
underdrawings: The addition of black to the dark and grey portions of an under-
lying layer or form will absorb infrared and register. In this way unsuspected
modifications and/or particular aspects of painting technique can be revealed.
Ironically an imaging device that is optimized for the penetration of paint is still
required. A researcher must be certain that infrared has revealed a ÒtrueÓ opacityand not one that is the result of using a camera whose sensitivity is too close to
visible light.Selected examples from FariesÕs own research can illustrate some of the pos-sibilities of this type of study. One concerns a small Crucifixion panel by an
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY97anonymous fifteenth-century German master (Houston, Museum of Fine Arts).In the left background of the painting, colors of an underlying painted form show
through the paint of the sky (see Figure 5). Further examination of this work
revealed that the painting process was surprisingly complex, with some forms
underdrawn that were later painted out, and then painted in again. Although X-
radiography might seem the method of choice to elucidate these overlapping
paint stages, infrared reflectography actually imaged some of the underlying forms
in more detail. In X-ray the shape under the background sky could hardly be
discerned (either because it was painted extremely thinly or with little dense
paint, such as lead white), but in infrared the shape could be identified as a small
castle painted on the horizon (see Figures 6 and 7). Because sufficient dark or
black pigment was used in its execution, the gate, castle walls, and castle building
and tower with crenellations, windows, and varying rooflines could all be distin-
guished (Faries, 1991).Overpaintings can change not only the appearance of a painting but also itsfunction, and sometimes occur when a new portrait is painted in over the image
of an original donor. Other cases indicate a slightly more complicated situation: A
work could be supplied with the intention of adding in portraits or coats of arms
at a later date. We know now that altarpieces were occasionally ordered or bought
on the art market with the middle panel completed but with the wings left blank,
painted only with a dark, base color to protect the ground and wood. Infrared, of
course, can detect this difference in ground color. In a triptych in the
Catharijneconvent Museum in Utrecht, infrared study revealed that the image in
the middle panel was built up from a light, reflective ground, while the portraits
were added in over a dark underlying layer. The work was completed in two
stages, and in its final form the altarpiece represents the work of two unrelated
masters: an artist from Antwerp who painted the central scene and supplied the
panels of the altarpiece and an Amsterdam master, Dirck Jacobszoon, who ex-
ecuted the portraits that were added to the wings (Faries, 2001).In the same way, infrared can disclose other opacities that are part of devel-oping painting techniques in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In the six-
teenth century, painters began to use dark pigments more and more frequently
for shading and/or undermodeling. The painter Herri met de Bles is known to
have used a gray layer as undermodeling for some of his blues. The infrared study
of a landscape by this artist in the Cincinnati Museum of Art clearly singled out
some blue drapery as an opaque dark form, while surrounding reds and greens
became completely transparent. Further study clarified the infrared results: A
cross section showed that the blue pigment, smalt, had been applied over a layer
of black particles in a white matrix (Faries and Bonadies, 1998). Blue smalt on its
own is known to become transparent in infrared. Developments of this nature
eventually lead to the methods of seventeenth-century masters, such as Rubens,
Jordaens, and others, and their use of an undermodeling paint stage that is often
described as Òdead coloring.Ó(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 5Anonymous German Master, 
Crucifixion, Houston, Museum of Fine Arts
(Photo: Molly Faries).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY99FIGURE 6X-radiograph detail of Figure 5 (Photo: Molly Faries).
Infrared has not been thought useful for the study of Rembrandt, but in thelast few years it has become apparent that we need to look at RembrandtÕs paint-ings again. The recent IRR study of the painting known as Self-Portrait withGorget (in the Mauritshuis in The Hague) revealed traces of underdrawing along
with undermodeling. The underdrawn shapes and undermodeling have been in-
terpreted by scholars as the result of compositional transfer, that is, a replication
of the surface of another closely related portrait of Rembrandt that is in
Nuremberg. This unexpected discovery has prompted a lively debate about the
attribution of The Hague painting. Some scholars still believe both paintings are
by Rembrandt, but others now consider the Nuremberg painting to be the au-
thentic Rembrandt, and The Hague painting the work of a studio assistant or
other anonymous seventeenth-century master (see articles by Edwin Buijsen,
J¿rgen Wadum, and Eric Jan Sluijter in the 2/4 issue of volume 114 [2000] of thejournal Oud Holland). Still, at this point in time, little is known about comparablepainting practices. The disclosure of the shaped layout of The Hague portrait(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 7Same detail as Figure 5. IRR reflectogram assembly at .9-1.6/2 
m (IRR andassembly: Molly Faries).suggests that infrared must be used more systematically in future technical studiesof seventeenth-century paintings, and that the undermodeling stage must be taken
more seriously.The last examples derive from research in progress (fieldwork done withgraduate students at the Rijksuniversiteit Groningen). They concern several paint-
ings by Vincent Van Gogh, although the current findings would in theory apply
to any painting with lighter colors on the surface and darker colors in underlying
forms. It is now known that nearly a third of Van GoghÕs works were painted ontop of previous compositions. Infrared reflectography, however, has rarely been
applied to study this phenomenon, since it has generally been assumed Van GoghÕspaint would be too thick to reveal anything except the surface.In one of the paintings studied, Interior of a Restaurant (Otterlo
, Krıller-Mller Museum), it was not possible to image any of the underlying composition,but underdrawing was revealed. This took the form of a rectangular border with
crossed diagonals, part of the perspective frame that Van Gogh is known to have
used to lay out his paintings and drawings. This painting was studied using both(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY101the MuSIS CCD camera and the Mitsubishi focal plane array. It was found thatthe underdrawing registered in infrared light accessed by both of the cameras, but
the surface colors reflected infrared radiation in a completely different way.Results were different in the second work studied, A Patch of Grass (Otterlo,
Krıller-Mller Museum) (see Figure 8). Infrared reflectography was able to im-age underdrawing as well as dark painted forms at different levels in the painting
(see Figure 9). The painted composition on the surface was found to be based on
a perspective frame and was easily made visible with the Mitsubishi camera. This
camera also disclosed some broad horizontal bands of paint near the center of the
painting that have yet to be explainedÑas well as the darker and lighter shapes ofan underlying form. Once the canvas was turned into an upright position, it was
easy to recognize the form as a portrait of a woman, similar in appearance to
portraits from the period of Van GoghÕs well-known Potato Eaters. The underly-ing portrait also registers in X-radiography. Both X-ray and infrared reveal the
basic shape of the portrait, but the infrared image provides additional informa-
tion about dark modeling strokes around the mouth and eyes and in the hair. InFIGURE 8Vincent Van Gogh, 
A Patch of Grass
, Otterlo, Kr
ıller-Mller Museum. (Photo:
Molly Faries).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 9Detail of Figure 8. Digital composite of IRR reflectograms at 1.1-2.5 
m; ashadow from the easel appears on the left side (IRR and digital composite: Molly Faries).this case infrared has imaged at least three unseen stages in the painting: anunderlying composition, along with the forms of an as-yet-unidentified interme-
diate stage, and the perspective frame for the surface landscape, which has been
applied over a presumably very thin layer of lead white.CONCLUSIONInfrared reflectography is clearly a versatile technique. This paper has attemptedto show how the method can facilitate art historical interpretation and how its(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF INFRARED REFLECTOGRAPHY103application may be extended for study beyond the disclosure of underdrawings.The research discussed here done with both the ÒclassicÓ infrared vidicon and the
newer focal plane arrays would indicate that there is reason to maintain the term
Òinfrared reflectographyÓ as a concept in infrared imaging. For the optimum
penetration of paint and visibility of most underdrawings, devices that work be-
yond 1.5 m and include the region around 2 m are required. There are, none-theless, appropriate applications for devices that are only slightly sensitive in the
infrared up to 1.1 m.Infrared reflectography has always had the advantage of being a portable,noninvasive scanning technique, and with new developments in the computer-
ized assembly of reflectograms, it has become easier to document paintings in
their entirety. If in coming years X-radiography were also developed as a portable
scanning technique, the usefulness of both methods would be enhanced when
applied concurrently. With such combined information about the overall evolu-
tion of a painting at hand, researchers would be in a better position to refine the
questions and selection of methods required for further study, and for any sam-
pling that might be required. One can also envision linking IRR and X-ray results
with those from other portable methods that analyze the components of paint,
such as X-ray fluorescence. Researchers would then be able to use integrated
scanning systems to obtain a dimensional image of the stages of execution coupled

with information from materials analysis of the paint surface.The parameters of use for infrared imaging can be determined only by acombination of theoretical study and experiential research. The theoretical work
that has already been done gives us a basic guide for infrared applications (van
Asperen de Boer, 1970; Walmsley et al., 1994). Such work is essential in modeling
the interrelationship of wavelength, pigments, grounds, and underdrawing mate-
rials. Nonetheless, reconstructions and test planks cannot replicate all the com-
plexities of historical painting techniques in actual works. Nor can they approxi-
mate the effects of aging or the varied thicknesses and mixtures of paint. As
indicated by the examples discussed in this text, infrared imaging can produce
extremely varied results. It is up to the researcher to determine how to adapt and
optimize the possibilities of infrared imaging as the examination unfolds. In addi-
tion, wavelength response itself is not always an absolute factor. Tests done with
some indium gallium arsenide focal plane arrays have shown that the high quan-
tum efficiency of these cameras can improve their performance (van Asperen de
Boer, 2003). Systematic comparisons of the same paintings using different infra-
red imaging devices at different wavelength ranges should therefore be pursued,
and this author has already begun to carry out such work. This research could
produce a set of reference images that would help in establishing reasonable
expectations for researchers and complement the already existing theoretical
guidelines for infrared studies.Infrared reflectography is becoming both more sophisticated and more tech-nologically complex. Our current knowledge about the painting techniques of(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTdifferent periods and different artists will undoubtedly need to be expanded.Analytical interpretation in this field depends on the expertise of the researcher,
and can even be described as connoisseurship of technical documentation. There
is thus every reason to pursue the systematic cataloguing of painting collections as
well as larger comparative studies using infrared, and to encourage interdiscipli-
nary research that combines the expertise of technical art historians with that of
research-oriented painting conservators and scientists who have a nuanced un-
derstanding of art.This text is based on the paper given at the Arthur M. Sackler colloquium,Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and Analysis,
held at the National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., March 19-21, 2003.
Molly Faries recently (September 2004) began a related research project: ÒInfra-red Reflectography: Evaluative Studies,Ó part of the De Mayerne Research
Programme on Molecular Studies in Conservation and Technical Studies in Art
History funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).REFERENCESFaries, M. 1991. Studying Underdrawings: Notes for the Cologne Workshop. Bloomington, Ind., 
¤ 1.212.
(This reader, under copyright, is used by many who work in the field of technical studies in art
history.)Faries, M. 2001. Reshaping the field: The contribution of technical studies. In Early NetherlandishPainting at the Crossroads: A Critical Look at Current Methodologies, ed. M. W. Ainsworth, pp.70-105. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.Faries, M., and S. Bonadies. 1998. The Cincinnati Landscape with the Offering of Isaac by Herri met de
Bles: Imagery and artistic strategies. In Herri met de Bles, Studies and Explorations of the WorldLandscape Tradition, eds. N. E. Muller, B. J. Rosasco, and J. H. Marrow, pp. 73-84. Turnhout:Art Museum of Princeton University in collaboration with Brepols Publishers.Faries, M., L. Helmus, with contributions by J. R. J. van Asperen de Boer. 2000. The Madonnas of Janvan Scorel, Serial Production of a Cherished Motif (exhibition catalog). Utrecht: Centraal Mu-
seum.Havermans, J., H. Abdul Aziz, and H. Scholten. Non-destructive detection of iron gall inks by meansof multispectral imaging. Restaurator 24(2003) no. 1, pp. 55-60 and no. 2, pp. 88-94.Meyer, M., and M. Raquet. 2002. Digitalfotografie fr die Restaurierung Restauro 5:350-355.
van Asperen de Boer, J. R. J. 1970. Infrared Reflectography: A Contribution to the Examination ofEarlier European Paintings, Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam.van Asperen de Boer, J. R. J. 2003. Slowly towards improved infrared reflectography equipment. InRecent Developments in the Technical Examination of Early Netherlandish Painting: Methodology,
Limitations, and Perspectives (M. Victor Leventritt Symposium), ed. M. Faries and R. Spronk,pp. 57-64. Turnhout: Harvard University in collaboration with Brepols Publishers.van der Weerd, J., R. M. A. Heeren, and J. R. J. van Asperen de Boer. 2001. A European 640 x 486 PtSicamera for infrared reflectography. In Colloque XIII pour lÕ”tude du dessin sous-jacent et de latechnologie dans la peinture: la peinture et le laboratoire: la peinture et le laboratoire, ed. R. VanSchoute and H. Verougstraete, pp. 231-243. Leuven: Uitgeverij Peeters.Walmsley, E., C. Metzger, J. K. Delaney, and C. Fletcher. 1994. Improved visualization ofunderdrawings with solid-state detectors operating in the infrared. Studies in Conservation39:217-231.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105Color-Accurate Image Archives Using
Spectral Imaging
Roy S. BernsMunsell Color Science LaboratoryChester F. Carlson Center for Imaging ScienceRochester Institute of TechnologyRochester, New YorkABSTRACTDigital imaging that includes spectral estimation can overcome limitationsof typical digital photography, such as limited color accuracy and con-
straints to a predefined viewing condition or a specific output device. An
example includes the use of ICC color management to generate an archive
of images rendered for a specific display or for a specific printing technol-
ogy. A spectral image offers enhanced opportunities for image analysis, art
conservation science, lighting design, and an archive that can be used to
relate back to an objectÕs physical properties. The Munsell Color Science
Laboratory at Rochester Institute of Technology is involved in a joint re-
search program with the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., and
the Museum of Modern Art in New York to develop a spectral-imaging
system optimized for artwork imaging, archiving, and reproduction.
Progress is being documented at the website www.art-si.org. This paper
summarizes the scientific approach.INTRODUCTIONImaging is an important technique in the scientific examination of art. Its mainuse has been for visual documentation. Photographs have long been used to
document condition before and after transit, microscopic examinations, conser-
vation treatments, and so on. They are used to enable color reproductions in
books and from the Internet. Images using materials with spectral sensitivities in(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTsuch non-visible regions of the electromagnetic spectrum as infrared and X rayare equally important to the visible spectrum. Although images are used to record
scientific examinations, they are used infrequently as an analytical tool, that is, the
amount of colorant in a photographic material would be used to relate to physical
properties of the art. In contrast, astronomy, remote sensing, and medicine have
exploited this capability for many years.The advent of digital imaging offers increased opportunities to exploit im-ages for the scientific examination of art. A research program is underway at
Rochester Institute of Technology to develop an image-acquisition system that
records reflection information as a function of wavelength. The system initially is
limited to the visible region.This publication will summarize our methodologies and give some perfor-mance examples. Full results, documentation, and demonstrations can be down-
loaded and viewed at www.art-si.org. At the end of this paper are relevant publi-
cations written by students, faculty, and staff of the Munsell Color Science
Laboratory.TECHNICAL APPROACHComplete SamplingÑSpectral MeasurementA spectrophotometer records spectral reflectance or transmittance for a spe-cific circular aperture; a single color is measured. By analogy a spectral-imaging
system records spectral reflectance or transmittance for a projected scene at a
specific spatial resolution; many colors are measured. One can envision a number
of techniques to disperse light onto a detector plane. The technique we have taken
is to couple a monochrome, area-array chaged-couple device detector with a
liquid-crystal tunable filter. Successive images are captured, each image centered
at a specific wavelength. Typically we capture 31 bands corresponding to 400-700
nm at 10 nm increments.As a measurement device, calibration is necessary. For each band, imagesare taken of a dark field (to remove fixed-pattern noise), several neutral diffuse
papers (to compensate for lighting non-uniformity and optical flare), a pressed
polytetrafluoroethylene tablet (to determine optimal exposure time), and a color
target made from a number of colorants (to compensate for wavelength and
geometry bandwidth). These targets are crucial to achieve acceptable perfor-
mance. In general, spectroradiometry and imaging have greater uncertainty than
contact spectrophotometry. Thus, it is necessary to derive transformations that
minimize these uncertainties. A typical transformation is shown in Figure 1. The
GretagMacbeth ColorChecker DC and a custom target of blue pigments mixed
with titanium white were used to develop the transformation. This figure is a
visualization of the matrix transformation from spatially corrected 31-band im-
ages to spectral reflectance factor images. The matrix contains 961 coefficients(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING10740047555062570040047555062570000.02
0.04Spectral reflectance factor (nm)00.0050.010.0150.020.025Coefficient 
FIGURE 1Visualization of calibration matrix for 31-band image-acquisition system.
(31   31). Ideally the matrix should have dominant diagonal and small off-
diagonal coefficients. Figure 2 is an image of the well-known color target, the
GretagMacbeth ColorChecker Color Rendition Chart. This independent evalua-
tion target provides a method to benchmark color and spectral accuracy. Typical
performance is shown in Figure 3 for these colors. The spectral accuracy was 1.4
percent root-mean-square (RMS) reflectance and an average color accuracy of
1.5E00 under daylight (D65) and viewed by the 1931 CIE standard observer.
SubsamplingÑSpectral EstimationThe system described in the previous section performs spectral measure-ment; there are the same numbers of image bands as wavelengths. The majority of
natural and synthesized colorants have large-bandwidth absorption spectra in the
visible region. Furthermore, there are not many sharp transitions from high to
low reflectance (and vice versa). From a dimensionality reduction perspective it
may not be necessary to collect images every 10 nm, that is, sub-sampling may not
result in a loss of accuracy. For example, during the 1970s, many spectrophotom-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2GretagMacbeth ColorChecker Color Rendition Chart.
400700400700400700400700400700400700
10101010Wavelength (nm)
Reflectance factorFIGURE 3Typical spectral-measurement accuracy for the ColorChecker using a 31-band
image-acquisition system (blue lines) compared with a small-aperture contact spectro-photometer (red lines).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING109eters used in color technology sampled the visible spectrum in 20-nm-wavelengthincrements and bandwidth. As the number of direct measurements reduces we
are performing spectral estimation rather than spectral measurement.Suppose a painting was created from a single chromatic colorant and white(or paper in the case of a watercolor). Because the concentration of one colorant
is being varied, one can measure the light reflection at a single wavelength, usually
the wavelength of maximum absorption (minimum reflectance ignoring the
white). A single image is captured; differences in gray level relate to differences in
colorant concentration. At this wavelength, changes in concentration will result
in the greatest change in reflectance (i.e., the greatest image contrast). If we mea-
sure the spectral absorption properties of the colorant using a spectrophotometer
and determine the relationship between camera signals and concentration and
between concentration and spectral reflectance (e.g., Kubelka-Munk theory,
BeerÕs law), the single image can be used to estimate a 31-band spectral image.
This estimation process has also enabled significant data reduction. We need to
archive only the single-band image. The spectral reflectances of the colorant and
white, the transformation from camera signals to concentration, and between
concentration and spectral reflectance are stored in the image tag. This is analo-
gous to an ICC input profile except in this case, the profile performs spectral color
management.This idea is extended to paintings created with many colorants. Principalcomponent analysis (PCA) is used to define a set of statistical colorants. Because
of the spectral properties of colorants in the visible region, the number of statisti-
cal colorants (eigenvectors) can vary between 5 and 16. The specific number
depends on spectral accuracy requirements and the samples analyzed statistically.
In general the imaging system captures the same number of images as the number
of statistical colorants. A relationship is determined between the camera signals
and statistical colorant amounts (principal components). Concatenating these
various steps results in a transformation that relates camera signals to spectral
reflectance.Principal component analysis can be interpreted as constraining the spectraloutcome of the mathematical transformation, a type of spectral interpolation.
With a large enough number of samples, we can eliminate the use of PCA. In its
place we derive a direct transformation from camera signals to spectral reflec-
tance. This method uses a singular-value-decomposition-based pseudo-inverse
calculation in which several hundred thousand samples are used to estimate sev-
eral-hundred-transformation coefficients. These many samples are acquired by
considering each pixel of an image an individual data point. We have found that
these two methods yield similar spectral accuracy.Both techniques are constrained in two ways. The first has to do with thecamera. Performance depends on the spectral sensitivities of each camera chan-
nel. Optimal filter design has been studied for many years; unfortunately these
filters, designed by simulation, cannot be fabricated. The practical solution is to(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTselect the best filters from those produced commercially. We have taken thisapproach. We have also used commercial cameras with color filter area-array
sensors. With additional filtration using colored absorption filters, sets of color
images are recorded. Three, six, or nine image planes (each triplet is the usual
red, green, blue image) are related to three, six, or nine statistical colorants or
directly to spectral reflectance. The second constraint is the dependence on a
color target. The target is used to derive the mathematical transformation. Ide-
ally, the target should have a number of colored patches sampling thoroughly
the color gamut of materials to be imaged. The patches should be made from
colorants with unique spectral properties. The gloss properties should be consis-
tent. In essence there is an assumption that the color target has spectral proper-
ties that encompass those of the art to be imaged. Most commercial targets do
not have these ideal properties.Despite these constraints, the method has proven to be nearly equivalent to31-band spectral imaging. Using a color-filter-array camera and two absorption
filters, the average performance for the ColorChecker was 1.6 percent RMS and
1.2 E00, plotted in Figure 4. The transformation matrix is plotted in Figure 5,derived using the ColorChecker DC. This transformation relates six camera sig-400700400700400700400700400700400700
101
01
010Wavelength (nm)
Reflectance factorFIGURE 4Typical spectral-measurement accuracy for the ColorChecker using a two-
filter color-filter-array image-acquisition system (blue lines) compared with a small-aper-
ture contact spectrophotometer (red lines).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING111nals to 36 wavelengths, totaling 216 matrix coefficients. At each wavelength, thereshould be at least one peak or valley.Spectral AdvantageA spectral image archive has a number of advantages over many currentimage archives. Sometimes, an archive is created by digitizing photographs. In
other cases direct digitization is used with scanbacks, using repurposed flatbed
scanning sensors. Film and scanbacks have spectral sensitivities quite different
from the human visual system. As a result these archives require significant visual
editing as part of the workflow. Thus, the archive is connected to a particular
display, viewing condition, and observer. Color accuracy is limited. Color man-
agement principles can be used to reduce the reliance on visual editing. Even so,
color accuracy can still be limited. The spectral archive is not subject to these
constraints; the result is excellent color accuracy, eliminating the need for visual
editing.A non-spectral archive stores three image planes per object, such as RGB123456380430480530580630680730 Ð40 Ð2002040ChannelWavelength, nmCoefficient Ð30 Ð20
 Ð100102030FIGURE 5Visualization of calibration matrix for six-band image-acquisition system,
achieved using two absorption colored glass filters and a color-filter area-array image-acquisition system.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTTIFF (tagged image file format). For color-managed images tags are used to relatethe digital signals to standardized viewing and illuminating conditions (source
profiles). Using ICC color management, this includes CIE illuminant D50 and the
CIE 1931 standard observer. Thus, the archive is limited to a single observer and
illuminant. The spectral archive can be used to relate the digital signals to any
observer, viewing, and illuminating condition. This provides tremendous oppor-
tunities by enabling an object to be rendered under multiple conditions without
re-imaging. Using vision models that account for chromatic adaptation, one can
compare an objectÕs appearance with changes in lighting, providing lighting de-signers with a unique and powerful tool.Many colorants have unique spectral properties within the visible spectrum.Thus, the spectral archive can be used to analyze the colorants used in a work of
art. The spectral information can aid conservators in selecting colorants for
inpainting (retouching) that result in minimal metamerism. We expect that a
combination of spectral imaging and direct small-aperture spectrophotometry
can be used to create colorant maps.Printed reproductions are quite useful for scholarly endeavors and duringconservation treatments. Color-managed prints are designed to match under CIE
illuminant D50 and to be viewed by the 1931 standard observer. By definition the
prints are metameric and will only match for this single condition. However,
prints are viewed under a variety of conditions. Spectral data can be used to
produce prints that better match original objects for these many conditions.Finally, a visible-spectrum archive can be combined with other wavelengthregions such as infrared and X ray, aiding in a more complete record on a work of
artÕs physical properties.CONCLUSIONSA spectral image archive results in high color accuracy and facilitates the scien-tific examination of art in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Two methods of image acquisition have been described: (1) complete spectral
sampling and (2) spectral sub-sampling combined with estimation. Each method
has advantages and disadvantages. Issues include spectral accuracy, colorimetric
accuracy, hardware complexity and cost, software complexity, image capture
time, data storage, ease of use, maintenance, and system duplication complexity.
One of the research goals is to describe these trade-offs in order to provide
museums, archives, and libraries with information to assist them in making
practical decisions regarding the incorporation of spectral imaging into their
imaging practices.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING113ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThis research is supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation; RochesterInstitute of Technology; the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.; and the
Museum of Modern Art, New York, and would not have been possible without
the participation of the students, faculty, and staff of the Munsell Color Science
Laboratory.RELEVANT MUNSELL COLOR SCIENCE LABORATORY (MCSL)PUBLICATIONSPublications1994Vent. D. S. Multichannel analysis of object-color spectra. M.S. Thesis, RochesterInstitute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.1996
Burns, P. D. and R. S. Berns. Analysis of multispectral image capture. In Proceed-ings of the IS&T/SID Fourth Color Imaging Conference Color Science, Systems,
and Applications, pp. 19-22. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science and
Technology.1997
Burns, P. D. Analysis of image noise in multi-spectral color acquisition. Ph.D.Dissertation, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.Burns, P. D. and R. S. Berns. Error propagation in color signal transformations.Color Research and Application 22:280-289.Burns, P. D., and R. S. Berns. Modeling colorimetric error in electronic imageacquisition, Proceedings of the Optical Society of America Annual Meeting, pp.147-149. Washington, DC: Optical Society of America.1998
Berns, R. S., F. H. Imai, P. D. Burns, and D. Tzeng. Multispectral-based colorreproduction research at the Munsell Color Science Laboratory. In Proceed-ings of the International Society for Optical Engineering, vol. 3409, ed. J. Bares,
pp. 14-25. Bellingham, Wash.: International Society for Optical Engineering.Imai, F. H. and R. S. Berns. High-resolution multi-spectral image capture for finearts preservation. In Proceedings of the Fourth Argentina Color Conference, pp.21-22. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Grupo Argentino del Color.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTImai, F. H. and R. S. Berns. High-resolution multi-spectral image archives: ahybrid approach. In Proceedings of the IS&T/SID Sixth Color Imaging Confer-ence Color Science, Systems, and Applications, pp. 224-227. Springfield, Va.:Society for Imaging Science and Technology.1999
Berns, R. S. Challenges for colour science in multimedia imaging systems. InColour Imaging: Vision and Technology, eds. L. MacDonald and R. Luo, pp.
99-127. Chichester: Wiley.Burns, P. D. and R. S. Berns. Quantization in multispectral color image acquisi-tion. In Proceedings of the IS&T/SID Seventh Color Imaging Conference: ColorScience, Systems, and Applications, pp. 32-35. Springfield, Va.: Society forImaging Science and Technology.Imai, F. H. and R. S. Berns. A comparative analysis of spectral reflectance recon-struction in various spaces using a trichromatic camera system. In Proceed-
ings of the IS&T/SID Seventh Color Imaging Conference: Color Science, Sys-tems, and Applications, pp. 21-25
. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science
and Technology.Imai, F. H. and R. S. Berns. Spectral estimation using trichromatic digital cam-eras. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Multispectral Imagingand Color Reproduction for Digital Archives, pp. 42-49. Chiba, Japan: ChibaUniversity, Miyake Laboratory .Rosen, M. R. and X. Jiang. Lippmann 2000: A spectral image database underconstruction. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on MultispectralImaging and Color Reproduction for Digital Archives, pp. 117-122. Chiba,Japan: Chiba University, Miyake Laboratory.2000
Berns, R. S. Billmeyer and SaltzmanÕs Principles of Color Technology, 3rd ed. NewYork:Wiley.Imai, F. H., R. S. Berns, and D. Tzeng. A comparative analysis of spectral reflec-tance estimation in various spaces using a trichromatic camera system. Jour-nal of Imaging Science and Technology 44:280-287.
Imai, F. H., M. R. Rosen, and R. S. Berns. Comparison of spectrally narrow-bandcapture versus wide-band with a priori sample analysis for spectral reflec-tance estimation. In Proceedings of the Eighth Color Imaging Conference: ColorScience and Engineering, Systems, Technologies and Applications, pp. 234-241.Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science and Technology.Imai, F. H., M. R. Rosen, R. S. Berns, N. Ohta, and N. Matsushiro. Preliminarystudy on spectral image compression. In Proceedings of Color Forum Japan2000, pp. 67-70. Tokyo: Japanese Optics Society, Japanese Illumination Soci-ety, Japanese Color Society, and Japanese Photographic Society.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING115Quan, S. and N. Ohta. Optimization of camera spectral sensitivities. In Proceed-ings of the Eighth Color Imaging Conference: Color Science and Engineering,Systems, Technologies and Applications, pp. 273-278. Springfield, Va.: Societyfor Imaging Science and Technology.Rosen, M. R., M. D. Fairchild, G. M. Johnson, and D. R. Wyble. Color manage-ment within a spectral image visualization tool. In Proceedings of the EighthColor Imaging Conference: Color Science and Engineering, Systems, Technolo-gies and Applications, pp.75-80. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science
and Technology.2001
Berns, R. S. The science of digitizing paintings for color-accurate image archives:A review. Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 45:305-325.Imai, F. H., M. R. Rosen, and R. S. Berns. Multi-spectral imaging of a van GoghÕsself-portrait at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. In Proceedingsof the IS&T PICS Conference, pp. 185-189. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imag-ing Science and Technology.Imai, F. H., S. Quan, M. R. Rosen, and R. S. Berns. Digital camera filter design forcolorimetric and spectral accuracy. In Proceedings of the Third InternationalConference on Multispectral Color Science, eds. M. Hauta-Kasari, J. Hiltunen,and J. Vanhanen, pp. 13-16. Joensuu, Finland: University of Joensuu Depart-
ment of Computer Science.Imai, F. H., M. R. Rosen, D. R. Wyble, R. S. Berns, and D. Tzeng. Spectral repro-duction from scene to hardcopy. I: Input and Output. In Proceedings of theInternational Society for Optical Engineering, vol. 4306, eds. M. M. Blouke, J.
Canosa, and N. Sampat, pp. 346-357.Matsushiro, N., F. H. Imai, and N. Ohta. Principal component analysis of spectralimages based on the independence of color matching function vectors. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Multispectral Color Sci-
ence, eds. M. Hauta-Kasari, J. Hiltunen, and J. Vanhanen, pp. 77-80. Joensuu,Finland: University of Joensuu Department of Computer Science.Rosen, M. R., F. H. Imai, X. Jiang, and N. Ohta. Spectral reproduction from sceneto hardcopy II: Image processing. In Proceedings of the International Societyfor Optical Engineering, vol. 4300, eds. R. Eschbach and G. G. Marcu, pp. 33-41.2002
Berns, R. S. and F. H. Imai. The use of multi-channel visible spectrum imaging forpigment identification. In Proceedings of the 13th Triennial ICOM-CC Meet-ing, pp. 217-222. London: James & James Ltd..
Berns, R. S. and R. Merrill. Color science and painting. American Artist, 68-70, 72(January, 2002).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTBerns, R. S. Visible-spectrum imaging techniques: An Overview. In Proceedings ofthe 9th Congress of the International Colour Association, Rochester, N.Y. pp.475-480. SPIE vol. 4421. Bellingham, Wash.: The International Society for
Optical Engineering.Imai, F. H. and R. S. Berns. Spectral estimation of oil paints using multi-filtertrichromatic imaging. In Proceedings of the 9th Congress of the InternationalColour Association, Rochester, N.Y. pp. 504-507. SPIE vol. 4421. Bellingham,Wash.: The International Society for Optical Engineering.Imai, F. H., M. R. Rosen, and R. S. Berns. Comparative study of metrics forspectral match quality. In Proceedings of the First European Conference onColor in Graphics, CGIV 2002, Imaging and Vision, pp. 492-496. Springfield,
Va.: Society for Imaging Science and Technology.Quan, S. and N. Ohta. Evaluating hypothetical spectral sensitivities with qualityfactors. Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 46:8-14.
Rosen, M. R., F. H. Imai, M. D. Fairchild, and N. Ohta. Data-efficient methodsapplied to spectral image capture. In Proceedings of the International Congressof Imaging Science, Tokyo, ICISÕ02, pp. 389-390. Tokyo: The Society of Photo-
graphic Science and Technology of Japan and The Imaging Society of Japan.Rosen, M. R., F. H. Imai, M. D. Fairchild, and N. Ohta. Data-efficient methodsapplied to spectral image capture. Journal of the Society of Photographic Sci-ence and Technology of Japan 65:353-362.Rosen, M. R., M. D. Fairchild, and N. Ohta. An introduction to data-efficientspectral imaging. In Proceedings of the First European Conference on Color inGraphics, CGIVÕ2002, Imaging and Vision, pp. 497-502. Springfield, Va.: So-
ciety for Imaging Science and Technology.2003
Berns, R. S., L. A. Taplin, F. H. Imai, E. A. Day, D. C. Day. Spectral imaging ofMatisseÕs Pot of Geraniums: A case study. In Proceedings of the IS&T/SIDEleventh Color Imaging Conference: Color Science and Engineering, pp. 149-153. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science and Technology.Day, D. C. Filter selection for spectral estimation using a trichromatic camera.M.S. Thesis, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.Day, E. A. The effects of multi-channel spectrum imaging on perceived spatialimage quality and color reproduction accuracy. M.S. Thesis, Rochester Insti-
tute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.Day, E. A., R. S. Berns, L. A. Taplin, and F. H. Imai. A psychophysical experimentevaluating the color accuracy of several multispectral image capture tech-
niques. In Proceedings of the IS&T 2003 PICS conference, pp.199-204. Spring-field, Va.: Society for Imaging Science and Technology.Imai, F. H., D. R. Wyble, R. S. Berns, and D. Tzeng. A feasibility study of spectralcolor reproduction. Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 47: 543-553.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING117Quan, S., N. Ohta, R. S. Berns, and N. Katoh. Heirarchical approach to the opti-mal design of camera spectral sensitivities for colorimetric and spectral per-
formance, pp. 159-170. SPIE 5008. Bellingham, Wash.: The International
Society for Optical Engineering.Quan, S. Evaluation and optimal design of spectral sensitivities for digital colorimaging. Ph.D. Dissertation, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester,
N.Y.Rosen, M. R. Navigating the roadblocks to spectral color reproduction: Data-efficient multi-channel imaging and spectral color management. Ph.D. Dis-
sertation, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.Sun, Q. Spectral imaging of human portraits and image quality. Ph.D. Disserta-tion, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.2004
Day, E. A., R. S. Berns, L. A. Taplin, and F. H. Imai. A psychophysical experimentevaluating the color and spatial-image quality of several multi-spectral image
capture techniques. Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 48:99-110.
Mohammadi, M., M. Nezamabadi, R. S. Berns, and L. A. Taplin. Spectral imagingtarget development based on hierarchical cluster analysis. In Proceedings ofthe IS&T/SID Twelfth Color Imaging Conference: Color Science and Engineer-
ing: Systems, Technologies, Applications, pp. 59-64. Springfield, Va.: Societyfor Imaging Science and Technology.2005
Berns, R. S., L. A. Taplin, M. Nezamabadi, Y. Zhao, and Y. Okumura. High-accuracy digital imaging of cultural heritage without visual editing. In Pro-ceedings IS&T Second Image Archiving Conference, in press. Springfield, Va.:Society for Imaging Science and Technology.Berns, R. S., L. A. Taplin, M. Nezamabadi, and M. Mohammadi. Spectral imagingusing a commercial color-filter array digital camera. In Proceedings 14thTriennial Meeting The Hague, ICOM Committee for Conservation, in press.Mohammadi, M., M. Nezamabadi, R. S. Berns, and L. A. Taplin, Pigment selec-tion for multispectral imaging. In Proceedings 10th Congress of the Interna-tional Colour Association, in press.Murphy, E. P. A testing procedure to characterize color and spatial quality ofdigital cameras used to image cultural heritage. M.S. Thesis, Rochester Insti-
tute of Technology, Rochester, N.Y.Rosen, M.R., and F.S. Frey. RIT American museums survey on digital imagingfor direct capture of artwork. In Proceedings IS&T Second Image ArchivingConference, in press. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Science andTechnology.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTSmoyer, E. P. M., L. A. Taplin, and R. S. Berns. Experimental evaluation of mu-seum case study digital camera systems. In Proceedings IS&T Second ImageArchiving Conference, in press. Springfield, Va.: Society for Imaging Scienceand Technology.Zhao, Y., L. A. Taplin, M. Nezamabadi, and R. S. Berns. Using matrix R methodin the multispectral image archives. In Proceedings 10th Congress of the Inter-national Colour Association, in press.Technical ReportsThese reports can be downloaded from www.art-si.org and www.cis.rit.edu/mcsl/research/reports.shtml.1998
Imai, F. H. Multi-spectral image acquisition and spectral reconstruction using atrichromatic digital camera system associated with absorption filters, parts I-
VIII. MCSL Technical Report, August.2000
Berns, R. S. Direct digital imaging of Vincent van GoghÕs self-portraitÑA per-sonal view. MCSL Technical Report
, May.Berns, R. S. The science of digitizing two-dimensional works of art for color-accurate image archivesÑConcepts through practice. MCSL Technical Re-
port, May.Imai, F. H. Spectral reproduction from scene to hardcopy: Multi-spectral acquisi-tion and spectral estimation using a trichromatic digital camera system asso-
ciated with absorption filters. Parts I and II. MCSL Technical Report, October.2002
Berns, R. S. Phase I final report to the National Gallery of Art, Washington, Art-SI project update. MCSL Technical Report, October.Day, E. A. Colorimetric characterization of a computer-controlled (SGI) CRTdisplay. MCSL Technical Report, April.Day, E. A., F. H. Imai, L. A. Taplin, and S. Quan. Characterization of a RoperScientific Quantix monochrome camera. MCSL Technical Report, March.Imai, F. H. Simulation of spectral estimation of an oil-paint target under differentilluminants. MCSL Technical Report, January.Imai, F. H., L. A. Taplin, and E. A. Day. Comparison of the accuracy of varioustransformations from multi-band images to reflectance spectra. MCSL Tech-nical Report, Summer.Imai, F. H., L. A. Taplin, D. C. Day, E. A. Day, and R. S. Berns. Imaging at theNational Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. MCSL Technical Report, Decem-ber.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLOR-ACCURATE IMAGE ARCHIVES USING SPECTRAL IMAGING1192003Imai, F. H., L.A., Taplin, and E. A. Day. Comparative study of spectral reflectanceestimation based on broad-band imaging systems. MCSL Technical Report,April.Day, D.C. Spectral sensitivies of the Sinarback 54 camera. MCSL Technical Report,February.Day, D.C. Evaluation of optical flare and its effects on spectral estimation accu-racy. MCSL Technical Report, February.2004
Berns, R. S., L.A. Taplin, M. Nezamabadi, and Y. Zhao. Modifications of aSinarback 54 digital camera for spectral and high-accuracy colorimetric im-
aging: Simulations and experiments. MCSL Technical Report, June.Mohammadi, M. and R. S. Berns. Verification of the Kubelka-Munk turbid me-dia theory for artist acrylic paint. MCSL Technical Report, June.Mohammadi, M., M. Nezamabadi, L. A. Taplin, and R. S. Berns. Pigment selec-tion using Kubelka-Munk turbid media theory and non-negative least squares

technique. MCSL Technical Report, June.Zhao, Y., L. A. Taplin, M. Nezamabadi, and R. S. Berns, Methods of SpectralReflectance Reconstruction for A Sinarback 54 Digital Camera. MCSL Tech-nical Report, December.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120Multispectral Imaging of Paintings in the
Infrared to Detect and Map Blue Pigments
John K. Delaney,1 Elizabeth Walmsley,
1Barbara H. Berrie,1 and Colin F. Fletcher
2SUMMARYSpectral imaging for conservators offers the promise of providing a non-destruc-tive tool for the identification of artistsÕ materials in situ
, as well as determiningtheir spatial distribution in an artwork. In this paper spectral imaging in the
reflective infrared (IR) spectral region (0.7 to 2.5 microns) is examined for its
potential to discriminate and identify blue pigments in paintings. The blue pig-
ments considered are azurite, indigo, Prussian blue, lapis lazuli, cobalt blue,
ultramarine, and thalo blue. Toward this end, visible to shortwave infrared dif-
fuse reflection spectra of the blue pigments in both powder and paint forms were
collected to determine the optimal spectral region to discriminate among these
pigments. The measured spectra show that these blue pigments have large and
varied reflectance in the near infrared (NIR, 0.7 to 1.0 microns) to shortwave
infrared (SWIR, 1 to 2.5 microns) as compared to the visible spectral region. The
large reflectance variation suggests the ability of broadband multispectral imag-
ing (MSI) (< ~15 spectral bands, bandwidths of a few 100 to a few 10s of nm) to
separate and support identification of these blue pigments in situ and to map
their distribution. To test this, visible and infrared cameras were equipped with
spectral band filters to allow collection of multispectral images of test panels and1Conservation Division, National Gallery of Art, 2000-B S Club Drive, Landover, MD 207852 The Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, 10675 John Jay Hopkins Drive, San
Diego, CA 92121(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS121two paintings known to contain a subset of the blue pigments listed above wereimaged.The reflectance spectra of the test panels obtained using cameras were foundto correlate to those obtained using the benchtop spectrometers. Multispectral
imaging of two paintings by Vincent van Gogh provided reflectance spectra con-
sistent with the presence of the blue pigments Prussian blue, cobalt blue and
ultramarine and gave information on the distribution of the pigments in the
works by utilizing spectral band ratio images and false color composites. The
identification of the pigments was confirmed using air-path X-ray fluorescence
spectroscopy and energy dispersive spectrometry. The results show that multi-
spectral imaging, either in numerous spectral bands from the visible to SWIR, or
in a judicious selection of bands, can be a powerful tool to aid in pigment identi-
fication and distribution in paintings especially when combined with sample-
based pigment identification methods such as X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy or
analysis of cross-sections.INTRODUCTIONSpectral imaging (or Imaging Spectrometry), the collection of images in separatespectral bands in order to obtain reflection spectra, has been shown to be a pow-
erful tool for geophysical remote sensing (1). The method also provides the spa-
tial distribution (maps) of materials, such as minerals and agricultural crops,
across the imaged region.The scientific examination of paintings often begins with the identification ofthe base set of pigments used by an artist. When identifying and determining the
spatial distribution of pigments in a work of art, conservators begin with a visual
inspection of the artwork. Subsequently, analytical methods, both destructive and
non-destructive, are used in the classification and identification of pigments.
Most of these techniques are applied to small areas of the painting either because
they are destructive (that is, involve removing a sample from the work for analysis
using polarized light microscopy or other techniques) or, if non-destructive, are
too cumbersome and expensive to apply across the painting (e.g., air-path X-ray
fluorescence spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy). Although powerful, these tech-
niques provide only localized information, and sampling sites are limited and
may be biased. A less precise analytical methodology is used to extrapolate the
results of Òpoint analysisÓ to the rest of the artwork. The identification of pig-
ments in un-sampled regions is often made through visual association. Success
often depends on the ability to identify various pigments by their color. This
hinders the ability to form general conclusions about the distribution of materials
throughout the artwork. This can lead not only to misidentifications but also the
possibility that some materials may not be discovered. Consequently, there has
been growing interest in the development of methods that do not require sam-
pling and provide information on spatial distribution.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTOne such method is visible reflectance spectroscopy using high-resolutionspectra acquired from a limited number of sites in an artwork (2, 3, 4). This
methodology is useful for helping to accurately define the color and has been used
for pigment identification utilizing spectral reference databases (2, 5). It is espe-
cially useful for pigment identification when it is extended to include the infrared
region (6, 7, 8). However, the technique suffers from the same limitation of the
other non-destructive methods, i.e., small sample sizes and the lack of an analyti-
cal methodology to sample the entire painting. Simply extending the number of
sample sites over the entire painting would allow, in principle, the determination
of the possible pigment composition at each site in the painting. Extending high-
resolution visible spectral analysis to large areas of a painting is problematic. The
ability to acquire high fidelity visible reflectance spectra (<5 nm band pass) of
entire paintings is beyond the resources of conservation laboratories. Using vis-
ible spectroscopy alone to identify pigments having similar colors is challenging
because of the small inherent reflectance differences among them, which are fur-
ther reduced and confounded by the presence of scattered light associated with
varying pigment particle size, and the collection/illumination geometries.In this paper, we investigate the use of infrared reflectance spectroscopy toaid in separating similar-appearing pigments and provide sufficient spectral data
to be an adjunct to pigment identification. One motivation comes from the suc-
cess of remote sensing reflectance spectral imaging, with its well-developed meth-
odology for the identification of mineral deposits, and because numerous artistsÕpaints consist of ground minerals. Some success in applying this technique to
works of art has already been achieved (6,); Casini et al. have differentiated be-
tween two yellow pigments in a painting by Pontormo (7).A well-designed reflectance spectral imaging system requires a compromisebetween the desired spectral and spatial resolutions. While the goal is to acquire
high-quality reflectance spectra with the smallest sample size over the target area
of interest (here the entire painting), the signal-to-noise requirements, instru-
ment and data handling complexity force compromise. Increasing spectral reso-
lution requires a reduction in spatial resolution and vice versa. Knowledge of the
expected range of artistsÕ materials to be encountered, their spectral properties,
and their particle size can be used to select the spectral and spatial resolutions
required for identification and mapping of the pigments.The pigments typically encountered in paintings are either mineral or or-ganic and as such their visible reflectance spectra are determined by broad elec-
tronic transitions that account for their color. There are overtones and combina-
tions of vibrational transitions in the near infrared (NIR, 0.7 to 1.0 microns) to
shortwave infrared (SWIR, 1 to 2.5 microns). In solids, the vibrational absorption
bands have widths ca. 20 nm or wider which determines a limiting spectral reso-
lution required for acquisition of spectra. While measurement of the position of
vibrational overtone bands may be useful for unique identification of materials,
designing instruments at this level of resolution (i.e., 20 nm) may be unnecessary.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS123Many minerals have slowly changing, large amplitude reflectance variations, largerthan 0.1, in the NIR to SWIR (9), which can be sampled with > 0.1 micron
bandwidths. Thus collection of broadband multispectral images (> 0.1 micron
bandwidth) appears to be sufficient for material separation and to support pig-
ment identification.The focus of this work was to optimize spatial sampling and utilize broaderspectral resolution compared to benchtop instrumentation, that is to use multi-
spectral reflectance imaging. This was applied over a larger spectral region than
the visible with the expectation of providing a more robust discrimination tool
for pigment identification. This methodology is suitable for conservators who are
used to collecting broadband images of paintings in the ultraviolet, visible and
infrared (10).EXPERIMENTALIn this study the reflectance spectra and multispectral images of six blue pigmentsare measured and analyzed. The pigments include mineral ores (azurite, lapis
lazuli); colors manufactured by industrial processes (Prussian blue, thalo blue,
cobalt blue, and synthetic ultramarine), and organic materials (indigo). The
colorant in lapis lazuli and synthetic ultramarine is chemically the same and is
treated as one pigment here.A three-part experimental approach was employed. First, the collection ofhigh-resolution diffuse reflectance spectra of six blue pigments in both pressed
powder and paint (linseed oil binder) at expected thickness on a chalk ground.
Second, the collection of broadband spectral images of the paint test panels to
investigate the correlation between spectral images and high-resolution spectra.
Third, the collection of spectral images of paintings to determine the ability of
multispectral imaging to separate and identify blue pigments in situ.Test PanelsTest panels of paint were constructed as previously described (10). The pan-els consist of paintouts of pigments hand-ground in linseed oil for azurite, lapis
lazuli, Prussian blue, and indigo. Commercial oil paint was used for cobalt blue
(Charbonnel) and thalo blue (Fezandie & Sperrle). The azurite, lapis lazuli, Prus-
sian blue, indigo, and  thalo blue paints were applied to a white chalk ground and

the cobalt blue paint on a gesso ground.Diffuse Reflection Spectra of Pigments and PaintsDiffuse reflectance spectra of seven dark blue pigments, in pressed powderform and from the test panels, were collected using either a Nicolet System 510(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTinterferometer spectrometer or a Beckman Instruments UV 5240 dual beam grat-ing interferometer, both equipped with an integrating sphere.Multispectral Imaging Instrumentation and ProceduresThe multispectral images were obtained in the visible, near infrared, andshortwave infrared spectral regions using cameras fitted with band pass filters. A
Sony XC-77 camera fitted with narrow band pass filters was used to acquire the
visible/NIR (0.45-1.0 microns) image sets. The silicon monochrome video charge-
coupled device (CCD) camera had a 25 mm f/1.6 lens. The filters (Corion Inc.)
were 0.40 micron bandwidth filters in 0.50 micron increments over the range
0.45-1.0 microns. A Mitsubishi M600 PtSi or a Kodak PtSi 310-21X thermal

imager was used to collect the SWIR (1.0 to 2.0 microns) image sets. Each camera
was fitted with a 55 mm f/1.2 Nikon lens. Images of La Mousm” were collected
using 1.2 (0.09 microns FWHH) and 1.6 (0.5 microns FWHH) micron broad-
band filters. Infrared images of details of the two paintings, the Self-Portrait and
La Mousm”, were captured using three broadband filters: 1.1-1.4 microns (As-
tronomy J, Barr Associates), 1.5-1.8 microns (Astronomy H, Barr Associates),
and 2.0-2.4 microns (Astronomy K, Barr Associates). Diffuse illumination was
used to light the scene, typically using a pair of Lowell Tota lights with FDN
Q5000T3/4 quartz halogen lamps (500 W, 3200 K) and photographersÕ umbrel-
las. Black and white Spectralon (Labsphere) diffuse reflection targets (1 inch di-
ameter) were used for in-scene calibration of the camera to reflectance. The lowstandard was 2-3 percent reflective over the range 0.45-2.4 microns, and the high
standard was 98-99 percent reflective over 0.45-2.4 microns. Non-uniformity of
the detector response was corrected using a gray card. For each test panel or
painting, a set of 8 to 15 images was captured. In the multispectral image sets of
the paintings, the paint test panels and Spectralon reflection standards were in-
cluded in each image. The Spectralon standards were used to convert the digital
counts of the image sets to reflectance units. Each multi-spectral experiment was
repeated several times.A Macintosh computer with a Perceptics Pixelbuffer card or a Scion AG5 PCIcard was used to capture the images. A variety of image processing programs
(Scanalytics IP Lab Spectrum, Adobe Photoshop, NIH Image, Research Systems
Inc. ENVI 3.4) was used in the analysis, non-uniformity, and calibration of the
data sets. Registration and warping of the visible-NIR images with the SWIR
image set was performed using ENVI. Spectral image data cubes were constructed
and analyzed in ENVI.X-ray Fluorescence SpectroscopyNon-destructive X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) was performed us-ing a Kevex 0750A spectrometer. The air-path instrument was equipped with a(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS125secondary target made from pressed barium chloride. This allowed simulta-neous measurement of X-rays from ca. 2 eV to 45 eV. Pigments composed
of light elements, for example, ultramarine, cannot be detected using this
instrumentation.Optical Microscopy and Other Analysis of Cross SectionsPigments from the top layer of paint were obtained by gently scraping thesurface of the painting using a surgeonÕs scalpel. A Leica MPX microscope wasused to examine the particles mounted in Cargille MeltMount (refractive index
1.66) on glass slides using polarized light microscopy. The same particles or oth-
ers could be mounted on a carbon planchet (stub) for examination by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS). A double-
sided sticky carbon tab was used to adhere the particle to the planchet. If the
particles could not be examined owing to charging they were coated with carbon.
A JEOL 6300 scanning electron microscope with an Oxford Tetra backscattered
electron detector was used for SEM. For EDS measurements an Oxford Inca 300
system was used with an Oxford Super ATW Si(Li) detector.Cross-sections were obtained from cracks or areas of loss. The fragmentswere mounted in Bioplastic¨ then cut to expose the layer structure of the paint.
The sections were polished on SiC grit papers (Micromesh) and examined using
optical microscopy and SEM-EDS.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONDiffuse Spectra of the Blue Pigments and PaintsThe six blue pigments have similar reflectance spectra in the visible regionwith few features. However, the spectra demonstrate larger and more varied
changes in reflectance in the reflective infrared (0.7-2.5 microns) (Figure 1). Re-
flectance peaks for all the pigments are centered near 0.44 microns, and all display
a strong absorption in the red. The mineral samples, azurite and lapis lazuli, have
a transition to increased reflectance in the NIR (0.7 to 1 microns), azurite lagging
behind lapis lazuli. In the SWIR (1 to 2.5 microns) both pigments have near-
constant reflectance. In contrast, the pigments indigo and thalo blue show a rapid
rise to high reflectance, peaking at ca. 1.5 microns and decreasing beyond that.
Prussian blueÕs transition to higher reflectance occurs at about 1.35 microns.Cobalt blue has the most variable reflectance in the IR, becoming highly reflective
in the NIR and weakly reflective in the high-energy side of the SWIR, between 1.3
and 1.6 microns, and moderately reflective at wavelengths > 1.6 microns.For all of the pigments the variations in reflectance amplitude through the IRregion are large, > 0.1, and occur over spectral regions wider than 0.1 microns.
These large, but slowly varying, changes in reflectance are suitable to be followed(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 1Diffuse reflectance spectra of six blue pigments in powdered form (dark line)
and in oil-bound paint (blue line). The powder samples were optically thick. Syntheticultramarine in powdered form was used instead of powdered lapis lazuli (natural ultrama-rine). The paint layers were generally 15-25 microns, a thickness often encountered in
paintings. The reflectance spectrum of the chalk ground is given in the Prussian blue plot(top solid black curve). Reflectance values derived from multispectral images (solid cir-cles) of the blue paint test panels (Figure 2) were obtained using spectral band pass filters.using broadband multispectral imaging. However, increased spectral resolutionand sampling (~10 nm) would allow the collection of vibrational lines such as the
-OÑH stretch in azurite that could be useful to characterize certain pigments.In Old Master paintings pigments are bound in organic binders (e.g., dryingoils, egg tempera) and applied in thin layers over preparatory ground layers con-
taining calcium carbonate (chalk) or calcium sulfate (gesso). As a result the re-
flectance spectra of the pigment and corresponding paint made from it may differ
for several reasons. To test the influence of the binders on the reflectance spectra(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS127in the IR, diffuse reflectance spectra of the blue paints were collected (Figure 1).The possible effects of the binders on the reflectance spectra are (1) decrease in
the amount of first surface reflectance (the intensity of reflectance spectra are
reduced), (2) alteration of the depth of ÒcolorÓ from absorption (some scaling),
(3) filtering of the pigment reflection by absorption properties of the binder
(added spectral lines or shape changes). The spectra of the test panels compared
to the powdered pigments show these effects occur. However, the general shape of
the reflectance spectra of the pigments in paint is preserved with an offset (white
light scatter) and scaling. Additionally, owing to the increasing transparency of
the pigments in the SWIR, vibration bands from the preparatory layer may be
observed in some cases.Linseed oil as a binder acts to reduce the difference in refractive index at thefirst interface with air and thus reduces the intensity of the first surface reflec-
tance. For particles larger than the wavelength of light (e.g., azurite) this results in
a decrease in the Ôwhite lightÕ reflectance, hence the reflectance curves shift down-
ward. Since the paints on the test panels do not represent infinitely thick layers,
there is also a change in the total absorption and hence a scaling change between
powder and paint arises. The binder can act as a spectral filter owing to its own
absorption. Linseed oil has little absorption in the visible to infrared, but some of
the commercial paint films (e.g., cobalt blue) appear to have additional bands in
the IR. High reflectance correlates with low absorption, thus the underlying pre-
paratory ground or underpaint layers may contribute to the reflectance spectra.
The contribution of the ground to the reflectance spectrum becomes significant
when the paint becomes transparent owing to decreased absorption and scatter-
ing in the SWIR. It is dependent on the thickness of the paint film. The addition
of absorption features from the ground to the spectrum of Prussian blue at wave-
lengths beyond 1.6 microns may be noted. The general reflectance signatures are,
however, maintained between bulk pressed powder and oil-bound pigments. In
the samples painted on a chalk or gesso ground, which itself has a high reflectance
in the visible to the SWIR, the paints appear to mimic the scattering of the opti-
cally thick powder samples. Multispectral Imaging of Paint Samples
To examine the extent to which diffuse reflectance spectra of pigments can bemodeled by using imaging cameras available to conservators, multispectral images
of the paint swatches were collected (Figure 2). Two cameras, one sensitive in the
visible/NIR and one in the SWIR, each outfitted with bandpass filters, were used
to sample the visible/NIR and SWIR spectral regions. For in-scene calibration, the
reflectance of the ground and carbon black were used as standards.The reflectance values derived from the multispectral images of the test pan-els show good agreement with the reflectance spectra measured using the bench-
top reflectance spectrometer (Figure 1), demonstrating that the image collection(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2Multispectral images of test panels with blue paint swatches. By column, from
left to right: Lapis lazuli (natural ultramarine), azurite, Prussian blue, indigo, and thalo
blue. Center wavelength of spectral band pass filter, by row, from top to bottom: 0.56,0.90, 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 microns. The images show varying changes in the reflectance of thedifferent pigments in the infrared and their increased transparency.method is adequate.  This shows that these blue pigments can be distinguished
from each other using only the multispectral images. This ability exists despite the
fact that the measurements on the powdered pigment samples were performed
using an integrating sphere, whereas the imaging of the panels and the works of art
were performed with a narrow collection solid angle. Given the near-Lambertian
nature of the samplesÕ reflectance, and the near-diffuse illumination, the close to
superimposition of the spectral data should not be surprising. These results dem-
onstrate that by utilizing multispectral imaging techniques the reflectance of the
blue pigments can be characterized adequately to distinguish among them and
ideally to identify them.In geophysical remote sensing applications, materials of interest are encoun-tered in optically thick, granular form, like the powdered pigment samples. How-
ever, as noted earlier, in works of art the pigments are in thin paint layers. In
regions of high reflectance, an increase in the transparency of the paint layer can
be observed (compare Figures 1 and 2). The preservation of the spectral reflec-
tance properties between paint and powder pigments and the maintenance of
high reflectance of the bound pigments appear to be due to the high reflectance of
the ground. A light-absorbing ground or pigment underneath would however
alter the reflectance spectra. Thus the effect of layering of thin paint films that
occurs in artwork needs to be considered. Since almost all pigments become
transparent by 1.5 microns (10), collection of spectral images from 1.5 to 2.5(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS129microns seems to be of little utility for their identification. It is the property ofincreasing transparency in this region that allows the detection of underdrawings
in paintings using infrared reflectography (10). Multispectral Analysis of Paintings to Characterize Blue Pigments
To demonstrate the ability of multi-spectral imaging to discriminate andidentify blue pigments in situ, two paintings by Vincent van Gogh in the collec-
tion of the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., were examined using the
technique. The paintings were selected because they have large regions of bright
to dark blue paints. Moreover, results from site-specific analysis techniques such
as XRF, polarized light microscopy and SEM-EDS were available, and the paint-
ings contain the pigments Prussian blue, cobalt blue, and ultramarine.The first painting imaged was La Mousm”, by Vincent van Gogh (1888,Chester Dale Collection, 1963.10.151) (Figure 3, visible light image; see also

www.nga.gov/search/index.shtm). Van Gogh describes this painting in his own
words (11):The portrait of the girl is against a background of white strongly tinged withemerald green, her bodice is striped blood red and violet, the skirt is royal
blue, with large yellow-orange dots. The mat flesh tones are yellowish-grey;the hair tinged with violet; the eyebrows and eyelashes are black; the eyes,orange with Prussian blue. A branch of oleander in her fingers for the two
hands are showing.Prussian blue has a large change in reflectance at ~1.35 microns where thepigment becomes less absorbing (Figure 1). Other blue pigments do not have as
large an absorbance change over this interval. To identify areas of the painting
where Prussian blue occurs, a ratio image was created by dividing an image ac-quired at 1.6 microns by one acquired at 1.2 microns. In the ratio image, passages
where Prussian blue is present have a ratio of absorbance >1 in comparison to
passages where ultramarine, cobalt blue, or indigo are present. The ratio image of
La Mousm” (Figure 3) shows bright (high reflectance ratio) features having higher
reflectance at 1.6 than at 1.2 microns, which can be assigned to Prussian blue. The
spectral ratio image in the IR indicates that, in the visible image, the dark lines of
the chair, the dark lines outlining the flowers, the outline of the girlÕs hair and toa lesser extent some daubs of paint on her skirt and some of the stripes on her
blouse are painted using Prussian blue. The lack of large reflectance changes in
some of the darker and brighter blue regions of the visible image suggests the use
of a different blue pigment there. To more confidently assign the regions identified in the band ratio image ofLa Mousm”, multispectral images in 11 spectral bands from the visible to theSWIR were collected from an 8  10-inch section of the painting. Each spectral
band image was collected using a visible/NIR or SWIR camera fitted with bandpass(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 3Vincent van Gogh
Õs La Mousm” (1888). (Left) Visible light image. (Right)
Shortwave infrared spectral band ratio image creaed from two infrared composite imagescaptured at 1.2 microns and at 1.6 microns. The bright areas are regions where the reflec-
tance of the painting is higher at 1.6 microns than at 1.2 microns, and thus indicate boththe probable presence of Prussian blue and where it occurs in high concentration withinthe painting. Each IRR composite comprises a mosaic of 24 flat-field-corrected images.filters in an arrangement similar to that typically used for collecting infraredreflectograms. The image sets were converted to reflectance units using the in-
scene reflectance standards. A multispectral image cube (a 3-D image where z is
the spectral band and x,y are spatial locations) was then constructed and the
images registered using tie points. The visible color image in Figure 4, generated
from an MSI cube using the 0.45, 0.55, and 0.65 micron images, shows a detail of
La Mousm” captured with the reference standards and blue test panels.
Verification of the reflectance calibration of the MSI cube was determined bycomparing the image-derived spectra of Òin-sceneÓ blue test panels with the prior
high-resolution spectra obtained with the benchtop spectrometer (Figure 4A).
Qualitatively these two match (compare Figure 1 with Figure 4A). The image
cube spectra derived from the blue test panels were a reasonable fit to the spectra
acquired using benchtop instrumentation after scaling and a small amount of
translation. Specifically only a small translation for Prussian blue (0.04 offset) and
scaling for lapis lazuli (0.87, 0.03 offset) and cobalt blue (0.75) (see Figure 4A)were required to get a good match. Since the illumination of the test panels alone,
versus in the scene of the painting, are different some transitional and scaling
changes are not unexpected.Reflectance spectra derived from the multispectral image cube of the paint-ing itself support the assignment of Prussian blue to bright areas of the ratio(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS131FIGURE 4Multispectral image analysis of a detail of 
La Mousm” showing the presence oftwo different blue pigments. The multispectral image cube consists of 11 spectral bands
from the visible through the SWIR. (Left) Visible color composite of spectral images ob-tained at 0.65, 0.55, 0.45 microns. Along the bottom, from left to right, are black andwhite reflectance standards (2 and 98 percent Spectralon standards) and blue pigment test
panels: cobalt (two swatches), Prussian blue, and lapis lazuli. (Right) A. Plots of reflec-tance, derived from the multispectral images of the reference panels: high reflectance 98percent Spectralon (open circles), cobalt blue swatch (solid blue diamonds), Prussian blue
(solid black circles), and lapis lazuli (blue squares). The blue and black lines are scaleddiffuse spectra.  B. Plots of reflectance derived from the multispectral images of the sites 1
to 4 in the detail image. Sites 1 and 2 (black circles and triangles) are in the chair. Sites 3
and 4 are in the blue stripes on the blouse.image (Figure 3) of La Mousm”. The image-derived spectra of the bright regionsin the ratio image that map to the dark blue areas of the visible image most closely
resemble the reference spectrum of Prussian blue paint test panel and powdered
pigment (Figure 4B). Spectra from two sites on the chair rail (Figure 4B, sites 1, 2)
are reasonably well described by the reference spectrum of Prussian blue scaled
0.53. Based on this spectral sensitivity, these areas can be determined to contain
Prussian blue. Not all the blue stripes on the blouse are bright in the 1.6/1.2
micron ratio image, suggesting the presence of another pigment (Figure 3 and
Figure 4, sites 3, 4). The image-based reflectance spectra show high reflectance in
the NIR to SWIR (0.8 to 1.6 microns, Figure 4B, sites 3, 4) that is consistent with
the reflectance behavior of indigo or ultramarine and not Prussian or cobalt blue.
A scaled diffuse reference spectrum of ultramarine powdered pigment (0.39(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 5Multispectral image analysis of a detail of 
La Mousm” showing the use of two
different dark blue pigments for outlining. The multispectral image cube consists of 11spectral bands from the visible through the SWIR. (Top left) Visible color composite ofspectral images obtained at 0.65, 0.55, 0.45 microns. (Top right) Infrared reflectogram ofthe detail area obtained at 1.2 microns and (Bottom right) 1.6 microns. Infrared imageobtained at 1.6 microns shows the change in reflectance from 1.2 microns for the darkoutline of the girlÕs flowers, but not the buttonholes. (Bottom left) Plots of reflectancederived from the images of the dark lines outlining the button (blue diamonds andsquares) and flower (black circles and triangles). The solid blue and black lines are diffusereflectance spectra of the paints using the ultramarine and Prussian blue test panels (after
scaling).0.17 offset) matches the measured spectra reasonably well. The reflectance spectrathus show that at least two blue pigments were used in this painting.The painting has other passages of the dark blue, for example, the outlines ofthe buttonholes on the girlÕs blouse and the top of the flowers she is holding.Visual inspection of the painting alone might suggest that these could be Prussian
blue as well. However, the ratio image does not show the strong reflectance
changes associated with Prussian blue. A detail from images obtained at 1.2 and
1.6 microns shows the dark blue outlining the flowers is dark at 1.2 microns and
light at 1.6 microns (Figure 5), whereas the dark blue outlining the buttonholes is
not apparent in either the image obtained at 1.2 or at 1.6 microns. The reflectance
spectra derived from the multispectral image cube show the dark lines of the
flowers are similar to Prussian blue (0.53 scaling of reference spectra), but the
buttonholes are not (Figure 5). The reflectance spectra of the dark blue outlining(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS133the buttonhole shows an earlier rise in reflectance than Prussian blue, more likesome of the blue stripes on the blouse.  A scaled and offset reference spectrum of

ultramarine (0.42, 0.02 offset) does pass though the majority of data in the redand infrared suggesting this blue pigment is present. Confirmation of ultramarine
at these sites was provided by SEM/EDS analysis, which also showed the presence
of zinc oxide (ZnO). Both the spectra and SEM/EDS are consistent with the
pigment in this area being ultramarine.Thus the blue pigments in the La Mousm” painting have been discriminated
into Prussian blue and ultramarine blue. The ratio image of the area in combina-
tion with the MSI cube suggest that Prussian blue was used in the chair, the
outline of the flowers in her hand, and in strokes of the girlÕs hair, eyebrows, lipsand some stripes of her jacket. The reflectance spectra derived from the image
cube suggest that the dark outline of the buttonholes and the blue outlines around
the spots on the girlÕs skirt were painted using ultramarine. Cobalt blue, a pig-ment that van Gogh used often, does not appear to have been used for painting LaMousm”.X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy indicated the presence of cobalt in the back-ground of Vincent van GoghÕs Self-Portrait (1889, Collection of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hay Whitney, 1998.74.5) (Figure 6, visible light image; see also www.
nga.gov/search/index.shtm). A spectral image cube of a region of the painting
shows that it can be used to find the locus of cobalt blue. The multispectral image
cube of Self-Portrait gives reflectance spectra from the background that are simi-
lar to that of the blue cobalt blue test panel (Figure 6). A false color image, made
by assigning the infrared image to the red channel shows the distribution of cobalt
blue in the painting (Figure 6). Cobalt blue is extensively used in the background
and also in the jacket, although spectra from the jacket are complex, indicating a
mixture of pigments here.CONCLUSIONSThis report contributes to the body of work that demonstrates the utility ofspectral imaging not only for discrimination among pigments but also to deter-
mine their spatial distribution within a work of art. While reflectance spectros-
copy is a relatively less specific analytical tool than other analytical chemical
tools, it is non-destructive and can be readily applied to the entire artwork. Its
power lies in helping to define the set of pigments used in the work, and identi-
fying regions of high concentration and thus directing site-specific, more power-
ful analytical tools such cross-section analysis, XRF, and SEM/EDS for more
thorough chemical analysis. Moreoever, in the case of Prussian blue, the reflec-
tance spectra in the infrared may be a more definitive assignment method than
XRF given the high tinting strength of Prussian blue. The results here demon-
strate that extending the multispectral imaging method to include the infrared(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTcan improve the success of spectral imaging in pigment identification and dis-crimination given the large and varied reflectance changes in these regions, in
particular when the visible spectra of pigments are similar. Large and slowly
varying reflectance changes in the infrared allow the utilization of broadband
MSI techniques, simplifying the methodology.This study of two paintings demonstrates that multispectral imaging in thevisible and NIR regions can be employed as a useful tool in the scientific examina-
tion of paintings. We have demonstrated that the optical properties of pigments
in the infrared display diagnostic features which can be employed to assign and
map pigments, and that these features can be detected using conventional imag-
ing techniques, including modeling of reflectance spectra and ratioing imagesFIGURE 6Multispectral image analysis of a detail of van Gogh
Õs Self-Portrait (1889). Thedistribution of cobalt blue is indicated in the false color image by the color red. The multi-spectral image cube consists of 13 spectral bands from the visible through the SWIR.(Left) Visible light image. (Bottom right) Plots of reflectance derived from the image of
the background (solid diamonds). The solid blue and black lines are scaled diffuse reflec-tance spectra of the cobalt blue paint (blue) and powder (black). (Top right) False colorinfrared composite of spectral images obtained at 0.90, 0.55, 0.45 microns. This image
renders the cobalt blue to appear ÒredÓ thus showing the cobalt is present in a large
proportion in the background and a smaller proportion in the jacket.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING OF PAINTINGS135obtained at different wavelengths. It is difficult to infer this information fromconventional techniques, which rely on a limited number of micro-samples. The
advantages of the technique are tempered by the increased complexity of the
reflectance spectra owing to particle size variation and increasing transparency in
the infrared.Conservators and conservation scientists utilizing imaging systems currentlyavailable can apply the power of visible and infrared multispectral imaging to
their work.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThis research forms part of an ongoing project at the National Gallery of Art onapplications of infrared imaging. Over the past ten years, we have benefited from
discussions and assistance from many people, including Dr. Jack Salisbury, who
gave us access in 1994-95 to his laboratory at Johns Hopkins University in order
to collect the diffuse reflectance spectra of the samples, and Mr. Dana DÕAria, whoassisted us in the collection of the spectra; Raymond Rehberg, David L Clark, and
Rollo E Black, of Eastman Kodak, who provided generous assistance using the
Kodak thermal imager; Elizabeth Freeman, Kristi Dahm, Lucy Bisognano, and
Laura Rivers, who helped with the image captures; Dr. Lisha Glinsman, who
provided the results of XRF data on the Self-Portrait; and Dr. Ren” de la Rie and
Mr. Ross Merrill, Chief of Conservation, for their continued interest. An early
phase of this research was supported by the Circle of the National Gallery of Art.REFERENCES1.A. F. H. Goetz, G. Vane, J. E. Solomon, and B. N. Rock, 
ÒImaging Spectrometry for EarthFemote Sensing,Ó Science, 228, 1147-1153.2.Guillaume Dupuis, Mady Elias, and Lionel Simonet, 
ÒPigment Identification by Fiber-OpticsDiffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy,Ó Applied Spectroscopy, 56, (2002), 1329-1336.3.Otto Hahn, Doris Oltrogge, and H. Bevers, 
ÒColoured Prints of the 16th Century: Non-Destructive Analyses on Coloured Engravings from Albrecht Drer and Contemporary Artists,ÓArchaeometry, 46, (2004), 273-282.4.Mauro Bacci and Marcello Picollo, 
ÒNon-Destructive Spectroscopic Detection of Cobalt(II)in Paintings and Glass,Ó Studies in Conservation, 41(3), (1996), 129-135.5.Roy S. Berns, Jay Kreuger, and Michael Swicklik, 
ÒMultiple Pigment Selection for InpaintingUsing Visible Reflectance Spectrophotometry,Ó Studies in Conservation, 47, (2002), 46-61.6.Elizabeth Walmsley, John K. Delaney, Barbara H. Berrie, Dana D
ÕAria, Colin Fletcher, andJack Salisbury, ÒPigment Identification in Artworks by MultiSpectral Imaging in the Near Infrared[abstract],Ó Final Program of the 34th Annual Eastern Analytical Symposium 
Õ95, Somerset, NJ;section ÒImaging for Conservation,Ó 66.
7.Andrea Casini, Franco Lotti, Marcello Picollo, Lorenzo Stefani, and Ezio Buzzegoli, 
ÒImageSpectroscopy Mapping Technique for Non-Invasive Analysis of Paintings, Studies in Conservation, 44(1999), 39-48.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ART8.Applied Spectroscopy Laboratory of the Institute of Applied Physics 
ÒNelloCarrara
Ó of the
Italian National Research Council and the Restoration Laboratory of the Opificio delle Pietre Dure,Fiber Optics Reflectance Spectra (FORS) of Pictorial Materials in the 350-1000 nm range database, http://fors.ifac.cnr.it/index.php.9.Dana D
ÕAria and Jack Salisbury, Johns Hopkins University Spectral Library, http://speclib.jpl.nasa.gov.10.Elizabeth Walmsley, Catherine Metzger, John K. Delaney and Colin Fletcher, 
ÒImproved Vi-sualization of Underdrawings with Solid-State Detectors Operating in the Infrared,Ó Studies in Con-servation, 39, (1994), 217-231.11.The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, 3 vols. Boston (1958). Letter 518.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.137Modern Paints
Tom LearnerSenior Conservation ScientistTateLondonABSTRACTFew would argue that oil paint has been the most important type of paintover the last 500 years. The use of oil as the film-forming component of
paintÑthe binding mediumÑwas well established by the start of the fif-
teenth century, and for many artists oil paints still remain the preferred
choice today. However, throughout the twentieth century a wide and varied
range of synthetic polymers have been developed, many of which have been
used as binding media in modern paints. The introduction of these synthetic
binders, most notably acrylic, alkyd, and polyvinyl acetate, has undoubtedly
enabled great advances to be made in paint technology, in terms of reduced
yellowing, greater flexibility, faster drying times, and in the case of emulsion
formulations, the elimination of organic solvents as thinners and diluents.
Many artists have utilized these modern paint types, including those that
were never intended specifically for artistsÕ use, and have explored and
exploited their distinct handling and optical properties.Establishing the constituents of paint is frequently necessary prior to anykind of conservation treatment and for developing long-term preventive
conservation strategies, as well as for technical art historical studies and
issues surrounding authenticity. The identification of binding media is par-
ticularly important, as this component appears to have the largest influence
on many of the properties of the resulting dried paint film. Although
noninvasive/nondestructive techniques would clearly be favorable, at present
the most useful analysis is obtained from high-sensitivity techniques that(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTrequire the removal of submilligram paint samples. Two analytical tech-niquesÑpyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (PyGCMS) andFourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR)Ñare now routinely used atTate to identify and characterize modern paints from works of art. This
paper will summarize the three principal classes of synthetic binder and how
PyGCMS and FTIR have been utilized to analyze them.INTRODUCTIONDespite the great variety of modern paint formulations (see Figure 1), there arethree principal classes of synthetic binder that have been widely used by artists:
acrylic, alkyd, and polyvinyl acetate (PVA) (Crook and Learner, 2000; Learner,
2000). The main binder used in the artistsÕ paint market has been acrylic, al-
though there are two quite distinct forms: acrylic solution, where the acrylicFIGURE 1Selection of modern paints.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS139polymer is dissolved in a mineral spirit or turpentine, and acrylic dispersion (i.e.,emulsion), where the acrylic polymer is dispersed in water (with the aid of a
surfactant and other additives). The solution form consists of a poly (n-butylmethacrylate) homopolymer, which was developed in the late 1940s, whereas the
emulsion form consists of an acrylic copolymer, typically between methyl meth-
acrylate (MMA) and either ethyl acrylate (EA) or n-butyl acrylate (nBA), and onlybecame available in the late 1950s. The two types have quite distinct mechanical
properties and exhibit very different sensitivities to organic solvents and water. It
is important therefore to be able to distinguish between them analytically.Acrylic binders are also used in the house paint market, but two other im-portant types of synthetic binderÑalkyd and PVAÑare also widely utilized.Alkyd paints are oil-modified polyester paints, introduced in the late 1930s,
although they did not make a significant impact on the paint industry until the
late 1950s in Europe and slightly earlier in the United States. Since then, the vast
majority of oil-based house paints have incorporated an alkyd resin as the prin-
cipal binder. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, they have received only limited use
by artistsÕ colormen. Alkyd resins are produced from three main components: a
polyhydric alcohol, a polybasic carboxylic acid, and a source of monobasic fatty
acid, which is often added in the form of a drying oil. The polyhydric alcohol
(also called ÒpolyolÓ) and polybasic acid constituents in the vast majority ofalkyd house paints are actually limited to just three compounds: glycerol and/or
pentaerythritol as the polyol and phthalic anhydrideÑthe dehydrated version ofortho-phthalic acid (1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid)Ñas the polybasic acid.PVA has also been used in waterborne polymer emulsions, although it re-quires some slight modification to lower its glass transition temperature, either by
the addition of a plasticizer (common in early formulations) or by copolymeriza-
tion with a softer monomer (the preferred option since the 1960s). A number of
different plasticizing methods have been used for this since the introduction of
PVA paints, and PyGCMS is able to differentiate between them. In early emulsion
formulations an external plasticizer, such as dibutyl phthalate (DBP), was added
and often in appreciable quantities (up to 20 percent by weight) (Martens, 1981,
p. 81). The problems caused by these plasticizers migrating out of the paint film
were overcome during the 1960s by the copolymerization of PVA with softer
monomers, often called internal plasticization. This has been achieved with a
variety of other vinyl monomers, including some of the softer acrylates but also
commonly achieved with vinyl versatates or VeoVa monomers, which are com-
mercial mixtures of highly branched C9 and C
10 vinyl esters manufactured by
Shell (Slinckx and Scholten, 1994).The choice of which binder is used in a household emulsion formulationappears to be dependent on such factors as cost (acrylic is more expensive),
durability (acrylic is considered more durable and therefore often used for exte-
rior paints), surface finish (acrylic has a superior binding power and is therefore(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTsometimes used for matt paints where less binder is present), and age (PVAemulsions were developed in the 1940s, earlier that the acrylics).The ability to identify the binding medium in paints is often essential forconservation reasons. Since different paint types will respond differently to clean-
ing solvents and reagents, paint characterization is often needed prior to treat-
ment. It is also necessary when examining the aging properties of paints. Reac-
tions such as oxidation, cross-linking or chain-scission all affect the physical and
chemical properties of a paint; so understanding the likely reactions is an impor-
tant consideration. It is, after all, better to prevent deterioration than try to re-
verse it. Much effort is currently being put into the general understanding of
artistsÕ materials and techniques, in other words, what did an artist use and how?Analysis can also play an important role in authentication issues.Many of the techniques used for traditional medium analysis, such as gas andliquid chromatography, are not totally suited to all these modern paint binders,
largely because of their high molecular weights (i.e., they are nonvolatile and
frequently insoluble in solvents) and the inability to extract diagnostic compo-
nents from the polymer matrix. Nevertheless, these polymeric materials can be
effectively broken down into volatile fragments through pyrolysis (i.e., heat in the
absence of oxygen), and these fragments can consequently be separated and iden-
tified by gas chromatography (GC). This techniqueÑpyrolysis-gas chromatogra-phy (Py-GC)Ñhas been used since the 1960s by forensic scientists for the identi-fication of synthetic binders in house paints, car paints, and various industrial
coatings (Jain et al., 1965; Challinor, 1983; Wheals, 1985) but was not properly
assessed by the conservation profession for its capability to identify the synthetic
binders used in artistsÕ painting materials until the 1990s (Sonoda and Rioux,
1990; Stringari and Pratt, 1991; Sonoda, 1998). More recently a wider range of
paint binders has been investigated with the many advantages of using a mass
spectrometer as a detector (i.e., with PyGCMS) (Learner, 1995a, 2001).Another technique frequently adopted for the analysis of traditional bindingmedia is Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). FTIR is normally used
as a comparative technique with the spectra of each unknown material being
matched either visually with a library of known standards or through a computer
search. Although this technique requires no instrumental modifications to enable
the analysis of synthetic polymers, an entire set of new reference standards has to
be generated. The technique is also semiquantitative; so it is normally possible to
assess the relative proportions of two components in a mixture if the spectra of
each are available and adequately different.At Tate, FTIR has been widely used as a nondestructive analytical method(see FTIR section below for details) to be carried out prior to PyGCMS (Learner,
1996). More recently it has also been used in attenuated total reflectance (ATR)
mode to examine the migration of surfactants to the surface of acrylic emulsion
films as part of an ongoing study into the effects of surface cleaning (Learner et al.,(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS1412002a,b). The use of PyGCMS and FTIR in the analysis of modern paints will nowbe outlined.PYROLYSIS-GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY-MASS SPECTROMETRYAcrylic SolutionsArtistsÕ acrylic solution paints, bound with a poly 
n-butyl methacrylate(pnBMA) homopolymer resin, produce extremely simple pyrograms consistingof a single peak of nBMA monomer. The acrylic binder undergoes completedepolymerization (a mechanism common to all polymethacrylates [Irwin, 1979])
on pyrolysis..OOOOOOC4H9C4H9C4H9OC4H9OOOC4H9CH3CH3CH3CH3CH3Figure 2 shows a pyrogram of Paraloid F-10 (Rohm and Haas)Ñthe acrylicbinder used in acrylic solution paintsÑwith the mass spectrum of the single peakidentified as nBMA. The two most intense ions in the mass spectrum are those ofm/z = 69 (loss of the n-butoxy side group) and 
m/z = 41 (loss of a further C=O),
FIGURE 2Pyrogram of Paraloid F-10 (p
nBMA acrylic resin) with mass spectrum of
nBMA.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTand these are both seen with all methacrylate monomers. Strong peaks at m/z = 87
(from the protonation of methacrylic acid) and m/z = 56 (from butene) are also
seen. The molecular ion of nBMA (m/z = 142) is extremely weak and often not
observed.Acrylic EmulsionsFigure 3 shows the overall pyrogram from Plextol B-500 (Rıhm), a p(EA/MMA) emulsion that has been used in artistsÕ acrylic paint formulations, and
from Spectrum polymer medium (Spectrum), a p(nBA/MMA) acrylic copolymerartistsÕ product. Also shown in the pyrogram of Plextol B-500 is the mass spec-
trum from the most intense peak, MMA. The mass spectrum of MMA shows a
similar fragmentation pattern to nBMA seen with acrylic solution paints, withPlextol B-500
(Rohm)trimers
dimerstrimers
sesquimersMMAsesquimers anddimersMMAnBAEAFIGURE 3Pyrogram of Plextol B-500, a p(EA/MMA) emulsion with mass spectrum of
MMA (top), and Spectrum polymer medium, a p(nBA/MMA) emulsion (bottom).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS143prominent ions at m/z = 69 and 41, but here the molecular ion (
m/z = 100) is
clearly visible.Figure 4 shows a detail from the early part of both of these pyrograms withthe mass spectrum of the EA and nBA monomers shown, respectively. The ability
to separate the EA and MMA monomers, despite their similar retention times, is
clearly seen in this detail. The mass spectra of both acrylate monomers are domi-
nated by a peak of m/z = 55, corresponding to the loss of the alkoxy side group to
produce a CH2CH.CO+ fragment ion (as shown for EA).
The overall pyrograms (see Figure 3) of both copolymers contain a numberof later additional peaks, which are the result of incomplete depolymerization
when an acrylate component is present in the polymer. These have been identi-
FIGURE 4Details of early sections of pyrograms of Plextol B-500 (top) and Spectrum
polymer medium (bottom) with mass spectra of acrylate components (EA and nBA, re-spectively).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTfied as a series of sesquimers, dimers, and trimers of acrylate or acrylate-MMAcombinations. Sesquimer is a term meaning 1.5 monomer units (i.e., a molecule
consisting of a three-carbon atom backbone with an acrylate/methacrylate group
at either end).Some materials labeled acrylic emulsions can actually be copolymers withother monomers, such as styrene (to create styrene-acrylics) or vinyl acetate (to
create vinyl-acrylics). Although not shown here, both are readily distinguished by
pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (PyGCMS), by the detection of
styrene monomer and acetic acid (see below), respectively.Polyvinyl Acetate (PVA) EmulsionsOn pyrolysis, PVA emulsion paints produce principally ethanoic (acetic)acid and benzene by a side group elimination mechanism. Figure 5 shows the
overall pyrogram observed from Emultex VV536 (Harco), with the mass spec-
trum from the intense peak at the start of the pyrogram. This spectrum is mainly
that of ethanoic acid (with a molecular ion of m/z = 60, and strong fragment ions
at m/z = 43, 45), although the peak of m/z = 78 corresponds to the molecular ionof benzene.It is usually possible to confirm the presence of an emulsion form of PVA (asopposed to a solution form) by the detection of a plasticizer, since pure PVA is
slightly too hard to form a continuous film from an emulsion.This particular emulsion, Emultex VV536 (Harco), actually contains both avinyl versatate resin and a phthalate plasticizer (in the majority of PVA emulsions
only one kind is used). The sharp peak at the far right of the pyrogram is identi-
fied as DBP, whose mass spectrum (also shown) has a very intense fragment ion
of m/z = 149, which is the characteristic fragment ion of all dialkyl phthalates. In
the center of the pyrogram is the band of rather broad peaks produced by the
VeoVa plasticizer. Although these peaks are not fully resolved, the overall peak
pattern does conform to a very distinctive profile.AlkydsFor alkyd paints based on ortho-phthalic acid, phthalic anhydride is the prin-cipal peak detected on pyrolysis and therefore used as the diagnostic peak. Figure
5 shows the pyrogram of 75045 alkyd resin (Croda), a typical ortho-phthalic alkydresin, with the mass spectrum of the very dominant phthalic anhydride peak on
the left. The molecular ion (m/z = 148) is clearly seen, with the most intense peak
at m/z = 104 produced from the loss of CO2. The mass spectrum on the right isfrom palmitic acid (with a molecular ion clearly visible at m/z = 256), normally
the most intense fatty acid observed from a dried oil component. The suspected
mechanism of phthalic anhydride liberation from the alkydÕs polyester structureis as follows:(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS145


FIGURE 5Top: Pyrogram of Emultex VV536, a PVA emulsion with mass spectrum of
ethanoic acid/benzene (left) and dibutylphthalate plasticizer (right). Bottom: Pyrogram ofCroda 75045 alkyd resin with mass spectrum of phthalic anhydride (left) and palmitic
acid (right).+OOOOOOOOMore recently work has been carried out to assess the advantages of carryingout an in situ methylation step at the time of pyrolysis, which appears to give a
quantitative method of analysis (Cappitelli et al., 2002). This is being investigated
to see whether oil type can be obtained reliably.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFOURIER TRANSFORM INFRARED SPECTROSCOPYThere are many ways of introducing a sample to a Fourier transform infraredspectroscopy (FTIR) instrument. The main technique currently employed at Tate

is to compress the sample in a diamond cell and make the measurement through
an infrared microscope, although a beam condenser seems to give equally good
results (Learner, 1995b).Although spectra obtained from a diamond cell are arguably inferior to thosefrom a KBr disc, the use of the diamond cell has three major advantages. First, the
technique is nondestructive, which permits the sample to be retrieved and then
reanalyzed by a complementary technique. Second, there is no sample prepara-
tion necessary. The diamond cell simply compresses the sample to a sufficiently
reduced thickness for reliable transmission spectra to be obtained. Use of a dia-
mond cell can be problematic with hard and brittle materials, but fortunately the
majority of twentieth-century paints are fairly soft materials, which permit easy
compression in the cell. Third, this soft nature of most synthetic polymers used in
paints (in particular, the acrylics) makes grinding them into KBr powder very
difficult. The main disadvantage of the diamond cell is the possibility of pressure
effects on the spectrum, although the actual pressures used in the diamond cell
are not thought to be particularly high.FTIR is an excellent way of obtaining information quickly about the basicchemical class of a binding material. For homogeneous samples, such as certain
synthetic varnishes, this is relatively straightforward. Figure 6 shows the FTIRFIGURE 6FTIR spectra of unpigmented media. From top to bottom: acrylic solution
(pink line), pEA/MMA-type acrylic emulsion (black line), PVA emulsion (blue line), alkyd
resin (green line), and nitro-cellulose (red line).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS147spectra of five different synthetic binders, all obtained from films of unpigmentedmedia. These are (shown from top to bottom) an acrylic solution, an acrylic
emulsion, a PVA emulsion, an alkyd resin, and a nitrocellulose resin (one of the
other less common types of modern paint binder).The FTIR spectra of paints are much more complicated as each additionalcomponent of the paint formulation, in particular the pigment(s) and extender(s),
will exhibit their own individual vibrations and absorb the infrared radiation at
those characteristic frequencies. Sometimes this can be a distinct disadvantage,
especially if the spectrum from a particular pigment completely dominates the
spectrum, thereby in effect masking out the absorptions from the binding media.
However, in some instances the absorptions of the various components are so
characteristic that it may be possible to sort out the individual bands by visual
methods. Here the presence of overlapping bands can be turned into an advan-
tage, as information can be gathered from all the individual components from a
paint sample from a single analysis.An example of how FTIR can successfully identify each of the three maincomponents in a paint is given in Figure 7, which shows four overlaid spectra. The
pink curve is the overall spectrum, obtained from an acrylic emulsion paint:FIGURE 7Overall FTIR spectrum of Hyplar Hansa yellow medium acrylic emulsion paint
(Grumbacher 1994 range) (pink line), with spectra of individual principal components:PY1 azo yellow pigment (black line), pEA/MMA binder (red line), chalk extender (green
line).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTHansa yellow medium artistsÕ acrylic color (Grumbacher). The other three curves
are reference curves taken from each individual constituents.¥Red curve: The frequencies of the C-H stretching bands at 2986 cmÐ1 and2955 cmÐ1, the overall profile of the C-H stretching region, C=O stretching at1732 cmÐ1, and skeletal vibrations at 1179 cmÐ1 are all indicative of a p(EA/MMA)
acrylic emulsion.¥Grey curve: The sharp peaks seen at 1667 cmÐ1, 1602 cmÐ1, 1562 cmÐ1,1508 cmÐ1, 1296 cmÐ1, 1140 cmÐ1, 953 cmÐ1, and 774 cmÐ1 are all present as strong
absorptions in the spectrum of the pigment PY1, one of the common organic
monoazo yellow pigments. The profile of absorptions in the region between 3000
cmÐ1 and 3300 cm
Ð1, with peaks at 3098 cmÐ1, 3145 cmÐ1, 3181 cmÐ1, and 3243cmÐ1 is also highly diagnostic of pigment PY1.
¥Green curve: the two absorptions at 2520 cmÐ1 and 1799 cmÐ1 are immedi-ately indicative of the presence of chalk (calcium carbonate). Although relatively
weak absorptions, these two wave numbers are normally found to be completely
separated from the absorptions from all the binding media, pigments, and other
extenders. The two very sharp peaks at 877 cmÐ1 and 713 cm
Ð1 confirm the pres-
ence of chalk as extender and the strong and very broad absorption between 1400
cmÐ1 and 1500 cm
Ð1 is also clearly visible.
Recently, attenuated total reflectance (ATR), a reflective mode of FTIR, hasproved useful at identifying the differences at the surface of a paint film, com-
pared with its bulk properties (as measured in transmission mode). This mode is
showing great potential for following chemical surface changes on a paint film
with age and after certain conservation treatments, such as cleaning. Figure 8
shows three stacked spectra measured with ATR. The top spectrum is from the
upper surface of an unpigmented acrylic medium (Golden) that has been cast on
a glass slide and been left for approximately five years. The middle spectrum is
from the lower surface of the same sample, after removal from the slide. There are
clear differences between the two. The peak assignments on each of these spectra
that are placed to the left of the relevant peak are characteristic of a p(EA/MMA)
acrylic emulsion. All peak labels that are placed to the right of their peaks are
indicative of polyethylene glycol, a common class of surfactant. In this example
the PEG has gathered at the upper surface of the paint film, a phenomenon that
could have significant ramifications for a paintingÕs appearance and its changewith age and/or cleaning.CONCLUSIONS AND LOOKING AHEADIt is possible to identify, characterize, and differentiate the principal classes ofsynthetic binders used in modern paints with a combination of pyrolysis-gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (PyGCMS) and Fourier transform infrared(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS149 110711491343 2952 11491725 2952961 11071342acrylic medium front
acrylic medium rear
poly(ethylene glycol) standard
-1.4-1.2-1.0-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8Absorbance 1000 2000 2000 3000 4000Wavenumbers (cm-1)
1725961 28902891FIGURE 8FTIR-ATR spectrum of unpigmented pEA/MMA acrylic medium (Golden
1993 range): upper surface (red line), lower surface (after removal from glass slide sup-port) (black line), and polyethylene glycol (PEG) reference spectrum (blue line).spectroscopy (FTIR). However, there still remain a great many analytical needsfor modern paints, including¥improved quantitative methods of medium analysis;¥analytical techniques for organic pigments and the additives added topaint formulations;¥surface analysis methods for chemical, physical, and optical changes onaging and conservation treatments; and¥high spatial resolution techniques to analyze individual layers from lay-ered paint structures.REFERENCESCappitelli, F., T. Learner, and O. Chiantore. 2002. An initial assessment of thermally assisted hydroly-sis and methylationÑgas chromatography/mass spectrometry for the identification of oils fromdried paint films. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 
63:339-348.Challinor, J. 1983. Forensic applications of pyrolysis gas chromatography. Forensic Science Interna-
tional 21:269-285.
Crook, J., and T. Learner. 2000. The Impact of Modern Paints. London: Tate Gallery Publishing.
Irwin, W. 1979. Analytical pyrolysisÑan overview. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 1:3-25.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTJain, N., C. Fontain, and P. Kirk. 1965. Identification of paints by pyrolysis gas chromatography.Journal of the Forensic Science Society 5:102-109.
Learner, T. 1995a. The analysis of synthetic resins found in twentieth century paint media. In ResinsAncient and Modern, eds. M. Wright and J. Townsend, pp. 76-84. Edinburgh: Scottish Societyfor Conservation and Restoration.Learner, T. 1995b. The use of a diamond cell for the FTIR characterisation of paints and varnishesavailable to twentieth century artists. Postprints: IRUG2 Meeting, pp. 7-20, available at http://
www.irug.org/documents/1Learner.pdf .Learner, T. 1996. The use of FTIR in the conservation of twentieth century paintings. SpectroscopyEurope 8(4):14-19.
Learner, T. 2000. A review of synthetic binding media in twentieth century paints. The Conservator24:96-103.Learner, T. 2001. The analysis of synthetic paints by pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrom-etry (PyGCMS). Studies in Conservation 46:225-241.Learner, T., O. Chiantore, and D. Scalarone. 2002a. Ageing studies of acrylic emulsion paints. Pre-prints of the 13th Triennial meeting of the ICOM Committee for Conservation, Rio de Janeiro, pp.911-919. London: James and James.Learner, T., M. Schilling, and R. de la Rie. 2002b. Modern paints: A new collaborative researchproject. Conservation. The Getty Conservation Institute Newsletter 17(3):18-20, available at http://www.getty.edu/conservation/resources/newsletter/17_3/news_in_cons1.html.Martens, C. 1981. Waterborne Coatings. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.Slinckx, M., and H. Scholten. 1994. Veova9/(meth)acrylates, a new class of emulsion copolymers.Journal of the Oil and Colour ChemistsÕ Association
 77:107-112.
Sonoda, N. 1998. Application des m”thodes chromatographiques a la caract”risation des peinturesalkydes pour artistes. Techne 8:33-43.
Sonoda, N., and J.-P. Rioux. 1990. Identification des mat”riaux synth”tiques dans les peinturesmodernes. 1. Vernis et liants polym‘res. Studies in Conservation 35
:189-204.Stringari, C., and E. Pratt. 1991. The identification and characterization of acrylic emulsion paintmedia. In Saving the 20th Century: The Conservation of Modern Materials, ed. D. Grattan, pp.411-439. Ottawa: Canadian Conservation Institute.Wheals, B. 1985. The practical application of pyrolytic methods in forensic science during the lastdecade. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis 8:503-514.
APPENDIXEXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONSPyrolysis-Gas Chromatography-Mass SpectrometryFOM-4LX Curie point pyrolysis unit mounted directly onto the injectionport of a Hewlett-Packard 5890 gas chromatograph and interfaced to a Finnigan
MAT Incos 50 quadrupole mass spectrometer. Pyrolysis conditions: 610C foreight seconds. Pyrolysis chamber kept at 200C. GC injection port kept at 180C.BPX-5 (SGE) nonpolar column: 25 meters long, 0.32 m internal diameter and0.1 m film thickness. Temperature program: 40C held for two minutes, thenramped at 10C/minÐ1 to 350
C and held for two minutes. The transfer line waskept at 250C. Incos 50 utilized EI ionization at 70 eV, and scanned from mass 35-500 every second.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODERN PAINTS151Fourier Transform Infrared SpectroscopyTransmission work carried out on a Nicolet Avatar 360 instrument withSpectraTech IR Plan microscope. Sample held in a diamond cell and 128 scans
were averaged at 4 cmÐ1 resolution. ATR work carried out on a Nicolet Magna IR
560 instrument and Nicolet Nic Plan IR microscope with a Spectra-Tech ATR
objective with zinc selenide crystal and purged with dry air. Two hundred scans
were averaged at 4 cmÐ1 resolution.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThis work was made possible by the support of the Tate Gallery and theLeverhulme Trust, and the generosity of the FOM Institute (which loaned the
PyGCMS instrument). The FTIR was purchased with a grant from the
ClothworkersÕ Foundation in London. Herant Khanjian at the Getty Conserva-
tion Institute carried out the ATR measurements during the authorÕs guest schol-arship there in 2001. The author is extremely grateful to all those involved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152Material and Method in Modern Art:
A Collaborative Challenge
Carol Mancusi-UngaroAssociate Director of Conservation and ResearchWhitney Museum of American ArtDirector, Center for the Technical Study of Modern ArtHarvard Univesity Art MuseumsRecently I reacquainted myself with an illuminating interview of Jasper Johns byone of the more important interviewers of American artists in our time, David
Sylvester. I knew the interview well. However, this particular rereading occurred
as I was reexamining in a more thoughtful way JohnsÕs encaustic works in the
Whitney Museum of American Art, including Three Flags (1958), 
White Target(1957), and Double White Map (1965). Despite my familiarity with the discussion,
there was something that the artist said in the 1965 interview that gave me pause
in 2003 and forced me to reconsider the nature of our collective professional
charge to elucidate and care for works of art.In addressing the now famous paintings of flags and letters, Sylvester askedJohns about the objects with which he begins. Johns, seeking clarification, asked,
ÒThe empty canvas?Ó ÒNo,Ó replied Sylvester, ÒNot only the empty canvas: well,
the motif, if you like, such as the letters, the Flag and so on, or whatever it may
be.Ó Johns said soberly, ÒI think itÕs just a way of beginning.Ó Clearly surprised,
Sylvester persisted, ÒIn other words the painting is not about the elements with
which you have begun.Ó Johns explained, ÒNo more than it is about the elements
which enter it at any moment. Say, the painting of a flag is always about a flag, but
it is no more about a flag than it is about a brush-stroke or about a colour or
about the physicality of the paint, I think.Ó Struck by the candor of this artist, who
had obviously given enormous thought to the role of materiality in his art, I
eagerly awaited clarification of his view, which came a few sentences later. He
explained, ÒWhat I think this means is that, say in a painting, the processes in-
volved in the painting are of greater certainty and of, I believe, greater meaning
than the referential aspects of the painting. I think the processes involved in the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL AND METHOD IN MODERN ART153painting in themselves mean as much or more than any reference value that thepainting has.Ó ÒAnd what would their meaning be?Ó asks Sylvester. 
ÒVisual, intel-lectual activity, perhaps recreation,Ó answers Johns.
1Is Johns saying that the making of the work of art is its most relevant aspect?If so, does that mean that we can understand the painting only if we elucidate the
process? Is the artist by implication suggesting that a conservator and a museum
scientist must readily be at hand with explanations in order for a viewer to com-
prehend fully a work of art? As tantalizing as we may find that proposition, I
believe it oversimplifies what the artist had in mind. Indeed, the cited passage may
elicit diverse interpretations of JohnsÕs view, and his attitude may not necessarilybe shared by other artists. In our context JohnsÕs comments focus attention on arelevant distinction that shapes the way we think about art. Clarifying his
thoughts, the artist explained further, ÒAnd I think the experience of looking at apainting is different from the experience of planning a painting or of painting a
painting. And I think the statements one makes about finished work are different
from the statements one can make about the experience of making it.Ó2Conservators, museum scientists, and art historians usually come upon thefinished work of art. Although some of us may occasionally be a part of the
making, generally our roles crystallize once the work of art is complete. After
Pollock puts down his stick, Rothko retires his brush, Newman takes off his
painting hat, and Johns exhausts his interest, the work of art moves away from the
maker and into a realm of the viewer. As researchers interested in how substance
and process affect the visual statement, conservators seek to enrich the aesthetic
experience through elucidation of the process, while art historians considering
primarily what is seen may posit and assess that information in a cultural context.
The third collaborative component is the museum scientist who may not only
affirm the nature of materials present but through analytic review may also
reconfigure historical perspective. From different points of reference that shape
different types of statement, as predicted by Johns, each inevitably seeks to resolve
the visual and intellectual activity of the process insofar as it affects the meaning
of the work of art.The conservation of the Rothko Chapel paintings, which engaged over 20years of my professional life, provides a personal case in point. Created between
1964 and 1967 by Mark Rothko for a chapel he designed in Houston, Texas, the
predominantly black and plum, so-called black-form, paintings had begun to
develop a whitening on their surfaces less than five years after their installation in
1971. Over time the whitish films developed into crystals that gathered into dis-1D. Sylvester. Interview. Jasper Johns Drawings (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1974), pp.
13-14.2Ibid., p. 18.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTtinct patterns on the surfaces of the paintings. The patterns interfered with theunified, monochromatic nature of the paintings and certainly bore no relation to
the final scheme for the chapel as determined by art scholars and as presumably
intended by Rothko. For this reason conservators and conservation scientists
were called upon to treat what was widely considered an inexplicable condition
problem.In the literature, art historians and critics had focused on the dark paletteand sharp contours of the chapel paintings as opposed to the bright amorphous
coloration of his earlier paintings and even his earlier commissions, namely the
Seagram murals of 1958-1959 and the Harvard panels of 1962. Although a reso-
nance certainly existed among the seven black-form paintings and the seven
plum paintings that comprised the whole of the chapel, no mention was made in
the literature of the facture of the paint or the particular physical properties that
shaped it. Rothko, who died before the chapel was consecrated, had been inter-
viewed throughout his career, but none of the discussion focused on the materi-
ality of these enigmatic paintings.My investigation began with the customary conservatorÕs question of howthe paintings were made. To that end we sought and located one of RothkoÕsassistants for the project, and he and I painted out simulations, using the same
materials and processes that the artist had employed. Although our simulations
certainly did not recall the originals, the material effect was close enough to con-
firm the ingredients of the mixture as whole eggs, tube oil paint, damar resin, and
turpentine. Through analysis of the whitening conducted by local scientists at the
Shell Oil Company, we were able to attribute the exudate to the migration of fatty
acids from the paint, and ultimately we devised a treatment that enabled its re-
moval. The strange patterns of rectangles formed by the exudate were explained
by differential amounts of egg in a dayÕs mixture or by the buildup of media inconsecutively layered forms. Ultimately, working drawings provided by the
Rothko Foundation offered an astonishing correspondence to the patterns of
whitening and thereby confirmed the relationship between the development of
the condition and the unfolding of the creative act.What had begun as a conservatorÕs customary question of ÒwhatÓ were we
looking at ended up providing insight into RothkoÕs creative process and anexplanation of ÒwhyÓ he chose to employ the particular materials that he did. In
sum, the technical study offered information that had much broader ramifica-
tions for the history of the art. For example, a thoughtful appraisal of the draw-
ings in graphite on black paper indicated that they were more than recordings of
process. Throughout, what distinguished the line was not color but reflection.
Indeed, in certain light the drawing was hardly visible. Rothko could have used
white chalk instead of graphite on the black paper, but he did not. Rather, by his
choice of materials the artist acknowledged that differences in reflectivity could be
as legible as differences in contrast. Thought of in this way the studies fortified
our developing notion of RothkoÕs keen regard for nuances of surface as docu-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL AND METHOD IN MODERN ART155mented also by the variable reflectance of the plum borders and black forms.3Reference to his earlier work confirmed that the artist had been engaged withthese issues throughout his career, but had brought them to fruition in part by
eliminating vivid color in the chapelÕs paintings. The technical analysis had in-formed the process that in turn directed the treatment and affected our regard for
RothkoÕs later work.Although statements about the experience of making art differ from state-ments about the finished work, they should inform each other. In the world of
modern art this discourse could begin with closer scrutiny of its most common
descriptive rubric, namely, Òmixed media.Ó This term, which abounds not only
on museum label copy but also in catalogues, is as familiar to postwar art scholars
as Òoil on canvasÓ is to those who study old-master painting. Walter Hopps,
founding director of the Menil Collection, predicted the emergence one day of, in
his terms, a Òmixed media morass.Ó4 That era has arrived, but in some ways it is
not a new phenomenon, considering that Òoil on canvasÓ is the official descrip-
tion of Sir Joshua ReynoldsÕs Captain Robert Orne (1756), as well as Willem de
KooningÕs Door to the River (1960). Given the visual range of these works of art
and the investigative capability of our technological age, one overriding descrip-
tive term seems woefully inadequate for both old-master painting and modern
art. In a recent interview Wayne Thiebaud mentioned that he added Zec, a brand
name for a substance that added girth to his oil paint, in order to create the
creamy ÒicingsÓ on his cakes. Willem de Kooning apparently did not add Zec, but
we know from technical investigations that he did add vegetable oils to his media
in order to achieve carefully sought-after working properties and effects that we
value in his paintings.5It is encouraging that recent studies of paintings by Pollock, de Kooning,Jacob Lawrence and Mark Rothko, among others, have identified materials by
scientific analysis in the context of technique and have thereby broadened our
understanding. Such analysis has also debunked prevailing myths, such as de
KooningÕs alleged use of mayonnaise in his paint, and undoubtedly will substan-tiate others. These exemplary studies have also offered insight into the intellectual
activity of the artist and that contribution about the making has broadened our
understanding of the seen. Once that information becomes an integral part of
how a work of art is discussed in the literature at large, we may begin to confront3C. Mancusi-Ungaro. Nuances of surface in the Rothko chapel paintings. Mark Rothko: The ChapelCommission (Houston: The Menil Collection, 1996), pp. 27-28.
4Private conversation with the author. June 1988.5S. Lake. The challenge of preserving modern art: a technical investigation of paints used in se-lected works by Willem de Kooning and Jackson Pollock. 
MRS Bulletin, January 2001, Volume 26.
pp. 56-60.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTthe disorder of the Òmixed media morassÓ that confounds our scholarship. The
importance of analytic review in this process cannot be overestimated.Generally, technical questions about modern art cannot be framed in thecontext of what we know about practice from artistsÕ treatises or the precepts of a
guild system. Rather, they are often shaped by anecdotal information provided by
artists or their assistants. Inevitably we have had to rely on art historical precedent
and our eyes to assess the credibility of the information. That is not a bad combi-
nation, but it is not enough at a time when analytic confirmation is possible.
Precise technical information may surface, but depending upon the source and
context, its certainty may not be assured.In 1982 I wrote a short technical note about Yves KleinÕs materials in acatalogue for a posthumous retrospective exhibition of the artistÕs work. I basedmy information on interviews conducted in Paris with KleinÕs former associatesand on a patent that the artist had secured in 1960 for ÒInternational Klein Blue,Óhis preferred painting medium. The mixture consisted of dry pigments in polyvi-
nyl acetate and industrial solvents, formulated by RhŽne-Poulenc. KleinÕs de-scription of the medium in the patent actually differed from that provided by the
company and seemed incompatible with the working properties necessary for its
sundry applications. Nonetheless, the reason for my note was not to draw atten-
tion to a possible error in KleinÕs application for a patent but rather to try todescribe how his choice of material permitted widely diverse processes. Despite
my conclusion that Òthough quantifiable, this quintessence of unencumberedcolor owes its vitality and beauty to the magic of the artistic endeavorÑa factorthat can never be measured or duplicatedÓÑthere arose a concern that I haddemystified KleinÕs art by describing its making.6Considering that allegation with regard to our work, I am reminded of anesteemed engineer, Peter Rice, who once spoke about the role of Iago in Othello.He said, ÒIago, if you remember, destroys the love of Othello and Desdemona byrational argument, by applying reason all the way through to every act which,
particularly, Desdemona undertakes. And in the eyes of many, the Iago role is the
role given to the engineer in modern life and in modern architecture of actually
reducing by reason, to destroy or to undermine the kind of unreasonable and
soaring ideas that architects may have.Ó7 I suspect the same could be said of
museum scientists who decipher the material ambiguity of works of art. Admit-
tedly the danger is there when the scientist is given a chip of paint in isolation and
is asked to identify it. Out of context, devoid of its visual significance not to
mention its role in artistic creation, the sample may be reduced to a fact that may
not undermine the Òsoaring ideasÓ but certainly does little to enhance them.
6C. C. Mancusi-Ungaro. A technical note on IKB. Yves Klein (Houston: Institute for the Arts, RiceUniversity, 1982), pp. 258-259.7P. Rice. RIBA Royal Gold Medal speech. Arup Journal (winter 1992/1993), p. 20.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL AND METHOD IN MODERN ART157Providing the data is one thing but explaining it in context is quite another.Cross-sections certainly help explicate the process in specific areas, and simula-
tions can inform the overall technique; however, anyone who has observed an
artist looking at a cross-section or tried to make a simulation of a work of art
knows that deconstruction of substance and process is informative but far from
art. There is the intangible element of the artistÕs intent in manipulating tangiblematerial that must be considered. Although associates or even studio assistants of
an artist may not comprehend this factor, artists invariably do, because they
appreciate the complexity of their undertaking.In part because we share a natural affinity for how substance and processaffect the visual statement, I began interviewing artists in front of their work over
12 years ago. I intentionally chose an open interview style that was captured on
film because in the presence of the works of art, artists invariably reveal through
approach and reaction their relationships to the materials. Alternatively, muse-
ums often ask artists to complete questionnaires about technique when a work of
art is acquired. If returned, these forms can impart important information. When
asked about the materials she used in For the Light (1978-1979), for instance,
Susan Rothenberg carefully listed the various media she had employed: Liquitex
gesso-ground, Liquitex Matte Medium, and LeFranc and Bourgeois Flashe (vinyl
paint made in France). She further noted, ÒAll 3 used in conjunction with mattemedium for both gesso + flashe.Ó8 When asked on the following page about the
subject of the work, the ideas expressed and the circumstances under which it was
executed, she replied with an emphatically drawn explanation point and question
mark. The point is, of course, as Johns postulated years earlier, there is greater
certainty about the processes than about the referential aspects. It is not so much
a question of relative importance as it is of relative surety.From the outset it was clear to me that my questions would inevitably reflectthe concerns of my own time and might therefore not provide answers to the
problems that might confront future conservators. What I had hoped to docu-
ment was not merely a discussion of materials and technique but, more than that,
a solid sense of the artistsÕ concerns about what they were looking at and its future
preservation. Naturally, artistsÕ relationships to their materials and thoughts about
the future care of the art are as varied as their personalities. For instance, James
Rosenquist may be concerned about the sinking in of his oil medium over time,
while Brice Marden worries more about the proper treatment of a localized dam-
age to one of his monochromatic works. The artistsÕ concerns may be narrow or
broad in scope. Yet, inevitably their involvement adds another dimension to the
investigation by posing questions unimagined by researchers and thereby enrich-
ing the pursuit in unexpected ways.8Questionnaire statement by S. Rothenberg. Whitney Museum of American Art archive. July 1,1979.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTAfter the Menil Collection acquired Ed KienholzÕs John Doe (1959), the
artist came to the museum to discuss the piece. Having carefully surveyed the
surface of the sculpture, he opened the drawer and removed a portion of flute
pipe from within. I had noted powdery debris in the bottom of the drawer, but I
had not initially associated it with the industrial ductwork (Figure 1). Eventually
Kienholz explained that the flute pipe represented the mannequinÕs male privatepart and that the dust in the drawer was what remained of its head that had been
fashioned from a rubber mask. Evidently the original Halloween mask had to-
tally disintegrated over 30 years, but without the artistÕs intervention I doubt wewould have known about the change. Archival photographs of John Doe had
unfortunately only documented the sculpture with the contents of the drawer
locked within. Obligingly Kienholz took the appendage with him to Los Angeles
and returned months later with a completed part fashioned out of a new rubber
mask (Figure 2).This albeit extreme example raises two issues concerning preservation. First,instances of disintegrating industrial materials unfortunately comprise many im-
portant works of modern art, among them John ChamberlainÕs foam sculpturesof the 1970s. The challenge to preserve the physicality of these objects is enor-
mous. Since the unstable material is central to the works of art and the sculptures
cannot be properly viewed encased, it seems the only reasonable course is to
restrict periods of exhibition as well as to require proactive storage containment.
In this scenario more rigorous research might focus on the object in storage so
that storage rooms become de facto laboratories wherein technical solutions are
executed without regard for exhibition parameters or other customary restric-
tions. This approach to a limited degree has been adopted in some institutions,
but it should become standard practice.The second issue concerns the broader philosophical question of what to dowith the sculpture in the future when the current replacement disintegrates. The
more expedient approach, of course, would be to replace the mask yet again, as
did Kienholz. Once the artist has died, however, it is unlikely that anyone would
be eager to refashion a new part without the artistÕs hand. A conservator and ascientistÕs approach might be to make a mold of the current form and then cast itin a more permanent material. An art historian could rightly object to the idea of
a cast form replacing a found object because it counters KienholzÕs notion ofmateriality. One wonders if replacement parts are ever appropriate? I had to
confront that question once when I made a new white wedding dress to replace
the discolored and irreparably stained original on KienholzÕs Jane Doe (1960). I
was asked to treat the work in this way by a curator because the aged dress offered
a tawdry view of marriage that countered the deceased artistÕs expressed intent.These two replacements, undertaken as treatments, were couched in terms that
reflect the central importance of the artistÕs intentÑan elusive concept that defiesquantification yet rests at the heart of our collective pursuit.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL AND METHOD IN MODERN ART159FIGURE 1.Detail of 
John Doe, showing powdery remnants of original mask. Source: Ed
Kienholz, John Doe, 1959, The Menil Collection. Photograph taken by Carol Mancusi-Ungaro. Permission for photograph granted by Nancy Reddin Kienholz.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2Detail of restored 
John Doe showing mask fashioned as male anatomy. Source:Ed Kienholz, John Doe, 1959, The Menil Collection. Photograph taken by Carol Mancusi-
Ungaro. Permission for photograph granted by Nancy Reddin Kienholz. (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MATERIAL AND METHOD IN MODERN ART161When the artist is still alive, the complicated but key questions regardingintent are often more readily identified. A recent exchange involving two sculp-
tures of a man and a woman by Kiki Smith at the Whitney Museum of American
Art comes to mind. Dated 1990, they had been intermittently on exhibition for
over a decade but had also spent a fair amount of time in storage. Recent observa-
tion revealed patterns of white crystals in the beeswax that seemed to mimic the
battens that held the pieces secure in their crates. Upon close examination the
disfigurement and its probable cause were obvious to the scientist who sampled
the material and the conservator who had begun to consider treatment options.
In an impromptu interview the artist offered a totally unexpected assessment of
the objectsÕ physical state. It seems what disturbed her most was not the exudate
that commanded our attention, which she summarily dismissed, but rather a
reddened pallor that had overcome the male figure. In her view the red wax that
underlay the uppermost visible layer and had been used to offer skin tone had
somehow become dominant. That condition problem, which had eluded us, far
outweighed any other in terms of importance to her. By affirming the certainty of
process, which Johns had observed, Smith not only left us with a better under-
standing of the nature of the problem but also of the work of art itself. Without
her intervention would the fundamental alteration in the material have even
elicited a question from us?Thoughts about the artistÕs intent affect what conservators do with the factsthat museum scientists uncover. A discussion of how the material is used and to
what artistic end is as important as, if not more important than, what the material
is. Analytic investigation is crucial, as are other types of review that take into
account art history, criticism, and connoisseurship. All play a part in affirming
artistic intent, especially after the artist has died. From their particular perspective
scientists offer valuable insight in this debate by evaluating statements about the
finished work in light of statements about the experience of making. Beyond
naming the material and thinking logically in terms of questions and answers,
they bring to the discussion diverse patterns of thinking. That contribution affects
the tensions between Òreason and intuition, certainty and uncertainty, delibera-tion and spontaneity,Ó the precise qualities that shape our reasoned comprehen-
sion of the illogical artifacts of human expression in our care.9It is only through intense collaboration among the distinct but related disci-plines that consider works of art that we can attempt to frame and pose the
relevant technical questions. By digesting the experience of looking as well as the
experience of making, we can assign meaning to the chips of paint that are ana-
lyzed, offer definition to the Òmixed media morass,Ó and discern the artist
Õs intentas it relates to materiality. Only in collaboration can we begin to offer the indeter-
minate work of art the rigorous yet insightful review it deserves.9A. Lightman. Art that transfigures science. New York Times, March 15, 2003, p. B9-10.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162Raman Microscopy in the Identification of
Pigments on Manuscripts and
Other Artwork
Robin J. H. ClarkChristopher Ingold LaboratoriesUniversity College LondonLondonThe identification of pigments on manuscripts, paintings, enamels, ceramics,icons, polychromes, and papyri is critical in finding solutions to problems of
restoration, conservation, dating, and authentication in artwork, and many tech-
niques (molecular and elemental) have been used for this purpose. Raman mi-
croscopy has emerged, thanks to recent advances in optics and detectors, as per-
haps the most suitable of these techniques on account of its high spatial ( 1 
m)and spectral ( 1 cm
Ð1) resolution, its specificity, its excellent sensitivity by way ofcharge coupled device (CCD) detectors, and the fact that many artifacts may be
analyzed in situ. Long-needed links between the arts and the sciences in this area
are now rapidly being developed.The Raman effect was first detected in 1928 and rapidly became, and thenremained for the following 20 years, the basis of the key technique for providing
vibrational information on molecules in all states of matter, and of ions and
lattice structures (Raman and Krishnan, 1928). However, the technique was then
very slow, as it involved the use of a mercury arc as radiation source and photo-
graphic plates for detection. With the introduction in the 1960s of lasers as mono-
chromatic polarized light beams of high irradiance and of semiconductors (e.g.,
GaAs) as detectors, the ability to detect weak Raman signals from materials of all
kinds increased markedly. The technique came to be applied to a wide variety of
chemical problems and increasingly to those amenable to analysis with a
microsampling configuration. In the past 25 years, and especially in the last de-
cade, the technique has been increasingly applied with great effect to the analysis
of micrometre-sized particles using optical microscopes interfaced with existing
spectrometer systems. These developments have revolutionized the usage of the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS163technique, which is seen to have many advantages over infrared (IR) microscopyand other techniques for phase identification.The intrinsic weakness of the Raman effect (Long, 2002) in the absence ofresonance effects (Clark and Dines, 1986), and the moderate sensitivity of even
semiconductors or multichannel intensified diode arrays as detectors were still
not ideal features of Raman microscopy for many applications. However, the
introduction of CCD detectors over the past decade has made it feasible to detect
and identify even poor Raman scatterers of micrometre dimensions and, by
change of excitation line, even many fluorescent materials. These technical ad-
vances have opened up many new areas to which Raman microscopy could make
a major contribution, pigment identification being one of these. It is now recog-
nized that the technique combines the attributes of high reproducibility and high
sensitivity with that of being nondestructive. Moreover, the technique can be
applied in situ, an important consideration for manuscript study. It also has high
spatial resolution ( 1 
m) and high spectral resolution ( 1 cm
Ð1), features thatare of obvious value for establishing the composition of pigment mixtures and
even of binders on works of art.Conservators and restorers need to be concerned with pigment identificationfor at least four reasons.1.To decide whether (a) all restoration should be carried out with the
original pigment and not with alternatives of similar hue; this is important since
some alternatives might be liable to react with contiguous pigments with delete-
rious visual effects or (b) restoration with a different pigment might be desirable
owing to instability of the original one or because it is more desirable to restore
with carefully documented and easily identifiable nonoriginal pigment, possibly
modern.2.To identify any degradation products of pigments and to suggest possible
treatments whereby degradation processes may be prevented, arrested or reversed.3.It is increasingly likely that auction houses will be required to assess scien-
tifically any works of art that they intend to offer for sale. One way of checking for
obvious forgeries is to establish the palette and to check that no pigments of
inappropriate dates of first manufacture or usage are present. Such analysis is
extremely important in view of the immense pricesÑoften > $1 millionÑforwhich medieval manuscripts and codices can currently be sold, usually without
any scientific validation of the pigments present.4.It is essential that conclusions on artwork as to the date, school, artist, etc.,
be drawn not only on paleographical, philological, and stylistic grounds but also
on scientific grounds based upon an experimentally established palette. The arts
community has been in general slow to accept this point.This article begins with a brief comment on the range of pigments tradition-ally used to illuminate artifacts throughout time, and then moves on to a discus-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTsion of various case histories in which knowledge of pigments present and of theirdegradation products has proved to be of interest to both the arts and the science
communities.THE PIGMENTSThe colors of inorganic pigments arise in most cases from ligand field, chargetransfer or intervalence charge transfer transitions, and in the case of metalsÑcommonly for silver or goldÑfrom specular reflectance (Clark, 1995, 2002;Jorgensen, 1962). The depth of color of inorganic pigments is related both to the
molar decadic absorption coefficients of electronic transitions in the visible re-
gion of the spectrum and to the dimensions of the pigment particles. These di-
mensions affect the balance between diffuse reflectance, which is controlled by
the absorption coefficients and bandwidths, and specular reflectance, which is
controlled by complementary factors (Clark, 1964). Early artists were well aware
of these effects in practice, and with a restricted palette could often achieve a wide
range of hues by selective control of particle size.Listings of standard inorganic pigments are given in reviews (Clark, 1995,2002), books (Mayer, 1972; Feller, 1986; Roy, 1993; FitzHugh, 1997; Thompson,
1956; Gettens and Stout, 1966; Wehlte, 1975), and proprietary literature. By way
of illustration, the commonly used blue inorganic pigments are listed in Table 1,
together with their chemical names, formulas, provenance, and an indication as
to the nature of the electronic transitions principally responsible for the blue
color in each case. Of course, the identification of blue pigments alone would only
be of restricted value for dating purposes, and so extensive studies of all the
pigments on a work of art are essential in order for it to be possible to estimate the
date of production of any particular piece.Many different organic dyes have been extracted from plants through theages for use on illuminations of all sorts, notably indigo from woad for blue,
alizarin from madder for red, weld from the weld plant (related to mignonette)
for yellow, crocetin from saffron, and gamboge from gum resinÑboth also foryellow. In addition, organic dyes were extracted from marine life (e.g., Tyrian
purple [6,6'-dibromoindigo] from mollusks and sepia from cuttlefish); from ani-
mal life (e.g., Indian yellow from cow urine); from insects (e.g., carmine from
cochineal or kermes beetles); and others from lichens (Clark, 1995). Since the
isolation by W. H. Perkin in 1856 of mauveine, the first synthetic dye, many
hundreds of other organic dyes have been synthesized, and this has greatly ex-
tended the nature of the palette to which artists have had access. The main scien-
tific concerns in the examination of a work of art are¥to identify each pigment, its crystal structure and, if possible, its place oforigin and to identify the pigment medium;¥to assess whether it is feasible to restore any degradation to the paintwork(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS165TABLE 1Commonly Used Blue Inorganic Pigments
PigmentChemical NameFormulaDate
aTransitionbAzuriteBasic copper(II)2CuCO
3.min.LF
carbonateCu(OH)
2Cerulean blueCobalt(II) stannateCoO.nSnO
21821LF
Chinese blueBariumBaCuSi
4O10ca 480 BCLF
copper(II) silicateCobalt blueCobalt(II)-dopedCoO.nAl
2O3ca 1550LF
alumina glassMing dynasty
Egyptian blueCalcium copper(II)CaCuSi
4O10ca 3100 BCLF
silicateFluorite (andCalcium fluorideCaF
2min.Trapped
antonozite)(purple)electrons?
Lazurite (fromSodalite + sulfurNa
8[Al6Si6O24]Snmin. 1828CT
lapis lazuli)radical anionsS
3-, S2-Manganese blueBarium manganate(V)Ba(MnO
4)2 + BaSO
41907LF
sulfateMaya bluePalygorskite/Mg
5(Si,Al)8O20MayanMie
indigo/nano-(OH)
2.8H2O, etc.scattering
cmaterialPhthalocyanineCopper(II)Cu(C
32H16N8)1936
-*dblue /Winsorphthalocyanine
bluePosnjakiteBasic copper(II)CuSO
4.min.LF
sulfate3Cu(OH)
2.H2OPrussian blueIron(III)Fe
4[Fe(CN)6]3.1704IVCT
hexa-cyanoferrate14-16H
2OFe(II)/
Fe(III)SmaltCobalt(II) silicateCoO.nSiO
2Earlier than 1500LF
Vanadium blueVanadium(IV)-dopedZrSiO
4(V(IV))1950?LF
zirconVerdigrisBasic copper(II)2Cu(O
2CCH3)2.CorrosionLF
acetateCu(OH)
2productVivianiteIron(II,III)- phosphateFe
3P2O8.8H2Omin.IVCT
Fe(II)/Fe(III)aThe pigment is specified to be a mineral (min.) and/or the date of its first manufacture is listed.bLF = ligand field; CT = charge transfer; IVCT = intervalence charge transfer transition.cThe origin of the color is uncertain. (Jos”-Yacam⁄n M., L. Rendon, J. Arenas, and M. C. SerraPuche. 1996. Science 273:223-227.)
d-* = electric-dipole-allowed charge transfer transition of the phthalocyanine ring system.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTor fabric, given the nature of the chemical processes likely to be involved;¥to consider whether knowledge of the identity of the pigments present ona work of art would give an indication as to date of production and hence the
authenticity, school, and/or artist; and¥to identify the correct measures needed to preserve a work of art from theeffects of heat, light, and gaseous pollutants, and from contiguous or underlying
pigments, dyes, or inks.THE RAMAN MICROSCOPEIn a Raman microscope the incident laser beam is brought to a focus by theobjective onto each different pigment grain in turn on the manuscript under
study (see Figure 1). The Raman scattering is collected by the same objective and
then directed by a beamsplitter in the optical path to the monochromator and the
detector. Although the use of a beamsplitter reduces the overall efficiency of the
system, as does the use of a pinhole as a spatial filter, both devices restrict the
amount of unwanted scattered light collected from outside the focus of the laser
beam. The benefit of a pinhole is that it ensures a good confocal arrangement,
thereby providing spatial resolution as a function of sample depth.The overall efficiency of detection of the Raman signal from the older Ramanspectrometers was still relatively poor in the 1980s, because it was based on doubleFIGURE 1Schematic representation of a Raman microscope (Renishaw RM 1000), which
employs notch filter assemblies and a CCD detector.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS167or triple spectrometers with a large number of optical surfaces and on multichan-nel intensified diode arrays, which are relatively insensitive detectors, albeit better
than photographic plates. However, two devices have improved matters greatly:
two-dimensional CCDs with up to 80 percent quantum efficiency of detection
and holographic notch filters, which are wavelength specific and have the prop-
erty of blocking out the unwanted Rayleigh scattering. These filters possess a
cutoff that readily permits approach to within 50 cmÐ1 or less of the excitation
line. This has the consequence that monochromators with the high dispersion
previously required to filter out the Rayleigh line can be replaced by a spec-
trograph system with a single grating only, leading to much greater efficiency of
throughput. The introduction of notch filters eliminates the need for separate
pinholes in the optical path. The benefits of CCD detector/notch filter spectro-
graphs are that (1) low-powered air-cooled lasers can be used, which both reduce
the costs of purchase and operation and make the entire system portable (since
elaborate and fixed water-cooling systems for the lasers are not required); (2) the
spectrographs are much lighter and much easier to realign than earlier double or
triple grating systems; and (3) the time required to acquire significant data is
greatly reduced, in some cases even to seconds. Such spectrographs can also be
used for remote Raman microscopy in which a probe head assembly both delivers
the excitation beam to the sample and collects the scattered radiation from the
sample by means of fiber optics. They may be appropriate for the study of heavy
items that need support from a specially designed cradle, notably large codices
that cannot fit safely onto the microscope stage, or for archaeological studies of
murals, cave paintings, etc.It is now also possible to collect data taken from many different samplepoints on an inhomogeneous surface to produce a Raman spectral map. The
method involves direct two-dimensional imaging of an inhomogeneous surface
by analyzing one or more of the Raman bands characteristic of a given compo-
nent on the surface. It offers intriguing further opportunities for the study of very
small (approximately 1 mm2) areas of artwork on stamps, maps, and writing (soas to be able to follow iron gall ink diffusion, paper damage, etc.), and in many
other fields (e.g., that of identification of the precise whereabouts and propor-
tions of active ingredients in pharmaceutical tablets).It is usually desirable to have a wide range of excitation lines (frequency 0)available in order to search for the most enhanced Raman spectrum, bearing in
mind the often opposing effects on the scattering intensity of 4 (the fourth power
of the frequency of the scattered light), absorption, resonance, and possible pho-
tochemical and/or thermal degradation of the sample. Fluorescence from certain
materials is often best avoided by use of a Nd/YAG (yttrium aluminum garnet)
laser operating at 1064nm, albeit with significant loss in spatial resolution and

scattering intensity. By use of equipment such as that described above, libraries of
Raman spectra of common inorganic, mineral and earth pigments, and organic
pigments and dyes have been compiled (Griffith, 1987; Bell et al., 1997; Burgio(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTTABLE 2 Comparison of Different Techniques for Pigment IdentificationCompound specificityTechniqueand type of informationSensitivity
Ramanexcellent, moleculargood
aIRexcellent, molecularfair
PLMfair, molecularfair
bUV/VISpoor, moleculargood
LIBSgood, elementalexcellent
XRFgood, elementalgood
cXPSgood, elementalgood
ePIXE/PIGEgood, elementalexcellent
gSEM/EDXgood, elementalgood
eXRDexcellent, molecularfair
bRaman, visible laser Raman microscopy; IR, mid-infrared reflectance microscopy; PLM,
polarised light microscopy; UV/VIS, ultraviolet/visible reflectance spectroscopy or fibre opticreflectance spectroscopy (FORS); LIBS, laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy; SEM/EDX,scanning electron microscopy with Be-windowed energy dispersive X-ray detection; XRF, X-
ray fluorescence spectroscopy; XPS, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, also called electronspectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA); PIXE/PIGE, external beam proton-induced X-rayemission/proton-induced -ray emission; XRD, powder X-ray diffraction.aSensitivity can be excellent under resonance conditions.bOnly possible with crystalline materials.cOnly atoms with atomic number Z 14 (Si) without an evacuated sample chamber.and Clark, 2001; Bikiaris et al., 2000; Vandenabeele et al., 2000), as well as of somepigment media (binders, gums, resins, etc.), and these are now widely available
for reference purposes.Many other techniques have been and are used for pigment identification,and estimates of their strengths and weaknesses vis-‹-vis Raman microscopyhave been given (Cilberto and Spoto, 2000; Pollard and Heron, 1996; Brundle et
al., 1992; Bousfield, 1992; Smith and Clark, 2002b) and are summarized in Table
2. Raman microscopy is considered by many to be the best single technique for
this purpose and is extremely effective when used in conjunction with other
complementary techniques, such as polarized light microscopy (PLM), infrared
microscopy (IR), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), particle-
induced X-ray emission (PIXE), or laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS). Further techniques such as laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) have occa-
sionally been used, as have nuclear ones, such as nuclear reaction analysis (NRA)
and Rutherford back scattering (RBS), at laboratories in which a cyclotron source
is available.Studies of Western and Eastern manuscripts, painting cross-sections, ceram-ics, papyri, icons, polychromes, and other artifacts (stamps, coins, etc.) as well as
degradation and corrosion products are now discussed with particular reference(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS169dX-ray escape depth varies from nm to mm dimensions depending on the material and the ele-ment being detected. Can lead to loss of spatial resolution and to interference from sub-surfacelayers.eAll atoms with Z  5 (B).
fDepth of sample is normally confined to several nanometres.gAll atoms with Z  11(Na). A proton beam (via PIXE) generates less 
bremsstrahlung background
radiation than other X-ray techniques, providing greater sensitivity. PIXE can also be modified with
different detectors to perform nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) and Rutherford back-scattering (RBS)studies.hEnvironmental SEM can analyse small, intact artefacts.to those carried out in London. Raman microscopy also has wide application tomany other fields of study, as discussed by Corset et al. (1989) and Turrell and
Corset (1996).WESTERN AND EASTERN MANUSCRIPTSThe Anglo-Saxon manuscripts in the British Library, one of the worldÕs foremostcollections, have been well studied from a paleographical standpoint but only
slightly in respect of the materials used and the methods followed in their con-
struction. Conclusive identification allows the correct materials to be used for the
conservation of any object. Most of the pigments present on a large number of
Western and Eastern manuscripts have now been identified at University College
London, the more important items being cited below.Western ManuscriptsEarly Raman studies of a Paris Bible of ca 1275 in Latin rapidly revealed theease with which most inorganic pigments may be distinguished, even with Raman
microscope systems of a 1980s design (Best et al., 1992, 1993). Spectra couldImmunity tointerferenceSpatial resolutionIn situ analysisPortable
goodexcellent (< 1 
m)yesyes
poorgood (~ 20 
m)yesyes
excellentgood (~ 10 
m)noyesfairgood (~ 10 
m)yesyes
goodgood (~ 20 
m)yes
nogoodfair
d (~ 1 mm)yesyes
goodfair
f (~ 1 mm)yes
nogoodfair (< 1 mm)yes
nogoodexcellent (< 1 
m)nohnogoodfair (< 0.1 mm)
nono
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 2Magnified (100 times) portion of a dark grey-black part of an illuminated
letter R on a German choir book (sixteenth century) showing grains of different pigments,all identifiable by Raman microscopy (Best et al., 1992). Reproduced with permission,
Elsevier.readily be obtained from a pigment grain of 1-2 m diameter, even when adjacentto other grains of different composition (see Figure 2), this is not an uncommon
situation in artwork, since many artists choose to mix pigments in order to obtain
shades of color not otherwise available. Other studies established the palettes of
Latin manuscripts (Burgio et al., 1997a), a German choir book (Burgio et al.,
1997b), German manuscripts (Burgio et al., 1997b), and illuminated plates from
the Flora Danica (Burgio et al., 1999a). Of particular interest is the Skard copy of
the Icelandic Book of Law, ca 1360, which was shown to have been richly illumi-
nated, albeit not with either of the lead pigments commonly used in Europe at
that time (i.e., white lead [2PbCO3.Pb(OH)2] and red lead [Pb3O4] [Best et al.,1995]) but with bone white (Ca3PO4) and vermilion (HgS)/red ochre (Fe2O3),respectively, possibly owing to the lack of lead ores in Iceland. Extensive studies
have now been carried out on many manuscripts and codices in the British Li-
brary, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Museum of London, the Beinecke(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS171Library, and elsewhere, the more recent work having the benefit of detection byCCD of the Raman scattered light from the pigments.One of the most notable of the recent studies is that in which the palettes ofseven different Gutenberg Bibles were established (i.e., the King George III in the
British Library, the ones at Eton College [Windsor] and Lambeth Palace [Lon-
don], and two in France and two in Germany [Chaplin et al., 2002a, 2005]).
These are brilliantly illuminated codices, the red, green, blue, white, and black
pigments on the King George III Bible consisting of vermilion (HgS), lead tin
yellow Type I (Pb2SnO4), carbon black, azurite (2CuCO3.Cu(OH)2), malachite(CuCO3. Cu(OH)2), verdigris (approximately 2Cu(CH3CO2)2.Cu(OH)2), chalk(CaCO3), gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O), and lead white (2PbCO3.Pb(OH)2), in agree-ment with instructions given in the accompanying model book (a situation that
is far from being always the case). The illuminations on the British Library andFIGURE 3Illumination on the prologue page of the King George III version of the Guten-
berg Bible held in the British Library (Chaplin et al., 2002a, 2005). Reproduced with
permission, Wiley and the American Chemical Society.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTEton College Bibles are similar to one another, consisting of interwoven floraand fauna around the columns of printed text (see Figure 3). Those on the
Lambeth Palace Bible differ for the major illuminations, which consist of geo-
metric patterns in blue, white, and gold but are similar for the minor ones.Also recently completed has been a detailed Raman study (Brown and Clark,2004a) of the Lindisfarne Gospels (valued at perhaps $40 million), which repre-
sent to many the pinnacle of artistic achievement of manuscript illumination.
Considered to have been created around 715 by Eadfrith in honor of St. Cuthbert,
who was bishop of Lindisfarne in Northumbria during the period 685-687, the
major pages display fantastic complexity of zoomorphic and interlace ornament,
by contrast to the simplicity of the evangelist portraits. The most important result
of the early pigment analyses of the Gospels by light microscopy was thought to
be the apparent identification (Roosen-Runge and Werner, 1960) of lazurite
(along with some indigo) on the evangelist portraits of St. Mark, f. 93v (folio page
93, verso) and St. Luke, f. 139, a result which would indicate the earliest known
usage of lazurite on an Anglo-Saxon manuscript. Since the presence of non-
indigenous materials on a work of art of known origin is regarded as indicating
that a trade route between the source of the material and the place of construction
of the work existed at its date of construction, the existence is implied at that very
early date of a trade route to Northumbria from the Badakshan mines in Afghani-
stan, then the only source of lazurite. The Gospels were recognised even in ca 715
to be very prestigious, and so there is little doubt that the most impressive and
expensive blue pigment would have been used thereon, if available. However,
Raman studies (Brown and Clark, 2004a) led to the identification of indigo alone,
both on f. 93v as well as on f. 139 (see Figure 4), there being no evidence at all for
lazurite. This suggests that trade in lazurite to Northumbria was most unlikely to
have begun by the early eighth century. Several other substantial studies of Anglo-
Saxon (Brown and Clark, 2004b,c) and Carolingian (Clark and van der Weerd,
2004) manuscripts have also recently been published.Eastern ManuscriptsStudies quickly revealed that the palette of Eastern manuscripts was not ingeneral greatly different from that of Western ones, except in respect to
some plant and animal extracts (e.g., Indian yellow [euxanthic acid,
MgC19H16O11.5H2O, from cow urine]). Included in early studies were ones onvarious Persian manuscripts: ÒAnatomy of the Body,Ó a nineteenth-century copy
of an earlier manuscript, and ÒPoetry in Praise,Ó sixteenth century (Ciomartan
and Clark, 1996); three very rare sixteenth-century copies of the Qazwini manu-
script ÒWonders of Creation and Oddities of Existence,Ó a late thirteenth-cen-
tury encyclopedic work in Arabic but of Indian style (Clark and Gibbs, 1998a); a
QuÕran section, Iran or Central Asia, thirteenth century, eastern Kufic script(Clark and Huxley, 1996); a Byzantine/Syriac Gospel lectionary, Iraq, thirteenth(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS173FIGURE 4Initial page of the Gospel of St. Luke, f. 139, in the Lindisfarne gospels, ca 715
(Brown and Clark, 2004a). Reproduced with permission, Wiley.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTcentury (Clark and Gibbs, 1998b); manuscript and textile fragments fromDunhuang, northwest China, tenth century (Clark et al., 1997a); Thai, Javanese,
Korean, Chinese, and Uighur manuscripts (Burgio et al, 1999b); and a precious
sixteenth-century Turkish manuscript (Hurev U Sirin) (Jurado-Lopez et al.,
2004).The serious and widespread blackening of the white areas on the valuablelectionary referred to above (Clark and Gibbs, 1998b) is considered to arise from
the conversion of white lead, either alone or in admixture with colored pigments,
into black lead(II) sulfide by hydrogen sulfide or other sulfur-containing species.
Hydrogen sulfide could arise from atmospheric pollutants, from bacteria, from
degradation of adjacent pigments, or from pigments on the reverse side of the
page containing the illumination in question. This blackening is a widespread
problem in artwork, the reversal of which has posed as many questions as an-
swers. Treatment of lead(II) sulfide with alkaline hydrogen peroxide generates
lead(II) sulfate, which is white, and this superficially at least, appears to solve the
problem. Whether the resulting pigment will remain permanently attached to the
manuscript has yet to be established.The photochemical conversion of the red pigment realgar (As4S4) to yellowpararealgar (also As4S4) by light optimally in the wavelength range 530-560 nm isof great interest. The conversion occurs naturally in sunlight and was apparently
recognized in Mesopotamia even as early as 1220, when pararealgar was applied
to the above lectionary as a yellow pigment in addition to, and in distinctly differ-
ent places from, the much more common yellow pigment orpiment, As2S3 (Clark
and Gibbs, 1998b).PAINTINGSIt may be possible to remove samples from watercolor or oil paintings in such away that the lacunae are not discernible to the naked eye, a procedure that is
rarely if ever permitted for manuscripts. Alternatively, the pigment might be able
to be sampled from under the frame of a painting or, in the case of codices, from
offsets transferred to the opposite page. A further possibility is to sample pigment
cross-sections, a procedure with the advantages of requiring neither the removal
of the work from its permanent location nor, equally importantly, the removal of
delicate and valuable scientific equipment from a laboratory to a library. Studies
of cross-sections are of considerable importance for paintings and icons when
depth profile analyses are required.Many Raman studies on pigments removed from paintings have now beenmade in order to complement those made by infrared spectroscopy and other
techniques. For example, studies of Titian and Veronese paintings at the National
Gallery in London have allowed the characterization of two distinct types of lead
tin yellow, Type I, Pb2SnO4, and Type II, PbSn0.76Si0.24O3, which was shown tohave a defect pyrochlore structure (Clark et al., 1995). These two pigments, in use(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS175FIGURE 5Painting 
ÒYoung Woman Seated at a VirginalÓ under study by Raman micros-
copy to identify the pigments present, and leading to evidence consistent with its attribu-tion to Vermeer, ca 1670 (Burgio et al., 2005). Reprinted with permission, American
Chemical Society.at different periods of history, have very similar colors, but they are readily distin-guishable by their Raman spectra.Some paintings are sufficiently small that they may be examined in situ undera Raman microscope. Figure 5 shows a paintingÑconsidered by art historians tobe from the late 17th century and Dutch Ñof a young woman with red ribbons inher hair, a pearl necklace, and a cream-coloured skirt beneath a yellow shawl. The
pigments (vermilion, lazurite, and lead tin yellow Type I, particularly the last two)
identified by Raman microscopy and other techniques are consistent with the
attribution of this painting to Vermeer. In consequence of these identifications
and other considerations, when it was auctioned at SothebyÕs on July 8, 2004, itrealised US$30 million (Burgio et al., 2005).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTCERAMICSThe effective use of Raman microscopy in the study of ceramics was demon-strated in 1997 on the glaze from buried fragments of medieval faience/majolica
excavated from the abandoned village of Castel Fiorentino in southern Italy. The
studies showed for the first time that lapis lazuli is stable at the firing temperature
of the glaze and that it had been used as a pigment in Italian glaze; the brown/
black pigment used was manganese(IV) dioxide (the latter identified at the time
by photoelectron spectroscopy) (Clark et al., 1997b,c). Red-brown shards of me-
dieval pottery from many sites in Italy have, not surprisingly, been identified to be
pigmented with iron oxides and yellow shards with hydrated iron(III) oxides
(Clark and Curri, 1998). Raman studies of many different ochres used in wall
paintings have also been carried out (Bikiaris et al., 2000).A Raman study (Clark and Gibbs, 1997) of the pigments on Egyptian faienceof the XVIIIth dynasty (ca 1350 BC) recovered in 1891 from the Nile Valley by Sir
William Flinders Petrie and held at the Petrie Museum, University College Lon-
don, has revealed that the red shards are pigmented with red ochre/red earth and
the brilliant yellow shards with lead antimony yellow (Pb2Sb2O7), a very earlysynthetic pigment dating back to ca 1500 BC (see Figure 6). The latter gives a very
clear and distinctive Raman spectrum that is identical to that of a contemporary
sample of this pigment. Similar studies of shards from an ancient (4300-2800 BC)FIGURE 6Lotus leaf shard from El Amarna; the pigment used is lead antimony yellow,
Pb2Sb2O7 (Clark and Gibbs, 1997). Reproduced with permission, Wiley.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS177site in Xishan, Henan, China, indicate that anatase, hematite, and magnetite wereamong the pigments used to decorate pottery found at that site (Zuo et al., 1999).Raman studies have been made by Colomban et al. (2001) of the palettescharacteristic of the S‘vres Factory, one relating to colored glazes/enamels onbisque (1050 C) and the other on moufle (850 C) painting colors. Other recentstudies by the same group relate to Vietnamese porcelain and celadon glazes
(Liem et al., 2002; Faurel et al., 2003). It is now clear that Raman microscopy is a
very valuable technique for compositional and provenance studies on ceramics
from sites of archaeological interest (van der Weerd et al., 2004b), this area having
recently been reviewed by Smith and Clark (2004).PAPYRIEgyptian papyri supposedly dating from the thirteenth to the first centuries BCand brought to London for auction were recently shown to be illuminated not
only with mineral pigments but also with the modern pigments phthalocyanine
blue (1935) and green (1936), a Hansa yellow (ca 1950), ultramarine blue (1828)Ñthe synthetic form of lazurite, red organic lakes (probably -napthols, ca 1939),and synthetic anatase (1923) (Burgio and Clark, 2000). Moreover, the pigments
had been painted directly onto the papyri, with no intervening ground layer of
mineral pigments. The papyri are clearly modern. An authentic papyrus from the
Petrie Museum at University College London had no modern pigments on its
illuminations, only carbon, orpiment (As2S3), malachite, and Egyptian blue(CaCuSi4O10), the earliest synthetic pigment (ca 3000 BC). Such discoveries high-light the urgent need for proper scientific evaluation of items offered for sale or
auction; indeed purchasers increasingly expect this prior to purchase.ICONS AND POLYCHROMESThe combined application of Raman spectroscopy and LIBS has proved to be veryeffective for the identification of pigments at different depths below the surfaces
of icons and polychromes. LIBS is an atomic emission technique in which an
intense nanosecond laser pulse onto the surface of the sample results in the for-
mation of plasma which, upon being allowed to cool, emits radiation characteris-
tic of the elements present. The technique has high sensitivity and selectivity, and
only a minute amount of material is consumed during each pulse (Anglos et al.,
1997). Successive pulses probe deeper into the artwork, so that depth profiling
becomes possible. A continuous-wave laser beam can be used as a Raman probe
at each depth and so complementary molecular information can also be obtained.Recent combined LIBS and Raman studies of a nineteenth-century Russianicon (see Figure 7) have revealed the identities of the pigments found in the upper
layers to be white lead, zinc oxide (ZnO, for repair purposes), vermilion, and red
earth, etc., all above a silver foil. Below this was found the white ground consisting(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 7Nineteenth-century Russian icon of St. Nicholas held in Greece on which
studies by LIBS and Raman microscopy enabled depth profile analyses of the pigments to
be made (Burgio et al., 2000). Reproduced with permission, Society for Applied Spectros-copy.mainly of gypsum immediately above the wood (Burgio et al., 2000). Similarstudies of a rococo polychrome, a fragment from a gilded altarpiece in a church in
EscatrŠn in Spain, has been carried out (Castillejo et al., 2000), and these revealthe power of the combined application of the two techniques for stratigraphic
analyses of the pigmentation on artwork. An extensive study of cross-sections
from two post-Byzantine icons from Chalkidiki, Greece, have revealed the cur-
rent state of preservation of these icons, any damage thereto, and details of the
pigments and materials used in the original paintings and in their overpaintings
(Daniilia et al., 2002). Similar details are revealed in cross-sections from a monas-
tic habit on the icon of St. Athanasios the Athonite (see Figure 8).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS179FIGURE 8A. Cross-section of a monastic habit painted on a Greek icon; photography
with a microscope in reflected light. B. Spectra of pigments taken with a Raman micro-scope. Identification: (a) underlayer: caput mortuum, lead white, azurite, red lake, andyellow ochre; (b) highlight: lead white and grains of caput mortuum; (c) varnish; (d)
overpainting: ultramarine blue, minium, lithopone, and carbon black (Daniilia et al.,2002). Reproduced with permission, Wiley.PHILATELYRaman microscopy has recently been shown to have potential for establishingwhether postage stamps are authentic or forgeries by way of offering an effective,
rapid, and nondestructive way of identifying the pigments and dyes used in the
inks, paper, and cancel marks. Thus the rare and valuable Hawaiian Missionary
stamps (1851) from the Tapling Collection at the British Library were shown to
have been printed using Prussian blue, Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3.14-16H2O, as the blue pig-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTment (see Figure 9). In addition, the paper fibers of the stamps were shown tohave ultramarine blue particles interspersed between them, to act as an optical
brightener. Distinctions between genuine and forged or reproduction stamps can
be drawn on the basis of the pigments used (Chaplin et al., 2002b).Similar studies of the earliest Mauritian stamps (1847) have been carried out,notably on an extremely rare one penny (1d, orange-red, used) stamp, a rare 2d
(blue, unused) stamp, as well as on a reproduction stamp (1905), early forgeries,
and Britannia-type stamps (1858-1862), in order to identify the pigments used.
For the Britannia-type stamps the pigments used were red lead (Pb3O4) on the 1dstamp, Prussian blue on the 2d stamp, chrome greenÑa mixture of Prussian blueand chrome yellow (PbCrO4)Ñon the 4d stamp, and vermilion (HgS) on the 6d(orange) stamp. The technique has great potential for expertising, i.e. distinguish-
ing between, genuine and forged or reproduction, stamps (Chaplin et al., 2004).WALL PAINTINGSMany studies have now been carried out on the pigments used to illuminatecolored frescos, whose palettes are much more restricted than those of manu-
scripts and paintings. By contrast with scriptoria, libraries, and museum collec-
tions, where pigment degradation has usually only been slight, wall paintings and
frescos often show obvious signs of overexposure to environmental extremes of
temperature and humidity. Moreover, the effects of microbial, fungal, and lichen
colonization on exposed frescos can be severe (Perez et al., 1999). Many more
Raman studies of the pigments and pigment degradation products on frescos and
on wall paintings in caves are likely to be made with the effective development of
mobile Raman systems (Clark and Gibbs, 1998a).FIGURE 9Hawaiian Missionary stamp (left) of 1851 showing (right) the blue printing
(Prussian blue, Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3.14-16H2O) on the surface of the stamp (top left) and parti-cles of ultramarine blue (bottom right) within the paper fibers (Chaplin et al., 2002b).Reproduced with permission, Wiley.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS181PIGMENT DEGRADATION PROBLEMSManuscripts are subject to problems arising from the degradation of pigments,particularly those that are copper-, arsenic-, or lead-based. Degradation products
of pigments can be identified by Raman microscopy, enabling each such process
to be revealed and its progress monitored.Verdigris is an umbrella term used for any green or blue corrosion productresulting from the action of atmospheric agents on copper, in particular acetic
acid and sometimes formic acid. It can be regarded as a disfiguring product of the
corrosion of objects made of copper alloys or as a pigment made deliberately by
corrosion of copper or by the conversion of a copper compound. Moreover, it
dissolves in many oils and resins to form copper resinates that can themselves be
dissolved in size or gelatin to form copper proteinates (Scott et al., 2001). Raman
microscopy has recently been applied to the problem of characterizing these
chemically very similar compounds.Many black minerals are used, or may have been used, as pigments at differ-ent periods of time, notably carbon black, chromite (FeCr2O4), covellite (CuS),galena (PbS), ilmenite (FeTiO3), magnetite (Fe3O4), plattnerite (PbO2), pyro-lusite (MnO2), tenorite (CuO), and silver glance (Ag2S). Both galena andplattnerite may develop on artwork as degradation products of other lead-
containing pigments, notably white lead, the net result being a gross disfigure-
ment of the manuscript or painting. The identification may now be carried out
using modern Raman microscopes and excitation lines of low power, both di-
rectly and by way of the recognition of their oxidation products (i.e., PbO.PbSO4,3PbO.PbSO4, and 4PbO.PbSO4) (Giovannoni et al., 1990; Burgio et al., 2001).Reversal of black PbS to white PbSO4 is one option sometimes used for restora-
tion of the intended effects of the artist, but this procedure is by no means fully
accepted by conservators. Detailed Raman studies have also been carried out on
millimetre-sized single crystals of PbS, a model material for quantum dot re-
search, under resonance Raman conditions, and the phonon modes identified
and assigned (Smith et al., 2002b).In Figure 10 a detail of the illumination (a set of dividers) in volume 1, f. 33v,of the Jamnitzer Manuscript reveals that severe degradation of lead white to lead
sulfide can readily be demonstrated in situ by Raman microscopy, most particu-
larly in the highlights (now black) (Smith et al., 2002a). Copper pigments, such as
azurite, likewise rapidly degrade to covellite in the presence of gaseous H2S (Smithand Clark, 2002a), as is also easily shown by Raman microscopy (see Figure 11).Raman microscopy may also be applied to the study of the corrosion ofmetals (Martens et al., 2003), including the main encrustments on ancient bronzes

derived from copper, tin, and lead. Thus bronze artifacts from Chinese tombs of
the Eastern Han dynasty (25-220) have been shown to include among their corro-
sion products Cu2O (cuprite), CuCO3.Cu(OH)2, PbO, PbCO3, and PbSO4(McCann et al., 1999). Two-dimensional mapping provided information on the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 10Detail of the illumination in vol. 1, f. 33v, of the Jamnitzer manuscript at the
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in which the original highlights of lead white have
degraded to lead sulfide (black) (Smith et al., 2002a). Reproduced with permission, Inter-national Institute for Conservation.FIGURE 11Raman spectra of covellite, CuS, azurite, 2CuCO
3.Cu(OH)2, and blackenedazurite following brief exposure of the azurite to H2S vapor (Smith and Clark, 2002a).Reproduced with permission, Elsevier.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS183spatial extent of each corrosion product. Many extensions to this work are beingplanned with the vast collections of degraded metals in museums in order to
understand the nature and causes of the degradation. The most recent studies of
this sort have led to the Raman-based identification of iron oxide impurities
(magnetite, iron-deficient magnetite, and hematite) in early industrial-scale pro-
cessed platinum (e.g., in the platinum metal constituting the three-ruble Russian
coin of 1837) (van der Weerd et al., 2004a).Modern Raman spectrometers may now be capable of identifying irongallotannate inks on manuscripts, a notoriously difficult task. Recent studies on
the Vinland Map (Beinecke Library, Yale University) have shown that the frag-
mented black ink lines that define the map consist of carbon black rather that iron
gallotannate and that the yellow-brown background to the lines, but not else-
where, contains nearly pure anatase (TiO2) (Brown and Clark, 2002). This mate-rial had earlier been shown to have a particle size (approximately 0.15 m) andparticle size distribution that is characteristic of the synthetic ca 1920 product
(McCrone, 1988). The Raman results thus confirm that the map dates from the
twentieth not the early fifteenth century, and thus that it is not pre-Columbian;
this is in complete agreement with the analysis of Towe (1990).CONCLUSIONRaman microscopy is now established to be a key technique for the identificationof pigments on works of art, largely because of its high spatial and spectral resolu-
tion, excellent sensitivity and specificity, and because it can be applied to an
object in situ. Difficulties may arise on occasions with certain organic pigments,
supports, and binders that fluoresce, that are photosensitive, or that fail to yield a
Raman spectrum owing to their small particle size, high dilution, or poor scatter-
ing efficiency. The use of other techniques in conjunction with Raman micros-
copy then becomes essential in order to effect full pigment characterization. Re-
mote laser Raman microscopy (Clark and Gibbs, 1998a) will increasingly be used
for the study of objects unable to be moved from their place of exhibition. The
whole area is one in which the arts and the sciences can coordinate with great
effect.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe author is most grateful to the members of his group in this field, most re-cently Drs. K. L. Brown, L. Burgio, T. D. Chaplin, S. Firth, A. Jurado-Lopez, G. D.
Smith, and J. van der Weerd, and to Renishaw PLC, the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council, the European Union, and the British Library for their
support of this research.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTREFERENCESAnglos, D., S. Couris, and C. Fotakis. 1997. Applied Spectroscopy 51:1025-1030.
Bell, I. M., R. J. H. Clark, and P. J. Gibbs. 1997. Spectrochimica Acta Part A 53:2159-2179.
Best, S. P., R. J. H. Clark, and R. Withnall. 1992. Endeavour, New Series 16:66-73.
Best, S. P., R. J. H. Clark, M. A. M. Daniels, and R. Withnall. 1993. Chemistry in Britain 118-122.
Best, S. P., R. J. H. Clark, M. A. M. Daniels, C. A. Porter, and R. Withnall. 1995. Studies in Conserva-tion 40:31-40.
Bikiaris, D., Sister Daniilia, S. Sotiropoulou, O. Katsimbiri, E. Pavlidou, A. P. Moutsatsou, and Y.Chryssoulakis. 2000. Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy56:3-18.Bousfield, B. 1992. Surface Preparation and Microscopy of Materials. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.
Brown, K. L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2002. Analytical Chemistry 74:3658-3661.
Brown, K. L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2004a. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 35:4-12.
Brown, K. L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2004b. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 35:181-189.
Brown, K. L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2004c. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 35:217-223.
Brundle, C. R., C. A. Evans, and S. Wilson. 1992. Encyclopaedia of Materials Characterization. Boston:Butterworth-Heinemann.Burgio, L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2000. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 31:395-401.
Burgio, L., and R. J. H. Clark. 2001. Spectrochimica Acta Part A 57:1491-1521.
Burgio, L., D. Ciomartan, and R. J. H. Clark. 1997a. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 28:79-83.
Burgio, L., D. Ciomartan, and R. J. H. Clark. 1997b. Journal of Molecular Structure 405:1-11.
Burgio, L., R. J. H. Clark, and H. Toftlund. 1999a. Acta Chemica Scandinavica 53:181-187.
Burgio, L., R. J. H. Clark, and P. J. Gibbs. 1999b. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 30:181-184.
Burgio, L., R. J. H. Clark, T. Stratoudaki, D. Anglos, and M. Doulgeridis. 2000. Applied Spectroscopy54:463-470.Burgio, L., R. J. H. Clark, and S. Firth. 2001. Analyst 126:222-227.
Burgio, L., R. J. H. Clark, L. Sheldon, and G. D. Smith, 2005. Analytical Chemistry 77:1261-1267.
Castillejo, M., M. Martin, D. Silva, T. Stratoudaki, D. Anglos, L. Burgio, and R. J. H. Clark. 2000.Journal of Molecular Structure 550:191-198.
Chaplin, T. D., R. J. H. Clark, D. Jacobs, K. Jensen, and G. D. Smith. 2002a. In Raman Spectroscopy,eds. J. Mink, G. Jalovszky, and G. Kereszbury, pp. 823-824. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.Chaplin, T. D., R. J. H. Clark, D. Jacobs, K. Jensen, and G. D. Smith. 2005. Analytical Chemistry 77.
Chaplin, T. D., R. J. H. Clark, and D. R. Beech. 2002b. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 33:424-428.
Chaplin, T. D., A. Jurado-Lopez, R. J. H. Clark, and D. R. Beech. 2004. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy35:600-604.Cilberto, E., and G. Spoto, eds. 2000. Modern Analytical Methods in Art and Archaeology. New York:
Wiley.Ciomartan, D., and R. J. H. Clark. 1996. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society 7:395-402.
Clark, R. J. H. 1964. Journal of Chemical Education 41:488-492.
Clark, R. J. H. 1995. Chemical Society Reviews 24:187-196.
Clark, R. J. H. 2002. In Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy, eds. J. M. Chalmers and P. R. Griffiths,pp. 2977-2992. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.Clark, R. J. H., and M. L. Curri. 1998. Journal of Molecular Structure 440:105-111.
Clark, R. J. H., and T. J. Dines. 1986. Angewandte Chemie-International Edition in English 25:131-158.
Clark, R. J. H., and P. J. Gibbs. 1997. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 28:99-103.
Clark, R. J. H., and P. J. Gibbs. 1998a. Journal of Archaeological Science 25:621-629.
Clark, R. J. H., and P. J. Gibbs. 1998b. Analytical Chemistry 70:99A-104A.
Clark, R. J. H, and K. Huxley. 1996. Science and Technology for Cultural Heritage 5:95-101.
Clark, R. J. H., and J. van der Weerd. 2004. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 35:279-283.Clark, R. J. H., L. Cridland, B. M. Kariuki, K. D. M. Harris, and R. Withnall. 1995. Journal of theChemical Society, Dalton Transactions 2577-2582.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMAN MICROSCOPY IN THE IDENTIFICATION OF PIGMENTS185Clark, R. J. H., P. J. Gibbs, K. R. Seddon, N. M. Brovenko, and Y. A. Petrosyan. 1997a. Journal ofRaman Spectroscopy 28:91-94.
Clark, R. J. H., M. L. Curri, and C. Laganara, 1997b. Spectrochimica Acta Part A 53:597-603.
Clark, R. J. H., M. L. Curri, G. S. Henshaw, and C. Laganara. 1997c. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy28:105-109.Colomban, P., G. Sagon, and X. Faurel. 2001. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 32:351-360.
Corset, J., P. Dhamelincourt, and J. Barbillat. 1989. Chemistry in Britain 612-616.Daniilia, Sister, D. Bikiaris, P. Gavala, R. J. H. Clark, and Y. Chryssoulakis. 2002. Journal of RamanSpectroscopy 33:807-814.
Faurel, X., A. Vanderperre, and P. Colomban. 2003. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 34:290-294.Feller, R. L., ed. 1986. ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
FitzHugh, E. W., ed. 1997. ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gettens, R. J., and G. L. Stout. 1966. Painting Materials. New York: Dover.
Giovannoni, S., M. Matteini, and S. Moles. 1990. Studies in Conservation 35:21-25.
Griffith, W. P. 1987. In Advances in Spectroscopy, vol. 14, eds. R. J. H. Clark and R. E. Hester, pp. 119-
186. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.Jorgensen, C. K. 1962. Absorption Spectra and Chemical Bonding. Oxford: Pergamon.
Jurado-Lopez, A., O. Demko, R. J. H. Clark, and D. Jacobs. 2004. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy35:119-124.Liem, N. Q., N. T. Thanh, and P. Colomban. 2002. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 33:287-294.
Long, D. A. 2002. The Raman Effect. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.
Martens, W., R. L. Frost, J. T. Kloprogge, and P. A. Williams. 2003. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy34:145-151.Mayer, R. 1972. The ArtistÕs Handbook. London: Faber and Faber.
McCann, L. I., K. Trentleman, T. Possley, and B. Golding. 1999. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy30:121-132.McCrone, W. C. 1988. Analytical Chemistry 60:1009-1018.
Perez, F. R., H. G. M. Edwards, A. Rivas, and L. Drummond. 1999. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy30:301-305.Pollard, A. M., and C. Heron. 1996. Archaeological Chemistry. Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry.
Raman, C. V., and K. S. Krishnan. 1928. Nature 121:501.
Roosen-Runge, H., and A. E. A. Werner. 1960. In Evangeliorum Quattuor Codex Lindisfarnensis, vol.2, ed. T. D. Kendrick, pp. 263-272. Lausanne: Urs Gras.Roy, A., ed. 1993. ArtistsÕ Pigments, vol. 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scott, D. A., Y. Taniguchi, and E. Koseto. 2001. Reviews in Conservation 2:73-91.
Smith, G. D., and R. J. H. Clark. 2002a. Journal of Cultural Heritage 3:101-105.
Smith, G. D., and R. J. H. Clark. 2002b. Reviews in Conservation 2:92-106.
Smith, G. D., and R. J. H. Clark. 2004. Journal of Archaeological Science 31:1137-1160.Smith, G. D., A. Derbyshire, and R. J. H. Clark. 2002a. Studies in Conservation 47:250-257.
Smith, G. D., S. Firth, R. J. H. Clark, and M. Cardona. 2002b. Journal of Applied Physics 92:4375-4380.
Thompson, D. V. 1956. The Materials and Techniques of Painting. New York: Dover.
Towe, K. M. 1990. Accounts of Chemical Research 23:84-87.
Turrell, G., and J. Corset, eds. 1996. Raman Microscopy: Developments and Applications. London:
Academic Press.van der Weerd, J., T. Rehren, S. Firth, and R. J. H. Clark. 2004a. Materials Characterisation 53: 63-70.van der Weerd, J., G. D. Smith, S. Firth, and R. J. H. Clark. 2004b. Journal of Archaeological Science31:1429-1437.Vandenabeele, P., L. Moens, H. G. M. Edwards, and R. Dams. 2000. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy31:509-517.Wehlte, K. 1975. The Materials and Techniques of Painting. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Zuo, J., C. Xu, C. Wang, and Z. Yushi. 1999. Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 30:1053-1055.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186Paint Media Analysis
Michael R. SchillingSenior ScientistThe Getty Conservation InstitutePigments and organic binding media are the two principle components of paint.Whereas pigments impart color to paint, it is the role of the organic binding
media to bind together the grains of pigment and adhere them to the work of art.
Synthetic polymers are the binding media of choice for most of todayÕs commer-
cial paints. Nevertheless, the continued use by contemporary artists of such natu-
ral products as egg, milk, animal hides, vegetable oils, plant gums, waxes, and
natural resins (which were the only binding media available from antiquity

ity, versatility, and working properties that artists value.Conservation scientists are often called upon to analyze organic binding me-dia and pigments in painted works of art. Knowledge obtained from the study of
artistsÕ materials and techniques enriches our understanding of the history of art,
informs the decisions of conservators who must develop appropriate conserva-
tion treatments, and reveals compositional changes in artistsÕ materials brought
about by age, weathering, and environmental factors. Although many instrumen-
tal analysis techniques now exist for identifying organic substances, several key
factors limit the actual number of techniques that are suitable for identifying
organic binding media. To begin, typical samples removed from paintings weigh
in the range of 1 to 50 micrograms; in many instances the medium simply may be
present below instrumental detection limits. Mixtures of organic binding media
may present problems of overlapping signals. Physical aging and pigment inter-
ferences may complicate data interpretation by changing the original composi-
tion. Moreover, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to resolubilize some
organic binding media (such as egg tempera) once they have become dried into(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS187paint films. For those instrumental techniques that are capable of detecting or-ganic binding media, application of simple qualitative analysis limits the extent to
which the analytical test results may be interpreted.Quantitative gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is one of thefew analytical techniques capable of overcoming the myriad of problems associ-
ated with identification of natural organic binding media in painted works of art.
In research at the Getty Conservation Institute, quantitative GC-MS procedures
were developed for identifying organic binding media based on proteins, oils, and
plant gums. The procedures were validated on test paints that were subjected to
two types of artificial aging (six weeks at 80C and 500 hours in a Weather-O-Meter light exposure chamber at 50 percent RH and 50C). The present studyillustrates the utility of quantitative GC-MS in the study of paintings by two
prominent American artists.A TECHNICAL STUDY OF PAINTINGS BY JACOB LAWRENCEJacob Lawrence was known for his simplified, brilliant graphic forms that depictAfrican American history and experience (Steele, 2000). Throughout his long
career he favored working in various water-based organic binding media com-
monly referred to as tempera: casein, egg, plant gums, and animal glue (Mayer,
1940). It is known that Lawrence mixed some of his own tempera paints from
artistsÕ recipe books, whereas in many of his later works he used commercially
available tube colors. Manufacturers often add materials to tube colors, in addi-
tion to the binding media, to modify the working properties of the paints and
stabilize the mixtures. These additives include glycerol, seed oils (such as linseed,
poppy, and walnut), natural resins (dammar, rosin), phthalate plasticizers, and
sugar. From these lists it is quite clear that LawrenceÕs paint media may be com-plicated mixtures of many substances (Steele and Halpine, 1993). It should also
be noted that it is nearly impossible to differentiate these tempera media based
solely on the appearance of the painted surface, yet because this is sometimes the
only means available to museum registrars when cataloguing their collections,
these records are sometimes erroneous.Recently a technical study of samples from a number of LawrenceÕs paintings(see Table 1) was undertaken to learn more about his painting technique, check
the accuracy of museum archival records, and contribute to a catalogue raisonn”of LawrenceÕs paintings (Schilling et al., 2000). Pigments were identified in thepaint samples using polarized-light microscopy. Some samples were tested using
Fourier transform infrared microspectrometry (FTIR) to identity the paint com-
ponents.To test for proteinaceous media in paint samples, amino acids were liberatedby acid hydrolysis and analyzed by quantitative GC-MS in the form of (tert-butyl-dimethylsilyl) derivatives (see Appendix A for experimental details) (Simek et al.,
1994; Columbini et al., 1998; Schilling and Khanjian, 1996a). The quantitative(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTTABLE 1Jacob Lawrence Paintings Analyzed in This Study
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New YorkBlind Beggars, 1938National Museum of American Art, Washington, D.C.Painting the Bilges, 1944New Jersey, 1946Men Exist for the Sake of One Another, 1958Library, 1960Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.African Gold Miners, 1946Vaudeville, 1951The Cue and the Ball, 1956Magic Man, 1958Playing Card (Joker) or (King), 1962Harriet and the Promised Land No.10, 1967In a Free Government, 1976Worcester Art MuseumThe Checker Players, 1947The Museum of Modern Art, New YorkSedation, 1950Private CollectionStruggle Series No.11: Informers Coded Message, 1955Ordeal of Alice, 1963National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.Street to Mbari, 1964Daybreak-A Time to Rest, 1967Merril C. Berman CollectionStudents with Books, 1966Jacob and Gwen Knight Lawrence CollectionOther Rooms, 1975results for the alkyl- and imino-substituted amino acids (the so-called ÒstableÓamino acids) were normalized to 100 mole percent. The quantitative yields for the
other amino acids are often unreliable due to pigment interferences in the hy-
drolysis and/or derivatization procedures, or due to aging (Halpine, 1992; Ronca,
1994; Schilling and Khanjian, 1996b); these amino acids were excluded from the
final dataset.Samples tested for plant gum media were hydrolyzed in trifluoroacetic acid,and the monosaccharides were analyzed as O-methyloxime acetate derivatives
(see Appendix B for details) (Murphy and Pennock, 1972; Neeser and Schweizer,
1983). For comparative purposes the monosaccharide dataset, excluding glucose
and fructose, were normalized to 100 weight percent.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS189Test Results for Jacob Lawrence PaintingsTable 2 lists the quantitative stable amino acid test results for the Lawrencepaint samples with those of several common proteinaceous and plant-gum-
binding media included for reference (the reference data originated from in-
house tests and from published sources [Schilling et al., 1996]). Carbohydrate
compositions for selected Lawrence samples and various reference materials are
listed in Table 3.Using the method of correlation coefficients, the quantitative stable aminoacid composition for each sample was compared to those of the common binding
media in order to find the closest match, as listed in Table 4 (Anderson, 1987); the
same method was employed for identification of plant gums (see Table 3). Most
samples correlated very closely either to glue, egg, casein, or gum arabic. In two
paint samples, however, there were indications in the test data that two proteina-
ceous media were present. This situation may arise either because the artist inten-
tionally mixed two binding media together in the paint, or because the paint
sample was contaminated with medium from a second paint layer (this last situ-
ation occurs frequently in samples from egg tempera paintings that have ground
layers mixed with glue). And so, for the two Lawrence samples, simple algebraic
equations were used to find the most likely pair of proteinaceous media that gave
the closest correlations to those in the paint samples (Schilling and Khanjian,
1996c). Thus, the red from Blind Beggars had a 0.99 correlation to a mixture (1:2)
of casein and glue, whereas the green from Sedation had a 0.95 correlation to amixture (1:3) of casein and glue.In general, good agreement was evident between the analytical findings andthe medium attributions in the museum archives. One notable exception was the
detection of glue as the medium of Playing Card
, which had been previouslymisidentified in the archives as plant gum. Another exception was Street to Mbari,which had been assessed visually as having a gouache medium.GC-MS was useful for detecting components in the paints that were unre-lated to the protein or plant gum media. Some samples revealed the presence of
commercial paint additives, such as Struggle Series Number 11. The brown paint
contained egg medium plus high amounts of glycerol, gallic acid, and rosin; this
formulation is consistent with an artistsÕ tube color (Steele, 2000; Steele and
Halpine, 1993; Schilling et al., 2000). Moreover, a few samples showed evidence
of biodeterioration of the paint medium. For instance, oxalic acid (a common by-
product of microbial activity [Matteini, 1998]) was detected in the dark paint
from The Checker Players. It may be that the relatively poor quality of the correla-
tion for the medium in this paint to the reference materials (0.91 to casein, 0.74 to
egg) may be due in part to the effects of biodeterioration.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190TABLE 2 Stable Amino Acid Compositions of Jacob Lawrence Paint SamplesConcentration (mole percent)PaintingSampleALAVALILELEUGLYPROHYP% Protein
Blind BeggarsRed13.510.87.813.728.820.94.64
Checker PlayersPaint & ground16.114.911.322.113.122.30.27
DaybreakYellow22.216.312.321.917.210.20.04
LibraryOchre20.618.316.425.716.32.70.02
Brown22.420.815.725.89.55.30.56
Magic ManLight black24.319.714.223.315.92.30.39
Men ExistBlue & ground21.516.313.524.016.48.30.03
Ordeal of AliceBrown27.219.514.121.713.33.70.42
ParadeBlue20.516.112.922.721.36.40.19
Playing Card (Joker)Blue & paper14.93.52.14.351.613.110.412
Playing Card (King)Red & fibers14.22.71.63.255.812.310.218
Black & paper17.15.53.66.952.610.83.511
SedationGreen & paper14.013.19.016.825.621.00.55
Street to MÕBariYellow & blue18.73.72.03.552.412.67.214
Blue17.83.11.73.251.213.29.713
Struggle Series #11Brown22.216.212.424.114.410.80.012
Students and BooksYellow25.017.813.123.510.48.71.516
Brown & ground23.118.313.222.415.46.70.96

Yellow22.015.112.222.320.67.80.08
VaudevilleBlue24.017.012.926.117.92.10.06
Ground12.416.811.121.88.828.90.23
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS191A STUDY OF WILLEM DE KOONINGÕS PAINTINGS FROM THE 1960S AND 1970S
Willem de Kooning was born in the Netherlands in 1904, and immigrated to theUnited States in 1926. He trained in guild and craft traditions of wood graining,
gilding, marbleizing, lettering, and sign painting; he also spent time as a house
painter and a commercial artist. These experiences gave him a thorough mastery
of materials and a craftsmanÕs skills (Lake et al., 1999).De Kooning routinely exploited unconventional materials for his pictures.Historical and anecdotal records report that he mixed house paint, safflower
cooking oil, water, egg, and even mayonnaise into his artistsÕ paints to achieve the
desired appearance and texture. During the course of creating a painting, he
scraped the painted canvas at dayÕs end, and repeatedly reworked it; for thisprocess to be successful, soft, slow-drying paints were required. Such paints were
abundant in the 1940s and 1950s, when oil was the typical medium in house
paints. Unfortunately for de Kooning, alkyd paint formulations became popular
in the retail trade industry in the 1960s and 1970s; their fast-drying properties
were incompatible with his chosen technique. In paintings from this period,

sources document his use of Bellini Bocour artistsÕ tube colors, which contained
heat-bodied linseed oil, to which he occasionally added safflower oil and water
(Lake et al., 1999).Although his methods and materials have been well documented, it was notclear what his actual practices were at specific times in his career. Moreover, there
was concern that his unusual paint formulations could negatively affect the long-
term stability of his paintings. The paintings executed during the 1960s and 1970s,
in particular, are problematic for conservators, with passages that remain soft and
sticky. Such paint surfaces are easily deformed when touched and they readily
pick up surface dust. To learn more about de KooningÕs materials and techniques,a study was undertaken to analyze the binding media and pigments of a selection
of his paintings from the period of 1960-1977 (Lake et al., 1999). Table 5 provides
a complete list of the paintings that were sampled.Chemistry of Oil PaintsThe chemistry of oil paint is very complex, and even with modern analyticalequipment, it is difficult to understand the precise details of the interactions
between the polymerized oil media and pigments. Nonetheless, a substantial body
of knowledge has been developed that sheds some light on the drying and subse-
quent aging of oil paints (van den Berg, 2002). Essentially, seed oils differ in terms
of their fatty acid distribution on the triglyceride molecules. The so-called drying
oils that are favored by artists (e.g., linseed, walnut, poppy seed) have a high
proportion of multiple unsaturated fatty acids, whereas the semidrying and non-
drying oils (such as castor, safflower, sunflower) do not. All of the aforemen-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTTABLE 3 Gum Sugar Compositions of Jacob Lawrence Paint Samples andPlant Gum Standards, with Correlation Coefficient DataNormalized Weight % of Gum SugarsWeight %SampleGum SugarsRhamnoseFucoseArabinose
African Gold Miners: blue paint10.413.00.136.3
African Gold Miners: black paint6.310.20.129.1
Blind Beggars: blue paint3.817.00.035.5
New Jersey: red paint11.812.90.132.8
Painting the Bilges: blue paint1.915.40.037.7

Gum Arabic standard57.016.00.036.0

Cherry gum standard95.70.60.046.6
Gum tragacanth standard46.43.38.848.4
tioned seed oils contain approximately 10 percent by weight of glycerol, plussmall amounts of saturated fatty acids (the two most important being hexade-
canoic acid and octadecanoic acid, more commonly known as palmitic acid and
stearic acid, respectively) (Mills, 1966).As oil paints dry, unsaturated fatty acids react with oxygen to form a poly-merized oil matrix; triglycerides and diglycerides provide additional cross-links to
the polymerized oil matrix via their glycerol backbones. The saturated fatty acids,
being less reactive, neither oxidize nor cross-link, and so remain as marker com-
pounds in oil paint. During the drying and aging processes, chain scission prod-
ucts such as dicarboxylic fatty acids are formed in oil paint. The most important
dicarboxylic fatty acid marker compound is nonanedioic acid (azelaic acid), but
other straight-chain dicarboxylic fatty acids (that contain from two to ten carbon
atoms) also form (Mills, 1966).Other reactions also occur during aging that further alter the fatty acid distri-bution of oil paints. For example, free fatty acids are produced by hydrolysis of
glycerides (e.g., glycerol esters of fatty acids). As hydrolysis progresses there is a
reduction in residual triglycerides and diglycerides, and formation of free fatty
acids. Complete hydrolysis of an oil paint would eventually yield three moles of
free fatty acids per every mole of glycerol (van den Berg, 2002).Reaction of the carboxylate groups of free fatty acids with pigments thatcontain coordinating metal cations (e.g., lead, copper, cobalt) produces metal
soaps. Evidence has shown that aged oil paints are essentially ionomeric polymers
of fatty acids coordinated with pigments (van den Berg et al., 1999).Figure 1 illustrates the results from a Monte Carlo simulation of the hydroly-sis of a model triglyceride, in which the extent of hydrolysis is estimated by the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS193percent of free fatty acids. This figure shows that nontrivial amounts of triglycer-ides and diglycerides remain even after significant hydrolysis of the model com-
pound. Undoubtedly this model is extremely simple, and does not account for
differing rates of hydrolysis of the middle ester group on a glyceride compared to
the end positions. Nonetheless, it does suggest that residual triglycerides and
diglycerides may remain even in extremely hydrolyzed oil paints, which can addi-
tionally stabilize oil paint ionomeric polymers.Additional alteration of the fatty acid composition of oil paints occurs byevaporation of free fatty acids. So-called Óghost imagesÓ that develop on the glassnext to framed and glazed oil paintings provide clear evidence of fatty acid evapo-
ration (Williams, 1989). Thermogravimetric analysis indicated that palmitic acid
evaporated approximately twice as rapidly as stearic acid or azelaic acid (Schilling
et al., 1999). Oil paints made with lead white pigment produced no visible ghost
image, which is consistent with the fact that lead pigments readily coordinate free
fatty acids.Analysis of Oil PaintsTwo GC-MS procedures were employed to analyze the de Kooning paintsamples. A quantitative procedure for fatty acid and glycerol analysis of food oils
(Mason et al., 1964) was modified to work on oil paint samples (Schilling and
Khanjian, 1996d). In this procedure FAMEs and isopropylidene glycerol (IPG, a
volatile glycerol derivative) were produced quantitatively by overnight treatment
with sodium methoxide in 2,2-dimethoxypropane, followed by addition of
methanolic hydrochloric acid. The FAMEs and IPG were separated in a singleCorrelation Coefficient to Plant Gum StandardsXyloseMannoseGalactoseGum ArabicCherry GumGum Tragacanth
0.70.449.41.000.900.39
0.70.559.30.970.840.24

0.50.546.51.000.880.37

0.50.253.60.990.870.31

0.60.046.31.000.900.42

0.00.048.0
10.42.240.2
27.50.012.1
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194TABLE 4 Correlation Between Jacob Lawrence Paint Sample Data (Table 2)and Reference Material Data (Table 8)Correlation CoefficientPaintingPaint SampleCollagenEgg YolkCaseinOther
Blind BeggarsRed0.820.290.33
0.99 (1 part glue, 2 parts casein)
Checker PlayersPaint & groundÐ0.060.79
0.91DaybreakYellow0.06
0.980.39LibraryOchre0.130.900.19
0.99 (yolk & ultramarine, light aged)
BrownÐ0.400.910.32
0.96 (yolk, aged at 80 deg C)
Magic ManLight blackÐ0.100.900.12
1.00 (Rowney cadmium red)
Men ExistBlue & groundÐ0.030.980.36Ordeal of AliceBrownÐ0.170.890.14
0.96 (yolk, light aged)
ParadeBlue0.190.900.21
0.96 (yolk & lead white, light aged)
Playing Card (Joker)Blue & paper0.99Ð0.06Ð0.27Playing Card (King)Red & fibers0.99Ð0.07Ð0.28Black & paper0.960.13Ð0.19SedationGreen & paper0.610.550.56
0.95 (1 part glue, 3 parts casein)
Street to MÕBariYellow & blue0.980.02Ð0.25Blue0.99Ð0.03Ð0.28Struggle Series #11BrownÐ0.091.000.47Students and BooksYellowÐ0.280.950.36Brown & groundÐ0.080.950.26Yellow0.200.920.25
0.96 (yolk, light aged)
VaudevilleBlueÐ0.010.900.00
0.99 (Rowney cadmium red)
GroundÐ0.210.55
1.00(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS195chromatogram using an HP-INNOWAX capillary column. This procedurederivatizes all three forms of fatty acids in oil paints (free fatty acids, pigment
soaps, and glycerides). The second quantitative procedure used hexamethylene
disilazane with trichloromethyl silane catalyst (HMDS/TMCS) in pyridine to form
trimethyl silyl esters of the free fatty acids and soaps, and separation of the deriva-
tives on a DB-5MS column (Pierce, 1968).In evaluating the quantitative test data several key parameters are calculatedfor identification and diagnostic purposes. For instance, the minimum content of
oil in the paint sample can be approximated from the glycerol content, although
the accuracy of this estimation is limited by loss of glycerol due to aging and
solvent extraction. Second, the molar ratio of palmitic acid to stearic acid (P/S) is
useful for identifying the type of oil present (Mills, 1966). Third, the extent of
hydrolysis may be estimated by comparing the content of free azelaic acid and its
soap to the total azelaic acid content. To probe the extent of alteration of the dried
oil matrix, the two most diagnostic ratios are palmitic to glycerol (P/G), and the
ratio of dicarboxylic fatty acids to glycerol (D/G, where D is the sum of all dicar-
boxylic fatty acids from C3 to C
8 plus C
10). Reduction in P/G from its originalvalue in the fresh oil is caused by loss of palmitic acid due to evaporation or
migration into the canvas and ground layer. Photo-oxidative reactions are re-
sponsible for increases in D/G (Schilling and Khanjian, 1996d; Schilling et al.,
1997).TABLE 5Willem de Kooning Paintings Analyzed in This Study
Door to the River, 1960, Whitney Museum of American Art, New YorkSpikeÕs Folly II, 1960, Robert and Jane Meyerhoff, Phoenix, MDRosy-Fingered Dawn at Louse Point, 1963, Stedelijk Museum, AmsterdamPastorale, 1963, private collection, New OrleansWoman, Sag Harbor, 1964, Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.Woman, 1965, Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.The Visit, 1966-67, Tate Gallery, LondonTwo Figures in a Landscape, 1967, Stedelijk Museum, AmsterdamAmityville, 1971, private collection. . . Whose Name Was Writ in Water, 1975, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New YorkUntitled I, 1977, Adriana and Robert MnuchinUntitled V, 1977, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 1Monte Carlo simulation of the hydrolysis of a model triglyceride.
NOTE:  10,000 triglyceride molecules and 100,000 iterations were used in this simulation,
which was run using an Excel macro program.Test Results for de Kooning PaintingsTable 6 lists the analytical results for the de Kooning paint samples. From anexamination of the test results a few generalizations can be made. The medium in
the paints with the highest P/S ratios was identified either as poppy oil, or poppy
oil mixed with linseed or castor oil. These paints tended to have the lowest values
for oil content, extent of hydrolysis, and content of dicarboxylic fatty acid degra-
dation products (as measured by D/G).In contrast, the medium in the paints with the lowest P/S ratios was identi-fied either as linseed oil, or linseed oil mixed with castor oil; it is likely that de
Kooning used unmixed tube colors in these paints. They had the highest values
for oil content, extent of hydrolysis, and D/G ratios. Paints with intermediate P/S
ratios contained linseed oil and safflower oil mixtures, and differed little from the
high P/S paints in terms of hydrolysis and D/G.Void spaces inside paint samples indicate that de Kooning mixed water intothem, and the test results show that this procedure had no deleterious effect on
the extent of hydrolysis. Another finding was that the sticky paints tended to
contain cadmium pigments or synthetic organic dyestuffs, whereas no clear rela-
tionship to the drying rate of the oil medium was apparent. The sticky paints
exhibited the highest degree of hydrolysis, as measured by the free fatty acid(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.197TABLE 6 Test Results for Willem de Kooning Paint Samples%%Painting, DateSample Description
P/SP/GD/GHydrolyzedOilOil(s)
Door..., 1960Pink, voids, matte
3.50.260.323225Poppy/linseed
White, voids, matte, brittle4.10.260.361929Poppy
SpikeÕs..., 1960Yellow, soft, matte
0.90.040.664052Castor
Blue, brittle, matte3.70.240.341223Poppy/castor
Pastorale, 1963Light blue, voids, brittle
4.80.20.363248Poppy
Rosy..., 1963Bright yellow, soft
1.90.070.574850Castor/linseed
Woman..., 1964Pink, soft3.40.10.232918Poppy/linseed
Woman, 1965Amber drip2.60.140.651752Linseed/safflower

Visit, 1966Orange, soft2.60.120.53324Linseed/safflower
Wrinkled gray-green, soft2.60.150.233431Linseed/safflower
Two..., 1967Orange, soft, soft2.10.170.322931Linseed/safflower
Pink, wrinkled, soft2.70.160.33233Safflower
Amber gel, wrinkled flesh2.80.090.352259Safflower
Amityville, 1971Yellow, wrinkled, soft
3.90.210.282823Poppy/linseed
White, soft3.70.240.251538Poppy/linseed
Whose..., 1975Amber drip, sticky
2.60.090.282529Linseed/safflower
Red, soft, sticky2.70.140.262667Safflower

Maroon, soft, stringy3.80.130.342624Poppy/castor
Untitled I, 1977White, wrinkled1.30.050.362359Linseed
Pink-white, wrinkled1.40.040.343767Linseed
Untitled V, 1977Gray, wrinkled, voids
1.80.070.311740Linseed
Black, wrinkled0.910.030.726648Castor
Dark blue, wrinkled, soft2.00.070.483759Linseed
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTcontent. In conclusion, the results supported the anecdotal evidence that deKooning did occasionally add semidrying oils to his paints, which would have
retarded their drying rate.CONCLUSIONSQuantitative GC-MS is an important analytical technique for characterizing natu-ral products that have been used by artists as organic binding media. In the study
of modern paintings the technique provides valuable information that enhances
our understanding of artistsÕ materials and techniques, permits changes in mate-
rial composition to be monitored, and contributes to the development of appro-
priate conservation strategies.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe following colleagues from the Getty Conservation Institute made invaluablecontributions to the analytical research presented in this paper: Herant Khanjian,
Joy Keeney, David Carson, Narayan Khandekar, Andrew Parker, and Luiz Souza.
Jim Druzik was the creative influence behind the Monte Carlo simulation study.
I am especially grateful to Dusan Stulik, who developed the organic binding me-
dium research project and who was its director for many years. Our principal
collaborator in the Jacob Lawrence study was Elizabeth Steele, paintings conser-
vator at the Phillips Collection, whose extensive knowledge of LawrenceÕs tech-nique and materials greatly enhanced the interpretation of our research. I am also
thankful for the enthusiastic support of Peter Nesbett, director of the Jacob
Lawrence Catalogue Raisonn” project, and Michelle DuBois, associate director.
In the Willem de Kooning study we collaborated with Susan Lake, chief conserva-
tor at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, who contributed in count-
less ways to the success of the research. Suzanne Quillen-Lomax, organic chemist
at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., studied a number of de Kooning
paintings and was an important partner in the collaboration.REFERENCESAnderson, R. L. 1987. In Practical Statistics for Analytical Chemists. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.Columbini, M. P., R. Fuoco, A. Giacomelli, and B. Muscatello. 1998. Characterization of proteina-ceous binders in wall painting samples by microwave-assisted acid hydrolysis and GC-MS de-termination of amino acids. Studies in Conservation 43:33-41.
Halpine, S. 1992. Amino acid analysis of proteinaceous media from Cosimo TuraÕs The Annunciationwith Saint Francis and Saint Louis of Toulouse. Studies in Conservation 37:22-38.
Khn, H. 1986. In Conservation and Restoration of Works of Art and Antiquities, vol. 1, pp. 157-167.
London: Butterworths.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS199Lake, S., S. Lomax, and M. Schilling. 1999. A technical investigation of Willem de KooningÕs paint-ings from the 1960s and 1970s. In ICOM Committee for Conservation Preprints, 12th TriennialMeeting, Lyon, France 29 August-3 September 1999, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 381-385. London: Jamesand James.Mason, M. E., M. E. Eager, and G. R. Waller. 1964. A procedure for the simultaneous quantitativedetermination of glycerol and fatty acid contents of fats and oils. Analytical Chemistry 36(3):597-
590.Matteini, M. 1998. Different integrated analytical methods for the study of the pictorial techniques inthe Vasari and Zuccari wall paintings of Florence Cathedral: Comparison and discussion. Sci-ence and Technology for Cultural Heritage 7(1):83-94.
Mayer, R. 1940. In The Artists Handbook of Materials and Techniques, p. 223. New York: Viking Press.Mills, J. S. 1966. The gas chromatographic examination of paint media. Part I. Fatty acid compositionand identification of dried oil films. Studies in Conservation 11:92-107.
Murphy, D., and C. A. Pennock. 1972. Gas chromatographic measurement of blood and urine glu-cose and other monosaccharides. Clinica Chimica Acta 42:67-75.Neeser, J. R., and T. F. Schweizer. 1983. A quantitative determination by capillary gas-liquid chroma-tography of neutral and amino sugar (as O-methyloxime acetates). Analytical Biochemistry142:58-67.Pierce, A. E. 1968. In Silylation of Organic Compounds, pp. 160-162. Rockford, Ill.: Pierce ChemicalCo.Ronca, F. 1994. Protein determination in polychromed stone sculptures, stuccoes and gesso grounds.Studies in Conservation 39:107-120.
Schilling, M., and H. Khanjian. 1996a. Gas chromatographic investigations of organic materials in artobjects: New insights from a traditional technique. In Innovation et Technologie au Service duPatrimoine de lÕHumanite, pp. 137-143. Paris: UNESCO/Admitech.Schilling, M., and H. Khanjian. 1996b. Gas chromatographic analysis of amino acids as ethylchloroformate derivatives. II. Effects of pigments and accelerated aging on the identification ofproteinaceous binding media. Journal of the American Institute of Conservation 35:123-144.
Schilling, M., and H. Khanjian. 1996c. Gas chromatographic analysis of amino acids as ethylchloroformate derivatives. III. Identification of proteinaceous binding media by interpretationof amino acid composition data. In ICOM Committee for Conservation Preprints, 11th TriennialMeeting, Edinburgh, Scotland 1-6 September 1996, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 220-227. London: Jamesand James.Schilling, M., and H. Khanjian. 1996d. Gas chromatographic determination of the fatty acid andglycerol content of lipids. I. The effects of pigments and aging on the composition of oil paints.
In ICOM Committee for Conservation Preprints, 11th Triennial Meeting, Edinburgh, Scotland 1-6September 1996, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 220-227. London: James and James.Schilling, M., D. Carson, and H. Khanjian. 1999. Gas chromatographic determination of the fattyacid and glycerol content of lipids. IV. Evaporation of fatty acids and the formation of ghostimages by framed oil paintings. In ICOM Committee for Conservation Preprints, 12th TriennialMeeting, Lyon, France 29 August-3 September 1999, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 242-247. London: Jamesand James.Schilling, M., H. Khanjian, and D. Carson. 1997. Fatty acid and glycerol content of lipids; effects ofageing and solvent extraction on the composition of oil paints. Techn” 5:71-78.
Schilling, M., H. Khanjian, and L. Souza. 1996. Gas chromatographic analysis of amino acids as ethylchloroformate derivatives. I. Composition of proteins associated with objects of art and monu-ments. Journal of the American Institute of Conservation 35:45-59.
Schilling, M., N. Khandekar, J. Keeney, and H. Khanjian. 2000. Identification of binding media andpigments in the paintings of Jacob Lawrence. In Over the Line: The Art and Life of Jacob Lawrence,eds. P. T. Nesbett and M. DuBois, pp. 266-269. Seattle: University of Washington Press.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTSimek, P., A. Heydov⁄, and A. Jegorov. 1994. High resolution capillary gas chromatography and gaschromatography-mass spectrometry of protein and non-protein amino acids, amino alcohols,
and hydroxycarboxylic acids as their tert-butyldimethylsilyl derivatives. Journal of High Resolu-tion Chromatography 17:145-152.
Steele, E. 2000. The materials and techniques of Jacob Lawrence. In Over the Line: The Art and Life ofJacob Lawrence, eds. P. T. Nesbett and M. DuBois, pp. 247-265. Seattle: University of Washing-ton Press.Steele, E., and S. M. Halpine. 1993. Precision and spontaneity: Jacob LawrenceÕs materials and tech-niques. In Jacob Lawrence: The Migration Series. Washington, D.C.: Rappahannock Press in
association with the Phillips Collection.Van den Berg, J. D. J. 2002. In Analytical Chemical Studies on Traditional Linseed Oil Paints. Ph.D.
thesis, pp. 45-52. University of Amsterdam.Van den Berg, J. D. J., K. J. van den Berg, and J. Boon. 1999. Chemical change in curing and aging oilpaints. In ICOM Committee for Conservation Preprints, 12th Triennial Meeting, Lyon, France 29August-3 September 1999, ed. J. Bridgland, pp. 248-253. London: James and James.Williams, S. R. 1989. Blooms, blushes, transferred images and mouldy surfaces: What are these dis-tracting accretions on art works? In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual IIC-CG Conference, pp.65-84. Ottawa: IIC-Canadian Group.APPENDIX APROCEDURE FOR QUANTITATIVE GC-MS ANALYSIS OF AMINO ACIDS,FATTY ACIDS, AND GLYCEROLAS (TERT -BUTYL-DIMETHYLSILYL) DERIVATIVES
All analytical standards were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Company. Weighpaint sample on an ultra-microbalance and then transfer to a 0.1 ml conical vial.
Add norleucine internal standard to give a final concentration of 20 ppm in the
final injection volume. Add 100 l of 6.0N hydrochloric acid (Pierce, sequanal-
grade) to the sample vial and close the vial with a screw-top lid and PTFE septum.
Heat the vial at 105C for 24 hours in an oven. Remove vial from oven, let standuntil cool, and centrifuge.Evaporate the contents to dryness under a stream of nitrogen gas while warm-ing the vial to 60C. Add 40 l of HPLC-grade water (VWR Scientific), replace lid,stir on a vortex mixer, centrifuge, and evaporate the contents to dryness. Add 40
l of absolute ethanol (Spectrum Chemical), replace lid, stir with a vortex mixer,centrifuge, and evaporate the contents to dryness.Prepare a solution of 40 mg of pyridine hydrochloride (Aldrich) to 1 ml ofsilylation-grade pyridine (Pierce Chemical). The silylating reagent consists of 300
l of 99 percent MTBSTFA/1 percent TBDMCS mixture (Pierce Chemical) in 700l of pyridine hydrochloride solution.Add silylating reagent to the vial and replace lid (Note: Use 1 l of reagent per2 g of sample for typical paint samples; use 300 l per 50 to 100 g of pure(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS201proteinaceous reference materials. Use a minimum of 20 l of reagent if an ovenis used for heating and 50 l if a heating block is used).Stir with a vortex mixer, warm the vial at 60C for 30 minutes on a hotplate,and heat in an oven at 105C for five hours. Remove vial from heat, let stand untilcool, centrifuge, and transfer solution to an injection vial.GC-MS Conditions for 30 M  0.25 mm 
 1 
m DB-5MS Column:  Helium
carrier set to a linear velocity of 45 cm/sec; splitless injector at 300C with a 60 secpurge off time; MS transfer line set to 300C. GC oven temperature program:80C for one minute; 75C/m to 180C; 10C/m to 320C; isothermal for threeminutes; solvent delay of seven minutes. MSD source temperature is approxi-
mately 200C. Figure 2 shows the GC-MS result for a standard mixture of aminoacids, fatty acids, and glycerol.Calibration parameters: See Table 7 for the list of quantitation ions for theTBDMS derivatives. Using a quadratic curve fit forcing through the origin gives
correlation coefficients of 0.995 or better for most analytes over the calibration
range of 2 to 50 ppm. Stable amino acid compositions for various reference
materials are listed in Table 8.FIGURE 2GC-MS analysis of (
tert-butyl dimethylsilyl) derivatives of amino acid, fattyacid, and glycerol standards.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTTABLE 7 Quantitation Ions for TBDMS DerivativesAnalytem/zAnalytem/z
Norleucine200.1Glycerol189.1
Alanine260.1Decanoic acid229.1
Glycine246.1Lauric acid257.1
Valine186.1Myristic acid285.1

Leucine200.1Pentadecanoic acid299.2
Isoleucine200.1Palmitic acid313.2
Proline184.1Heptadecanoic acid327.2

Methionine218.1Oleic acid339.2
Serine390.2Stearic acid341.2
Threonine303.2Nonadecanoic acid355.2

Phenylalanine234.1Eicosanoic acid369.2
Aspartic acid302.2Oxalic acid261.1
Hydroxyproline416.2Malonic acid115.1

Glutamic acid432.2Succinic acid289.1
Lysine488.2Glutaric acid303.2
Arginine460.2Adipic acid317.2

Histidine196.1Pimelic acid331.2
Tyrosine302.2Subaric acid345.2
Azelaic acid359.2
Sebacic acid373.2
APPENDIX BPROCEDURE FOR QUANTITATIVE GC-MS ANALYSIS OF SUGARS INPLANT GUMS AS O-METHYLOXIME ACETATE DERIVATIVESAll analytical standards were obtained from Aldrich Chemical Company. Weighsample on an ultra-microbalance, transfer to a conical reaction vial, and add
allose internal standard to give a final concentration of 20 ppm in the injection
volume. Add 100 l of 1.2N trifluoroacetic acid (Pierce Chemical), purge vial with
nitrogen for 30 seconds, and cap. Heat the vial for one hour at 125C, removefrom heat, let stand until cool, and centrifuge.Transfer contents to a 2 ml autosampler vial, rinse conical vial with 40 l ofwater, and combine in the 2 ml vial. Evaporate the contents to dryness using a
nitrogen stream while warming the vial to 50C. Rinse with 40 l of absoluteethanol (Spectrum Chemical), and evaporate to dryness.Add 80 l of a 1 percent solution of methoxyamine hydrochloride (Sigma) inpyridine (Pierce Chemical), replace cap, and heat for 10 minutes at 70C. Removefrom heat, let stand until cool, and add 40 l of acetic anhydride (Supelco).Replace the cap, and heat the vial for 10 minutes at 70C. Remove vial from heat,let stand until cool, and centrifuge.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.203TABLE 8 Stable Amino Acid Compositions of Various Reference MaterialsConcentration (mole percent)Reference MaterialALAVALILELEUGLYPROHYP
Casein (mean)10.916.912.822.08.628.80.0
Collagen & Gelatine (mean)15.73.01.83.746.716.712.4
Egg Yolk (mean)20.916.613.323.214.111.90.0

Yolk & ultramarine, light aged23.515.713.122.315.89.50.0
Yolk, aged at 80C21.019.214.621.913.69.80.0
Rowney egg tempera with cadmium red23.618.714.424.516.12.70.0
Yolk, light aged23.516.013.422.715.58.90.0

Yolk & lead white, light aged23.316.014.021.018.57.10.0
1 part glue, 2 parts casein13.310.17.313.027.322.96.1
1 part glue, 3 parts casein12.711.68.515.023.224.24.8
NOTE: All data taken from (M. Schilling, H. Khanjian, and L. Souza, 1996), except for the mixtures of glue and casein (which are hypothetical mixturescalculated from the equations in M. Schilling and H. Khanjian, 1996), and the Rowney egg tempera with cadmium red (which was tested for this study).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTFIGURE 3GC-MS analysis of O-methyloxime acetate derivatives of carbohydrate stan-
dards.Evaporate the contents using a nitrogen stream while warming the vial to50C. Reconstitute the contents in 100 l chloroform (Spectrum Chemical), andtransfer into a clean 2 ml vial. Rinse the first vial with 100 l chloroform, andcombine. Evaporate chloroform to about 50 l under a nitrogen stream whilewarming the vial to 50C. Transfer the chloroform to a conical glass insert. Evapo-rate to dryness and reconstitute to desired final volume. Reconstitute the contents
in chloroform (use an amount equivalent to 1 g of gum per 5 l), and inject intoGC-MS.GC-MS Conditions for a 15 M  0.25 mm 
 0.25 
m DB-WAX CapillaryColumn: Helium carrier set to a linear velocity of 60 cm/sec; splitless injector at
240C with a 60 sec purge off time; MS transfer line set to 240C. GC oventemperature program: 105C for one minute; 30C/m to 180C; 5C/m to 240C;isothermal for two minutes; solvent delay of seven minutes. MSD source tem-
perature is approximately 200C. Figure 3 shows the GC-MS result for a standardmixture of carbohydrates.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PAINT MEDIA ANALYSIS205TABLE 9 Quantitation Ions for MOA DerivativesAnalytem/zAnalytem/z
Allose115.1Xylose115.1
Rhamnose129.2Mannose131.2
Fucose129.2Fructose203.2

Ribose115.1Glucose89.2
Arabinose115.1Galactose131.2
Calibration parameters: See Table 9 for the list of quantitation ions for theMOA derivatives. Using a linear curve fit forcing through the origin gives correla-
tion coefficients of 0.995 or better for most analytes over the calibration range of
2 to 50 ppm.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206A Review of Some Recent Research
on Early Chinese Jades
Janet G. DouglasDepartment of Conservation and Scientific ResearchFreer Gallery of Art/Arthur M. Sackler GalleryWashington, D.C.ABSTRACTChinese jades produced in the earliest periods of China, during the Neolithic
period (5000 to 1700 BCE) to the Han dynasty (206 BCE to 220 CE), were

typically fashioned by abrasive techniques using fine mineral powders with-
out the advantage of metal tools. Most of these jades are composed of neph-
rite, a fine-grained variety of the tremolite-actinolite series of amphiboles,
although other stone materials were used as well. The study of early Chinese
jades using scientific techniques is a relatively narrow field aimed at devel-
oping the cultural and archaeological contexts of these materials. The pri-
mary areas of investigation include mineralogical identification, geological
source of jade, early jade working methods, detection of heating in jade,
burial alteration ,and surface accretions. Research in this field is particu-
larly exciting given the large number of excavations in China during the
past few decades.INTRODUCTIONIn early China most jade manufacturing involved abrasion, using fine mineralpowders, without the advantage of metal tools. The material of choice was neph-
rite, a fine-grained variety of the tremolite-actinolite series of amphiboles, al-
though other stone materials were used as well. Nephrite is a calcium magnesium
hydroxyl silicate that occurs in a massive form consisting of interlocking fibrous
crystals (Hurlbut and Switzer, 1979). Another jade material, jadeite, was not(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A REVIEW OF SOME RECENT RESEARCH ON EARLY CHINESE JADES207known in China until the eighteenth century, when it was imported fromMyanmar (Burma) for working by Chinese artisans.Scientific study of Chinese jades produced in the earliest periods of China,during the Neolithic period (5000 to 1700 BCE) to the Han dynasty (206 BCE to

220 CE), is leading to a richer understanding of these early cultures and their use

of jade. Study of well-documented, preferably excavated Chinese jades is helping
to place into context those jades of uncertain origin and address issues of
authentication.MINERALOGICAL IDENTIFICATIONDuring the last few decades, analysis of early Chinese jades has focused on theidentification of the mineral content of jade materials. In China over 500 exca-
vated jades from a wide variety of sites dating from the Neolithic period to the
Han dynasty have been analyzed for their mineral content at the Chinese Acad-
emy of Geological Sciences (Wen, 1996, 1997, 1998; Wen and Jing, 1992). Many
of the over 800 early jades at the Freer and Sackler galleries have been analyzed
for mineral content, thus making this collection one of the most extensively
studied in the West. In the last decade minimally invasive analytical methods
such as X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR) have been routinely used for identification. Most of these early Chinese
jades have been found to be composed of nephrite, a fine grained, massive vari-
ety of tremolite-actinolite. Other materials identified include serpentine, marble,
olivine, and corundum. Examples of FTIR spectra from three of these jades are
given in Figure 1. Similar findings appear throughout a wide range of Chinese
archaeological reports.In addition to the study of individual jades, some composite works havebeen studied in detail, such as the Freer GalleryÕs jade and gold pectoral from the
Jincun site in Henan province, dating to about the third century BCE (Douglas

and Chase, 2001). The pectoral consists of 10 jades attached to a gold chain, and
was examined to determine whether its configuration was correct. The jades
were found to be similar in material and workmanship and consistent with other
jades from the site. The pectoral, however, was found to be a pastiche where the
jades were attached to the gold chain with modern gold wires and cut links from
the chain.GEOLOGICAL SOURCE OF JADEBoth nephrite and jadeite are known to occur in geological environments throughmetasomatic processes in a variety of worldwide localities (Harlow and Sorensen,
2001). Two major types of geologic occurrences of Chinese nephrite are known:
nephrite associated with metamorphosed dolomitic marbles and nephrite associ-
ated with serpentinites.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTThe geological sources of nephrite used by early cultures in China are notcurrently known. Such sources may have been depleted in antiquity, as nephrite
can occur in small localized deposits. Research involving scientific methods on
early Chinese jades has been addressing issues related to the geological origin of
nephrite in early China, as well as jade production and use (Douglas, 2003).
Analysis of early Chinese jades at the Freer and Sackler galleries using X-ray
fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) indicates that the geological sources of the ma-
terial used for these jades are most likely associated with dolomitic marbles. The
145 jades analyzed by XRF were found to be consistently low in Cr2O3 (< 0.08percent by wt.) and NiO (< 0.01 percent by wt.), characteristic of nephrites asso-ciated with dolomitic marbles. Future work on geological sourcing of nephrite
should concentrate on these types of deposits in China.Of particular interest are the FeO and MnO contents, which have been deter-mined by XRF to point to simple source patterns for the nephrite used by the
Neolithic cultures of Hongshan, Liangzhu, and Longshan, possibly involving one
or more related geologic sources for each culture. Longshan jades were found to
have unusually high FeO (0.35-17.95 percent by wt.) and MnO (0.02-0.89 percent
by wt.) contents, suggesting a source particularly rich in iron and manganese.
Jades of the Shang and Western Zhou dynasties show a wide range of composi-
tions, suggesting multiple nephrite sources for these objects. XRF is a simple
noninvasive tool for determining minor elemental oxide concentrations, but fur-
ther work on jade sources will need to involve an expanded suite of analytical
methods on a wider range of jade objects and geological samples from China.FIGURE 1 FTIR spectra of some early Chinese jades.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A REVIEW OF SOME RECENT RESEARCH ON EARLY CHINESE JADES209EARLY JADE WORKING METHODSJade working methods have been investigated by a variety of researchers, and weare beginning to understand how early jades were worked. This type of study can
include examination of tool marks on finished and unfinished jades as well as
remains from jade working (Wu, 1994). It is particularly important to understand
the working methods used on jades of the Neolithic Hongshan culture because of

the large numbers of forgeries that have been produced (So and Douglas, 1998;
Forsythe, 1990).The remains of one jade workshop were discovered in 1997 north ofDingshadi near Nanjing in the proximity of the remains of the Neolithic cultures
of Majiaban, Songze, and Liangzhu (Lu and Tao, 2001). The Nanjing Museum
Institute of Archaeology and the Institute of Geological Research of Huadong are
currently excavating this area. To date, the workshop has yielded a variety of stone
tools that may have been used to work jade through cutting, drilling, surface
abrading, polishing, and incising. Raw jade pebbles can still be found along a
nearby riverÕs bank that may have been a source of jade for craftsmen during theNeolithic period.The Lingjiatan site in Anhui province was discovered in 1987, and jadesyielded from the site are being studied with the aid of stereomicroscopy (Zhang
et al., 2002). The Lingjiatan site is thought to be the location of the earliest
agriculture-based city in China, dating to 4000 BCE or earlier. A proficient jade-

producing culture inhabited the area as evidenced by the approximately 1,200
jades that have been unearthed there. This work is showing the presence of
highly developed working methods, and evidence of the earliest use of the Òtuo,Óa small rotary disk tool to create fine incised decoration. A cutting edge of the
tuo would be similar to the flat head of a nail, although other shapes could have
been used for different purposes. In most cases the technique for drilling holes
through jade was typically done from both sides of the object. The high level of
craftsmanship is exemplified by the glossy polish on these jades, which has left
little or no surface striation visible under the stereomicroscope.Tool marks preserved on jades from the collection at the British Museumhave begun to be studied using detailed impressions with silicone dental resin
(Michaelson and Sax, 2003), which follows from previous work on Mesopotamian
seals composed of several quartz varieties. Impressions of small tool marks from
jades are imaged using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), which greatly facili-
tates examination and documentation of these marks for comparison among
jades. One Eastern Zhou jade plaque mentioned in this work was worked with
several different handheld tools.Polishing techniques used in early China has been a largely unexplored areaof research, but quartz sand and related fine-grained materials are generally ac-
cepted as the abrasives employed. After a Liangzhu corundum-rich axe was stud-
ied at the Freer Gallery of Art in 1998, a fragment from a similar axe was studied(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTin a polishing replication experiment using commercially available abrasives thatapproximate natural diamond and corundum (Lu et al., 2005). The resulting
polished surfaces were compared with the original surface polish produced by
Liangzhu jade workers in antiquity. The polished surfaces were examined using
optical and electron microscopes and characterized using atomic force micros-
copy. Three abrasives were used to polish the corundum-rich stone, and the
diamond-polished surface most closely matched the surface polished in antiquity.
The data suggest that extremely hard mineral abrasives composed of diamond
may have been used to polish jades to the high gloss observed on these jades
today. Likewise, corundum would have been another likely hard abrasive used.Ornamental jade rings from the Spring and Autumn period (771 to 475 BCE)
are decorated with spiral grooves that were created through a mechanical method
involving the use of a precision compound machine (Lu, 2004). Such rings must
have had their spiral design drafted or directly carved through precisely linked
rotational and linear motion of the type that has been demonstrated in recent
experiments. These findings imply greater mechanical sophistication than has
previously been assumed for this period in ancient China.DETECTION OF HEATINGSome physical and chemical changes that occur with the heating of nephrite areknown from studies of the amphibole group minerals, tremolite-actinolite
(Whittels, 1951; Vermaas, 1952). The dehydration of actinolite occurs in three
stages, including the loss of adsorbed water, the loss of structural water, and a very
small quantity of absorbed water. Studies using differential thermal analysis
(DTA) show that an exothermic reaction takes place between 815oC and 824oC,and is associated with the oxidation of the small amounts of ferrous iron present
in the mineral. This oxidation is not associated with any structural change in the
crystal structure. Structural water is liberated at temperatures between 930oC and988oC, and at lower temperatures with increasing iron in the mineral structure.This change occurs through a solid-state reaction:Ca2Mg5Si8O22(OH)2 + heat 
 2 CaSiO
3.5MgSiO3 + SiO
2 + H
2O[1]
nephrite (tremolite)pyroxene (diopside)  cristobalite water
Detection of heating in jades using minimally invasive analytical methods is ofinterest because some jades may have been heated in antiquity prior to working or
during burial rituals involving burning. Heat treatment may also be used in the
production of modern-day forgeries to make jade appear older due to natural
weathering or alteration. At the Freer and Sacker galleries, XRD and FTIR have
been used to detect heating in jade, but these techniques have been found to be
successful only if the object has been heated to at least 900oC (Douglas, 2001).In this study a nephrite pebble was sliced and heated in 100oC increments(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A REVIEW OF SOME RECENT RESEARCH ON EARLY CHINESE JADES211from 500oC to 1100oC to observe visual changes and to investigate XRD and FTIRas methods to identify heating in jade. This heating series is shown in Figure 2,
along with an example of a heated jade bracelet dating to the Neolithic or Shang
dynasty. The heating series samples became more white and opaque with heating.
Vickers hardness measurements on the heated samples showed that nephrite be-
comes slightly harder, rather than softer up to 800oC. After this temperature thematerial becomes brittle and tends to fracture more easily. In addition, black
areas developed in the nephrite upon heating, which then became brown at 900oC.This black coloration may be due either to carbonization of small amounts of
organic material trapped in crevices or oxidation of iron in the nephrite.The applicability of noninvasive Raman spectroscopy to the detection ofheating in jade is also being investigated on the same nephrite heating series
(unpublished information from P. P. Knops-Gerrits). Some of the XRD, FTIR,
and microRaman data that can be used to identify heating in jade composed of
nephrite are summarized in Table 1.BURIAL ALTERATION AND SURFACE ACCRETIONSBurial alteration is a particular type of alteration known to occur on early Chinesejades composed of nephrite. Such alteration usually appears as opaque, white,
chalky areas on otherwise translucent, polished jades. In many cases these patchyFIGURE 2(a) Heating series of low-iron (tremolitic) nephrite heating from Hetian (Kho-
tan), Xinjiang province (nephrite slice length approximately 3 cm). (b) Heated bracelet
(F1917.43) dating to the Neolithic period or Shang dynasty (bracelet diameter 6.0 cm).(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212TABLE 1 Some XRD, FTIR, and MicroRaman Data That Can Be Used to Identify Heating in Jade Based on a NephriteHeating ExperimentXRDaFTIRb Peaks
Heating SeriesDiffuse8.38 
†Rel % TSampled-spacingsd-spacing3670 cm
Ð11075 cmÐ1(475 and 512 cm1)MicroRaman
c Peaks
Unheated_++_475 cm
Ð1393, 368, 348, 1058, 1029, 930 cmÐ1500oC_++_475 cm
Ð1393, 369, 349, 1058, 1028, 930 cmÐ1600oC_++_475 cm
Ð1391, 365, 349, 1058, 1027, 930 cmÐ1700oC_++_475 cm
Ð1391, 365, 1058, 1026, 929 cmÐ1800oC_++_475 cm
Ð1391, 367, 1058, 1025, 927 cmÐ1900oC++++512 cm
Ð1391, 323, 1340, 1010 cmÐ11000oC+__+512 cm
Ð1392, 327, 1341, 1011 cmÐ11100oC+__+512 cm
Ð1392, 327, 1341, 1013 cmÐ1NOTE: _ absent; + present.aPhilips RG-2600 X-ray diffractometer with Gandofi camera.bMattson Alpha Centauri Fourier transform infrared spectrometer.cRenishaw R1000 microRaman spectrometer, 785 nm excitation.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A REVIEW OF SOME RECENT RESEARCH ON EARLY CHINESE JADES213areas of alteration are softer than the unaltered areas of the jade. This type ofalteration consists of a selective dissolution or leaching on a microscopic scale
along mineral grain boundaries by solutions of high pH (pH > 9) rather than a
mineralogical change (Gaines and Handy, 1975). This type of high-pH environ-
ment can occur during decay of the corpse(s) with which the jades were buried.
Experiments to produce burial alteration on jade indicate that it is likely that this
type of alteration occurs during the months immediately after the burial when a
corpse decomposes (Aerts et al., 1995).Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a noninvasive technique that isbeing used to study the subsurface morphologies of jade objects to determine
whether surface whitening is due to burning or natural alteration (Yang et al.,
2004). Tomography images are used to show the refractive index or dielectric
constant variations in jades, which reflect their internal structures. To date, OTC
has been applied to a relatively small number of early jades but may prove to be
useful in the future to answer questions relating to the authenticity of jade objects.Surface accretions remain an unexplored area of focused research, probablybecause it can be difficult to determine the significance and relative age of such
deposits. Many jades are heavily cleaned and waxed, which often obliterates any
accretions on their surfaces. Other accretions may unintentionally find their way
to the surface of a jade but are typically not related to its early history. Earthy
encrustations typically include calcareous deposits and soil. Occasionally lacquer
and other organic remains can be seen.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONSResearch using scientific techniques is helping us to understand the mineral com-position and early history of well-documented and excavated jades. Similar work
on unknown jades is helping to solve questions of authenticity (Douglas, 2000).
Such study is most fruitful if it can include thorough visual examination using a
stereomicroscope along with comparison to similar, preferably excavated jades.
No direct methods of dating jade materials exist.Some future areas for research include1.identification and distribution of surface accretions, weathering, and al-
teration;2.continued study of jade working methods, with particular emphasis on
the study of large groups of related jades from individual sites and cultural areas;3.study of jade working remains, including tools and jade debris;

4.analytical and technical methods of dating jade workmanship; and

5.study of early jades from areas neighboring China, such as Korea, Taiwan,
Siberia, and Southeast Asia, as all of these areas had jade-producing cultures.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214SCIENTIFIC EXAMINATION OF ARTREFERENCESAerts, A., K. Janssens, and F. Adams. 1995. Orientations Nov.:79-80.
Douglas, J. G. 2000. Orientations Feb.:86.
Douglas, J. G. 2001. Proceedings of the Conference on Archaic Jades across the Taiwan Straits. Taipei:
Guo li Taiwan da xue li xue yuan di zhi ke xue xi yin xing and Guo li Taiwan da xue chu ban weiyuan hui. pp. 543-554.Douglas, J. G. 2003. In Scientific Research in the Field of Asian Art, Proceedings of the first Forbes
Symposium at the Freer Gallery of Art, ed. P. Jett, with J. G. Douglas, B. McCarthy, and J. Winter,pp. 192-199. London: Archetype Publications in association with the Freer Gallery of Art,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.Douglas, J. G., and W. T. Chase. 2001. Studies in Conservation 46:35-48.Forsythe, A. 1990. Orientations May:54-63.
Gaines, A. M., and J. L. Handy. 1975. Nature 253:433-434.
Harlow, G., and S. Sorensen. 2001. Australian Gemmologist 21:7-10.Hurlbut, C. S., and G. S. Switzer. 1979. Gemology
. 243 pp., Canada: John Wiley.Lu, J., and H.Tao. 2001. In Enduring Art of Jade Age China, vol. 2, ed. E. Childs-Johnson, pp. 31-42.New York: Throckmorton Fine Art.Lu, P. 2004. Science 304:38.
Lu, P. J., N. Yao, J. F. So, G. E. Harlow, J. F. Lu, G. F. Wang, and P. M. Chaikin. February 2005.Archaeometry 47:1-12.Michaelson, C., and M. Sax. 2003. APOLLO Nov.:3-8.
So, J. F., and J. G. Douglas. 1998. In East Asian Jades: Symbol of Excellence, vol. 1, ed. C. Tang, pp.148-163: Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong.Vermaas, F. H. S. 1952. Transactions of the Geological Society of South Africa 55:1.
Wen, G. 1996. Acta Geological Taiwanica 32:55-83.
Wen, G. 1997. Chinese Jades-Colloquies on Art & Archaeology in Asia 18:105-122.
Wen, G. 1998. In East Asian Jades: Symbol of Excellence, vol. 2, ed. C. Tang, pp. 217-221. Hong Kong:Chinese University of Hong Kong.Wen, G., and Z. Jing. 1992. Geoarchaeology 7:251-255.
Whittels, M. 1951. American Mineralogist 36:851.
Wu, T. 1994. Renshi Guyu: Gudai yuqi zhizuo yu xingzhi. Taiwan: Zhonghua ziran wenhua xuehui.Yang, M. L., C. W. Lu, I. J. Hsu, and C. C. Yang. 2004. Archaeometry 46(2):171-182.
Zhang J., Z. Yang, and Q. Cheng. 2002. Dong nan wen hua 5:17-27.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.217APPENDIX
AContributors
Roy S. Berns is the Richard S. Hunter Professor in Color Science, Appearance,
and Technology at the Munsell Color Science Laboratory and Graduate Coordi-
nator of the Color Science masterÕs degree program within the Center for Imaging
Science at Rochester Institute of Technology. He received B.S. and M.S. degrees in
textile science from the University of California at Davis and a Ph.D. degree in
chemistry with an emphasis in color science from Rensselaer Polytechnic Insti-
tute. His research includes spectral-based imaging, archiving, and reproduction
of cultural heritage; algorithm development for multi-ink printing; the use of
color and imaging sciences for art conservation science; and colorimetry. He is
active in the International Commission on Illumination, the Council for Optical
Radiation Measurements, the Inter-Society Color Council, and the Society for
Imaging Science and Technology. He has authored over 150 publications includ-
ing the third edition of Billmeyer and SaltzmanÕs Principles of Color Technology.During the 1999-2000 academic year, he was on sabbatical at the National Gallery
of Art, Washington, D.C., as a Senior Fellow in Conservation Science. During
2000, Dr. Berns was invited to participate in the Technical Advisory Group of the
Star-Spangled Banner Preservation Project. He is currently involved in a joint
research program in museum imaging with the National Gallery of Art, Washing-
ton, D.C., and the Museum of Modern Art, New York. He is also collaborating
with the Art Institute of Chicago and the Van Gogh Museum in digitally rejuve-
nating paintings that have undergone undesirable color changes.Barbara H. Berrie is senior conservation scientist at the National Gallery of Art,Washington, D.C. She received her B.Sc.(Hons) in chemistry from St. Andrews(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218APPENDIX AUniversity, Scotland, and her Ph.D. on electron transfer reactions fromGeorgetown University. She was awarded a National Research Council
Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Naval Research Laboratory where she investi-
gated the reaction of carbon dioxide with low-valent palladium compounds. She
has worked at the National Gallery since 1984. Dr. Berrie has always been inter-
ested in the alchemy of turning base materials into art; now she is involved in
studying the materials and painting methods of artists and analysis of materials
in works of art in order to understand the artistÕs original intention, and addressissues of authenticity and preservation. She has used chemical analysis in the
study of over 300 works of art in all media, including works on paper, easel
paintings, and sculpture. She has published on paintings by Dosso Dossi, Gerard
David, and Orazio Gentileschi among others and on the watercolors of Winslow
Homer. Berrie is a Fellow of the International Institute for Conservation. She is
the editor of the forthcoming volume of ArtistsÕ Pigments 
that will be publishedby the National Gallery of Art.Robin J. H. Clark is the Sir William Ramsay Professor of Chemistry and former
Dean of Science at University College London. His research on physical inorganic
chemistry and spectroscopy is concerned with synthesis, characterisation, and
structure, focusing mainly on the electronic and vibrational spectroscopy of inor-
ganic compounds, on matrix isolation infrared spectroscopy of photochemically
generated species, and on infrared-based spectroelectrochemistry of redox-active
species. In particular, he has made seminal contributions to virtually all aspects of
Raman spectroscopy, notably to the characterisation of deeply coloured materials
(e.g., TiI4) and to metal-metal bonded (e.g., M2X8n-) and linear-chain species, togas-phase Raman band contour analysis, to Raman band intensities and the na-
ture of the chemical bond, to the theory and practice of resonance Raman spec-
troscopy (including its application to the determination of excited state geom-
etries), to nanostructures and thin, photoactive oxide/sulfide films on glass and,
at the Arts/Science interface, to the application of Raman microscopy to the
characterisation of pigments on medieval manuscripts, paintings, icons, papyri,
sherds, and other artefacts. His research is embodied in nearly 500 scientific pa-
pers, 3 books, and 36 edited books. He has acted as Visiting Professor in 13
universities and has lectured in over 350 universities and institutions in 33 coun-
tries throughout the world. He was elected Hon FRSNZ (1989), FRS (1990),
FRSA (1992), FUCL (1992), Hon DSc(Cant 2001), HonFRI (2004), and a Com-
panion of the New Zealand Order of Merit (CNZM, 2004).John K. Delaney has been a scientific consultant to the Conservation Division of
the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., since 1990, and has consulted on
infrared imaging applications for other major American museums. He has pub-
lished over 20 peer-reviewed papers on spectroscopy and several papers on infra-
red imaging in art conservation. He received his Ph.D. in Biophysics from The(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A219Rockefeller University. He completed post-doctoral studies in the spectroscopy ofbiomolecules at the University of ArizonaÕs Department of Chemistry and theDepartment of Biological Chemistry at John Hopkins UniversityÕs School of Medi-cine. He is currently Chief Scientist for the Business Unit of Surveillance and
Reconnaissance Systems, which is a part of Optical and Space Systems of Goodrich
Corporation.Janet G. Douglas is a Conservation Scientist in the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery and
Freer Gallery of ArtÕs Department of Conservation and Scientific Research at theSmithsonian Institution. Her area of research involves the analysis of a variety of
inorganic materials relating to Asian art such as jade, stone, pigments, metals, and
corrosion products. She holds an M.A. in Geology (Metamorphic petrology) from
Bryn Mawr College, awarded in 1980. She was a mineralogist at the U.S. Bureau of
Mines for 5 years, involved in asbestos research. At the Freer and Sackler Galler-
ies, her work involves research on Asian art and archaeological materials to an-
swer questions relating to their authenticity, cultural context, and method of
manufacture. Recent projects involve the mineralogical study of early Chinese
jades, characterization of glass and stone gokok beads from Korea, and petro-
graphic analysis of stone sculpture from Cambodia.Molly Faries received her Ph.D. from Bryn Mawr College in 1972. During her
years at Indiana University/Bloomington from 1975 on, she directed two long-
term infrared reflectography (IRR) research projects: one a National Endowment
for the Humanities Basic Research Grant (1984-1987) and the second, a Samuel
H. Kress Foundation Grant for Art Historical Study Using Infrared Reflectography
(1990-1997). Since 1998, she has also held a chair in Technical Studies in Art
History at the University of Groningen in the Netherlands. Currently, she is in-
volved in research for the catalogue of the fifteenth- and sixteenth-century north-
ern collection of the Centraal Museum, Utrecht (funded by the Mondrian Foun-
dation), and she is CPI for a project entitled, ÒInfrared Reflectography: EvaluativeStudies,Ó in the interdisciplinary De Mayerne Program funded by the Dutch Or-
ganization for Scientific Research (NWO), linking the exact sciences, conserva-
tion, and art history. In 1995, for her many publications in the field of northern
European painting, she was awarded the College Art Association/National Insti-
tute for Conservation Joint Award for Distinction in Scholarship and Conserva-
tion, and in 2001, she was awarded the American Institute for Conservation
Caroline and Sheldon Keck Award for Excellence in Education. Recent publica-
tions include The Madonnas of Jan van Scorel, Serial Production of a CherishedMotif (2000) and Recent Developments in the Technical Examination of Early Neth-erlandish Painting: Methodology, Limitations & Perspectives (2003).
Colin F. Fletcher is a Program Manager of Mouse Genetics at the Genomics
Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation (GNF). His area of research is the(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220APPENDIX Agenetic analysis of mouse models of human disease, specifically neurologicalmutants that display ataxia. While at GNF he was a scientific co-founder of
Phenomix Corp. Prior to joining GNF, he was a staff scientist in the Mammalian
Genetics Laboratory at the National Cancer Institute. In the course of his research
Dr. Fletcher employs a variety of imaging modalities, including confocal micros-
copy, magnetic resonance, X-ray, and low-light luciferase imaging with cryogeni-
cally cooled CCDs. A long-standing interest in the scientific examination of works
of art has lead to the previous publication of two reports in Studies in Conserva-tion. Dr. Fletcher received his Ph.D. from The Rockefeller Institute in Biochemis-try and Molecular Biology and his A.B. from Dartmouth College in Biochemistry.Joyce Hill Stoner has taught for the Winterthur/University of Delaware (UD)
Program in Art Conservation for 29 years and served as its director for 15 years
(1982-1997). She graduated Phi Beta Kappa summa cum laude from the College
of William and Mary in 1968. She received her MasterÕs degree in Art History atthe Institute of Fine Arts of New York University (1970), her diploma in conser-
vation at the NYU Conservation Center (1973), and a Ph.D. in Art History (1995,
UD). She has been a Visiting Scholar in Painting Conservation at the Metropoli-
tan Museum and at the J. Paul Getty Museum. In 1976, she founded the oral
history project for the Foundation of the American Institute for Conservation
and has interviewed more than 45 major art conservation professionals interna-
tionally. Both an art historian and a practicing paintings conservator, Stoner has
treated paintings for many museums and private collectors and was senior con-
servator of the team for the five-year project of examination and treatment of
WhistlerÕs Peacock Room at the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. Stoner
has authored more than 60 book chapters and articles, and has recently been
studying the paintings of the Wyeth family. She is currently serving as a Vice
President of the Board of Directors of the College Art Association and a Vice
President of the Council of the International Institute for Conservation. In June
2003 she received the AIC ÒLifetime Achievement AwardÓ sponsored by Univer-
sity Products.Tom Learner is a Senior Conservation Scientist at Tate in London, the UK
Õsnational collection of British and international 20th/21st century art. He received
a MasterÕs degree in Chemistry from Oxford University in 1988 and a Diploma inthe Conservation of Easel Paintings from the Courtauld Institute of Art, London
in 1991. He spent a year as a Getty Intern in the Painting Conservation and
Scientific Research Departments at the National Gallery of Art (NGA), Washing-
ton, D.C., and then joined the Conservation Department of the Tate Gallery in
1992, where he established appropriate analytical protocols for the identification
and characterisation of twentieth-century painting materials with Fourier Trans-
form infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spec-
trometry (PyGCMS). During this time he received his Ph.D. in Chemistry on The(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A221Characterisation of Acrylic Painting Materials and Implications for their Use, Con-servation and Stability from Birkbeck College, University of London in 1997. He
was a guest scholar at the Getty Conservation Institute (GCI) in 2001, assessing

analytical techniques to follow changes in artistsÕ acrylic emulsion paints with
accelerated light aging and with water immersion. He has written two books: 
TheImpact of Modern Paints, co-authored with Jo Crook and published in 2000, andThe Analysis of Modern Paints, published in 2004. He is currently coordinating a
collaborative research venture into modern paints between the GCI, the NGA,
and Tate, in which three initial areas of focus are improving methods for chemical
analysis, studying their physical properties and assessing cleaning treatments.Carol Mancusi-Ungaro serves as Associate Director for Conservation and Re-
search at the Whitney Museum of American Art and Founding Director of the
Center for the Technical Study of Modern Art at Harvard University Art Muse-
ums. She graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from Connecticut College in
1968 and a Master of Arts degree from the Institute of Fine Arts, New York
University in 1970. She trained and worked in conservation at the Yale University
Art Gallery until she assumed a position of Conservator of Paintings at the British
Art Center at Yale. Subsequent positions included Conservator of Paintings at the
J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, California, and at the Intermuseum Conserva-
tion Association in Oberlin, Ohio. For 19 years she served as Chief Conservator of
The Menil Collection in Houston, Texas, and during that time she also consulted
on the conservation of twentieth-century paintings at the National Gallery of Art
in Washington, D.C. She has lectured widely on the conservation of modern art
and written for retrospective catalogues on Mark Rothko and Jackson Pollock
and most recently for the catalogue raisonn” of Barnett Newman. In 2004 she
received the College Art Association/Heritage Preservation Award for Distinction
in Scholarship and Conservation. In her joint position, she teaches undergraduate
and graduate students at Harvard University and continues to engage in research
documenting the materials and techniques of living artists as well as other issues
pertaining to the conservation of modern art.Louisa C. Matthew received her Ph.D. in Italian Renaissance Art History from
Princeton University with a thesis on Venetian painting. She received fellowships

from the Delmas Foundation, the Harvard Center for Italian Renaissance Studies
at Villa I Tatti in Florence, Italy, and recently a paired Kress fellowship together
with Dr. Barbara Berrie at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Visual Arts at
the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. Currently, Dr. Matthew is an
Associate Professor of Art History at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.Christopher J. McNamara received his Ph.D. in Aquatic Ecology in 2001 from
the Department of Biological Sciences at Kent State University. Since receiving his
doctorate, he has worked in the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences at(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222APPENDIX AHarvard University, first as a Postdoctoral Fellow and currently as a ResearchAssociate. His research focuses on the ecology of biofilm bacteria and he has
studied biofilms in diverse systems such as streams and aircraft fuel tanks. He has
also studied the role of biofilms in deterioration of cultural heritage materials
such as limestone from Maya ruins, protective coatings for bronze statues, syn-
thetic cloth in Apollo spacesuits, and wax sculptures by Edward Degas.Ralph Mitchell is the Gordon McKay Professor of Applied Biology in the Divi-
sion of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard. His Laboratory of Applied
Microbiology has as its focus the microbiology of surfaces. The laboratory inves-
tigates the basic processes involved in the formation of biofilms on surfaces. His
research group emphasizes the effects of biofilms on degradation of stone, metals,
and artificial polymers. Current research in his laboratory involves the role of
microorganisms in the biodeterioration of Maya sites in Mexico and in microbial
processes resulting in corrosion of metals in the U.S.S. Arizona memorial.Richard Newman is Head of Scientific Research at the Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston, where he has worked since 1986. His lab oversees scientific research on
the MuseumÕs collections carried out in collaboration with curatorial and conser-vation activities. One of his research interests is scientific methods for establishing
the provenance of stone sculptures and the application of alteration layers in
helping to resolve questions of authenticity. He is particularly interested in inter-
disciplinary research projects on works of art involving scientists, conservators,
and art historians, and subjects he has studied range from qero cups produced in
the Inka and colonial periods in Peru, to stone sculptures from the Indian sub-
continent, to painting materials used in ancient Egypt. He collaborated with an
art historian, conservator, and technical photographer in a 1988 book, ExaminingVelazquez, which received the 1991 Award for Distinction in Scholarship andConservation from the College Art Association and National Institute for Con-
servation.Thomas D. Perry IV is the Sandia National Laboratories Campus Executive
Graduate Fellow at Harvard University. His research involves understanding the
processes of deterioration of materials, including stone, aluminum, and artificial
polymers, by microorganisms living in biofilms. Biofilms are thin films of micro-
organisms living on surfaces that are capable of changing their surrounding envi-
ronment through production of metabolites resulting in affected material dete-
rioration. He is particularly interested in the specific mineral binding and
mineralization caused by microbially produced polymers.Michael R. Schilling earned his B.S. and M.S. degrees in chemistry from The
California State Polytechnic University, Pomona. He has worked at The Getty
Conservation Institute (GCI) since 1983 and presently holds the position of Se-(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A223nior Scientist in charge of the Analytical Research Section. Michael oversees andcoordinates a wide variety of projects in his section: applied research in materials
analysis, scientific support to GCIÕs field conservation projects, study of museumcollections, evaluation of the air quality in museums, assessment of safe levels of
lighting in museum galleries, and characterization of building materials. One
research area in which Analytical Research scientists have developed considerable
expertise is the characterization and analysis of organic materials. In this project,
several gas chromatography-mass spectrometry procedures were developed for
qualitative and quantitative analysis of natural organic binding media in paints.
He and other scientists in the Analytical Research Section have conducted numer-
ous workshops that were developed to inform conservation professionals about
these GC-MS procedures. Since 1997, Michael and his staff have been studying
the materials and techniques of modern and contemporary artists. Much of this
work has involved the analysis of modern synthetic binding media and synthetic
organic pigments. Michael has participated in collaborative projects to study and
preserve wall paintings in the tomb of Nefertari, located in Luxor, Egypt, and also
in the Mogao Grottoes, which is near the city of Dunhuang in the Gansu Province
of China. He was also a member of a GCI research team that studied the Dead Sea
Scrolls.Elizabeth Walmsley is a painting conservator at the National Gallery of Art
(NGA), Washington, D.C. She has also worked on the NGAÕs systematic cata-logue project from which has stemmed her interests in the technical examination
of Old Master paintings using digital imaging, infrared reflectography, and x-
radiography, and in the history of conservation. She graduated with an AB from
Dartmouth College and received an M.A. in Art History with a Certificate in Art
Conservation from Buffalo State College.Paul M. Whitmore was trained as a chemist, getting a B.S. from Caltech and a
Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley. He has worked in art conser-
vation science for his entire professional career, starting at the Environmental
Quality Laboratory at Caltech, working with Professor Glen Cass studying the
effects of air pollution on works of art. From there, he went to the Fogg Art
Museum at Harvard University, where he worked as a scientist in what is now the
Straus Center for Conservation. Since 1988 he has been at Carnegie Mellon Uni-
versity, directing the Research Center on the Materials of the Artist and Conserva-
tor. His current research interests are in material degradation chemistries, intrin-
sic and environmental risk factors for those processes, and chemical sensors for
material aging processes and risk factors. He has published on paper deteriora-
tion, its treatment, and damage induced by humidity changes; acrylic paint media
stability and the physical damage to acrylic coatings from shrinkage stresses dur-
ing drying; fading of colorants from air pollutant exposure; fading of transparent
paint glazes from light exposure and the relationship between photochemical(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224APPENDIX Adegradation and color changes; and projects utilizing a new nondestructive probeof light stability for colored artifact materials. He has edited a book, Contributionsto Conservation Science, a compilation of research papers published by the firstdirector of the Center, Robert Feller. He is currently senior editor of the Journal ofthe American Institute for Conservation.John Winter is a chemist (B.A., Cambridge University, Ph.D., University of
Manchester) who, after a period of academic and industrial research, moved into
the field of archaeological science and then into research on works of art using
scientific methods. He holds the position of Conservation Scientist on the staff of
the Department of Conservation and Scientific Research, Freer Gallery of Art/
Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, Smithsonian Institution. These museums hold the
national collections of Asian art, which form the chief focus of research in the
department. Dr. WinterÕs own studies have mainly centered around East Asianpaintings, their components, structural aspects, and the influence of microstruc-
ture and macrostructure on deterioration processes. He has published work on
Chinese ink (the ubiquitous black design component across China, Japan, and
Korea), lead-based white pigments, methods for the identification of organic
colorants used as design components or as support dyes, painting techniques
including those based on the use of precious metals, deterioration processes in
East Asian paintings, and on other aspects of paintings as physical objects. Dr.
Winter is a past President of the International Institute for Conservation of His-
toric and Artistic Works, and has received research support from the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation as well as from the Smithsonian Institution itself.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.225APPENDIX
BProgram
Arthur M. Sackler ColloquiumScientific Examination of Art:Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisNational Academy of SciencesWashington, D.C.March 19-21, 2003Chaired by Torsten Wiesel and Roald HoffmannOrganized by Barbara Berrie, E. Ren” de la Rie, Janis Tomlinson, John WinterTHE STATE OF THE FIELDMorning SessionModerator: Timothy P. Whalen, Director, Getty Conservation InstituteOverview and IntroductionJohn Winter, Conservation Scientist, Freer Gallery of Art andArthur M. Sackler Gallery, Washington, D.C.PaintingBarbara Berrie, Senior Conservation Scientist,National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.The Scientific Examination of Works of Art on PaperPaul Whitmore, Director, Research Center on the Materials of the Artistand Conservation, Carnegie-Mellon UniversityScientific Examination of Photographic Art: Why and HowJames Reilly, Director, Image Permanence Institute,Rochester Institute of Technology(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226APPENDIX BChanging Styles in Conservation: Progress to ProcessJoyce Hill Stoner, Professor and Paintings ConservatorWinterthur/University of DelawareAfternoon SessionModerator: Ren” de la Rie, Head of Scientific Research,National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.Stone SculptureRichard Newman, Head of Scientific Research,Museum of Fine Arts, BostonBiodeteriorationRalph Mitchell, Gordon McKay Professor of Applied Biology,Harvard UniversityCeramicsPamela Vandiver, Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch and EducationTECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONSMorning SessionModerator: Barbara Berrie, Senior Conservation Scientist,National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.Imaging TechniquesAnalytical Capabilities of Infrared Reflectography (IRR)Molly Ann Faries, Professor, Groningen UniversityImaging TechniquesRoy Berns, Richard S. Hunter Professor, Munsell Color Science Laboratory,Rochester Institute of TechnologyInfrared Multispectral ImageryJohn Delaney, Consultant to National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.Painting Conservation and Conservation ScienceModern PaintsTom Learner, Conservation Scientist, Tate Gallery(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B227The Impact of Collaborative Investigation on our Understanding of ModernPaintings: A Personal ViewCarol Mancusi-Ungaro, Director for the Technical Study of Modern Art,Harvard University/The Whitney Museum of American ArtAfternoon SessionModerator: Maurizio Seracini, Director of Diagnostic Services,Editech, Inc., Milan, ItalyRaman Microscopy in the Identification of Pigments onManuscripts and Other ArtworkRobin Clark, Sir William Ramsay Professor of Chemistry,University College, LondonDynamic Interactions in Ageing Paintings:Metal Soap Formation, Aggregation and ExtrusionJaap Boon, FOM Institute for Atomic and Molecular PhysicsPaint Media AnalysisMichael Schilling, Head, Analytical Department,Getty Conservation Institute17th Century Dutch PaintingMelanie Gifford, Scientific Research Development,The National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.Recent Research on Early Chinese JadesJanet Douglas, Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery,Washington, D.C.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228APPENDIX
CParticipants
Arthur M. Sackler ColloquiumScientific Examination of Art:Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisNational Academy of SciencesWashington, D.C.March 19-21, 2003Julie ArslanogluPost-Graduate Mellon FellowBalboa Art Conservation Center7689 Palmilla Drive #1416
San Diego, CA  92102

Phone:  (858) 518-1510

E-mail:  jarslanoglu@yahoo.com
Rhea BaierSenior Paper Conservator
Folger Shakespeare Library
201 East Capitol Street SE
Washington, DC  20003

Phone:  (202) 675-0332

Fax:  (202) 675-0317

E-mail:  rbaier@folger.edu
Charlotte AmeringerPaintings ConservatorFine Arts Musuems of San FranciscoDeYoung Museum Interim Offices
245A S. Spruce Avenue
San Francisco, CA  94080

Phone:  (415) 750-3645

Fax:  (415) 750-7692

E-mail:  cameringer@famsf.org
Mark AronsonChief Conservator
Yale University Art Gallery
PO Box 208271
New Haven, CT  06520-7159

Phone:  (203) 432-7628

Fax:  (203) 432-7159

E-mail:  mark.aronson@yale.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C229Zizi Ileana BaltaScience Fellow
National Gallery of Art
Conservation Division
Scientific Research Department
6th St. & Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6949

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  I-balta@nga.gov
Lisa BarroAssistant Conservator
Photograph Conservation
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
1000 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY  10028

Phone:  (212) 570-3812

Fax:  (212) 570-3811

E-mail:  lisa.barro@metmuseum.org
Arthur BealeChair, Conservation & CollectionManagementMuseum of Fine Arts, Boston
465 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA  02115

Phone:  (617) 369-3502

Fax:  (617) 369-3702

E-mail:  abeale@mfa.org
Emily BellSenior Conservation Technician
McKeldin Library, PreservationDepartmentUniversity of Maryland
College Park, MD  20742-7011

Phone:  (301) 405-9349

E-mail:  eb172@umail.md.edu
Paul L. BensonAssociate Conservator of Objects
The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art
4525 Oak Street
Kansas City, MO  64111

Phone:  (816) 751-1253

Fax:  (816) 561-1011

E-mail:  pbenson@nelson-atkins.org
Roy BernsRichard S. Hunter Professor
Munsell Color Science Laboratory
Rochester Institute of Technology
54 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY  14623

Phone:  (585) 475-7189

E-mail:  berns@cis.rit.edu
Johanna Bernstein9117 Potomac Station Lane
Potomac, MD  20854

Phone:  (301) 983-1182

Fax:  (301) 299-5147

E-mail:  j.r.bernstein@umist.ac.uk
Barbara BerrieNational Gallery of Art
2000B South Club Drive
Landover, MD  20785

Phone:  (202) 842-6448

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  b-berrie@nga.gov
Erin BlakeCurator of Art
Folger Library
201 E. Capitol Street SE
Washington, DC  20003

Phone:  (202) 675-0323

Fax:  (202) 675-0328

E-mail:  eblake@folger.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230APPENDIX CVictoria Book2505 Cedar Tree Drive #3B
Wilmington, DE  19810

Phone:  (302) 475-9305

E-mail:  booklette@yahoo.com
Jaap T. BoonProfessor
FOM Institute AMOLF
Kruislaan 407
1098 SJ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Phone:  31 20 608 1234

E-mail:  boon@amolf.nl
Jennifer Boyer117 Merritt Avenue
Douglassville, PA  19518

Phone:  (610) 385-6843

E-mail: jlboyer@marauder.millersville.eduFrancesca CappitelliDepartment of Food Science andMicrobiologyUniversity of Milan
Via Celoria, 2
20133 Milan
Italy
Phone:  39-02 5031-6720

Fax:  39-02 5031-6694

E-mail:  francesca.cappitelli@unimi.it
Janice CarlsonSenior Scientist
Winterthur Museum
Winterthur, DE  19735

Phone:  (302) 888-4732

Fax:  (302) 888-4838

E-mail:  jcarls@winterthur.org
Francesca CassadioConservation Scientist
Art Institute of Chicago
111 S. Michigan Avenue
Chicago, IL  60603

Phone:  (312) 443-7305

Fax:  (312) 541-1959

E-mail:  fcasadio@hotmail.com
Silvia A. CentenoAssociate Research Scientist
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
11 West 53rd Street
New York, NY  10019

Phone:  (212) 650-2114

Fax:  (212) 396-5060

E-mail:  silvia.centeno@metmuseum.
orgEllen ChaseObjects Conservator
Smithsonian Institution
Freer Gallery of Art & Arthur M.Sackler GalleryPO Box 37012, MRC 707
Washington, DC  20013-7012

Phone:  (202) 357-4880

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  ellen.chase@asia.si.edu
W. T. Chase4621 Norwood Drive
Chevy Chase, MD  20815-5348

Phone:  (303) 656-9416

Fax:  (301) 656-4103

E-mail:  tchase4921@aol.com
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C231Giacomo ChiariChief Scientist
Getty Conservation Institute
1200 Getty Center Drive
Suite 700
Los Angeles, CA  90049-1684

Phone:  (310) 440-6244

Fax:  (310) 440-7711

E-mail:  gchiari@getty.edu
Soyeon ChoiPaper Conservator
264 South 23rd Street
Philadelphia, PA  19103

Phone:  (215) 545-0613

Fax:  (215) 735-9313

E-mail:  soyeonchoi@yahoo.com
Sue Ann ChuiThe Walters Art Museum
600 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD  21201

Phone:  (410) 547-9000 x244

Fax:  (410) 752-4797

E-mail:  sueannch@mac.com
Robin ClarkSir William Ramsay Professor ofChemistryDepartment of Chemistry
University College, London
Christopher Ingold Laboratories
20 Gordon Street
London WCIH 0AJ
United Kingdom
Phone:  44 20 7679 7457

Fax:  44 20 7679 7463

E-mail:  r.j.h.clark@ucl.ac.uk
Jim CoddingtonChief Conservator
Museum of Modern Art
New York, NY
Phone:  (212) 708-9573

Fax:  (212) 408-6425

E-mail:  jim_coddington@moma.org
Elizabeth H. CourtChief Conservator of Paintings
Balboa Art Conservation Center
PO Box 3755
San Diego, CA  92103

Phone:  (619) 236-9702

Fax:  (619) 236-0141

E-mail:  bacc9702@compuserve.com
Sara Creange429 Geddes Street
Wilmington, DE  19805

Phone:  (302) 888-4872

E-mail:  sjcrayon@aol.com
Roland H. CunninghamSenior Paintings Conservator
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch & Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700 x150

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  cunninghamr@scmre.si.edu
Ren” de la RieHead, Scientific Research
National Gallery of Art
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6669

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  rdelarie@csi.com
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232APPENDIX CJohn Delaney72 Lincoln Street, Unit 31
Newton, MA  02461

Phone:  (617) 964-3684

E-mail:  hejd@attbi.com
Susan Dionisio2512 Jacqueline Drive C-8
Wilmington, DE
Phone:  (302) 529-0926

E-mail:  sue_dionisio@hotmail.com
Janet DouglasConservation Scientist
Freer Gallery of Art/Arthur M. SacklerGalleryWashington, DC  20560

Phone:  (202) 357-4880 x269

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  janet.douglas@asia.si.edu
Michael DoumaWeb Exhibits
1851 Columbia Road NW
Washington, DC  20009

Phone:  (202) 352-2235

E-mail:  douma@webexhibits.org
Christine DownieThird Year Objects Intern
The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art
4525 Oak Street
Kansas City, MO  64111-1873

Phone:  (816) 751-1253

Fax:  (816) 561-1011

E-mail:  cdownie@nelson-atkins.org
Joanna DunnConservation Intern
National Gallery of Art
3628 Connecticut Avenue NW #101
Washington, DC  20008

Phone:  (202) 244-2981

E-mail:  jdunn@nga.gov
Molly FariesProfessor, Technical Studies in ArtHistoryUniversity of Groningen
Institute for History of Art andArchitectureOude Boteringestraat 34
9700 AS Groningen
The Netherlands
Phone:  31 (0)50 363 6102

Fax:  31 (0)50 363 7362

E-mail:  m.faries@let.rug.nl
Melanie FeatherAssistant Director for Operations
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch & Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700 x156

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  featherm@scmre.si.edu
Patricia GarlandSenior Painting Conservator
Yale University Art Gallery
PO Box 208271
New Haven, CT  06520-8271

Phone:  (203) 432-8241

Fax:  (203) 432-7159

E-mail:  patricia.garland@yale.edu
Glenn GatesPost-doctoral Fellow in ConservationScienceStraus Center for Conservation
Harvard University Art Museum
32 Quincy Street
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 384-8717

E-mail:  ggates@fas.harvard.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C233Amy GerbrachtMellon Conservator
Jewish Theological Seminary Library
3080 Broadway, Room 5513
New York, New York  10027

Phone:  (212) 678-3919

Fax:  (212) 678-8891

E-mail:  amgerbracht@jtsa.edu
Jennifer GiaccaiFreer & Sackler Galleries
1050 Independence Avenue SW
Washington, DC  20560

Phone:  (202) 357-4880 x294

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  giaccje@asia.si.edu
E. Melanie GiffordResearch Conservator for PaintingTechnologyNational Gallery of Art
2000B South Club Drive
Landover, MD  20785

Phone:  (202) 842-6724

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  m-gifford@nga.gov
Eliza GilliganBook Conservator
Smithsonian Institution Libraries
627 C Streeet NE
Washington, DC  20002

Phone:  (202) 357-1486

Fax:  (202) 357-1775

E-mail:  gilligane@si.edu
Kevin GleasonAssistant Paintings Conservator
ConservArt LLC
72 South Cayuga Rd.
Williamsville, NY  14221

Phone:  (716) 626-0614

Fax:  (716) 626-0614

E-mail:  dogen@adelphia.net
Lisha GlinsmanConservation Scientist
National Gallery of Art
Scientific Research Department, DCL
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6217

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  l-glinsman@nga.gov
Meghan GoldmannPost Graduate Fellow
The Morgan Library
29 East 36th Street
New York, NY  10016

Phone:  (212) 685-0008 x583

Fax:  (212) 532-4099

E-mail:  mgoldmann@morganlibrary. org
Martha GoodwayArchaeological Metallurgist
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch and Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700 x164

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  goodwaym@scmre.si.edu
Nicole GrabowGraduate Intern
Sackler/Freer Galleries
3202 Military Road NW
Washington, DC  20015

Phone:  (202) 364-9636

E-mail:  nicolegrabow@hotmail.com
Ed GrantProfessor
Purdue University
Department of Chemistry
West Lafayette, IN  47907

Phone:  (765) 494-9006

Fax:  (765) 496-2512

E-mail:  edgrant@purdue.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234APPENDIX CCarol GrissomSenior Objects Conservator
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch & Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700 x153

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  grissomc@scmre.si.edu
Nica GutmanAssociate Conservator for the KressCollection Conservation ProgramConservation Center of the Instituteof Fine Arts14 E. 78th Street
New York, NY  10028

Phone:  (212) 992-5866

Fax:  (212) 992-5851

E-mail:  nmg5@nyu.edu
Eric HaganQueenÕs University78 Ridean Street
Kingston, ONT
Canada
Phone:  (613) 545-7904

Fax:  (613) 533-6489

E-mail:  hagan@me.queensu.ca
Richard R. HarkAssociate Professor
von Liebig Center for Science
601 17th Street
Huntingdon, PA  16652

Phone:  (814) 641-3740

Fax:  (814) 641-3685

E-mail:  hark@juniata.edu
Carole HavlikIntern
Detroit Institute of Arts
5200 Woodward Ave.
Detroit, MI  48202

Phone:  (313) 494-5222

Fax:  (313) 833-6406

E-mail:  chavlik@dia.org
Michael HenchmanWeb Exhibits/Brandies University
Department of Chemistry
MS015, Brandeis University
Department of Chemistry
Waltham, MA  02454-9110

Phone:  (781) 736-2558

E-mail:  henchman@brandeis.edu
Paul HepworthAssistant Paper Conservator
The Walters Art Museum
600 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD  21217

Phone:  (410) 547-9000, x682

E-mail:  phepworth@thewalters.com
Patricia HillMillersville University
Department of Chemistry
Millersville, PA  17551

Phone:  (610) 872-3421

Fax:  (610) 872-3985

E-mail:  pat.hill@millersville.edu
Paul JettHead
Freer Gallery of Art
Department of Conservation andScientific ResearchSmithsonian Institution
Washington, DC  20013-7012

Phone:  (202) 357-4880 x274

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  paul.jett@asia.si.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C235Joanna KakoulliLeone Court, Apartment 10
Sacred Heart Avenue
St. Julians,   SLM 13

Malta
Phone:  356 79065634

Fax:  356 21674457

E-mail:  kakoulli@mcr.edu.mt
Margaret KellyChemist
National Archives (NWTD)
8601 Adelphi Road
College Park, MD  20740

Phone:  (301) 837-1874

Fax:  (301) 837-3615

E-mail:  margaret.kelly@nara.gov
Narayan KhandekarHarvard University Art Museums
32 Quincy Street
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 495-4591

Fax:  (617) 495-0322

E-mail:  nkhandek@fas.harvard.edu
Margaret KiplingGraduate Fellow
429 Geddes Street
Wilmington, DE  19805

Phone:  (302) 888-4872
Robert KoestlerResearch Scientist
Metropolitan Museum of Art
1000 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY  10028

Phone:  (212) 396-5390

Fax:  (212) 570-3859

E-mail:  robert.koestler@metmuseum.
orgDale KronkrightChief Conservator
The Georgia OÕKeeffe Museum217 Johnson Street
Santa Fe, NM  87501

Phone:  (505) 946-1041

Fax:  (505) 946-1023

E-mail:  dkronkright@
okeeffemuseum.orgSusan LakeChief Conservator
Hirshhorn Museum & Sculpture
Conservation Lab
Smithsonian Institution
7th and Independence SW
Washington, DC  20560

Phone:  (202) 357-3268

Fax:  (202) 357-3151

E-mail:  lakes@hsmg.si.edu
Yadin LarachetteAdvanced Studies
Winterthur, DE  19735

Phone:  (302) 888-4680

Fax:  (302) 888-4838

E-mail:  yadinl@hotmail.com
Tom LearnerTate Gallery
Millbank
London  SW1P 4RG

United Kingdom
Phone:  44 20 7887 8066

Fax:  44 20 7887 8982

E-mail:  tom.learner@tate.org.uk
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236APPENDIX CSusan Lee-BechtoldChemist
National Archives (NWTD)
8601 Adelphi Road
College Park, MD  20740

Phone:  (301) 837-1906

Fax:  (301) 837-3615

E-mail:  susan.lee-bechtold@nara.gov
Marco LeonaSenior Conservation Scientist
Los Angeles County Museum of Art
5905 Wilshire Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA  90036

Phone:  (323) 857-6162

Fax:  (323) 857-4754

E-mail:  mleona@lacma.org
William LewinConservator
1637 E. Baltimore St.
Baltimore, MD  21231

Phone:  (410) 675-2764

Fax:  (410) 675-5605

E-mail:  wlewin@erols.com
Gordon LewisSenior Director & Vice President
The Fine Arts Conservancy, Inc.
5840 Corporate Way, Suite 110
West Palm Beach, FL  33407

Phone:  (561) 684-6133

Fax:  (561) 684-8508

E-mail:  lab@art-conservation.org
Dorothy MahonConservator
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
1000 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY  10028

Phone:  (212) 650-2993

E-mail:  dorothy.mahon@
metmuseum.orgCarol Mancusi-UngaroDirector
Center for the Technical Study ofModern ArtHarvard University
Whitney Museum of  American Art

32 Quincy Street
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 384-9410

E-mail:  Carol_Mancusi-Ungaro@
whitney.orgJennifer MassAssociate Scientist
Winterthur Museum
Conservation Department
Winterthur, DE  19735

Phone:  (302) 888-4808

Fax:  (302) 888-4838

E-mail:  jmass@winterthur.org
James MayerProfessor
Arizona State University
3355 No. Valencia Lane
Phoenix, AZ  85018

Phone:  (480) 965-9601

Fax:  (480) 965-9004

E-mail:  james.mayer@asu.edu
Hope MayoCurator of Printing & Graphic Arts
Houghton Library
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 495-2444

Fax:  (617) 495-1376

E-mail:  mayo@fas.harvard.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C237Constance McCabeConservator
National Gallery of Art
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6444

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  c-mccabe@nga.gov
Blythe McCarthyConservation Scientist
Smithsonian Institution
Freer Gallery of Art
PO Box 37012, MRC707
Washington, DC  20013-7012

Phone:  (202) 357-4880

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  blythe.mccarthy@asia.si.edu
Ross MerrillChief of Conservation
National Gallery of Art
6th St and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6432

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  r-merrill@nga.gov
Ralph MitchellProfessor
Harvard University
Division of Engineering & AppliedSciencesPierce Hall
29 Oxford Street
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 496-3906

Fax:  (617) 496-1471

E-mail:  mitchell@deas.harvard.edu
Dianne Dwyer ModestiniAdjunct Professor
Conservation Center of the Instituteof Fine Arts14 East 78th Street
New York, NY  10021

Phone:  (646) 251-0288

Fax:  (212) 992-5851

E-mail:  dm34@nyu.edu
Camille Moore103B N. Quarry Street
Ithaca, NY  14850

Phone:  (607) 256-3003

E-mail:  cmm57@cornell.edu
Kathryn MoralesScientific Research Technician
National Gallery of Art
2000B S. Club Drive
Landover, MD  20785

Phone:  (202) 842-6700

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  k-morales@nga.gov
Alison MurrayProfessor
QueenÕs UniversityArt Conservation Program
Kingston, ONT  K7L 3N6

Canada
Phone:  (613) 533-6000 x74338

Fax:  (613) 533-6889

E-mail:  am26@post.queensu.ca
Dale NewburyNational Institute of Standards andTechnology100 Bureau Drive
222/A113, MS8371
Gaithersburg, MD  20899-8371

Phone:  (301) 975-3921

Fax:  (301) 417-1321

E-mail:  dale.newbury@nist.gov
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238APPENDIX CRichard NewmanHead of Scientific Research
Museum of Fine Arts
Boston, MA  02116

Phone:  (617) 369-3466

Fax:  (617) 369-3702

E-mail:  rnewman@mfa.org
Debra Hess NorrisChair, Art Conservation
University of Delaware
Room 303, Old College
Newark, DE  19716

Phone:  (302) 831-3696

Fax:  (302) 831-4330

E-mail:  dhnorris@udel.edu
Mark OrmsbyPhysicist
National Archives (NWTD)
8601 Adelphi Road
College Park, MD  20740

Phone:  (301) 837-2026

Fax:  (301) 837-3615

E-mail:  mark.ormsby@nara.gov
Thomas D. PerrySamuel H. Kress Graduate ResearchFellowHarvard University
40 Oxford Street
Cambridge, MA  02138

Phone:  (617) 495-4180

Fax:  (617) 496-1471

E-mail:  tperry@deas.harvard.edu
Flavia PeruginiConservator
Mount Vernon
PO Box 110
Mount Vernon, VA  22121

Phone:  (703) 799-8632

Fax:  (703) 799-8698

E-mail:  fpergini@mountvernon.org
Sarah Pinchin2029 Quarterline Road
Hubbardsville, NY  13355

Phone:  (315) 691-2936

E-mail:  sarahpinchin@hotmail.com
Leni PotoffConservator of Modern Art
475 Keap Street
Brooklyn, NY  11211

Phone:  (718) 387-8777

Fax:  (718) 282-7140

E-mail:  linkonup@earthlink.net
Thomas PrimeauAssociate Paper Conservator
The Baltimore Museum of Art
Baltimore, MD  21218

Phone:  (410) 396-6341

Fax:  (410) 396-6562

E-mail:  tprimeau@artbma.org
Panayappan RamanthanChemist
National Archives (NWTD)
8601 Adelphi Road
College Park, MD  20740

Phone:  (301) 837-2032

Fax:  (301) 837-3615

E-mail:  panayappan.ramanathan
@nara.govBarbara RamsayDirector of Conservation Services
Artex Fine Art Services
8712 Spectrum Drive
Landover, MD  20785-4761

Phone:  (301) 350-5500

Fax:  (301) 350-6620

E-mail:  bramsay@artexfas.com
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C239James ReillyDirector
Image Permanence Institute
College of Imaging Arts and Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
70 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY  14623

Phone:  (585) 475-2306

E-mail:  jmrpph@rit.edu
Marion RiggsQueens University
343 Morris Hall
Kingston, ON  K7L 3T7

Canada
Phone:  (613) 533-3117

E-mail:  7mcr@qlink.queensu.ca
Bonnie RimerWilliam R. Leisher Fellow, PaintingConservationNational Gallery of Art
6th St and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 789-3088

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  b-rimer@nga.gov
Barbara RobertsConservator
The Frick Collection
1 East 70th Street
New York, NY  10021

Phone:  (212) 547-6864

Fax:  (212) 628-4417

E-mail:  roberts@frick.org
Mark RoosaDirector for Preservation
Library of Congress
101 Independence Avenue SE
Washington, DC  20540-4500

Phone:  (202) 707-5213

Fax:  (202) 707-3434

E-mail:  mroo@loc.gov
Michael SchillingSenior Scientist
Getty Conservation Institute
1200 Getty Center Drive #700
Los Angeles, CA  90049-1684

Phone:  (310) 440-6811

Fax:  (310) 440-7711

E-mail:  mschilling@getty.edu
John ScottNew York Conservation Foundation
PO Box 20098LT
New York, NY  10011-0149

Phone:  (212) 714-0620

Fax:  (212) 714-0149

E-mail:  nyconsnfdn@aol.com
Maurizio SeraciniDirector of Diagnostic Services
Editech, Inc.
via dei Bardi 28
Milan
Italy
Phone:  055 2343 998

Fax:  055 2343 564

E-mail:  seracini@editech.com
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240APPENDIX CNobuko ShibayamaTextile Conservation Department
Metropolitan Museum of Art
1000 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY  10028

Phone:  (212) 396-5139

Fax:  (212) 396-5055

E-mail:  nobuko.shibayama@
metmusem.orgGregory SmithSamuel Golden Research Fellow
National Gallery of Art
6th St and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC  20565

Phone:  (202) 842-6762

Fax:  (202) 842-6886

E-mail:  g-smith@nga.gov
Joyce Hill StonerProfessor
Winterthur/UD Program in ArtConservationConservation Division
Winterthur Museum
Winterthur, DE  19735

Phone:  (302) 888-4888

Fax:  (302) 888-4838

E-mail:  jhstoner@udel.edu
Joe SwiderResearch Scientist
Freer Gallery of Art, DCSR
Washington, DC  20560-0707

Phone:  (202) 357-4880 x298

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  joseph.swider@asia.si.edu
Hanna SzczepanowskaPaper Conservator
Museum of Natural History
10th & Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Phone:  (202) 357-2363

E-mail:  hannas@gwu.edu
Janis TomlinsonDirector
Exhibitions and Cultural Programs
National Academy of Sciences
500 Fifth Street NW
Washington, DC  20001

Phone:  (202) 334-2439

Fax:  (202) 334-1690

E-mail:  arts@nas.edu
Karen TrentelmanDetroit Institute of Arts
5200 Woodward Ave.
Detroit, MI  48202

Phone:  (313) 833-0261

Fax:  (313) 833-6406

E-mail:  ktrentelman@dia.org
Jia-sun TsangSenior Paintings Conservator
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch & Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700 x151

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  tsangj@scmre.si.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C241Ellen TullyConservation Fellow
Smithsonian Institution
Department of Conservation
PO Box 37012
Freer Gallery of Art, MRC707
Washington, DC  20013-7012

Phone:  (202) 357-4880 x303

E-mail:  ellen.tully@asia.si.edu
Pamela VandiverSenior Ceramic Scientist
Smithsonian Center for MaterialsResearch & Education4210 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD  20746

Phone:  (301) 238-3700

Fax:  (301) 238-3709

E-mail:  vandiverp@scmre.si.edu
Thalia Leigh WeisPurdue University
622 South Street #4
Lafayette, IN  47901

Phone:  (765) 428-8322

Fax:  (765) 494-0239

E-mail:  tlweis@purdue.edu
Terry Drayman WeisserDirector of Conservation andTechnical ResearchThe Walters Art Museum
600 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD  21201

Phone:  (410) 547-9000 x291

Fax:  (410) 752-4797

E-mail:  tweisser@thewalters.org
Tim WhalenDirector
The Getty Conservation Institute
1200 Getty Center Drive
Suite 700
Los Angeles, CA  90049-1684

Phone:  (310) 440-6717

Fax:  (310) 440-7714

E-mail:  tpwhalen@getty.edu
Paul WhitmoreDirector
Research Center on the Materials ofthe Artist and ConservatorCarnegie Mellon Research Institute
700 Technology Drive
Pittsburgh, PA  15219

Phone:  (412) 268-3100

E-mail:  pw1j@andrew.cmu.edu
Torsten N. WieselPresident Emeritus
The Rockefeller University
1230 York Avenue
New York, NY  10021

Phone:  (212) 327-7093

Fax:  (212) 327-8988

E-mail:  wiesel@rockvax.rockefeller.edu
John WinterConservation Scientist
Freer Gallery of Art/Arthur M. SacklerGallerySmithsonian Institution
1050 Independence Avenue SW
Washington, DC  20560-0707

Phone:  (202) 357-4880

Fax:  (202) 633-9474

E-mail:  wintejo@asia.si.edu
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and AnalysisCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242APPENDIX CFrank ZuccariExecutive Director of Conservation
Art Institute of Chicago
111 S. Michigan Avenue
Chicago, IL  60603

Phone:  (312) 443-7305

E-mail:  fzuccari@artic.edu
Joyce ZuckerConservator
NYS Bureau of Historic Sites
PO Box 219
Waterford, NY  12188

Phone:  (518) 237-8643 x3242

Fax:  (518) 238-1985

E-mail:  jsof@nycap.rr.com
