DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11434Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks andOpportunities132 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10012-0 | DOI 10.17226/11434Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes; Committee on National Statistics;Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; National ResearchCouncilExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Panel on Data Access for Research PurposesCommittee on National StatisticsDivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationEXPANDING
ACCESS TO
RESEARCH DATA
Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for ap-propriate balance.This study was supported by Contract No. NO1-OD-4-2149 between the NationalAcademy of Sciences and the National Institute on Aging. Support of the work ofthe Committee on National Statistics is also provided by a consortium of federal
agencies through Grant No. SBR-0112521 from the National Science Foundation.Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publi-cation are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataExpanding access to research data : reconciling risks and opportunities.Ñ 1st ed.       p. cm.

  Includes bibliographical references.  ISBN 0-309-10012-7 (pbk.) Ñ ISBN 0-309-65340-1 (pdf)  1.  Privacy, Right ofÑ
United States. 2.  Public recordsÑAccess controlÑUnited States. 3.  Freedom of

informationÑUnited States. 4.  ResearchÑInformation services.  I. National Acad-
emies Press (U.S.)  JK468.S4E96 2005  323.44Õ830973Ñdc22                                                            2005030054Additional copies of this report are available from The National Academies Press,500 Fifth Street, NW, Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202)334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.eduPrinted in the United States of AmericaCopyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Suggested citation: National Research Council. (2005). Expanding Access to ResearchData: Reconciling Risks and Opportunities. Panel on Data Access for Research Pur-poses, Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sci-ences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-
bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors

engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Insti-

tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.

Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in provid-ing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering com-munities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute

of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL ON DATA ACCESS FOR RESEARCH PURPOSESELEANOR SINGER (Chair), Survey Research Center, Institute for SocialResearch, University of MichiganJOHN M. ABOWD, School of Industrial and Labor Relations, CornellUniversityJOE S. CECIL, Division of Research, Federal Judicial Center,Washington, DCGEORGE T. DUNCAN, Heinz School of Public Policy and Management,Carnegie Mellon UniversityV. JOSEPH HOTZ, Department of Economics, University of Californiaat Los AngelesMICHAEL HURD, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA
DIANE LAMBERT, Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ
KENNETH PREWITT, School of International and Public Affairs,Columbia UniversityRICHARD ROCKWELL, The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research,University of Connecticut
EUGENIA GROHMAN, Study DirectorCHRISTOPHER MACKIE, Study Director (through October 2004)MARISA GERSTEIN, Research AssociateAGNES GASKIN, Senior Program AssistantALLISON SHOUP, Senior Program Assistant (through November 2004)vExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS2004-2005WILLIAM F. EDDY (Chair), Department of Statistics, Carnegie MellonUniversityKATHARINE ABRAHAM, Department of Economics, University ofMaryland, and Joint Program in Survey MethodologyROBERT BELL, AT&T Research Laboratories, Florham Park, NJ
LAWRENCE D. BROWN, Department of Statistics, Wharton School,University of PennsylvaniaROBERT M. GROVES, Survey Research Center, Institute for SocialResearch, University of Michigan, and Joint Program in Survey
MethodologyJOHN HALTIWANGER, Department of Economics, University ofMarylandPAUL W. HOLLAND, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ
JOEL L. HOROWITZ, Department of Economics, NorthwesternUniversityDOUGLAS MASSEY, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
VIJAY NAIR, Department of Statistics and Department of Industrial andOperations Engineering, University of MichiganDARYL PREGIBON, Google, Inc., New York
KENNETH PREWITT, School of International and Public Affairs,Columbia UniversityLOUISE RYAN, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University
NORA CATE SCHAEFFER, Department of Sociology, University ofWisconsinÐMadisonCONSTANCE F. CITRO, DirectorviExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Neither the issue of access to research data nor that of privacy andconfidentiality is new; it is not even new to the National Research
Council, which has considered one topic or the other, or the twoin conjunction, on numerous occasions in the past. Why, then, this recon-
sideration?Chapters 1 and 2 offer several answers to this question, based on whathas changed in the external environment, especially since the 1993 publi-
cation of Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility ofGovernment Statistics. But perhaps the most immediate cause is discontenton the part of researchers with the speed and scope of access to the very
rich research data that have been collected by federal statistical and re-
search agencies.Juxtaposed against researchersÕ demands for increased access areheightened concerns on the part of the agencies and their grantees and
contractors about maintaining the confidentiality of their data files. These
concerns arise in part from convictions, borne out by research, that per-
ceived risks to privacy and confidentiality reduce survey participation.In this report, the Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes hastried to reconcile the risks and opportunities arising from increased access
by urging a variety of rational solutions: making data available through
multiple modes, tailored to the needs of different types of users; under-
taking research to improve both the utility and the confidentiality protec-
tions of some newer access modes; and measuring the level of research
data use as well as the frequency with which confidentiality breaches oc-
cur, for example.Preface
viiExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEGiven the panelÕs relatively narrow charge and limited resources,however, the report does not address certain less obvious, but not neces-
sarily less important, contributors to the problem. One of these is the lack
of resources and structural incentives for making data more readily avail-
able. At present, outside researchers appear to gain more than agencies
do from the prompt and generous release of confidential data, and
they stand to lose less than agencies do if such releases lead to docu-
mented breaches of confidentiality. Nor does the report examine the re-
ward structures within the statistical agencies, though we suspect
that those structures favor data collection over data dissemination. In
short, the report proposes solutions that do not require an in-depth look
at, and perhaps change of, the motivational structures that undergird the
current system of data collection and dissemination.Nor does the report attempt to decide how much disclosure risk isacceptable in order to achieve the benefits of greater access to research
data. Such a decision involves weighing the potential harm posed by dis-
closure against the benefits potentially foregone. The panel believes that
this decision appropriately belongs to the wider community of those po-
tentially affected by itÑusers, data collectors, and the people who pro-
vide the data.In framing the response to its charge, the panel drew heavily on exist-ing reports and supplemented these reports by commissioning a series of
papers on outstanding issues, written by experts and presented at a work-
shop open to the public. The workshop was held in October 2003 at the
National Academies. A summary of the papers presented, together with a
list of participants, is included as Appendix A to our report, which we
tried to keep quite brief.Even brief reports, however, make substantial demands on panelmembers and staff. The panel thanks Christopher Mackie, who served as
study director for much of the panelÕs life, for his critical role in guiding
the discussions during its four meetings, for organizing the workshop and
writing the summary of the presentations, and for his initial drafting of
Chapter 3 of the report. We also thank Eugenia Grohman, associate ex-
ecutive director of the Division of Social and Behavioral Sciences and Edu-
cation (DBASSE), who was the study director for the final stages of the
panelÕs work and without whose skill, experience, and patience the final
report could not have been written. Connie Citro, director of the Commit-
tee on National Statistics, provided invaluable guidance and help during
the entire process. We are especially indebted to her for incisive contribu-
tions to Chapters 2 and 5. We also appreciate the interest and support of
Michael Feuer, executive director of DBASSE, and Miron Straf, its deputy
director.Much appreciation is due to the many people who wrote and pre-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixsented papers at the Workshop on Access to Research Data: AssessingRisks and Opportunities. Their work contributed substantially to our for-
mulation of both the problems and the proposed solutions, as is evident
from the citations to their work throughout the report. We are also appre-
ciative of a letter from the Task Force on Confidentiality of the Associa-
tion of Public Data Users (March 17, 2004) that raised important issues of
methods for protecting confidentiality that facilitate data access.Richard Suzman, associate director of Behavioral and Social Researchat the National Institute on Aging, commissioned this study in order to
stimulate more creative approaches to the dissemination of research data.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Institute
on Aging.Finally, I thank the members of the Panel on Data Access for ResearchPurposes, themselves an extraordinarily knowledgeable, engaged, and
vocal group. Together, they represent many disciplines intimately in-
volved in the use and production of research dataÑeconomics, political
science, statistics, sociology, survey methodology, and law. They repre-
sent, as well, differing perspectives, with some being more concerned
about expanding access, others about maintaining confidentiality. The
panelÕs discussions reflected these differing experiences and perspectives,
and the report tries to balance the competing demands. I appreciate the
contributions of all the panel members to this report, but three, in particu-
lar, generously contributed to its writing: I thank Joe Cecil, George
Duncan, and Kenneth Prewitt for their substantial and indispensable help.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Re-
search Council. The purpose of this independent review is to provide can-
did and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the
published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confi-
dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.We thank the following individuals for their participation in the re-view of this report: Martin David, The Urban Institute; Gerald W. Gates,
Policy Office, U.S. Census Bureau; Douglas Massey, Woodrow Wilson
School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University; Trivellore
Raghunathan, Department of Biostatistics and Institute for Social Re-
search, University of Michigan; and Avi C. Singh, Methodology Research,Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu-
sions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the reportExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEbefore its release. The review of this report was overseen by Richard A.Kulka, Center for Demographic Studies, Duke University. Appointed by
the National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that
an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance
with institutional procedures and that all review comments were care-
fully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests
entirely with the authoring panel and the institution.Eleanor Singer, ChairPanel on Data Access for Research PurposesExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION 7
Scope and Structure of Report, 8
Private Lives and Public Policies:  A Decade Later, 112THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE15
Increasing Public Concern, 15
SocietyÕs Increased Need for Data, 17
Changes in Information Technology, 20
Changes in the Legal Environment, 22
Developments in Limiting Data Identifiability, 25
Developments in Methods and Procedures forRestricted Data Access, 28Meeting the Challenges, 343BENEFITS OF ACCESS36
Data Collection and Research, 36
Data Access and the Scientific Process, 38
Microdata for Policy-Relevant Research, 40
Longitudinal Microdata, 43
Linking Survey and Administrative Data, 45
Access and Data Quality, 48ContentsxiExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4RISKS OF ACCESS:  POTENTIAL CONFIDENTIALITY
BREACHES AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES50

Confidentiality Concerns and Nonresponse inCensuses and Surveys, 52Why Confidentiality Breaches Might Occur, 555RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDEDDATA ACCESS63

Documenting Use, 64
Access Through Multiple Modes, 66
Public-Use Data, 69
Facilitating Access to Research Data Centers, 74
Expanding and Improving Remote Access, 77
Licensing Agreements, 78
Informing Respondents of Data Use, 80
Safeguarding Confidentiality:  Training, Monitoring, and
Education, 81REFERENCES85

APPENDIXES
AWORKSHOP SUMMARY95
BBIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF PANELMEMBERS AND STAFF116
xiiCONTENTSExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryPolicy makers need information about the state of the nationÑfromthe national economy to household use of MedicareÑin order to
evaluate existing programs and to develop new ones. That infor-mation often comes from research based on data collected by statisticalagencies or others under a pledge of confidentiality. The most critical data
are microdataÑdata about individual people, households, and businesses
and other organizations.The benefits of providing wider access to microdata for researchersand policy analysts are better informed public policies. The risk of pro-
viding increased access to microdata is increased risk of breaching the
confidentiality of the data.Both data collection and research are decentralized activities in theUnited States. Many federal agencies collect dataÑfrom the decennial cen-
sus to statistics on traffic patternsÑand some sponsor data collection
through universities and other nongovernment institutions. Although
some agencies have in-house staffs of policy analysts and researchers,
most researchers are based at universities and other nongovernment in-
stitutions. The value of this decentralized system is to ensure a variety of
perspectives and approaches to both data collection and research. The
challenge is to safeguard the confidentiality of the data while making them
available to researchers and analysts in a wide variety of settings. One
consequence of the decentralized system is a frequent lack of understand-
ing about how data could and will be used and of planning for those uses.The charge to the Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes was ÒtoExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAassess competing approaches to promoting exploitation of the researchpotential of microdataÑparticularly linked longitudinal microdataÑ
while preserving respondent confidentiality.Ó The panel was asked to con-
sider the tradeoffs between the benefits and risks of data access and to
make recommendations about Òhow microdata should optimally (from a
societal standpoint) be made available to researchers.ÓThe panel concludes that no one way is optimal for all data users orall purposes. To meet societyÕs needs for high-quality research and statis-
tics, the nationÕs statistical and research agencies must provide both unre-
stricted access to anonymized public-use files and restricted access to de-
tailed, individually identifiable confidential data for researchers under
carefully specified conditions.Research using detailed confidential data is needed not only for well-informed policy making but also to improve the quality of public-use
files, which are the most widely used microdata products made available
by statistical and other data collection agencies. In turn, wide access to
public-use data leads to new analyses and conclusions that must be tested

on the more detailed confidential data available only through restricted
access.High-quality public-use files require continuing research into meth-ods of assuring the inferential validity of the data while safeguarding their
confidentiality. A great deal of promising work has been done on this
topic, but more is clearly needed.At the same time, the continuing need for restricted access to moredetailed microdata means that the conditions for obtaining such access
need improvement on a continuing basis. The use of licensing agreements,
as a mechanism for granting wider access to confidential microdata,
should be expanded. Especially important is easier access to research data
centers, such as those maintained at universities and other host institu-
tions by the U.S. Census Bureau. Such centers, which several other agen-
cies maintain at their headquarters, are currently the only place where
researchers have access to key microdata that provide the level of detail
(e.g., small geographic areas) needed for many important analyses. Re-
search to facilitate secure remote access to these data centers is also needed

in order to remove the burden on researchers of traveling to a distant site.We believe that the changes we recommend will result in wider ac-cess to high-quality anonymized public-use files as well as to potentially
identifiable microdata. But such expanded access requires expanded pro-
cedural and legal protections. The panel believes that users, like agencies,
should be held accountable for safeguarding the confidentiality of micro-
data files to which they are granted access. We recommend that statistical
agencies set up procedures for monitoring any breaches of confidentiality
that may occur, as well as their causes and consequences. We recommendExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3that agencies require auditing of license holders and penalties for viola-tions of the license. We also recommend that agencies institute confidenti-
ality agreements for public-use data files and meaningful penalties for all
data users who willfully violate such agreements.However, laws, enforcement, and penalties are not enough to safe-guard the confidentiality of research records. What is needed in addition
to the legal sanctions is a system of norms and values concerning the
ethical use of such data. Everyone working with confidential research
recordsÑinterviewers, data entry clerks, statistical analysts, and social
and behavioral scientistsÑrequires education and training in these ethi-
cal principles and practices. The statistical system of the United States
ultimately depends on the willingness of the public to provide the infor-
mation on which research data are based. To ensure such willingness,
there must be scrupulous attention to assuring the informed consent of
data providers, as well as continuing research into public attitudes rel-
evant to data collection, privacy, and confidentiality.The panelÕs recommendations should be read in the context of themany existing reports that have addressed similar issues of data access
and confidentiality protection in the past. In particular, we have drawn
heavily on Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibilityof Government Statistics, published in 1993, though we have not attemptedto make recommendations in all of the areas considered in that report.
Rather, our recommendations focus on the needs highlighted by legal,
social, and technological changes during the last decade.The panel offers four recommendations on basic issues of documen-tation and access:¥maintenance of bibliographies of research and policy analysispublications by government and nongovernment data collection agencies
in order to provide tangible evidence of the benefits of making data widely
available for analysis;¥use of a variety of modes for data access, including restricted ac-cess to confidential data and unrestricted access to appropriately altered
public-use data, in order to meet research needs for high-quality data with
different levels of detail and precision;¥research to guide more efficient allocation of resources amongdifferent data access modes; and¥greater involvement of users in planning modes of access to agen-ciesÕ data in order to better accommodate their needs.The panel offers four recommendations focused specifically onpublic-use data. The first two are intended to increase access to data,Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAwhile the third and fourth try to balance increased access with increasedsafeguards against misuse:¥research on techniques for providing useful, innovative public-use data sets that increase informational utility without increasing disclo-
sure risk;¥a new system of access to public-use microdata through existingand new data archives (following recommendations in Protecting Partici-pants and Facilitating Social and Behavioral Science Research), intended tospeed researchersÕ access to such files;¥a warning on all public-use data that the data are provided forstatistical purposes only and a requirement that all users attest to having
read the warning; and¥restriction of access to public-use data to those who agree to abideby the confidentiality protections governing such data and the institution
of meaningful penalties for willful misuse of those data.Looking more closely at restricted access to confidential data, thepanel offers five recommendations on research data centers, remote ac-
cess, and licensing agreements:¥for the Census Bureau, broadening interpretation of the criteriafor access to data, maintaining a continuous cycle for reviewing research
proposals, and taking account of prior scientific review of those proposals
in order to facilitate and speed researcher access;¥research by statistical and other agencies that sponsor data collec-tion on cost-effective means of providing secure access through remote
data access mechanisms, with the aim of increasing the availability of re-
mote access to confidential data;¥the use of licensing agreements by statistical and other agencies(that do not now have them) for access to confidential data, and expand-
ing the data files for which a license may be obtained;¥development of flexible, consistent standards for licensing agree-ments and implementation procedures by statistical agencies, with the
involvement of data users; and¥ inclusion of auditing procedures and appropriate legal penaltiesin licensing agreements, for the willful misuse of confidential data, in or-
der to balance expanded access with appropriate confidentiality safe-
guards.PeopleÕs perceptions of benefits and trust that they will not be harmedas a result of the information they provide are crucial to their cooperationExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5with data collection efforts. The panel offers two recommendations onthis topic:¥provision by data collection agencies of basic information aboutconfidentiality and data access to everyone asked to participate in statisti-
cal surveys; and¥continuing research on the views of data providers and the publicabout research benefits and risks. Because the panel believes that laws and enforcement alone are inad-equate for protecting confidential data, it offers four recommendations on
training, monitoring, and education to complement legal, administrative,
and technical protections. The first two are directed to data collection
agencies:¥providing employees with continually updated written guide-lines for confidentiality protection of individually identifiable data and
training in confidentiality practices and data management; and¥ongoing research into violations of confidentiality protection pro-cedures and breaches of confidentiality that may occur, as well as the
causes and consequences of those breaches.The second two are directed at educational and professional organiza-tions, which are an important source for the development of professional
norms and ethical standards:¥training in ethical issues related to research for all those involvedin the design, collection, analysis, and distribution of data obtained under
pledges of confidentiality; and¥development of strong codes of ethical conduct to protect the con-fidentiality of personal data and education about those codes.The panel is confident that, taken together, these recommendationscan improve access to and use of data for research and so improve the
quality and relevance of those data for social science research and public
policy, while providing appropriate protection for the confidentiality of
identifiable data.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71Introduction
The United States at present has the most extensive array of datacollection programs undertaken by federal statistical, research, and
administrative agencies in its history. Collectively, these data yielda detailed portrait of population groups and of organizations that affectpeopleÕs lives (employers, educators, health care providers, and others).
When made available in the form of microdata, particularly linked, longi-
tudinal microdata, federal data collections provide an unparalleled re-
source for policy analysis and research on important social issues.1 Theinterest in such data is exemplified by a trend toward studies with great
richness and detailed information, such as the proposed national
childrenÕs study on environmental and genetic effects on health and de-
velopment (see www.nationalchildrensstudy.gov).Yet this very trend has increased the risk of violating the confidential-ity of those who provide the information. Recent innovations in informa-
tion technology, such as the widespread availability of data about indi-
viduals on the Internet, have also increased that risk. In response, many
data collection agencies have reduced the amount of detail in publicly
available microdata sets, although they have also worked with research-
ers to develop new methods and arrangements for data access that pro-
tect confidentiality and respect privacy.1Microdata, in contrast to summary, aggregated data, provide individual-level informa-tion. Linked microdata usually refer to individual survey data that are linked to individualinformation from administrative records or to other survey data.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAPrivacy has many dimensions. The emphasis in this report is on infor-mational privacy, which encompasses an individualÕs freedom to choose
the extent and circumstances under which personal information will be
shared with others, and how it will be used. Confidentiality refers broadly
to an obligation not to transmit identifiable informationÑfor an individual
or a businessÑto an unauthorized party. More specifically, this report is
concerned with the explicit or implicit promises made to respondents re-
garding how their data will be used and the extent to which they will be
protected against the risk that the data they provide may allow others to
identify them (see National Research Council, 1993:22).The nation needs to use its statistical data, especially properly pro-tected microdata, for credible, detailed analyses of current and proposed
government programs and policies in such areas as education, health care,
and taxation. These data are also needed for basic research in the social,
behavioral, and economic sciences that can advance the quality and scope
of policy analyses. Much basic and policy research will be undertaken
outside the federal government, in universities and other research cen-
ters. Thus, there are questions about how to provide researchersÑinside
and outside governmentÑaccess to data that can both inform public
policy and protect the privacy of respondents and the confidential nature
of the information they provide.SCOPE AND STRUCTURE OF REPORTIn response to those questions, the Panel on Data Access for ResearchPurposes undertook a study to understand and propose ways to resolve
the tension between the goal of facilitating researchersÕ access to federal
data collections, particularly detailed microdata sets, and that of main-
taining confidentiality. The panel was convened by the National Acad-
emiesÕ Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) at the request of the
National Institute on Aging, which supports the collection of microdata
and funds research that depends on the availability of those data for analy-
sis. The panel began its work early in 2003, building on earlier efforts by
CNSTAT. Those efforts included a major comprehensive review of the
issues more than a decade ago, which produced Private Lives and PublicPolicies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics (NationalResearch Council, 1993) and a workshop held in 1999 (National Research
Council, 2000). A CNSTAT report from two decades ago on the benefits of
sharing research data is also still relevant (National Research Council,
1985).The panel was given the following specific charge for its work:This study will assess competing approaches to promoting exploita-tion of the research potential of microdataÑparticularly linked longitu-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9dinal microdataÑwhile preserving respondent confidentiality. The ulti-mate goal is for the panel to make recommendations about how micro-data should optimally (from a societal standpoint) be made available to
researchers. This will require, among other things, thinking about howto measure the value of the research good made possible by data produc-tion and access, as well as the risk (and associated cost) of disclosures.
Such measures are needed in order to assess the tradeoff between thebenefits derived from increased protection of data versus those derivedfrom fuller data access.The panel may also focus on (1) technical, legal and statistical ingredi-ents needed to promote arrangements within and between agencies, andalso between government and private sector data producers; (2) enforce-
ment of legal protections for data subjects and appropriate penalties formisuse, and how breakdowns in security are detected, assuming theyare, and traced to responsible parties.The panel will also consider the relative advantages associated withvarious approaches to data protection and form recommendations about(1) alternative, less burdensome systems (e.g., Internet, remote access,
etc.) of providing researchers with access to restricted data and (2) cut-ting-edge statistical techniques for manipulating data in ways that claimto preserve important statistical properties and allow for broader general
data release.In undertaking its work, the panel quickly discovered that the rangeof issues, as well as developments since the earlier major CNSTAT report,
precluded detailed consideration of the optional elements in our charge.
We took as our task a broad overview of the basic issues; we did not
explore in detail all data that are or might be available and all ways to
protect them. For example, we did not consider the resources and struc-
ture of data collection agencies, although we recognize that agenciesÕ his-
tories, priorities, stakeholders, and incentives are factors that affect data
access. In addition, although we acknowledge efforts in other countries to
develop innovative, workable methods for research access to microdata
(notably, the work of the Luxembourg Income Study and the German
Socio-Economic Panel Study), we limited our study to the United States
because of the differences in this countryÕs laws, organizational structures,
and public attitudes. And we touch only briefly on the role of nongovern-
ment survey organizations.Yet the basic responsibilities and techniques for protecting privacyand confidentiality while promoting data access for research are appli-
cable across all kinds of data, including administrative data on individu-
als and businesses linked to microdata and individualsÕ biological data
collected in surveys. For example, many kinds of biological informationÑ
such as blood pressure, weight, or cholesterolÑcan be released publicly
after some alteration, just as data on income or hours of work can, becauseExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAthe information is not unique. In contrast, genetic data (such as a DNAsample) and data from geographic information systems (GIS) are unique,
as are Social Security numbers, and pose much more difficult issues of
protection (see National Research Council, 2001a).This report is intended to take stock of the present situation; it shouldbe seen as one in a line of periodic assessments that will be required over
time. It does not pretend to have all the answers nor, given constrained
resources, to represent a detailed investigation of alternative data access
methods and arrangements. It provides a broad view of the issues, noting
why imaginative data access methods are required to satisfy the public
need for sophisticated policy analysis and basic social science research.In addition to regular meetings, the panel held a workshop in fall2003 to obtain a wide range of views on how issues of data access and
confidentiality protection have changed over the past decade since PrivateLives and Public Policies was published (see Appendix A for a summary ofthe workshop). The rest of the panelÕs work was carried out through in-
tense discussions and sharing of draft materials at its meetings.The rest of this chapter and Chapter 2 provide context for the panelÕswork. We begin in this chapter with a brief overview of Private Lives andPublic Policies (National Research Council, 1993). Our report draws on theconceptual framework presented there though it does not revisit in detail
the issues or recommendations covered in that study (some of which have
not yet been implemented). Rather, our focus is on changes in key areas in
the past decade, detailed in Chapter 2: increased public concerns about
privacy and confidentiality; societyÕs increased need for data for policy
analysis and evaluation and, consequently, for basic social science re-
search; changes in information technology; changes in laws and regula-
tions; and developments in methods for providing access to data for re-
search.Chapter 3 discusses the benefits to society from the research use ofdata collected by federal agencies, especially from rich microdata for in-
dividuals, organizations, and businesses. Chapter 4 discusses the poten-
tial costs to data providers in terms of possible breaches of confidential-
ity. Chapter 5 proposes ways to reconcile the tensions between the
benefits and risks with recommendations for improved access to data for
research purposes while protecting the dataÕs confidentiality.Appendix A is a summary of our workshop, for which we commis-sioned papers on a range of topics relevant to the panelÕs task: the eco-
nomics of data confidentiality (Abowd and Lane, 2003); the role of data
access in scientific replication (Bailar, 2003); balancing individual rights
and societal benefits from data collection and analysis (Barquin and
Northouse, 2003); the role of longitudinal microdata in research and policyExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION11(Brown, 2003); the Census BureauÕs research data center network(Hildreth, 2003); recent legislation relevant to privacy, confidentiality, and
data sharing (McMillen, 2003); protecting confidentiality of research data
through legal means (Perritt, 2003); evaluating inferences from synthetic
data (Raghunathan, 2003); estimating probabilities of identification for

microdata (Reiter, 2003); monitored remote microdata access systems
(Rowland, 2003); licensing and enforcement mechanisms for promoting
data access and protecting confidentiality (Seastrom, Wright, and
Melnicki, 2003), and the historical record of disclosure and risk (Seltzer
and Anderson, 2003). In addition, Michael Larsen gave a talk on technical,
legal, and organizational barriers to data linking.PRIVATE LIVES AND PUBLIC POLICIES: A DECADE LATERJust over 10 years ago, the Panel on Confidentiality and Data Accessproduced the report, Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality andAccessibility of Government Statistics (National Research Council, 1993).Commissioned by the Committee on National Statistics in collaboration
with the Social Science Research Council, the report emphasized the in-
herent tension between protecting the privacy of individuals and obtain-
ing and disseminating accurate, detailed data to inform public policies.
Society affirms to individuals the value of assuring their information pri-
vacy and confidentiality, but this affirmation must be balanced with the
need of the community for data about individuals and organizations. The
first two paragraphs (National Research Council, 1993:15) establish the
competing forces:Private lives are requisite for a free society. To an extent unparalleledin the nationÕs history, however, private lives are being encroached on by
organizations seeking and disseminating information. In their steward-ship of data collection and data dissemination, federal statistical agen-cies have had a long-standing concern for the privacy rights of the data
providers, but they now face mounting demands for privacy . . .In a free society, public policies come through the actions of thepeople. Those public policies influence individual lives at every stageÑ
financing of prenatal care, state aid to school districts, job training andplacement, law enforcement, and determining retirement benefits. Dataprovided by federal statistical agencies . . . are the factual base needed for
informed public discussion about the direction and implementation ofthose policies. Further, public policies encompass not only governmentprograms but all those activities that influence the general welfare,
whether initiated by government, business, labor, or not-for-profit orga-nizations. Thus, the effective functioning of a free society requires broaddissemination of statistical information.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAThe reportÕs thorough analysis stressed that government data collec-tion operations must reflect both the obligation to supply the information
that is needed to inform the countryÕs democratic and free society and the
sometimes competing obligation to respect the individual (or organiza-
tion) who provides the often highly personal responses on which those
data are based. Most importantly, the report laid out a series of recom-
mendations for helping to resolve the tension between these two funda-
mental mandates. Today, many of these recommendations have been
implemented and have led to better information practices. Why, then, look
to this issue again?At root, the tension between the concern for the data provider mani-fest in the phrase, Òprivate lives,Ó and societyÕs need for data, signaled by
Òpublic policies,Ó is structural and can never be fully resolved, no matter
how enlightened the practices of a statistical or other data collection
agency may be. However, changing conditions can increase (or reduce)
the level of tension. As brokers between the data provider and the data
user, statistical and research agencies need to continually examine chang-
ing conditions and attempt to resolve the resulting tension as best they
can.There is no doubt that these early years in the 21st century challengestatistical and other data collection agencies with a sharply increased level
of tension between the two mandates, which, in turn, calls for reexamina-
tion of information practices. Several key changes since Private Lives andPublic Policies thus motivated our study:¥There is evidence of increased public concern about personal pri-vacy and distrust of government assurances of confidentiality; such con-
cern is predictive of reduced cooperation with censuses and surveys (see,
e.g., Singer, Mathiowetz, and Couper; 1993; Singer, Van Hoewyk, and
Neugebauer, 2003; National Research Council, 2004b; Hillygus et al.,
2006).¥There is also evidence of considerable public unease over the bur-geoning capability of businesses and private organizations (such as credit
rating firms) to gather personal information about millions of individuals
(see, e.g., Dash and Zeller, 2005). In early 2001, large percentages of Ameri-
cans expressed concern about on-line credit card theft (87 percent),
Internet fraud (80 percent), hacking of government computers (78 per-
cent), and hacking of business computers (76 percent) (Fox and Lewis,
2001:2). More recently, there have been widely publicized instances of
unauthorized release of personal records maintained by large data ware-
house firms and credit card companies.¥Assessment of complex public policies requires increasingly de-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION13tailed data, and researchers increasingly have the ability to carry out awide range of causal analyses.¥Statistical and research agencies have successfully carried outmajor data collections, including longitudinal surveys, that can answer
important policy questions for which aggregate, cross-sectional data
would be inadequate. There is an obligation to ensure that this substantial
investment of public monies yields factual evidence that can inform de-
bate in public policy areas.¥New kinds of individually identifiable data, such as unique ge-netic information and increasingly precise geospatial detail, can be col-
lected and disseminated.¥Statistical agencies, which conduct substantial methodologicalresearch on data collection and estimation, often do not have either the
internal resources or the political mandate to carry out the causal analyses
needed for policy formulation and the advancement of scientific knowl-
edge relevant to policy; this capability is more readily found in the re-
search and policy analysis community.¥Advances in information technology have raised both fears of pri-vacy intrusion and expectations about access to information. Two key fac-
tors increasing the risk of disclosure are the existence of comprehensive
databases with individual identifiers and the development of sophisti-
cated record-linkage and data-mining methodologies, many of which are
readily available on the Internet.¥The legal framework that guides the information process haschanged in important ways, notably with the enactment of the Confiden-
tial Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA)
and the fact that medical records, including those used for research, are
subject to new confidentiality regulations under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). At the same time, the
USA Patriot2 Act of 2001 overturned the protection previously accordededucation records gathered and maintained by the National Center for
Education Statistics (see National Research Council, 2005:35).¥New techniques have been developed for producing restricteddata products that can be made publicly available because the data have
been altered to minimize the risk of individual identification. Techniques
have also been developed for analyzing the effects of different alteration
methods on disclosure risk and data utility.¥Agencies and researchers now have some experience with re-stricted data access procedures put in place during the last decade that2The name is an acronym for Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropri-ate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATApermit authorized researchers to use confidential data that are not pub-licly available. Those procedures include protected enclaves, commonly
known as research data centers; licensing arrangements; and methods for
secure, monitored on-line access to data.The next three chapters explore these issues in more depth.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152The Changed LandscapeThis chapter details significant changes in the past decade that affectresearchersÕ access to government microdata: increasing public
concern about issues of privacy and confidentiality; societyÕs in-creased need for data; changes in information technology; changes in thelegal environment; developments in limiting data identifiability; and de-
velopments in methods and procedures for restricted access, including
research data centers, monitored remote access, and licensing. We end the
chapter with a brief comment on the potential for devising new ap-
proaches to data access while taking account of these changes.INCREASING PUBLIC CONCERNPrivate Lives and Public Policies noted public concerns about privacyand confidentiality, but did not describe them in any detail. This report,
more so than its predecessor, takes account of changing public attitudes
about privacy and confidentiality issues as they bear on principles of data
collection and data access.From recent analyses of data on public attitudes (see Chapter 4), twocentral findings emerge. First, levels of public concern about the intru-
siveness of government inquiries and about whether there is or might be
unauthorized disclosure of individual data appear to have increased in
recent decades. Second, people who are worried about privacy and confi-
dentiality issues are less likely to cooperate with government surveys.
Response to the 2000 census strongly confirmed this second finding, asExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAsummarized in Chapter 4 and elsewhere (see National Research Council,2004b; Hillygus et al., 2006). In addition, there is survey evidence that
many members of the public do not believe the governmentÕs pledge that
data will be kept confidential. In one survey, less than half of the public
said that the promise of census confidentiality could be trusted. Also,
nearly as many Americans agree as disagree that census answers can be
used against them (Hillygus et al., 2006).A vivid expression of public concern about the privacy and confiden-tiality of government statistics emerged in spring 2000, when talk show
hosts, editorial pages, late-night comics, and even political leaders at-
tacked the 2000 census long form on grounds that it was too intrusive.
Responding to a public outcry, President George W. Bush, then a presi-
dential candidate, said he understood Òwhy people donÕt want to give
over that information to the government. If I had the long form, IÕm not so
sure I would do it eitherÓ (Prewitt, 2004:1452). The U.S. Senate passed a
nonbinding resolution urging that Òno American be prosecuted, fined, or
in any way harassed by the federal governmentÓ for not answering cer-
tain questions on the census long form, in effect telling the public it was
acceptable to break the law (Prewitt, 2004). Many more census respon-
dents in 2000 than in 1990 answered long-form questions only selectively,
leading to unprecedented levels of imputed values for missing responses
(National Research Council, 2004b:283-285).Relevant research does not draw a clear distinction between the ef-fects of privacy concerns and confidentiality concerns on survey response.
However, the long-form controversy suggests that it will be useful in fu-
ture research to determine when respondents are resisting Òunwarranted
intrusivenessÓ simply because they do not like particular questions (a pri-
vacy concern) and when they are uncooperative because of fears about
Òunauthorized disclosureÓ (a confidentiality concern).The Census Bureau recognized the importance of this distinctionwhen, in its statement of privacy principles for the general public, first
developed in 2000, it acknowledged the importance of balancing the need
for statistical information with a respect for individual privacy. The Cen-
sus Bureau now offers a principle, titled Òrespectful treatment of respon-
dents,Ó under which it offers two promises (for voluntary surveys): Òwe
promise to respect your right to refuse to answer any specific questions
or participate in the surveyÓ and Òwe promise to set reasonable limits on
our efforts to obtain completed questionnaires and will restrict the num-
ber of follow-up contacts we conductÓ (www.census.gov/privacy/files/
data_protection/002822.html).This newly articulated principle on the part of the Census Bureau isindicative of how much has changed in the few years since Private Livesand Public Policies was issued. Few people would have suggested in 1993Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE17that the Census Bureau, which has built its reputation on persistence ingetting complete answers from nearly 100 percent of its sample respon-
dents, would only a decade later offer a principle that seems to contradict
long-established practices.SOCIETYÕS INCREASED NEED FOR DATAPublic policies very often focus on population groups defined in termsof one or more characteristics: low-income families, veterans, Medicare
patients, preschool children, software engineers, drug addicts, home-
owners, to name a few from a long list. Policy design proceeds on the
basis of knowing how many people are in these groups, how they are
geographically distributed, and how they differ in characteristics. Other
public policies focus on establishments: small businesses, public schools,
military bases, banks, hospitals, prisons, insurance firms, and so onÑall
entities that are subject to statistical measurement and for which detailed
information is required in order to inform policy choices.Complex policy-making requires multivariate causal thinking aboutpolicy alternatives, which, in turn, requires complex, multivariate, often
longitudinal data. For example, how will changing the age of eligibility
for Social Security affect retirement decisions across different occupations
and regions of the country? Over what time-frame (if at all) does Head
Start close the educational gap between children from disadvantaged
families and children from better-off families? At what levels of state and
local unemployment will single mothers in welfare-to-work programs
find secure jobs, and what will be the consequences for their children?As the economy grows more complex and the population becomesmore diverse, increasingly detailed data and data analyses are required
for policies to match well with economic and demographic realities. This
is true not only for policy making, but also for policy assessment and
evaluation.1 A nation learns how well policies are working by comparingtheir intended effects with the actual outcomes. These comparisons draw
on statistical information. One example makes this obvious point. Con-
gress recently debated whether undocumented college-age students who
have lived in the country for at least 5 years and performed well in sec-
ondary schools should be eligible for in-state tuition if they enroll in a
public university in their state of residence (American Association of State
Colleges and Universities, 2003). On one side of the debate are people1For examples, see National Research Council (1997), which assesses data requirementsfor the analysis of retirement income policies, and National Research Council (2001b), whichdoes the same for welfare reform policies.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAwho assert that rewarding undocumented people in this fashion will bean incentive for increased illegal immigration. On the other side are people
who assert that there will be long-term economic contributions to society
if this group attends colleges and universities. Either, neither, or both of
these assertions could turn out to be correct. Evaluating these alternative
assertions appropriately requires an exercise in data-based policy analy-
sis.In addition to federal, state, and local government policy uses of sta-tistical information, commentators on American democracyÑstarting
with George Washington and Thomas JeffersonÑhave repeatedly
stressed that an uninformed public is incompatible with preserving demo-
cratic principles and practices. Just as statistical data are used by political
leaders to design policy, they are used by the electorate to assess how well
those policies have worked and thus to rate the effectiveness of the gov-
ernment, especially when data are available on trends. What are often
referred to as social and economic indicators play an important role in
democratic accountability, as the public gauges the quality of public life
by taking note of what is trending up and what is trending down. Crime
rates, air quality, access to health care, charitable giving, education levels,
homeownership, out-of-wedlock births, voter participation, and unem-
ployment are illustrative of features of our society that are given public
visibility in the nationÕs official statistics. This public visibility strength-
ens democratic practice.The private sector is no less in need of detailed information on theAmerican population. Citing only data from the decennial census, a re-
cent National Research Council report (2004b:66) observed:Retail establishments and restaurants, banks and other financial insti-tutions, media and advertising firms, insurance companies, utility com-
panies, health care providers, and many other segments of the businessworld use census long-form-sample data, as do non-profit organizations.An entire industry developed after the 1970 census to repackage census
data, use the data to develop lifestyle cluster systems (neighborhoodtypes that correlate with consumer behavior and provide a convenientway of condensing and applying census data), and supply address cod-
ing and computer mapping services to make the data more useful.The most important source of the information used for policy designand evaluation and the other purposes described above are the more than
70 federal agencies that carry out statistical activities of at least $500,000
per year (U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 2004). These agencies
include statistical agencies, such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),
the National Centers for Education and Health Statistics (NCES and
NCHS), and the U.S. Census Bureau. They also include research funding
and analysis agencies, such as the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Re-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE19search, the National Institutes on Aging and Child Health and HumanDevelopment, and the National Science Foundation (NSF). In fiscal 2004
these agencies were authorized to spend an estimated $4.8 billion for sta-
tistical programs to serve the nationÕs information needs (U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, 2004).Over a 10-year period, the 2000 census alone cost more than $6.5 bil-lion. This seemingly very high cost pales in comparison with the value of
the many uses to which census data are put. The Constitution requires
that seats in the U.S. House of Representatives be allocated in proportion
to population, for which it mandates an enumeration of the population
every 10 years. Two other major uses are redistricting and fund alloca-
tions. Congressional and state and local legislative districts are drawn on
the basis of census counts for small geographic areas. Currently, federal
agencies allocate more than $200 billion of federal dollars to states and
other areas by formulas that, directly or indirectly, depend on census data
(National Research Council, 2004b:Ch. 2). Across the decade, about $2 tril-
lion in federal funds depend on census data, so that the investment in the
census represents only 0.0035 percent of the federal funding based on cen-
sus results. And this calculation does not take into account state and local
expenditures, or the huge business investments in marketing, labor prac-
tices, and manufacturing and retail location decisions that rely on census
data.Similarly, other statistical programs provide data that serve manypurposes and are collected at a fraction of the dollars at stake in the deci-
sions made on the basis of analyses with those data. For example, the
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), conducted by the
NCES, has made and continues to make major contributions to analysis
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the nationÕs elementary and second-
ary education policies at the federal, state, and local levels (see
nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard).SocietyÕs increased needs for data and their intelligent analysis havebeen matched by a significant expansion of the analytic capacity found in
the nationÕs universities, policy organizations, corporations, and advocacy
groups. The government frequently turns to this private-sector-based ana-
lytic capacityÑespecially to university researchers and analysts in spe-
cialized private research institutionsÑto carry out policy analyses and
basic research using government-collected data, particularly microdata
on individual units. This behavior is recognition that federal research and
evaluation agencies are not funded to take full advantage of the public
investment in the collection of the original data on their own. In the case
of statistical agencies, they may avoid policy-oriented data analysis so as
not to impair credibility, which is based in part on the publicÕs perception
of their objectivity (National Research Council, 2005).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAAn effective public-private partnership between data collection agen-cies and the research community is a critical element in bringing analyses
of complex data, particularly microdata, to bear on policy design and as-
sessment. The partnership is strengthened by continuous improvements
in data access, both through public-use data sets and through restricted
data access modalities (see below and Chapter 5).CHANGES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY The information world now functions through extraordinarily com-plex networks of humans and computers, capturing enormous numbers
of records of personal and organizational information, storing them in
data warehouses with capacities in petabytes, analyzing them through
sophisticated statistical and data mining tools, and disseminating the re-
sults through ever more capable communications media. This explosion
in the capability of information technology is evident at each stage of the
process of data capture, storage, integration, and dissemination by public
and private entities (Duncan, 2004).As recently as 1993, when Private Lives and Public Policies was pub-lished, easy access to complex computerized databases produced by fed-eral statistical and other data collection agencies was only a design goal.
Now the Web provides access to vast arrays of information from a desk-
top. For example, through www.census.gov, there is ready access to tables
and maps of 2000 census data for all geographies to the block level, as
well as access to complex microdata sets through extraction and down-
loading tools. Other statistical and research agencies also offer Web access
to detailed aggregate and microdata.2One useful measure of the extent of this enhanced information tech-nology is reduced cost. In each of the four stages of the process of data
capture, storage, integration, and dissemination, advances in informa-
tion technology have pushed costs lower. Although the picture is com-
plicated by demographic and social factors that drive costs up (such as
the declining willingness of the public to respond to telephone surveys),
in many ways the cost of obtaining data is much less today than it was 10
years ago. Electronic data capture techniquesÑsuch as scanning and
computer-assisted interviewing, surveillance by video cameras in build-
ings and on streets, and satellite imagingÑhave become commonplace
and readily available at moderate cost. Similarly, terabytes of data stor-
age can be purchased for little. By scanning, one terabyte of storage can2The Web address for access to all statistical agencies is Fedstats.gov.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE21hold the contents of 2,000 file cabinets of documents. Ten years ago, suchstorage would have cost $1 million; about 5 years later the cost was less
than $800 (Gilheany, 2000). More recently, Hayes (2002:Fig. 4) estimated
the cost of a megabyte at a few tenths of a cent, and Rhea and his col-
leagues (2003) estimated that the cost of a terabyte will be $100 in 2006.
Data integrationÑthat is, consolidating information from heterogeneous
databasesÑis no longer a horrendously complex task, but one that is fa-
cilitated by data standards (such as XML), the growth of the Web, and
fast and inexpensive data transmission capability. Correspondingly, data
dissemination through the Web and electronic mail is now free for all
practical purposes.Lowered cost at each stage of the data process provides benefits toresearchers. With lowered costs, researchers and policy analysts can en-
joy the prospect of being able to work with new data sources, to use his-
torical records that are maintained indefinitely in user-friendly formats,
to create rich contextual databases with relevant attributes, and to dis-
seminate their results quickly throughout the world.3Lowered cost also provides opportunities for Òdata snoopers,Ó bywhich we mean individuals or organizations that attempt to identify re-
spondents for purposes that range from curiosity to marketing to pin-
pointing individuals who may have committed a crime or who may con-
stitute a terrorism risk. In contrast, researchers are not interested in
individuals as such, but only in the answers to research or policy ques-
tions that can be obtained by analyzing aggregations of individualsÕ at-
tributes.Yet the data that are most useful to legitimate researchers typicallyhave characteristics that pose substantial risk of disclosure. Some data
characteristics that create vulnerability include:¥detailed geographic information;¥repeated data collection from the same subjects;¥outliers, such as people with very high incomes;¥many attribute variables; and¥complete census data rather than a survey of a small sample ofthe population.Data with geographic detail, such as census block data, may easily be3One such historical source is the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), whichcontains individual records from the U.S. censuses from 1850 through 2000 (see Ruggles,2000). IPUMS is available on-line at the University of Minnesota (www.ipums.umn.edu)with funding from the NSF and the National Institutes of Health.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAlinked to known characteristics of respondents, unless steps are taken toalter or mask the data. Longitudinal data obtained in panel surveys, which
track entities over time, pose substantial disclosure riskÑboth because
identifiers must be retained by the collection agency in order to recontact
respondents and because longitudinal data typically include many more
attributes than do one-time surveys. In general, data files containing many
attribute variables permit easier linkage with known attributes of identi-
fied entities. This problem is magnified when social survey data are linked
to unique identifiers, such as genetic data. Furthermore, data from a cen-
sus or near census pose more disclosure risk for some kinds of data snoop-

ing than data from a survey having a small sampling fraction: there is
little likelihood, for example, that a record from a small sample survey
that has some attributes in common with an identified record from an
administrative source is actually unique in the population.The risk of disclosure has been significantly increased because of theready availability to data snoopers of external databases on the Web (see
Sweeney, 2001). These databases identify persons or other entities by
name and location and share with statistical data certain attribute vari-
ables that may permit matching the anonymized statistical data with iden-
tified data (as with marketing databases). Moreover, software for match-
ing is widely available and easily used. Thus, would-be data snoopers
now have a treasure trove of potential methods of infringing on the pri-
vacy and confidentiality of subjects of statistical surveys by matching in-
formation across databases (Winkler, 1998).CHANGES IN THE LEGAL ENVIRONMENTFor the reasons outlined above, statistical agencies face increased ten-sion as they try to respond to public policy and research needs for data
while protecting the confidentiality of the underlying information. In ad-
dition, they are expected to maintain both a high quality of the data they
produce and their role at the forefront of scientific data collection (see
Groves and Lepkowski, 1985). At their disposal they have an array of le-
gal as well as technical solutions. This legal environment has changed in
important ways during the last decade.Recently, federal statistical data have received broad new statutoryprotections against traditional threats to confidentiality, but they may be
increasingly vulnerable to new threats from statutes intended to enhance
national security and government accountability (see National Research
Council, 2005:35, App. B). In 2002, Subpart A of the Confidential Informa-
tion Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA) established mini-
mum standards for protection of information gathered by a federal agency
for a statistical research purpose under a promise of confidentiality. SuchExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE23information may not be disclosed in identifiable form for nonresearch pur-poses without the consent of the respondent: nonresearch purposes in-
clude administrative determinations, law enforcement investigations, and

adjudicatory proceedings. CIPSEA thereby provides statutory protection
to the many statistical agencies that previously had only custom or other
nonstatutory authority to back up pledges of confidentiality. The obliga-
tion to protect research data extends beyond federal agency personnel to
include those who contract with the agency to provide statistical research
services, such as conducting survey interviews or preparing data prod-
ucts. The U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is developing
guidance for the implementation of Subtitle A of CIPSEA, but such guid-
ance has not yet been issued for public comment.Subpart B of CIPSEA permits identifiable business records to beshared for ÒstatisticalÓ purposes by the U.S. Census Bureau, Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA), and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), subject to
written agreements that specify the nature of the records, the statistical
purposes, and the procedures governing access and security. Such data
sharing, which fully maintains confidentiality protection, can support sig-
nificant improvements in the nationÕs ability to obtain high-quality data
on business formation, internationalization of employment, and other
critically important issues for economic policy. A key element in the Cen-
sus BureauÕs data is its business register, which is constructed with data
from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). However, without new legisla-
tion (to amend Title 26 of the U.S. Code, which governs access to IRS tax
data), the business register and associated data cannot be shared with
BEA and BLS.Medical records, including those used for research, are subject to newconfidentiality regulations under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 (P.L. 104-191). Researchers who rely
on information collected by health care providers must comply with strict
requirements governing the use and disclosure of health care information
(see National Research Council, 2003b:117-118). Identifiable medical in-
formation may be disclosed for research purposes only with the written
consent of the person providing the information or in a limited set of cir-
cumstances in which an institutional review board determines that the
identifiable medical information is essential to the conduct of the research
and the disclosure presents minimal risk to the individual. The research-
ers must protect identifiable information from improper disclosure and
destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with the con-
duct of the research (45 C.F.R. ¤ 164.512).44There is anecdotal information that implementation of HIPAA has caused some difficul-ties for researchers (see Linet, 2003).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAAt the same time, new challenges to confidentiality of research recordshave arisen. As noted in Chapter 1, the USA Patriot Act of 2001 (P.L. 107-
56) overturned the strict confidentiality protection of education records
gathered and maintained by the NCES, a change in protection that was
later reflected in corresponding amendments to the statute governing
NCES. The USA Patriot Act allows the Attorney General to petition a court
for access to identifiable education records, including those from research,
for use in the investigation and prosecution of terrorist activities.Access to federal research information for nonresearch purposes isalso permitted by the Shelby Amendment to the Omnibus Consolidated
and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Fiscal 1999 (P.L.
105-277), which requires the OMB to set forth regulations to ensure that
all data that are supported by a federal grant to colleges, universities, hos-
pitals and other nonprofit institutions Òwill be made available to the pub-
lic through procedures established under the Freedom of Information
Act.Ó The resulting OMB guidelines restricted access to data under the
Shelby amendment to published or cited research that has been used by
the federal government to develop legally binding regulations and rul-
ings, and noted the exemptions to access under the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act for information that would result in a Òclearly unwarranted inva-
sion of personal privacy, such as records that could be used to identify a
particular person in a research studyÓ (for a detailed discussion of this
issue, see National Research Council, 2003a). CIPSEA strengthens such an
interpretation by prohibiting disclosure of confidential information un-
der the Freedom of Information Act. The validity of the OMB guidelines
and the effect of the CIPSEA restrictions are the subject of some dispute
and have yet to be tested through litigation.Federal statistical agencies also confront increased scrutiny about thequality of information that they disseminate to the public, even if the data

have not been used as part of the regulatory process. The Information

Quality Act (also known as the Data Quality Act, P.L. 106-554, ¤ 515, which
was enacted in 2000 as an amendment to an appropriation bill), directs

OMB to issue guidelines for Òensuring and maximizing the quality, objec-

tivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated . . . by federal

agenciesÓ to the public, and requires all federal agencies to establish ad-

ministrative procedures to allow affected parties to obtain correction of

information disseminated by an agency that does not meet those stan-

dards. The resulting OMB guidelines (U.S. Office of Management and
Budget, 2005) define Òscientific informationÓ to include Òany communica-

tion or representation of knowledge such as facts or data, in any medium

or form.Ó ÒDisseminationÓ is defined as Òagency initiated or sponsored

distribution of information to the public.Ó Taken together, these defini-

tions would extend the regulations to include agency distribution of
Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE25public-use and restricted use statistical data sets. Agencies must meet
higher information quality standards for distribution of Òinfluential sci-

entific information,Ó which is defined as information reasonably expected

to Òhave a clear and substantial impact on important public policies or

important private sector decisions.Ó Agencies that disseminate influential

scientific information must conduct a peer review prior to dissemination

and reveal the data and methods used to generate the scientific informa-

tion to the extent necessary to facilitate independent reanalysis, while tak-
ing into account privacy, confidentiality and intellectual property rights

of those who are the focus of the data.
5 The act has raised concern amongsome researchers that those opposed to certain agency policy initiatives

may challenge the findings and quality of research data as a means of

impeding agency regulatory activities. In 2003, some 19 agencies received

requests for data correction under this act.6Clearly, the courts can have difficulty in balancing individual pri-vacy against a right to public access. For example, in a recent case (South-ern Illinoisan v. Dept. of Publ. Health, N.E.2d, 2004 WL 1303656 [Ill. App.5Dist. June 9, 2004]), a newspaper sought release under the state freedom
of information act of cancer registry records for people with a rare form
of childhood cancer. The state department of public health opposed re-
lease of the information, which included zip code of residence, pointing
to another state statute that prohibits the public inspection or dissemina-
tion of any group of facts that tends to lead to the identity of any person
whose condition or treatment information is submitted to the registry.
The agency then supported its claim that release would result in inad-
vertent disclosure of identifiable information by offering expert testi-
mony in which the expert linked most of the records in a test sample to
other data and identified the patients. The court dismissed this demon-
stration, responding that such identification by one expert was not proof
that the records could be readily identified, and ordered their release.DEVELOPMENTS IN LIMITING DATA IDENTIFIABILITYThe confidentiality of individual data may be protected either by re-stricting researcher access to such data (restricted access) or by various
alterations that limit the identifiability of the data and hence permit them
to be made publicly available (restricted data). Statistical agencies and5National Academies workshop in 2003, ÒPeer Review Standards for RegulatoryScience and Technical Information,Ó also explored this issue; for a transcript, see www7.nationalacademies.org/stl [June 2005].6See www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/2005_ch/draft_2005_cb_report.pdf [June 2005].Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAtheir contractors currently use both methods (see Cohen and Hadden,2004).Historically, beginning with the development of public-use summaryfiles and microdata samples from the 1960 and 1970 censuses, restricted
data have represented the most widely used method for facilitating re-
searcher access to complex data (see Dunton, 2000; Gaquin, 2000a, 2000b).
Restricted data products play an especially important role in providing
research access to data because such products are available to all research-
ersÑboth inside and outside the governmentÑfor critical assessment and
alternative analyses. Restricted data may be in the form of microdata files,
which contain transformed or imputed attribute values for a sample of
individuals (such as age, sex, race, income, occupation, labor force his-
tory) or organizational entities. Restricted data may also be in the form of
tabular arrays, such as cross-classifications of income and education for
geographic areas.At present, a wide array of summary and microdata sets are availablein public-use form. Reflecting the advances in Internet capabilities, access
to such data sets is increasingly provided on-line. Examples include:¥the Census BureauÕs American FactFinder for geographic areatabulations from the census and American Community Survey (at www.
census.gov) (see Hawala, Zayatz, and Rowland, 2004);¥the NSFÕs on-line tabulation systems for data on science and engi-neering personnel and resources (www.nsf.gov. statistics.databases.cfm);¥the DataFerrett System of the Census Bureau, which enables re-searchers to extract and analyze such complex public-use microdata sets
as the Census BureauÕs Current Population Survey and Survey of Income
and Program Participation, and microdata sets from the NCHS, includ-
ing the National Health Interview Survey and the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (dataferrett. census.gov); and¥the Online Data Analysis System of the National Archive ofCriminal Justice Data, which uses software developed by the Computer-
Assisted Survey Methods Program at the University of California, Berke-
ley: the archive contains a wide range of federal, state, and local criminal
justice data sets and is maintained by the University of Michigan Inter-
university Consortium for Political and Social Research, with funding
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National Institute of Justice
(www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD).Although many types of restricted data continue to be available, sta-tistical agencies (in response to the increased threats to confidentiality pro-
tection noted above) have curtailed the availability of some data that were
previously included in public-use files. For example, public-use microdataExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE27samples (PUMS files) from the 2000 census were somewhat more re-stricted in data content than PUMS files from previous censuses, and, be-
cause of state laws, the NCHS no longer makes publicly available linked
files of microdata from the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey and mortality records. (Public-use files of business microdata have
never been created because of the relative ease of identifying individual
firms.)Restricted data are created through disclosure limitation techniques,which involve either the transformation of the original data, which is
called masking, or through the use of the original data to guide the genera-tion of synthetic or virtual data through a statistical technique of multiple
imputation. Initially, relatively simple data masking techniques, such as
top coding income amounts (that is, assigning all income amounts above
a certain value to a single category), were used to generate restricted data
products. During the last decade the increasing risks of confidentiality
breaches have led researchers to develop increasingly sophisticated meth-
odologies for restricted data products (see, e.g., Doyle et al., 2001; Singh,
Yu, and Dunteman, 2003).As developed in Duncan and Pearson (1991), masking may involvecoarsening of the data through various forms of data recoding. Attributes
may be deleted or combined, or attribute values may be grouped into
categories (or bins), such as broad intervals for asset values. Masking may
also involve perturbing the data, for example, by adding random noise or
stochastically misclassifying certain entities in a table or by swapping se-
lected data among individual records.The Research Triangle Institute has developed a set of procedures as asophisticated approach to masking, called macro-agglomeration with sub-
stitution, subsampling, and calibration (MASSC) (see, Singh, Yu, and

Dunteman, 2003). Substitution refers to perturbation of data fields, and
subsampling refers to suppression of individual records. MASSC was
originally developed to create public-use files for the National Survey of
Drug Use and Health, sponsored by the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Administration. An important design goal was to protect against
breaches of confidentiality by individuals who know someone in the sur-
veyÑsuch as a parent who provided consent for a child to participate.
MASSC is able to provide measures of disclosure risk and information
loss for a particular application.The development of a methodology for generating synthetic or vir-tual data is a relatively recent activity (Rubin, 1993). A key objective of the
method is to preserve faithful representations of the original data so that
inferences from the synthetic data are as consistent as possible with the
inferences that would be drawn from the original data. The method is
akin to creating multiple samples from the true population. EstimatesExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAfrom any one simulated data set are unlikely to equal those from the ob-served data, but by combining estimates from several such samples
(hence, Òmultiple imputationÓ), it is possible to estimate the true value, as
well as the amount of variation produced by three sources of error: sam-
pling the collected data, sampling the synthetic units from the popula-
tion, and generating values for those synthetic units (Reiter, 2003;
Raghunathan, Reiter, and Rubin, 2003). The value and usefulness of syn-
thetic data for inferential analysis, though promising, have not yet been
fully studied or determined.In developing restricted data, researchers are paying increasing atten-tion to methods for systematically analyzing the joint impact of various
disclosure limitation techniques on disclosure risk and data utility (e.g.,
Abowd and Woodcock, 2001). A general framework for such an analysis
is the risk-utility (R-U) confidentiality map (Duncan, Keller-McNulty, and
Stokes, 2003), which incorporates quantified measures of disclosure risk
as well as measures of data utility (Duncan and Lambert, 1986, 1989; Lam-
bert, 1993; Reiter, 2003). Nonetheless, more research is clearly needed to
assess the relative ability of different masking methods, and of synthetic
data, to reduce the risk of disclosure while preserving data utility.DEVELOPMENTS IN METHODS AND PROCEDURESFOR RESTRICTED ACCESSJust as important developments have been under way since the early1990s in methods for producing restricted data products that can preserve
both data confidentiality and utility, so, too, has there been substantial
expansion in the repertoire of modes for facilitating restricted access to
confidential microdata. (Confidential information refers to any identifi-
able information, regardless of whether direct identifiers, such as name or
address, have been removed from the record.) All such restricted access
methods are designed to provide the researcher with data not subjected to
the perturbationsÑvariable suppression, top and bottom coding, round-
ing, swapping, random noise, etc.Ñfound in microdata provided in pub-
lic-use files.For several decades, major statistical agencies, including BLS, the Sci-ence Resources Statistics Division of NSF, and the Census Bureau, have
sponsored fellowship programs through the American Statistical Asso-
ciation and the NSF for researchers to work with confidential data at the
agencyÕs site.7 These programs have been invaluable to the agencies in7The American Statistical Association also administers research fellowship programs forthe NCHS and the BEA.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE29obtaining significant commitments of researchersÕ time to working withan agencyÕs key data sets; however, they provide such access to only a
handful of researchers each year. The last decade has seen the develop-
ment of distributed research data center programs, monitored remote ac-
cess systems, and licensing to encourage many more researchers to work
with confidential data.Research Data CentersStimulated by researchersÕ interests in analyzing detailedwdata onbusiness organizations for which it is very difficult to create useful public-
use microdata products, the Census BureauÕs Center for Economic Stud-
ies worked with researchers to set up two research data centers (RDCs) in
1994. The Census Bureau currently sponsors eight RDCs, with a ninth
scheduled to open in late 2005. These RDCs are operated and funded in a
variety of ways: one is run by the Census Bureau itself at its Washington-
area headquarters; several are run by consortia of research institutions
that include universities, not-for-profit organizations, and government
agencies; and several are run by a single university with financial assis-
tance from other sponsors, including the Census Bureau (see www.ces.
census.gov/ces.php/rdc).8 The NCHS established an RDC at its head-quarters in Hyattsville, Maryland, in 1998 (see www.cdc.gov/nchs/r&d/
rdc.htm), and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality opened an
RDC at its headquarters in Rockville, Maryland, in 2004 for analysis of
confidential information from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (see
meps.ahrq.gov/DataCenter.htm). BLS maintains three separate RDCs at
its headquarters in Washington, D.C., for research using confidential data
maintained by the Office of Employment and Unemployment, the Office
of Compensation and Working Conditions, and the Office of Prices and
Living Conditions (www.bls.gov/bls/blsresda.htm). The approval of the
Census Bureau is required for access to some BLS data sets for which the
Census Bureau is the data collection agent.The Census Bureau states that the purpose of its RDCs is to increasethe utility and quality of Census Bureau data products by providing con-
fidential microdata to qualified researchers under conditions that do not
pose unacceptable disclosure risks. The NCHS offers a similar rationale.
To access data through an RDC, qualified researchers submit proposals
that are reviewed for feasibility, scientific merit, consistency with the
agencyÕs mission, and conformity with confidentiality protection proto-8An RDC that was started at Carnegie Mellon in 1996 has since closed.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAcols. Work is done on a secure site, with secured computers, and underthe supervision of agency staff. All outputs are subject to disclosure re-
view. In addition, researchers using the NCHS site sign a confidentiality
protocol. To use a Census Bureau site, researchers obtain a special sworn
status as a Census Bureau employee. Violation of the terms of that status
subjects the researcher to the same legal penalties as Census Bureau em-
ployees: for disclosure of confidential data, a fine up to $250,000, impris-
onment for up to 5 years, or both.The rules governing use of the research data centers are more con-straining than those encountered in most research settings. Many re-
searchers are willing to accept those constraints because the RDCs pro-
vide unique research opportunities that require access to confidential
microdata records. At the Census Bureau sites, for example, researchers
have access not only to microdata sets on business establishments, but
also to demographic microdata sets (including versions of the Current
Population Survey and the Survey of Income and Program Participation)
with more geographic and socioeconomic detail than is made publicly
available and to linkages of population and economic census, survey, and
administrative records data (such as the data sets being assembled by the
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program). At the NCHS
site, researchers can merge that agencyÕs data with their own data files.The development of the RDC conceptÑparticularly the concept un-derlying the Census BureauÕs program of distributing RDCs around the
countryÑis an important step in providing access to microdata sets that
pose particularly difficult challenges of data protection. Hildreth (2003:5)
claims that the Census BureauÕs ÒRDC network has . . . led to some of the
most innovative social science research currently being undertaken.Ó To
establish and operate an RDC, however, is costly for a statistical agency
and, in the case of a distributed RDC, for the host institution (see Hildreth,
2003). Indeed, the RDC once located at Carnegie Mellon University was
closed because the university was unwilling to continue the required level
of financial support.To recover their operating costs, RDCs must attract a sizable clientele.However, the experience to date with the Census BureauÕs RDC network
is that the long and arduous approval process may be deterring many
researchers from applying, particularly graduate students and junior re-
searchers who cannot afford to lose much time before beginning their
work. The amount of time varies by project: an economics data project, for
example, takes an average of 7 months for approval, not including pro-
posals that require revision and resubmission (Hildreth, 2003:19). Part of
the delay for many projects is the necessity to obtain the approval of an-
other agency, such as the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), for the CensusExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE31BureauÕs business establishment files (which include information from tax
returns).In addition, in response to a 1999 IRS review of the Census BureauÕsprotocols for confidentiality protection, the Census Bureau specified that
the predominant purpose of research using data sets that fall under Title 13(which governs the Census BureauÕs operations) must be to benefit Cen-
sus Bureau programs. This strict interpretation of Title 13, which applies
to most of the demographic and economic data provided through the Cen-
sus BureauÕs RDCs, may deter research that would use Title 13 data in
important ways but does not meet the strict criteria for approval.Hildreth (2003) contends that the criteria and time for approval andthe direct costs to the researcher associated with use of an RDC have led
to their underutilization. He notes the common view among RDC direc-
tors and researchers that the use of restricted data sets, specifically the
Longitudinal Research Database and other Census Bureau data, has de-
clined. Recognizing these issues, the Census Bureau has recently indicated
its intention to consider ways to streamline the RDC process and to ex-
plore the addition of data sets from other statistical agencies to its RDC
network, which would increase their attractiveness to researchers.9Monitored Remote AccessMonitored remote access to confidential data is currently imple-mented in four federal statistical agencies:¥the NCES, which permits access to a range of education files con-taining confidential data using the NCES Data Access System
(nces.edu.gov/das);¥the NCHS, which permits access to almost all of the surveys spon-sored by NCHS, including geographic and other detail not contained in
public-use data products, through remote access to its research data cen-
ter;10¥the U.S. Census Bureau, which permits users to develop their owntabulations from the 2000 census basic records using the Advanced Data
Query System (advancedquery.census.gov); and¥the Economic Research Service (ERS) in the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, which recently inaugurated a remote system for statistical9This information is from comments by Hermann Habermann, deputy director of the U.S.Census Bureau, at a meeting of the Committee on National Statistics, May 6, 2005.10The NCHS system is sometimes referred to as ANDREÑfor analytical data research byemail.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAanalysis of microdata from the Agricultural Resource Management Sur-vey (ARMS).11The pioneer of monitored remote access is the Luxembourg IncomeStudy (LIS) in Belgium, which makes microdata from 66 household in-
come surveys available to researchers from 25 participating countries. LIS
began in 1983; its software allows users to submit their own programs
using standard statistical software. Output is monitored both electroni-
cally and manually to protect confidentiality. The LIS software is also used
to provide access to the Luxembourg Employment Study, the German
Socio-Economic Panel, and EUROSTAT data (see Rowland, 2003). As de-
scribed by Rowland (2003:4):Remote access systems make it possible for users to analyze restrictedmicrodata without visiting an RDC. The systems used for remote access
to restricted microdata are monitored automatically and/or manuallyfor disclosure avoidance. They employ automated and manual filters thatblock certain kinds of queries and results. The files available are usually
edited for disclosure avoidance using the same techniques as those usedfor public use files. They provide more detail to researchers than publicuse files, but less detail than is usually available in an RDC. The files
reside in the [federal statistical agencies] and extracts of microdata anddirect access to the records are not permitted.Unlike the NCES remote access system, the NCHS system allows us-ers to submit SAS (statistical analysis system) programs by e-mail to pro-
duce most kinds of output supported by SAS. Output is returned within a
few hours of submission (during work hours). Researchers must obtain
approval from NCHS for the proposed analysis, sign an affidavit of confi-
dentiality protection, and pay a minimum processing fee of $500 per
month, or they can pay $500 per year for selected files that have been
developed for repeat and multiple users (for the details of the NCHS

policy, see www.cdc.gov/nchs/r&d/rdcfr.htm; Institute of Medicine,
2005). The most used data file is the National Survey of Family Growth,
which contains geographic and other detail not available in the public-use
format. The Census BureauÕs Advanced Data Query System enables users todevelop their own tables from the full 2000 census complete count and11ARMS obtains information from farm households on income, assets, and selected croppractices. Access to the remote system requires a memorandum of understanding for re-search purposes between ERS and the research institution, an approved research project
agreement, and a confidentiality agreement with the National Agricultural Statistics Ser-vice. The system software monitors data output for confidentiality protection (seearms.ers.usda.gov).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE33long-form sample records. Tables must be for standard census geographicareas: to protect confidentiality, data cannot be obtained for city blocks or
block groups, unlike the prespecified tables that are available from the
American FactFinder. Users must register and log in with a user identifi-
cation and password; there are no processing costs. As of 2003, more than
500 users were registered to use the Advanced Query System; in compari-
son, the NCHS remote access system had about 45 users in the period
1998-2003 (Rowland, 2003:15,20).Monitored remote access has the advantage that a researcher does nothave to go to an RDC to make use of confidential data and, in the case of
the NCES and Census Bureau systems, output is returned quickly. How-
ever, output in those systems is limited to tables. The NCHS system pro-
vides more output choices, but it has waiting periods to obtain output.
With regard to the efficacy of the disclosure review systems, evaluation
(see Rowland, 2003) suggests that they protect well against direct disclo-
sure but not against complementary disclosure (that is, disclosure of the
information in a table cell by manipulating other cells).LicensingLicensing, the third major mode for restricted data access, was firstestablished in 1989 by the NCES. Other agencies and archives that have
licensing procedures include the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Division
of Science Resources Statistics of NSF, the Health and Retirement Study
data archive (hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/rda), the University of Michigan
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, and the Wisconsin Longitudi-
nal Study (see www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch).12The license allows researchers to use nonpublic microdata at their ownwork site, and thus is the most convenient of the three modalities that
have emerged over the last decade, although, to date, it is the least used
mode. Applicants submit a research plan that includes justification for the
use of confidential data, identification of all persons who will have access
to the microdata, and a computer security plan. For successful applicants,
a license is signed by an official with authority to bind the university,
research corporation, or other government agency to the conditions
spelled out in the license. Persons with access to the data also sign affida-
vits of nondisclosure and agree to unannounced inspections to monitor12For a list of all the federal agencies that offered licensing agreements for microdata setsas of 2000, see Seastrom (2001:Table 1); for a comparison of licensing arrangements in theUnited States with those in other countries, see Seastrom, Wright, and Melnicki (2003).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAcompliance with security procedures. Most license agreements includesevere criminal penalties for confidentiality violations.License agreements are not available in agencies with existing legisla-tion that places more demanding restrictions on confidential data. The
Census Bureau, for example, remains constrained by legislation that re-
stricts access to individual records to sworn officers and employees. Li-
censing conditions vary from agency to agency, as does the duration of
the license agreements. Penalties for violating license agreements are uni-
formly severe, but the procedures for monitoring the performance of lic-
ensees and detecting and taking appropriate action against violations are
weak (Seastrom, Wright, and Melnicki, 2003). Audits of data protection
protocols have found violations due largely to carelessness; they have not
found any actual breaches of confidentiality.MEETING THE CHALLENGESThe panelÕs report points to a number of serious challenges at theinterface of confidentiality and data access. It places a high value on pro-
tecting confidentiality. It also takes seriously the responsibility to assure
that the nationÕs robust research and policy analysis infrastructure has
sufficient access to microdata so that it can provide intelligent analysis of
social and economic conditions and of the effect of policies designed to
improve them.Although it is easy to agree with the Jeffersonian principle that ab-sent an informed public there is no democracy, it is equally easy to agree
with the late Senator Moynihan, who famously justified his vote reject-
ing Robert Bork for the Supreme Court: ÒI cannot vote for a jurist who
simply cannot find in the Constitution a general right to privacy . . .Ó But
the Jeffersonian public that needs to be informed is the same public that
must supply answers to questions sometimes viewed as infringing on
privacy and must be assured that answers given are confidential.The panel finds in history the warrant for asserting that there are waysto move forward without sacrifice to either the value the nation places on
privacy and confidentiality or the value it finds in a data-rich democracy.
Statistical agencies, working closely with scholars, have for more than 40
years simultaneously improved the technologies that protect confidenti-
ality and the modalities that provide appropriate access to microdata.
Even as some methods are applied to decrease disclosure risk, others have
been designed to improve access under carefully controlled conditions.In response to increased public concerns about privacy and confiden-tiality and developments in information technology and data availability
in the past decade, the statistical and research communities responded
quickly with new methods for restricted access modes and restricted dataExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CHANGED LANDSCAPE35products. The challenge at the present time is to evaluate how well thenew methods are working, forthrightly assess problematic areas, and de-
termine ways in which alternative methods can be improved. Nothing in
the past suggests that increasing access to research data without damage
to privacy and confidentiality rights is beyond scientific reach. This report
offers recommendations that, if implemented, will continue the past
record of simultaneous improvement along both dimensions. Such im-
provement will require strong partnership between the research commu-
nity and statistical and research agencies in the design of innovative re-
search on disclosure avoidance techniques and data access modalities and
in the implementation of the advances that result from such research.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.363Benefits of Access
The United States, like all modern societies today, depends on com-plex data to develop legislation, design policies, and evaluate pro-
grams. Although aggregate data are widely available from manyfederal agencies, especially the U.S. Census Bureau, data in that form do
not permit in-depth, multivariate analysis of the trends, antecedents, or
possible consequences of social and other phenomena of interest. Such
analyses require access to microdata, which permit the use of statistical
models to study specific questions. As noted in Chapter 2, most of these
analyses are done by outside researchers rather than the agencies. Ana-
lysts also need access to microdata in order to evaluate data quality, al-
though some of this work, too, is also done by some agencies themselves.
Thus, access to microdata by outside researchers is critical to both sub-
stantive and methodological work.This chapter discusses the role of data access in the scientific process,some of the specific ways access to research data have contributed to
policy making, and the role of access in addressing the question of data
quality. We begin with a brief consideration of individuals as the source
of much data and the structure of the federal government as it relates to
research and data collection.DATA COLLECTION AND RESEARCHMuch of the data needed in a modern society comes from individuals.In many cases, people are willing to provide information because it re-
sults in direct financial or other benefit to them. In buying a home, forExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS37example, the detailed financial information from prospective buyers al-lows banks to determine what kind of mortgage they will offer, which, in
turn, allows prospective buyers to know what they can afford. In this case,
as in many others, high-quality information reduces transaction and other
costs, which in turn results in lower prices for consumers. Instant access
to personal financial data and streamlined credit-reporting systems have
not only enhanced the ability of lenders to assess risk quickly, but also
increased competition among lending institutions with the result that

mortgage rates have been reduced significantlyÑby some estimates, as
much as 2 percentage pointsÑsaving American consumers billions of
dollars a year (see McCullagh, 2004). In other sectors, mechanisms such as
frequent shopper cards and on-line credit applications have reduced the
prices of groceries and Internet purchases.In the market context, people seem generally willing to accept theunderlying rationale for surrendering a degree of privacy and confidenti-
alityÑand running the risk that their data will be misusedÑbecause the
financial and other benefits are personal, immediate, and clear. The ben-
efits of data requested by governments are often less recognizable: they
accrue to society as a whole, not just the data providers; they may take
years to be realized in the form of new laws or programs; and they may be
used in indirect and complex ways that are not obvious. The benefits of
supplying information to a grocery store to save 50 cents on a can of tuna
fish are transparent; the benefits of supplying data to a statistical agency
that may contribute to improved research on retirement decisions that
could, in turn, improve the functioning of pension or social security sys-
tems are not. The lack of transparency in the value of personal data for
societal purposes has two consequences: people may be reluctant to sup-
port (through taxes) government data collection, and there is evidence
that people are increasingly reluctant to respond to government requests
for information (see Chapter 4).The United States has not only a decentralized federal statistical anddata collection system (see National Research Council, 2005), but also a
decentralized, pluralistic structure for basic and applied social science re-
search and policy analysis (as well as other kinds of research). Most of
that research, supported by federal grants and contracts, is carried out at
universities, nonprofit research institutions, and for-profit research com-
panies, although some federal agencies conduct considerable in-house
research. State and local governments, private foundations, and corporate
and individual donations are also sources of social science research sup-
port at universities and private research organizations, including advo-
cacy and public interest groups with a variety of policy preferences and
perspectives.Federal statistical and other data collection agencies also carry outExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAsome research and analysis, but the largest share of their budgets is allo-cated to data collection and processing. In-house research is generally lim-
ited to descriptive studies, such as analyses of trends and group compari-
sons, along with significant methodological research to improve data
quality and the effectiveness of data collection. Statistical agencies do few
studies that have specific policy-related conclusions, although their work
often relates to policy questions. One reason underlying this approach is
that the agencies must avoid undercutting their credibility as a source of
high-quality, objective information. As a matter of principle, substantive
analyses by statistical agency staff should be relevant to public under-
standing and policy issues but Ònot take positions on policy options or be
designed with any particular policy agenda in mindÓ (National Research
Council, 2005:41). Because the scope of research by statistical agencies is
often narrowly focused, data access by other researchers is necessary to
ensure that alternative methodologies and uses are fully explored to ad-
vance social science knowledge and the design and evaluation of public
policies. Research access provides opportunities for disparate academic
and policy communities to communicate and learn from one another; it
also provides valuable information to statistical agencies about their data.DATA ACCESS AND THE SCIENTIFIC PROCESSEmpirical science includes not only data collection and use, but alsodata access and sharing. Data access is especially central to the produc-
tion of policy-relevant social science research in which microdata, which
comprise detailed information about individual units (people, house-
holds, firms), and particularly longitudinal microdata, which comprise
repeated observations on the same units, play an essential role. A large
portion of such data is collected in surveys conducted or funded by gov-
ernment agencies. Many of the raw data produced from these surveys
contain individual and group identifiers along with sensitive informa-

tion; the data are typically collected under a promise of confidentiality
and are to be used only for research or statistical purposes.Almost 20 years ago, a study by the Committee on National Statisticsdescribed the benefits of data sharingÑsome of which apply to data ac-
cess more generallyÑand its essential role in science (National Research
Council, 1985:9-16; see also Sieber, 1991). Data sharing promotes new re-
search and allows for exploration of new questions without necessitating
new data collection. Economies of scale are also created. The same
datasets can be used for multiple purposes without substantial new in-
vestments: data gathered by researchers to answer one set of questions
may be useful to others to answer another. Finding new ways to use
existing data may also lessen the need for new collection efforts, which,Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS39in turn, reduces the burden on respondents. Sharing data can also lead tofile linkages and the creation of new, more powerful datasets for examin-
ing public policy issues.When government-funded research is used for decision making, datasharing allows for analysis of problems by investigators with diverse per-
spectives. Policy disputes related to interpretation are common, and, with
wide dissemination of data to researchers, debate can be better informed.
In contrast, much of the policy-related research that is commissioned by
private interests is never published, so it cannot be corroborated or ex-
tended to new work.When data are shared along with study results, the research commu-nity and data collection agencies can improve and hone their own data
collection methods and analytic capabilities. Faulty techniques that might
not otherwise have been acknowledged as such can be identified, and
techniques that are effective can be promoted (we return to this important
point below). Researcher access also makes it more likely that additional
information about the statistical procedures that underlie the data, which
might otherwise not be completely documented by agencies, is archived.Perhaps most important, data sharing fosters an open research com-munity and reinforces transparent scientific inquiry. Data sharing allows
for verification, refutation, or refinement of original results. In this way,
data access safeguards the scientific enterprise by ensuring that other sci-
entists can replicate important findings (see Abowd and Lane, 2003). Al-
though replication is not a common scientific activity in the social sci-
ences, philosophers and historians of science (e.g., Kuhn, 1962) agree that
it is an important one. ÒIt is by means of wide and complete disclosure,
and the skeptical efforts to replicate novel research findings, that scien-
tific communities collectively build bodies of Ôreliable knowledgeÕÓ David
(2001:2). Moreover, there is a considerable amount of informal replica-
tion: when an investigator extends previous results, he or she may begin
by trying to replicate the first finding. Replication acts as an important
disciplinary device for both academic researchers and government statis-
ticians. In addition, as is evident from news stories of research fraud, sci-
entists have sometimes misrepresented the results of research by altering
their data or reporting only some observations. Wide access to research
data helps ensure that such misrepresentations, when they occur, will be
identified by other researchers. The U.S. National Science Foundation has required that data used inprojects supported by its grants be placed in a publicly accessible archive.
There are similar requirements at the U.S. National Institute of Justice and
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The National Institutes of Health
have pursued policies to encourage data sharing for further analysis or
replication studies in such areas as DNA sequencing, mapping informa-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAtion, and crystallographic coordinates (Soete and ter Weel, 2003). Someacademic journals promote reproducibility of empirical findings for the
articles they publish. However, many journals that have a policy of mak-
ing the underlying data available (e.g., the American Economic Review)waive the requirement if any portions of the data are Òrestricted use,Ó
which undermines the value of the policy.Some important data sets produced by statistical agencies pose par-ticularly difficult challenges of confidentiality protection: they are there-
fore accessible only in a restricted access modeÑa secure research data
center, a monitored remote access arrangement, or through a licensing
agreement (see Chapter 2). If scientific replication is to be encouraged,

application procedures to use confidential data need to be as streamlined
as possible so that researchers, including graduate students and junior
researchers, are not discouraged from applying by the length of time and
amount of resources required for review (see Chapter 5).MICRODATA FOR POLICY-RELEVANT RESEARCHThe nation faces a range of complex policy issues, including the pro-vision and funding of health care, education standards, retirement income
security, and savings and consumption behavior. Equally complex policy
issues are posed by such economic changes as increasing globalization of
trade and shifts in the relative importance of various industry sectors. In
turn, these changes have widespread ramifications for employment op-
portunities and income security. Addressing policy issues in these areas
requires increasingly sophisticated behavioral modeling, which, in turn,
requires detailed microdata, particularly longitudinal microdata.The more detailed the data, the more utility they have for research.For example, the inclusion of geographic detailsÑsuch as state, county, or
city of residenceÑin microdata sets from large national probability sample
surveys would permit modeling disparities in health, economic, and other
outcomes that vary significantly across geographic areas. Similarly, the
inclusion of contextual variables for cities and neighborhoods in micro-
data sets from national surveys would permit analyses of many policy-
relevant issues. Some RDCs do currently offer access to geographic detail
for selected surveys: for example, the National Center for Health Statistics
includes a version of the microdata from the National Health Interview
Survey with state and county identifiers at its RDC, and researchers can
make special arrangements at the University of Michigan to use microdata
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics with contextual neighborhood-
level variables derived from census and other data.Detailed microdata permit in-depth analyses of socioeconomic trendsand their antecedents and consequences. Such analyses require multi-
variate behavioral modeling, which cannot be effectively undertakenExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS41with aggregate data. For example, it has become increasingly clear overrecent decades that analysis of aggregate statistics does not give policy
makers an accurate view of the functioning of the economy (Abowd and
Lane, 2003). Indeed, the creative turbulence that is a hallmark of the U.S.
economy and a major contributor to its success is not apparent from
macrolevel indicators. Analysis of microdata has revealed how flux in
labor markets factors into job creation (Haltiwanger, David, and Schuh,
1996) and how widespread reallocation of factors of production (e.g.,

workers) from one firm to another firm in and across narrowly defined
industries is a major contributor to U.S. productivity growthÑmore im-
portant than investment in equipment and structures (Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan, 2001).Detailed microdata are also needed for modeling economic decisionsand other kinds of social behavior. Indeed, research is expanding into
areas that were relatively untapped even a few years ago. For example,
research using attitudinal information in combination with socioeconomic
data about individuals and families to model savings behaviorÑalthough
anticipated 50 years ago by Klein and Goldberger (1955), who used data
on consumer sentiment to forecast consumptionÑhas become a vibrant
field in recent years with the expanded collection of microdata and their
increasing availability to researchers.A number of applied microdata examples relate to one prominentpublic policy issueÑpopulation aging (see Woodbury et al., 1999). The
issue is at the forefront of public attention because of the changing demo-
graphic structure of the U.S. population and the budget pressures that
face Medicare and Social Security. To develop policies for an aging popu-
lation in an informed manner, researchers must assess such trends as in-
creasing life expectancy, changing retirement and savings patterns,
changes in pension plans, and declines in employer-provided health in-
surance coverage. Rapidly changing medical technologies and increasing
costs of care add further complexity to the analysis. Microdata for indi-
viduals and families can be used to simulate outcomes under different
possible policies and to estimate costs and benefits associated with vari-
ous policy options (see National Research Council, 1991, 1997). Data from
the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), for example, have been instru-
mental in answering such questions as how Social Security benefits inter-
act with pensions and savings in household efforts to finance retirement,
how social security age eligibility requirements affect retirement rates and
timing, and how changes in out-of-pocket medical expenses affect the use
of federal programs.11For a full bibliography of research using the HRS data, see the website for the survey atthe University of Michigan: hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/papers/sho_papers.php? hfyle=bib_all[May 2005].Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAAnother example of microdata needs can be found in research on pol-lution abatement.  In this case, and many others like it, use of aggregate

data leads to biased estimates of relationships among variables because
different firms in an industry respond to regulations in different ways.
Moreover, when aggregated, industry responses are weighted to repre-
sent the universe of firms at a given time. As that universe changes as a
result of the entry and exit of firms, the assigned weights will no longer be
correct and neither will be the analyses based on them (see Abowd and
Lane, 2004).Microdata also allow for a much broader range of analyses than doaggregate data: for example, examining relationships among variables for
individual classes of firms in an industry or industries (McGuckin, 1995).
The expansion of research on the human dimensions of environmental
change is another. Researchers increasingly include individual-level con-
textual variables in their modelsÑthe schools respondents attend, the
neighborhoods they live in, the firms they work for, and the people with
whom they interact. Linking data on people and their environmentsÑ
including biological and spatial dataÑis at the very core of this kind of
research (Rindfuss, 2002). More generally, the increasing complexity of
social and economic activity requires data that can be used to separate out
demographic interactions and economic and ecological effects.A key characteristic of microdata is that they allow the marginal ef-fects of key variables to be isolated, adjusting for other factors. Research
into the relationship between household income and Medicare expendi-
tures is an example: interestingly, the results of recent studies have been
mixed. Work by Battacharya and Lakdawalla (2003), which uses house-
hold-level data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey linked to
Medicare claims records, does not find a positive association between in-
come and Medicare use. In contrast, McClellan and Skinner (2004), using
insurance claims and data from the census and the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID), find that households in high-income neighborhoods
pay more in Medicare taxes but receive more in benefits. It will take more
studies, possibly with other microdata sets, to answer the important policy
question about redistribution from poor to well-to-do households through
the Medicare system. The microdata-based literature on Medicare shows other interestingrelationships. For instance, a small proportion of the elderly population
accounts for a very large proportion of Medicare expenditures, and those
who account for a high proportion of expenditures in one year are likely
to be above-average users in subsequent and preceding years (Garber,
MaCurdy, and McClellan, 1998). The importance of the Medicare pro-
gram, and research about it, is difficult to overstate: total disbursements
in 2002 were $265.7 billion, and its costs are growing faster than those ofExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS43Social Security. Understanding Medicare program use, and its correlationwith income and health, is critical to understanding its current effects and
to making projections and policy recommendations for the future.LONGITUDINAL MICRODATAFor many research applications, it is desirable to analyze not justmicrodata, but also longitudinal microdataÑrepeated observations on the

same units over time. For example, decisions by individuals and firms
that affect retirement behavior and benefits occur over long periods of
time, requiring microdata sets that follow people through their working
lives (National Research Council, 1997:70-71). Similarly, understanding
the cumulative effects of racial or gender discrimination on employment,
health, and other outcomes requires longitudinal data on generations of
individuals and families (National Research Council, 2004a:Ch. 11).Longitudinal data contribute to high-quality research in at least twodistinct ways. First, such data allow more accurate estimation than is typi-
cally possible with a single cross-sectional survey of such information as
transitions between states (for example, a householdÕs income falling be-
low the poverty line), durations in a particular state, and changes in vari-
ables of interest. Because shorter recall periods tend to result in more ac-
curate reporting of retrospective information, collecting information each
year about the past yearÕs activities will produce more accurate data than
asking for, say, a 10-year history (Bound, Brown, and Mathiowetz, 2001).
Second, longitudinal data allow a researcher to control for the role of un-
observed characteristics in explaining variation in outcomes among indi-
viduals, so long as the unobserved characteristics are relatively stable for
individuals over time (Brown, 2003).Longitudinal data generally derive from three sources: surveys, ad-ministrative records, and policy experiments. Experiments in such areas
as welfare reform usually combine data from surveys and administrative
records for baseline information around the time of the intervention with
follow-up surveys and administrative records at a later time to assess the
effects of the intervention (Brown, 2003; National Research Council,
2001b).Longitudinal data collections are major investments, and their im-provement over time is an important goal to which widespread access can
contribute. For example, timely researcher access has led to identification
of ways to improve economic measures in the HRS, such as the linking of
asset values with income from assets (Hurd, Juster, and Smith, 2003). This
progress can be contrasted with the lack of progress in the measurement
of pension entitlements: those data are complex but, more important, less
available. It has taken many years for researchers to understand theirExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAweaknesses, in part because few of them have had access to the data andto become familiar with them (see National Research Council, 1997:97-
101).Nearly anything that is done to facilitate the use of longitudinal datafor social science research also has the potential to contribute to informed
policy discussion. The list of topics to which longitudinal microdata have
been applied is a long one: welfare reform, job training, unemployment
insurance, preschool programs, retirement, employer-provided health in-
surance, policies affecting the disabled, K-12 educational reform, occupa-
tional safety, and tax policy. However, because of the time it takes to
gather and then analyze the data, they are not always available when
policy makers want them.For policy makers, the best-case scenario may appear to be one inwhich there is a brief policy intervention, the effects of interest are short
run, and the data needed for evaluation are contained in routinely col-
lected administrative records. The experiments that preceded the 1996
welfare reform legislationÑwhich replaced Aid to Families with Depen-
dent Children with the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)
programÑare a good example of this happy coincidence. The main effect
that the experiments were designed to assess was the extent to which, and
how quickly, the prompt provision of job search assistance would move
recipients off the welfare rolls; administrative record-keeping for the ex-
perimental programs went a long way toward providing the data needed
for this assessment. Yet longer term effects of welfare reform, such as the
extent to which former welfare recipients hold jobs for 2 or more years,
are also of interest, and these kinds of assessments require longitudinal
microdata (see National Research Council, 2001b).Moreover, the early results of experiments can be misleading, so thatan adequate period of measurement is needed before effects can be confi-
dently measured. For example, early analysis of the effects of the Seattle
and Denver income maintenance experiments indicated that income sup-
port leads to marriage dissolution (Groenveld, Tuma, and Hannan, 1980).
Subsequent analysis, however, suggested that long-term stability in mar-
riage was enhanced by income support: what had been captured by the
data at the beginning of the experiment was a one-time enabling of di-
vorce for women who had no other source of financial support (Cain and
Wissoker, 1990).Longitudinal data can also contribute to policy analyses when a pro-gram continues for a long enough time so that evaluations of its early
incarnations can be informative in guiding subsequent decisions. Head
Start is an example. The earliest cohorts of Head Start participants have
reached adulthood, and later cohorts have progressed far enough in
school so that the medium-term effects on achievement can be assessed.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS45Nevertheless, because Head Start was not designed as an experiment us-ing randomly assigned control groups, the program evaluations have been
less clear-cut than they might have been if a field experiment had been
conducted.2A third situation in which longitudinal data have timely policy rel-evance is when an ongoing longitudinal data program contains the infor-
mation needed to address a current policy question. For example, the PSID

was originally created in 1968 to study poverty-related problems. It ful-
filled that goal well in its early years, and in its more than three decades of
existence it has also been the basis for very informative work on duration
of spells of welfare receipt (OÕNeill et al., 1984; Hoynes and MaCurdy,
1994; Boisjoly, Harris, and Duncan, 1998; Duncan, 2000). The data are now
beginning to be used to assess the effects of more recent welfare reforms.In 1979 the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) was be-gun, and it and the PSID extended data collection to the children of origi-
nal PSID respondents. Both data sets have been able to shed light on the
consequences for children of poverty, welfare receipt, and maternal em-
ployment. Similarly, the HRS, having continued long enough for its initial
cohort to reach retirement age, has become the data set of choice for many
policy discussions related to retirement.LINKING SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATAThirty-five years ago, interagency agreements permitted the linkageof some microdata from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the Social Se-
curity Administration (SSA), and the Census BureauÕs Current Popula-
tion Survey (CPS). A publicly available 1973 CPS-SSA-IRS exact-match
file was the basis for a major dynamic microsimulation model of social
welfare policies and retirement income and was also used to analyze the
quality of income reporting in the March CPS. A 1978 CPS-SSA exact-
match file was the basis for another microsimulation model of retirement
income, although that file was not made publicly available. Because linked
data present challenges for minimizing the likelihood of re-identifying
individuals, concerns about increasing nonresponse rates to government
surveys and, subsequently, legislation (e.g., the 1976 Tax Reform Act, P.L.2In general, it is easier to mount evaluations with random assignment for experimentalprograms than for ongoing ones. For Head Start, if program administrators were to definepriority classes of applicants and select randomly when they cannot serve everyone in the
highest priority class, this difficulty could be overcome. See also the report of an evaluationof the High/Scope Perry Preschool Project, which did use random assignment and foundsubstantial positive effects after an interval of some 35 years (Schweinhart, 2004).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA94-455) led agencies to curtail the development of linked microdata forpublic use. The linkages that were performed (for example, of March CPS
files with limited tax return information) were for internal agency use
only (see National Research Council, 1991:66-68, 134-135).Linking survey and administrative microdata can create datasets thatfacilitate a broad spectrum of research relevant to complex policy ques-
tions. For example, by linking Wisconsin income tax records, Social Secu-
rity earnings and benefits records, and probate records, Menchik and
David (1983) determined that prospective Social Security benefits did not
have a perceptible effect on lifetime wealth accumulation. Linkages such
as those of HRS with Social Security records introduce detail to the data
that are particularly constructive for modeling savings incentives, retire-
ment decisions, and other dynamic economic behavior. In this case, the
potential research benefits of linking were sufficiently large that the Social
Security Administration approved the link with minimal controversy (the
linked data are available through special access arrangements at the Uni-
versity of Michigan).Another example that illustrates the benefits of data linkage is re-search to investigate the effects of community context on child develop-
ment and socialization patterns and the effects of the availability of child
care on parentsÕ work decisions (Gordon, 1999). By having access to an
NLSY file with detailed geographic codes for survey respondents, Gor-
don was able to add contextual dataÑsuch as the availability of child
careÑfor the neighborhoods in which respondents lived. GordonÕs appli-
cation highlights the tradeoff between data precision and disclosure risks.
Access to census tract-level geocoding permitted more sensitive construc-
tion of community and child care variables central to the study; however,
it also increased the identifiability of individual NLSY records.3The new Medicare drug benefit provides another example in whichdata linkage might contribute significantly to policy-relevant research and
modeling. Policy makers would like to know the effects of the legislation:
who gains and by how much and how the benefit changes drug consump-
tion, retirement decisions, and other behaviors. To observe and model
these responses, individual survey data and linked Medicare data are
needed on the same people both before and after the policy change.Data linkage also has the potential to reduce data collection costsÑboth direct costs and the cost of respondent burden. Linking existing in-
formation from different surveys or a combination of survey and admin-3It is important to keep in mind the distinction between identifiability of individual
records and the risk of re-identification. The first is a statistical matter; the second assumes,in addition, intruder motivation (see Chapter 4).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS47istration data, as in the continuing Medical Care Expenditure Panel Sur-vey (MEPS), can streamline the data collection process by reducing the
need to duplicate surveys. If survey designers know that links to adminis-
trative data can be made, they can limit the length of questionnaires as
well. Yet statistical agencies have not made extensive use of linkages of
administrative records and survey data in household surveys. They have
made much more extensive use of administrative records, such as tax
records, for business data collection.Another benefit from linkages of survey data and administrativerecords is that they can improve data accuracy and scope by giving re-
searchers access to information that individuals may not be able to recall
or estimate accurately. For example, the lifetime earnings data in the So-
cial Security files that are linked to the HRS are virtually impossible for
respondents to recall or even find in their own records. Similarly, respon-
dents may not have immediate access to information in medical records
or have the technical knowledge to answer some questions. Yet adminis-
trative data contain their own errorsÑsuch as omissions and duplica-
tionsÑand they may use different concepts and cover different popula-
tions than surveys. Thus, although there are many advantages of linked
data, care is needed in making linkages and in using the linked data.In addition to their role in complementing survey data, administra-tive records can be used to estimate the measurement errors in survey
reports, an idea that dates back at least to Ferber (1966) and the work of
the Inter-University Consortium for Savings Research. For example, for
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), a census of fed-
eral and state administrative records was taken in 1983-1984 for four states
to ascertain the validity of reporting for eight income maintenance pro-
grams (Marquis and Moore, 1990). Analysis of survey reports and admin-
istrative data for the Food Stamp Program determined that systematic
differences in reporting biased the relationships derived from the SIPP
sample and that error-prone respondents were more likely to drop out of
the SIPP panels.Another way in which linkage increases data utility is by making itpossible to get more research mileage from isolated datasets that would
otherwise have limited application. In addition to the above-noted value
in reducing data collection redundancies and improving data accuracy in
a cost-effective manner, linking information sources may provide in-
creased flexibility to meet future research needs with existing data sets.
For example, if SIPP records were linked to administrative tax returns or
wage and salary data from state unemployment insurance records, the
income data would be more accurate, the cost of the survey would de-
crease, and the utility of the data for research and policy analysis would
increase.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAThe benefits of linked data extend beyond social science research.Linking records is essential for high-quality studies of effectiveness in
many areas of medical research by permitting the analysis of data already
available. For example, linking together emergency medical service (EMS)
data, hospital records, and death registries allows researchers to follow
patients through the pre-hospital, hospital, and post-discharge stages (Na-
tional Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2001). Data linkage also
facilitates research on infrequent events, such as rare diseases that affect
only a small percentage of the population. In such cases, working from
general sample data does not provide adequate sample sizes for target
groups, and population-based data, which are very expensive to collect,
are often required. Linkage can, in some instances, provide a much less
costly substitute.ACCESS AND DATA QUALITYResearchersÕ access to and use of the complex data collected by fed-eral statistical agencies are essential to maintain and improve data qual-
ity (Abowd and Lane, 2004). The findings derived from such analyses
undergo reexamination and reinvigoration when disseminated to the re-
search community. ResearchersÕ use of government data creates an effec-
tive feedback loop by revealing data quality and processing problems, as
well as new data needs, which can spur statistical agencies to improve
their operations and make their data more relevant. The use of data by
outside researchers can also verify or improve sampling frames for sur-
veys and censuses. Data access and use by a variety of researchers, for
diverse purposes, provides a range of feedback to data collection agen-
cies. Agencies may also be able to generate new data products when they
combine existing records with other information from research.The relationship between data use and data quality is the essentialfoundation for the common interest of the statistical system and the wider
research community in broad and responsible access to data. That rela-
tionship is well recognized by such agencies as the Census Bureau. The
agencyÕs Center for Economic Studies web page states: ÒExposing to the
light of research the conceptual and processing assumptions that are em-
bedded in the Census BureauÕs micro databases constitutes a core ele-
ment in the Census BureauÕs commitment to qualityÓ (see mission state-
ment at ces.census.gov). This recognition is not new. McGuckin (1992)
argued more than a decade ago that coordinated research efforts between
in-house and outside researchers offer the best model for ensuring that
agencies maximize the benefits from data users. In fact, McGuckin
(1992:19) argued that it is a primary responsibility of statistical agencies to
facilitate researcher access to confidential microdata files. Such access, byExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BENEFITS OF ACCESS49improving the microdata for research and policy analysis, also improvesthe quality and usefulness of the aggregate statistics on trends and distri-
butions that are the bread and butter of statistical agency output.Thus, the benefits from research access to complex microdata accruenot only to policy makers, but also, and importantly, to the statistical agen-
cies themselves. There is growing appreciation for the point of view that
the largest single improvement that the U.S. statistical system could make
is to enhance the capabilities for analysis of statistical data by researchers
inside and outside of government, which, in turn, would enable statistical
agencies to better understand and improve their data (see Abowd and
Lane, 2003).There are many examples of the synergy that can be created fromlarge numbers of researchers using the same datasets, which allows for
corroboration of results and an accumulation of the benefits of knowl-
edge. In a workshop featuring results from Wave 1 of the HRS, for ex-
ample, much was learned about what had gone right and wrong (Journalof Human Resources, 1995). On a practical level, multiple users assure anincreased return on the investment in expensive data collection projects.Although statistical agencies expend substantial resources to ensurethat they produce the best possible product, there is no substitute for ac-
tual research use of microdata to identify data anomalies. Indeed, there is
general recognition of the direct correlation between the quality of a sta-
tistical agencyÕs data and its openness to external research. A variety of
studies offer evidence that the U.S. statistical system now collects more
relevant and higher quality statistics as a result of disclosing both the sur-
vey instruments and the data to outside researchers (e.g., Levitan and
Gallo, 1990; McGuckin and Nguyen, 1990; Taeuber, 1981; Triplett, 1991;
see also Soete and ter Weel, 2003). By increasing access to their data, sta-
tistical and other data collection agencies will almost certainly improve
both the quality of the data and their usefulness for research and policy
analysis. Such improvement will, in turn, increase the value of the invest-
ments in collecting, processing, and maintaining the data.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.504Risks of Access:
Potential Confidentiality Breaches and
Their ConsequencesChapter 3 has argued that to fulfill their function in a democraticsociety, statistical and research agencies must provide access to
the data they collect. Yet, at the same time, they are chargedwithprotecting the data
’s confidentiality. That charge rests on three un-derlying considerations: ethical, legal, and pragmatic. The ethical obliga-
tion, rooted in the Belmont Report (National Commission for the Protec-
tion of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979),
requires agencies to strive for a favorable balance of risks and harms for
survey respondents. Legally, they are bound by federal laws to honor the
promises of confidentiality they make, with potential civil and criminal
penalties if they fail to do so. On a pragmatic level, their ability to collect
high-quality data from respondents will be compromised by real or per-
ceived breaches of confidentiality. This chapter elaborates on all three of
these assumptions.A pledge of confidentiality stipulates that publicly available data—whether summary data or microdata and including any data added from
administrative records or other surveys—will be anonymized or other-wise masked to ensure that they cannot be used to identify a specific per-
son, household, or organization, either directly or indirectly by statistical
inference. Such a pledge also means that more readily identifiable data
will be made available for research purposes only through restricted ac-
cess modalities that impose legal obligations and penalties to minimize
the risk that researchers with access to such data might disclose them to
others. An example of such more readily identifiable data is a set of house-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS51hold survey records that, although stripped of names and addresses, con-tains codes for small geographic areas.The reason for confidentiality pledges and for stringent procedures toprevent disclosure is that they improve the quality of data collected from
individuals, households, and firms. It is essential that respondents believe
they can provide accurate, complete information without any fear that the
information will be disclosed inappropriately. Indeed, if the information
was disclosed, harm might come to an individual respondent. Many gov-
ernment-sponsored surveys ask about sensitive topics (e.g., income or al-
coholic beverage consumption), as well as about stigmatizing and even
illegal behavior. The disclosure of such information might subject a re-
spondent to loss of reputation, employment, or civil or criminal penalties.
Furthermore, the breach of a confidentiality pledge would violate the prin-
ciple of respect for those consenting to participate in research, even if the
disclosure involved innocuous information that would not result in any
social, economic, legal, or other harm (see National Research Council,
2003b:Ch.5).The occurrence of a breach also threatens the research enterprise it-self, because concerns about privacy and confidentiality are among the
reasons often given by potential respondents for refusing to participate
in surveys, and those concerns have been shown to affect behavior as
well. Any confidentiality breach that became known would be likely to
heighten such concerns and, correspondingly, reduce survey response
rates. Efforts to increase researchers’ access to data must, therefore, takeinto account the need to avoid increasing the actual and perceived risks
of confidentiality breaches.This chapter begins by reviewing research linking survey non-response to concerns about confidentiality. The rest of the chapter dis-
cusses some of the ways in which confidentiality breaches might occur,
with special attention to how increasing access might increase both the
actual and perceived risks of confidentiality breaches. Although much of
this report focuses on statistical disclosure—re-identification of respon-dents or their attributes by matching survey data stripped of direct iden-
tifiers with information available outside the survey—these sectionsserve as a reminder that statistical disclosure is by no means the only,
and perhaps not even the most important, way in which confidentiality
breaches might occur. They also serve as a reminder that public percep-
tions that personal data are being misused may be as potent a deterrent
to participation by potential survey respondents as an actual breach of
confidentiality.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATACONFIDENTIALITY CONCERNS AND NONRESPONSE INCENSUSES AND SURVEYSThe first experimental demonstration that confidentiality concernsincrease refusal to participate in a government survey comes from a Na-
tional Research Council study sponsored by the U.S. Census Bureau in
the late 1970s (National Research Council, 1979), but most of the evidence
comes from a series of surveys commissioned by the Census Bureau in the
1990s. In the 1990 census, for example, people who were concerned about
confidentiality and saw the census as an invasion of privacy were signifi-
cantly less likely to return their census form by mail than those who had
fewer privacy and confidentiality concerns (Singer, Mathiowetz, and
Couper, 1993; Couper, Singer, and Kulka, 1998). Although such attitudesexplained a relatively small proportion of the variance in census returns
(1.3 percent), this proportion represented a significant number of people
who had to be followed up in person to obtain information required for
the census.Analysis of the mail returns of a sample of respondents in the 2000census yielded similar results. Once again, respondents with greater pri-
vacy and confidentiality concerns were less likely to return their census
forms by mail. The variance in census returns explained by attitudes to-
ward privacy and confidentiality was very similar to that obtained in 1990
(Singer, Van Hoewyk, and Neugebauer, 2003). In 2000, respondents with
greater privacy and confidentiality concerns were also significantly less
likely to provide an address to Gallup survey interviewers for the pur-
pose of matching their survey responses to the file of census returns, and
they were much less likely to respond to a question about their income.Another way of looking at the effect of confidentiality concerns is tolook at the relationship between beliefs that the census may be misused
for law enforcement purposes and the propensity to mail back the census
form. Of the 478 respondents in the Gallup survey following the 2000
census who believed that census data are used for none of three purposes
(identifying illegal aliens, keeping track of troublemakers, and using cen-
sus answers against respondents), 86 percent returned their census form
by mail. The percentage dropped to 81 percent among those who selected
exactly one of the three items (N = 303), to 76 percent among those who
selected exactly two items (N = 255), and to 74 percent among the 171
respondents who selected all three items (Singer, Van Hoewyk, and
Neugebauer, 2003). In 1990, census return rates declined from 78 percentto 55 percent on a similar index of confidentiality concerns (Singer,
Mathiowetz, and Couper, 1993). Given the cost of obtaining census infor-
mation that is not sent by mail, this reduction in the likelihood of return-
ing the census form has significant consequences. Other research on theExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS532000 census is in accord with these findings: one study (Hillygus et al.,2006) concludes that the census return rate in 2000 would have been ap-
proximately 5 percent higher if there had not been public anxieties over
privacy and what was characterized in the media and by some political
leaders as unwarranted “intrusiveness.”There is also indirect evidence that requests for information on thecensus form that respondents consider sensitive leads to higher non-
response rates for both the sensitive item and the entire questionnaire.
For example, a 1992 experiment involving the Census Bureau’s requestfor Social Security numbers led to a decrease of 3.4 percent in the return
of the census form and an increase of 17 percentage points in the number
of questionnaires returned with missing data (Dillman, Sinclair, and
Clark, 1993). An experiment involving a request for Social Security num-
bers conducted during the 2000 census led to an almost identical result
(Guarino, Hill, and Woltman, 2001:17).Of particular interest in this context is the finding that concerns aboutconfidentiality and negative attitudes toward data sharing increased sub-
stantially between 1995 and 2000 (Singer et al., 2001:Tables 2.16-17, 2.21-
29). People’s stated willingness to provide their Social Security numbersalso declined, from 68 percent in 1996 to 55 percent in 1999 (Singer et al.,
2001:Table 2.45). Several studies (summarized in Bates, 2005) have also
documented that it has become increasingly difficult for the Census Bu-
reau to obtain Social Security numbers. In the Survey of Income and Pro-
gram Participation, there was an increase in refusals to provide them from
12 percent in the 1995 panel to 25 percent in the 2001 panel; in the Current
Population Survey, there was an increase in refusals from approximately
10 percent in 1994 to almost 23 percent in 2003.Evidence about the effects of concerns about privacy and confidenti-ality on response to nongovernmental surveys is provided by a series of
small-scale experiments carried out in the context of the Survey of Con-
sumer Attitudes (SCA). The SCA is a national telephone survey fielded
every month at the University of Michigan, primarily to measure eco-
nomic expectations and attitudes.The first experiment, conducted in 2001, was designed to investigatewhat risks and benefits respondents perceived in two specific surveys—the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) and the Health and Retire-
ment Study (HRS)—and how these perceptions affected their willingnessto participate in the research. After hearing the description of each study,
respondents were first asked whether or not they would be willing to take
part in the survey, and if not, why not; they were then asked whether or
not they thought each of several groups (family, businesses, employers,
and law enforcement agencies) could gain access to their answers and
how much they would mind if they did. Both the perceived risk of disclo-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAsure (how likely various groups were seen as gaining access to respon-dents’ answers along with their names and addresses) and the perceivedharm of disclosure (how much respondents would mind such disclosure)
significantly predicted people’s willingness to participate in the surveydescribed. Perceived benefits, as well as the ratio of risk to benefit, were
also highly significant.In January and April 2003, two virtually identical experiments werecarried out, again on the SCA (Singer, 2004). The introductions to both
surveys mentioned the possibility of record linkage—medical records inthe case of NSFG and government (financial) records in the case of HRS.
Respondents who indicated that they would not be willing to take part in
the survey described (48 percent of the sample) were asked why they
would not do so. The most frequent reasons given—59 percent of all first-mentioned reasons—were that the surveys were too personal or intrusiveor that they objected to giving out financial or medical information or
providing access to medical or financial records. As in the previous ex-
periment, perceptions of disclosure risk, disclosure harm, individual and
social benefit, and the ratio of risk to benefit were strong and significant
predictors of people’s willingness to participate. Similarly, an experimentin connection with the 2000 census found that respondents primed to con-
sider privacy issues had higher rates of item nonresponse to census long-
form questions than a control group (Hillygus et al., 2006).These experiments point to the importance of perceptions of disclosurerisk, as well as of actual risks. Public awareness of confidentiality breaches
in nongovernment surveys may adversely affect perceptions of the risks
arising from participation in government surveys. That is, public knowl-
edge of a breach of confidentiality by an employee of a government ben-
efit agency or private insurance company may increase concern about
such breaches by federal statistical agencies, such as the Census Bureau.
Similarly, public knowledge of legal demands for identified records, such
as subpoenas for data about individuals by law enforcement agencies or
attorneys for plaintiffs or defendants, may increase such concerns. Similar
concerns and effects may result from identity theft, through unauthorized
access to an individual’s credit card account and Social Security numbers;from misuse of medical records by entities (e.g., insurance companies)
that are entitled access to them for administrative purposes; or from mis-
use of administrative records or survey records by employees of a data
collection agency. And, as noted above, such concerns about confidential-
ity adversely affect the likelihood of participation in government surveys.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS55WHY CONFIDENTIALITY BREACHES MIGHT OCCURCarelessness and Illegal IntrusionsSurvey researchers have identified various ways in which the confi-dentiality of individual respondents might be breached. Perhaps the most
obvious and common threat to confidentiality protection of research data
arises from simple carelessness—not removing identifiers from question-naires or electronic data files, leaving cabinets unlocked, not encrypting
files containing identifiers, talking about specific respondents with others
not authorized to have this information. Although there is no evidence of
respondents having been harmed as a result of such negligence, it is im-
portant for government data collection agencies and private survey orga-
nizations to be alert to these issues, provide employee guidelines for ap-
propriate data management, and ensure that the guidelines are observed.Confidentiality may also be breached as a result of illegal intrusionsinto the data. For example, in 1996, ten Social Security employees (bribed
by outsiders) were found to have stolen confidential information from
agency computers. The key piece of information was mothers’ maidennames, which were stored in a database with password protection but
less stringent security than that protecting earnings statements and other
private information. The information was used to activate credit cards of
residents in the New York area. Identity theft has been increasingly in the
news since then.As detailed data collected under a pledge of confidentiality are in-creasingly made available to researchers through licensing agreements or
in research data centers, the potential for inadvertent disclosure as a re-
sult of carelessness and through deliberate illegal intrusions may also in-
crease unless strong educational and oversight efforts accompany such
means of access. In Chapter 5 we offer several recommendations designed
to strengthen protections against these sources of disclosure of informa-
tion about individuals.However, the extent of the problem is not easily determinable, eitherby assessing past experience or predicting future effects. Numerous me-
dia stories have documented harms of identity theft from such sources as
credit card and banking data. In contrast, there is no documented evi-
dence of harms from misuse of research data or carelessness by research-
ers or others. Overall, very little is known about how many breaches of
confidentiality may actually occur in such settings or how many people
are harmed as a result. Under most circumstances, attempted breaches
are difficult to detect, and relying on self-reports is problematic. A July
1993 survey by Harris, for example, reported that between 3 percent and
15 percent of the public, depending on the person or organization askedExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAabout, believed that medical information about them had ever been im-properly disclosed, and about one-third of these said they had been
harmed by the disclosure (Singer, Shapiro, and Jacobs, 1997). But the ac-
curacy of these reports is unknown. Moreover, disclosure of medical in-
formation to an insurance company may be permitted by law but re-
garded by survey respondents as improper. For many people, questions
about breaches of confidentiality may be highly abstract so that their
ideas about the uses that might be made of their medical information are
limited. As a result, little is really known about what people have in mind
when they answer such questions, and even less about the actual state of
affairs. Again, in Chapter 5 we offer some recommendations to address
this concern.Law Enforcement and National SecurityPotentially more serious threats to confidentiality than simple care-lessness are legal demands for identified data, which may come in the
form of a subpoena or as a result of a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
request. Requests may also come from a law enforcement or national se-
curity agency to a statistical or other government agency; the legal status
of such requests is not fully resolved, as discussed below. Individual
records from surveys that collect data about such illegal behaviors as drug
use are potentially subject to subpoena by law enforcement agencies. To
protect against this possibility, researchers and programs studying men-
tal health, alcohol and drug use, and other sensitive topics, whether feder-
ally funded or not, may apply for certificates of confidentiality from the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The National Institute of
Justice (in the U.S. Department of Justice) also makes confidentiality cer-
tificates available for criminal justice research supported by agencies of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Such certificates, which remain in effect
for the duration of a study, protect researchers in most circumstances from
being compelled to disclose names or other identifying characteristics of
survey respondents in federal, state, or local proceedings (42 Code of Fed-eral Regulations Section 2a.7, “Effect of Confidentiality Certificate”). Theconfidentiality protection afforded by certificates is prospective; research-
ers may not obtain protection for study results after data collection has
been completed.Protection for identifiable statistical data collected by federal agenciesor their agents under a promise of confidentiality is also provided by the
Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act
(CIPSEA), which was enacted as Title V of the E-Government Act of 2002
(P.L. 107-347). The legislation is intended to “safeguard the confidential-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS57ity of individually identifiable information acquired under a pledge ofconfidentiality for statistical purposes by controlling access to, and uses
made of, such information.” The statute includes a number of safeguardsto ensure that information acquired for statistical purposes under a pledge
of confidentiality “shall be used by officers, employees, or agents of theagency exclusively for statistical purposes,” and “shall not be disclosedby an agency in identifiable form, for any use other than an exclusively
statistical purpose, except with the informed consent of the respondent.”Identifiable information can be disclosed, under proper conditions, for
“statistical activities,” which are broadly defined to include “the collec-tion, compilation, processing, or analysis of data for the purpose of de-
scribing or making estimates concerning the whole, or relevant groups or
components within, the economy, society, or the natural environment” aswell as “the development of methods or resources that support those ac-tivities, such as measurement methods, models, statistical classifications,
or sampling frames.”CIPSEA also imposed additional responsibilities on statistical agen-cies, requiring them to “clearly distinguish data or information [they col-lect] for nonstatistical purposes,” and to “provide notice to the public,before the information is collected, that the data could be used for
nonstatistical purposes.” Nonstatistical purposes are defined as “any ad-ministrative, regulatory, law enforcement, adjudicatory, or other purpose
that affects the rights, privileges, or benefits of a particular identifiable
respondent” and include disclosure under the Freedom of InformationAct. The act also provides criminal penalties for a knowing and willful
breach of confidentiality by employees of the sponsoring agency and any
of its “agents,” who may be data collectors or outside analysts.CIPSEA offers great promise for increasing researcher access to confi-dential data. Fulfillment of that promise requires, in the first place, coor-
dination of access and protection procedures across the various agencies
in order to satisfy the uniform protection promised by the act. At the time
of this report, the Office of Management and Budget is preparing regula-
tions to implement the safeguards under CIPSEA. These implementing
regulations will be critically important in translating a statutory right into
clear rules that protect research participants across all federal agencies.
The regulations are expected to define both the reach of protection for
confidential statistical records and the opportunity for research access.The regulations will have to cover a wide range of questions, such as:•Other than federal agency personnel, who can qualify as an“agent” under the statute and thereby be eligible for research access toidentifiable records?Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA•Does a licensing agreement between an agency and a private re-searcher for research access fall within the coverage of the statute?•What degree of risk of inadvertent disclosure of identifiable in-formation will govern the release of anonymized records?•What form of public notice is required when a statistical agencycollects identifiable information for nonstatistical purposes?•Which, if any, of the CIPSEA protections extend to identifiableadministrative records that are used for research purposes?•How does CIPSEA affect existing regulations and practices underother agency statutes that protect research records?•What procedural safeguards are required to monitor the work ofagency staffs and nonagency personnel who are deemed “agents” underCIPSEA?Fulfillment of the potential for research access to data sharing underCIPSEA will ultimately also require companion legislation that would
permit the Census Bureau to share tax information that it receives from
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with the Bureau of Labor Statistics and
the Bureau of Economic Analysis in order to reconcile the business lists
built by the three agencies. In the absence of such legislation, data sharing
for research among the three agencies is restricted to information that does
not include, or derive from, tax data. Another topic that may need future
legislative attention is the sharing of individual data, since the data-shar-
ing provisions of CIPSEA currently apply only to business data.The seeming clarity of the protections afforded by CIPSEA is cloudedby concerns about potential conflict with access to identifiable data for
national security purposes. In the past, government agencies have at-
tempted to use confidential data collected by a statistical agency for law
enforcement purposes, especially in times of heightened national security
concerns. Seltzer and Anderson (2003) review attempts by various gov-
ernment agencies to obtain confidential census data between 1902, when
the Census Bureau was established as a permanent agency, and 1965. A
few of these attempts in the years before enactment of Title 13 in 1929—especially those involving national security—were successful and, in atleast some of them, actual disclosure of information about individuals for
national security or law enforcement purposes occurred. In 1917, for ex-
ample, personal information from the 1910 census was released to courts,
draft boards, and the Justice Department for several hundred young men
suspected of not complying with the draft (Barabba, 1975:27, cited in Selt-
zer and Anderson, 2003). During World War II, according to Prewitt
(2000:1): “The historical record is clear that senior Census Bureau staffproactively cooperated with the internment [of Japanese Americans], and
that census tabulations were directly implicated in the denial of civil rightsExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS59to citizens of the United States who happened also to be of Japanese an-cestry.”1 In 2004 the Census Bureau provided information about the resi-dences of Arab Americans to the Customs and Border Protection agency
of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, but that information was
also available on a public-use site and involved data masked to protect
confidentiality. Although this incident was not a violation of law, it was
perceived as such by many people, as well as a violation of trust (see
Clemetson, 2004).The 2001 USA Patriot Act, which is being considered for renewal byCongress as this report is being written, includes provisions for access by
the U.S. Attorney General to identifiable research records of the National
Center for Education Statistics (in the U.S. Department of Education). This
provision appears to be unique: the panel is not aware of any other provi-
sions for access to confidential research data for national security pur-
poses. Both the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-296) and the In-
telligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2003 (P.L. 107-306) make clear
that exchange of federal agency information for homeland security needs
does not include exchange of individually identifiable information col-
lected solely for statistical purposes. Nevertheless, as Seltzer and Ander-
son have shown, national security crises have in the past led to circum-
ventions or actual violations of confidentiality guarantees.2Statistical DisclosureBreaches of confidentiality due to carelessness, as well as those fromillegal intrusions, are obviously more likely to occur if a data file contains
direct identifiers—name, address, or Social Security number, for example.Yet there is increasing awareness that even without such identifiers, sta-
tistical disclosure may be possible. “Statistical disclosure” refers to there-identification of respondents to a survey (or their attributes) even
though direct identifiers such as names and addresses have been re-
moved from the data file. Statistical disclosure involves using data avail-
able outside the survey to breach the protection thought to have been1In that same speech, former Census Bureau Director Kenneth Prewitt apologized on be-half of the agency for its activities in connection with the internment of Japanese Americans.For a detailed history of Census Bureau cooperation with national security activities duringWorld War II, see Seltzer and Anderson (2000).2Although it is not directly relevant to national security, the Shelby Amendment (part ofP.L. 105-277) and the Data Quality Act (see Chapter 2) also have implications for confidenti-ality protection that have not yet been fully determined.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAafforded a survey data set by various data deletion and masking tech-niques. Re-identification of respondents may be increasingly possible
because of high-speed computers, external data files containing names
and addresses or other direct identifiers as well as information about a
variety of individual characteristics, and sophisticated software for
matching survey and other files. In Chapter 2 we noted some of the fac-
tors that may increase statistical disclosure risk and harm for respon-
dents in government-sponsored surveys, including factors that are inte-
gral to the survey design and factors that are external to data collection
agencies and researchers. In addition, there is a growing concern by data
collection agencies (see below) that wider dissemination of research data
may itself increase disclosure risk.For a breach of confidentiality due to statistical disclosure to occur,there must be the technical or legal means, as well as the motivation to use
them. With regard to motive, there are (at least) four: curiosity, sport (e.g.,
hackers), profit (e.g., identity theft), and law enforcement or national
security.3Breaches occurring because of curiosity or sport may never becomeknown to the respondent. However, the confidentiality pledge has been
violated, and ethical harm has been done, even if all that has happened is
that someone has identified a record in a data file and not used it for any
purpose.The further harm a breach of confidentiality may cause depends inpart on the type of intruder and the type of data. Federal regulations for
the protection of human subjects of research (in the Common Rule, 45
Code of Federal Regulations 46) focus mainly on the potential harm to anindividual’s reputation, livelihood, or liberty resulting from the disclo-sure of confidential information, suggesting that disclosure of deviant or
illegal behavior or unpopular beliefs is most likely to be harmful. How-
ever, if an intruder’s aim is identity (or property) theft, then anything thatpermits the appropriation and abuse of another’s identity may be harmfulto that individual. If the intruder is a hacker simply out to embarrass the
survey organization, then public identification of one or more survey par-
ticipants may be enough to do harm to the data collection and research
enterprise, even if the information is not sensitive and the participants are
not directly harmed.A survey design factor that, prima facie, would seem to increase therisk of statistical disclosure is the increasing number and diversity of at-3Ochas et al. (2001) list additional reasons why reidentification might be attempted: inves-tigative reporting, blackmail, marketing, denial of insurance, and political action.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RISKS OF ACCESS61tributes asked about and stored on the data record for each respondent.The greater the number of attributes about which information is provided,
the greater is the theoretical potential for re-identification. Since the late
1960s, surveys have become more detailed on several dimensions. Thus,
more and more surveys are collecting detailed socioeconomic attributes
for individuals and households; more and more surveys are asking about
individual behaviors, including those that are risky and even illegal; and
more and more surveys are longitudinal in design, collecting repeated
measurements on the same individuals. In addition, a growing number of
both cross-sectional and longitudinal surveys collect data about an indi-
vidual from multiple sources: for example, surveys of children in which
data are obtained from parents, schoolteachers, and others, and surveys
that collect information about individuals, the schools they attend, and
the neighborhoods in which they live.More recently, a small but growing number of surveys are makinguse of new technologies for collecting biological and geographic informa-
tion, which in turn make it easier to identify respondents—or more diffi-cult to conceal their identity (see, e.g., National Research Council, 1998,
2001a). Such information, which includes DNA samples, biological mea-
surements, and geospatial coordinates, complicates the problem of mak-
ing data files anonymous and heightens the dilemma of data collection
agencies and researchers who want to increase access to the data they
collect while protecting the confidentiality of respondents (see, e.g.,
Abowd and Lane, 2004).Other factors that may increase the risk of statistical disclosure areexternal to the survey organization and researcher. As noted above and in
Chapter 2, these factors include the increasing availability of files in the
external environment that are suitable for matching to survey records and,
in addition, contain names and addresses or other direct identifiers; the
ready availability of matching software; and quantum increases in the
processing and storage capabilities of computer hardware and software,
which make it possible to manipulate multiple files with rapidity and rela-
tive ease. If microdata have been stripped of direct identifiers but no
added steps have been taken to minimize disclosure risk, it is relatively
easy to match the file with external databases that contain some of the
same variables as the original midcrodata (plus names and addresses)
and thus to identify some respondents (see, e.g., Winkler, 1988). Similar
research has been conducted by others (see, e.g., Sweeney, 2001). How-
ever, the panel knows of no information on whether this has been done
other than in a research context.Statistical agencies and survey organizations understandably worrythat wider access to ever more complex datasets, in an era of cheap, capa-
cious computing technology and many outside data sources for match-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAing, will increase the risk of statistical disclosure and the potential forharm to respondents, as well as to survey participation. Although many
factors seem to increase the risk of disclosure, there is some evidence sug-
gesting that increasing the number of attributes in a data record does not
necessarily lead to increased disclosure. For example, the Retirement His-
tory Survey (RHS), which followed people who were aged 58-63 in 1969
for 10 years, made more information publicly available than the HRS,
which has followed people aged 51 and older since 1992. Yet there are no
known instances of a breach of confidentiality for the RHS, from which
microdata have been publicly available for more than 30 years. Similarly,
there are no known instances of disclosure or consequent harm for other
richly detailed and long-available datasets, such as the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics, which has followed families and their descendants for
more than 35 years. Although this evidence is suggestive, it is important
for statistical and other agencies to know how often inappropriate disclo-
sures of information actually occur and what the risk of disclosure is in
different circumstances.Ultimately, decisions about how much disclosure risk is acceptable inorder to achieve the benefits of greater access to research data involve
weighing the potential harm posed by disclosure against the benefits po-
tentially foregone, as well as a judgment about who should make those
decisions. The panel does not resolve these difficult issues. Rather, in
Chapter 5 we recommend research to reduce disclosure risk while pre-
serving data utility. We also recommend research that improves estima-
tion of disclosure risk and procedures for monitoring the actual frequency
of disclosure. Finally, we recommend continuing consultation with data
users and data providers about all of these issues.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.635Reconciling the Benefits and Risks ofExpanded Data Access
The charge to this panelÑand the challenge to those who collectdata from individuals and organizations and those who use themÑ
is to understand and weigh the tradeoffs between the benefits andrisks of increased access to research data. The benefits of increased accessare better data for policy analysis and research; the risks are breaches of
confidentiality and their consequences. As noted in Chapter 4, breaches of
confidentiality can occur in a variety of ways. The work of this panel has
focused primarily on statistical disclosureÑthe re-identification of indi-
vidual respondents (or their attributes) through the matching of survey
data with information available outside the survey.Achieving the benefits of access to research data presupposes a will-ingness by people in households and organizations to provide detailed
and sometimes sensitive information for government-sponsored statisti-
cal surveys and censuses. Such willingness requires public trust: trust that
the data will be used for important research and policy purposes and that
the confidentiality of the information will be maintained. Thus, the agen-
cies that collect data have an obligation to communicate clearly to respon-
dents the purposes of the data they collect and to assure respondents of
the confidentiality of the information they provide.In this final chapter of the report, we draw on technological, legal,administrative, and statistical sources to offer recommendations that we
believe will facilitate access to research data while protecting the confi-
dentiality of information provided by the public. We offer recommenda-
tions in eight broad areas: documenting the use of research data; planningExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAfor access to data through a variety of modes; expanding access to public-use files; facilitating access to research data centers; expanding remote
access capabilities; broadening the use of licensing and bonding agree-
ments; assuring informed consent; and safeguarding confidentiality
through training, monitoring, and education in research ethics.DOCUMENTING USEAs discussed in Chapter 3, data collected by government agenciesbenefit society by providing the basis for research and policy analysis,
which, in turn, can inform policy makers and the public. Longitudinal
surveys that obtain data for analyzing the determinants and consequences
of social and economic behaviors have been a major positive develop-
ment for research and policy in the past 30 years. Linking survey and
administrative data can create particularly rich datasets that, in some
cases, can substitute for additional surveys, thus reducing respondent
burden as well as government costs. To realize the full potential of these
data, researchers outside of government need access to them.The United States has a decentralized, pluralistic research structure,in which not only the staffs of statistical and other data collection agen-
cies, but also researchers in many institutions, with different policy pref-
erences and perspectives, can and should have access to data. This broad
access by independent researchers and analysts provides checks and bal-
ances on the governmentÕs dominant role in public policy. The fruits of
the diverse, decentralized social science research enterprise include not
only studies that contribute to longer-term understanding of the dynam-
ics of individual, household, and organizational (e.g., business) behavior,
but also analyses that contribute directly to public discourse and the de-
velopment and evaluation of public policies.The rapid expansion of information and communication technologiesin the past decade has enhanced the potential for society to benefit even
more from the collection and provision of data for social science research.
With greater computing power and better software, the value of data,
especially complex longitudinal microdata, has increased. With such data,
investigators can estimate and test models that are closer approximations
to reality and that directly address problems of causal inference. Although
the new technologies make it more difficult to protect the confidentiality
of respondents, they also enhance the possibilities for disseminating re-
search data more widely. Failure to use such technologies inhibits the abil-
ity of society to exploit fully the rich data collected by federal agencies or
others on their behalf.In part because of the public goods aspect of data collection and re-search and in part because of the decentralized structure of both data col-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS65lection and data analysis activities, it is difficult for data collection agen-cies, research organizations, or society to assess the value of the data pro-
duced. Although the benefits of data access are compelling (see Chapter
3), no one has developed a generally accepted approach for quantifying
the extent and value of that access or placing a quantifiable value on the
uses of the data.Careful tracking of the numbers and types of users and the body ofresearch produced would provide a sense of the importance of various
data products.More broadly, we conclude that a more comprehensive

record of the research use of data would be valuable to agencies, policy
makers, and researchers.Registries and documentation of data use could

help foster understanding by both the public and policy makers of the
value of various kinds of data, including microdata, and the research that
these data inform.In addition to a record of the use of research data, it is importanttoknow how many requests for data are received and how many of those

are denied, as well as the time required to gain access when the request is
granted.The panel that produced
 Private Lives and Public Policies explic-itly recommended that procedures be established for keeping records of
data requests denied or partially fulfilled (National Research Council,
1993:100). This panel endorses that recommendation, which has not yet

been implemented.Records of such requests for confidential data may

also be useful to agencies in monitoring confidentiality protection proce-
dures and actual breaches of confidentiality (see ÒResearch on Breaches of
Confidentiality,Ó in this chapter).A first step in documenting use would be to assemble bibliographiesof research papers for particular data sets. The bibliographies of research
papers maintained for some existing datasets offer models of the kinds of
documentation that we envision. They include: the National Longitudinal
Surveys of Labor Market experience (NLS, housed at the Center for Hu-
man Resource Research at Ohio State University), the Panel Study of In-
come Dynamics (PSID, housed at the University of Michigan), the Health
and Retirement Study (HRS, housed at the University of Michigan), and
the General Social Survey (GSS, housed at the University of Chicago). The
U.S. Census Bureau has a bibliography of nearly 2,000 references to pub-
lished and unpublished work using data from the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) and the predecessor Income Survey Devel-
opment Program, but the bibliography has not been updated since 1998
(www.sipp.census.gov/sipp/aboutbib.html). In addition to research pub-
lications, such as articles and books, we encourage bibliographies of re-
search presentations at scholarly meetings and any research analysis pre-
sented in the form of software applications.Federal statistical agencies could use such bibliographies, not only toExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAassess the use of their data sets, but also as a sampling frame for contact-ing researchers to obtain feedback on the quality and usefulness of the
data. Similarly, research funding agencies could usefully commission
analyses that build on research bibliographies to assess the extent, qual-
ity, and importance of social science research conducted with statistical
data, particularly microdata.Recommendation 1As a first step to facilitate systematic study ofthe extent and value of data access for research, public and private
agencies that collect social science research data should maintain up-
to-date bibliographies of research and policy analysis publications,
presentations, and software applications that use the data.ACCESS THROUGH MULTIPLE MODESThe actual data collected for statistical purposes from households, in-dividuals, business establishments, and other organizations through cen-
suses and surveys under a pledge of confidentiality are never made avail-
able to users. Instead, data are made available either in the form of

confidential, restricted-access data files or in the form of anonymized data
products, including published tables and microdata files.Confidential files delete direct identifiers such as names and addresses
but retain the observational structure of the original data and include all
of the value added by an agency to generate its published statistics (such
as analysis weights, imputation for unit and item nonresponse, data qual-
ity edits, geocoding, industry coding, occupation coding). They also con-
tain details (such as place of residence, occupation, industry, income, and
wealth) that cannot be made available on public-use files. In some cases
an agency may also create links to administrative records or other data
files.Public-use microdata files, constructed from the confidential files, con-tain data that have been masked through various steps (rounded, aggre-
gated, edited) or that have been altered through such techniques as mul-
tiple imputation to ensure that individual respondents and their attributes
cannot be identified. Public-use files are the most accessible and widely
used microdata products made available by statistical agencies, but their
value for much policy-relevant research is limited. To exploit the full re-
search and policy value of microdata, researchers will often need access to
the confidential files. Modes of access to such data (restricted access
modes) include access at supervised locations, remote access with prior
review of data output, and access through licensing and bonding agree-
ments (discussed below).Because public-use files are available to all, statistical agencies mustExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS67exercise great care to ensure their anonymity, as well as their usefulnessand accuracy. The ultimate goal is to provide public-use data that will
yield the same statistical inferences that would be derived from the confi-
dential data. But since many of the analyses that will be performed on
public-use files cannot be foreseen at the time of their release, the process
of assuring their quality requires a continual feedback relationship be-
tween the public-use files and the underlying confidential data. Analyses
performed on the confidential data can be used to improve the next gen-
eration of public-use data in several ways. For example, such analyses can
identify errors in the original data, the public-use data, or both, as well as
anomalies that should be corrected in statistical procedures (such as im-
putation). They can also identify ways in which the public-use data could
be made more useful for research by altering the procedures for confiden-
tiality protection for some items. Such analyses can also suggest priority
areas for improvement and enhancement of data content in subsequent
data collections.This feedback relationship serves two related purposes. First, it im-proves the quality and relevance of public-use files, an outcome of great
importance to the statistical agencies because they must attest to the use-
fulness of these products as a source of statistical information to a broad
audience. Second, it justifies a substantial investment in facilitating access
to the underlying confidential microdata because such an investment sup-
ports an agencyÕs core mission of assuring the quality and usefulness of
its public-use products. Both kinds of accessÑrestricted access to the con-
fidential data and unrestricted access to inference-valid public-use dataÑ
are needed, not only to accommodate different types of users with differ-
ent purposes, but also to maintain and improve the quality of public-use
files and to obtain accurate estimates of the error entailed by their use.Economists and statisticians have begun to model the optimum mixof different data access modes by examining the costs and benefits of pro-
viding research access through public-use data products or through re-
stricted access modes (Abowd and Lane, 2004). Such modeling is in its
infancy but could be valuable at several levels. For individual variables,
cost-benefit modeling might identify specific items that could be moved
from restricted access to public-use data without impairing confidential-
ity protection and, conversely, items that should be moved from public-
use products to restricted access modes.At a broader level, cost-benefit modeling could be used to evaluatethe tradeoffs among the various forms of restricted accessÑresearch data
centers, remote access, licensingÑas well as among different ways of re-
stricting data (through various masking techniques and various ways of
producing synthetic data). Cost-benefit modeling entails the use of a large
number of assumptions, including the expected number, variety, andExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAvalue of uses in each mode; the disclosure risk and associated costs foreach mode; the user costs for access through a research data center com-
pared with a public-use file or a licensing arrangement; and the producer
costs for preparing the public-use product compared with running a re-
search data center and approving and overseeing licensees. For realistic
estimation, cost-benefit modeling will require empirical estimates of such
factors as disclosure risks and costs, numbers and benefits of research
uses, user costs of access for various modes, and producer costs of provid-
ing various modes of access. Such estimates do not currently exist, and
some of them, including disclosure risks and costs and the benefits of
research use, are not easy to develop, although promising work is under
way on estimating disclosure risk (see Reiter, 2003; see also ÒPublic-Use
DataÓ in this chapter).Given the importance of facilitating research access to statistical
microdata, statistical and research agencies should encourage research on
the most efficient allocation of resources among different access modes to
guide their planning and to support changes (including legislative
changes, if needed) to facilitate one or other type of access. If a variety of
agencies, as well as users, are involved in such research and planning
efforts to develop data access programs, the data that agencies produce
are more likely to be widely used, ultimately leading to better research
and policy analysis and to important feedback to data producers that can
enable them to enhance data quality and relevance. Examples of the kinds of involvement of users and producers thatwe envision include the major longitudinal surveys that are funded
through grants to academic survey organizations (including the HRS and
the PSID), which have active boards of users and potential users that guide
their development. Although most federal statistical agencies also have
outside advisory groups, they rarely focus on data access programs for
particular data sets. However, one example of focused user involvement
for a statistical agency microdata collection is the Association of Public
Data Users Working Group on SIPP Data Products, which was active from
1989 to 1994. It played a major role in the development of more user-
friendly data products and comprehensive user documentation from the
Survey of Income and Program Participation.Recommendation 2Data produced or funded by government agen-cies should continue to be made available for research through a vari-
ety of modes, including various modes of restricted access to confi-
dential data and unrestricted access to public-use data altered in a
variety of ways to maintain confidentiality.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS69Recommendation 3The National Science Foundation, the NationalInstitutes of Health, and major statistical agencies should support re-
search to guide more efficient allocation of resources among different
data access modes.Recommendation 4Statistical and other data collection agenciesshould involve users more fully in planning modes of access to their
data.PUBLIC-USE DATAImproving QualityPublic-use files, introduced in the 1960s, are the most widely avail-able form of research data. As described above, information generated
from investigating confidential data in a restricted access environment
can be used to improve their quality and relevance. Improved public-use
data files, in turn, can reduce the need and demand for restricted access
for some data sets. If, for example, it is possible to move certain variables,
such as summary measures or average values, from restricted-access to
public-use files while maintaining confidentiality protections, overall ac-
cess to research data could be increased at reduced cost to users and pro-
ducers. Doing so requires further sustained research and development of
methods that permit data collection agencies to assess the increase in dis-
closure risk posed by the addition of specific variables to existing public-
use files. Data from the HRS provides an example of the kind of assessmentneeded. The primary insurance amount (PIA), which is calculated from
the detailed Social Security earnings records of HRS respondents, is a
very desirable variable for many researchers, most of whom do not need
the detailed Social Security administrative records. PIA information

would seem to present little additional disclosure risk because many pat-
terns of lifetime earnings will produce the same PIA. Thus, one cannot
recover any particular detailed earnings history from a single PIA num-
ber. But because HRS policy requires that any variable derived from So-
cial Security records must be a confidential variable, all researchers must
apply for access to the confidential files (a tedious and costly process) in
order to gain access to the PIA data. Research that demonstrated the ab-
sence of increased disclosure risk might make it possible to alter the HRS
policy so that PIA data could be made available as part of the public-use
file. Such a step would be likely to substantially reduce the demand for
detailed earnings data. Moreover, and paradoxically, by increasing ac-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAcess to the public-use file, the overall risk of disclosure might be reducedbecause fewer people would have access to the confidential data.Other improvements to public-use files also require research. Cur-rently, these files rely on a variety of disclosure limitation methods, such
as rounding, coarsening, data swapping, and top coding (see Duncan,
2002). Research is needed to examine and quantify the tradeoffs between
disclosure risk and data utility when these methods are used. Since all
public-use files require disclosure limitation in order to protect confiden-
tiality, it is crucial that the methods used maximize both the utility of the
data and the protection of confidentiality, recognizing that a zero risk of
disclosure can never be guaranteed.1Disclosure risk research has begun to advance from the delineation ofgeneral approaches with simulated data to empirical estimation of the
disclosure risk in existing microdata sets. For example, Reiter (2003) esti-
mated changes in disclosure risk by altering variables, such as age and
property taxes, in the Current Population Survey, under alternative as-
sumptions about what a data snooper might know (see also Duncan et al.,
2001; Duncan and Stokes, 2004). Much could be learned from more em-
pirically based work with different variables and different files, including
work by agencies that do not currently release much, if any, public-use
microdata, such as the Social Security Administration. That work might
determine that such disclosure limitation methods as calculating sum-
mary measures or average values from confidential data and attaching
these measures to other commonly used microdata could result in highly
useful, fully protected public-use microdata for research and policy analy-
sis on such important topics as taxation and retirement income security.Currently, studies of the probabilities of disclosure include estimatesof the technical possibility of matching public-use survey data with other
widely available information, but they do not include estimates of the
likelihood that such matching would be attempted. Consequently, esti-
mates of disclosure risk may overstate the potential risk. Yet without data
on peopleÕs propensities for snooping through different types of survey
data (which may not be the same as their propensities for hacking into
credit card company records or other data sets that present clear financial
incentives), one cannot empirically estimate the likelihood of attempts to
re-identify records in particular microdata sets. However, it would be
possible to use different assumptions about those propensities to help
agencies set bounds on their estimates of disclosure risk for particular
types of data.1For a bibliography on disclosure risk analysis and best practices for statistical disclosurecontrol, see OÕRourke and Gutmann (2005).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS71Another factor that could be considered in the calculus of the disclo-sure risk-benefit tradeoff is the degree of harm that might result from
disclosure of particular types of information about an individual or orga-
nization. It may be that some degree of uncertainty about the risk of dis-
closure could be tolerated for data that are not likely to put an individual
at risk of serious harm, while a worst-case assumption about disclosure
risk would be prudent for highly sensitive data (e.g., reports of illegal
drug use or detailed information about financial assets). In making a deci-
sion about acceptable levels of disclosure risk, it is important that data
providersÕ views be considered along with those of the data collection
agency and potential research users (see below).Research on disclosure limitation methods should include establish-ment (business) data as well as household and individual data. This topic
has so far received relatively little attention for business data because of
the presumption that establishments are too easy to identify unless their
attributes are so heavily masked that the resulting public-use microdata
would have little analytic value. Yet there may be methods that could be
effective in protecting confidentiality and preserving research utility for
establishment-based public-use microdata. Without research on different
methods, access to establishment data is likely to continue to be severely
restricted, limiting research and policy analysis on important topics.Methods of disclosure limitation based on synthetic or virtual data,which are constructed from confidential data through partial or complete
multiple imputation techniques, show promise in safeguarding confiden-
tiality and permitting the estimation of complex models; they should con-
tinue to be explored as an alternative to other disclosure limitation meth-
ods (see, e.g., Abowd and Woodcock, 2001; Doyle et al., 2001;
Raghunathan; 2003). The chief drawback of synthetic data, as of masked
data, is their potential for yielding misleading results, especially when
complex models are estimated. Empirical estimates of the amount of er-
ror introduced by imputation-based disclosure limitation methods un-
der various assumptions are needed both to demonstrate their utility and
to suggest ways in which they can be improved. Such research, which
should also be conducted for perturbation and data swapping methods,
will become increasingly important as highly useful but highly sensitive
variablesÑsuch as biological markers, including DNA samples, and
geospatial coordinatesÑare increasingly linked with survey responses.Synthetic public-use microdata could also facilitate data access by pro-viding a means for researchers to explore, test, and refine estimation mod-
els at relatively low cost before incurring the higher costs of access to
confidential data through a research data center or another restricted ac-
cess mode. For this purpose, the synthetic data would need to meet a high
standard for supporting valid inference but not as high a standard asExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAwould be necessary for research and policy analysis that relied on thesynthetic data alone.Recommendation 5Agencies that sponsor data collection shouldconduct or sponsor research on techniques for providing useful, inno-
vative public-use data that minimize the risk of disclosure. Such re-
search should also be a funding priority for the National Institutes of
Health and the National Science Foundation. In particular, research
should be directed to:(1)developing measures for quantifying disclosure risk;
(2)estimating the effect on disclosure risk of adding selected vari-

ables from confidential data files to public-use files;
(3)estimating and improving the utility-disclosure limitation trade-

offs of alternative disclosure limitation methods, including synthetic
data; and
(4)developing disclosure limitation methods for establishment data.
Facilitating Access to Public-Use FilesAcademic researchers in the United States need approval from an In-stitutional Review Board (IRB) to conduct research involving human par-
ticipants, including, in many cases, secondary analyses. Currently many,
perhaps most, IRBs lack the expertise required to review the adequacy of
the confidentiality protection for research that involves original data col-
lection. As a result, researchers spend much time justifying to IRBs pro-
posed reanalyses of public-use microdata from federal agencies and es-
tablished data archives that incorporate best practices for confidentiality
protection (see National Research Council, 2003b).The Panel on Institutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Sci-ence Research recommended a new confidentiality protection system,
built on existing and new data archives and statistical agencies, to facili-
tate secondary analysis of public-use microdata (National Research Coun-
cil, 2003b:138 [Recommendations 5.2 and 5.3]). Such a system would per-
mit IRBs to exempt secondary analysis with such data from review as a
matter of standard practice under clause 46.101(b)(2) of 45 CFR 46, Sub-
part A, Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects.The system could be developed as follows: the Office for Human Re-search Protections in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
would work with statistical agencies, appropriate interagency groups, and
data archives to develop a certificate to accompany the release of public-
use data sets. Data producers and archives could obtain certification for
all of their public-use data sets or for individual files if they rarely pro-
duce public-use data. Such a certificate would attest that the public-useExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS73file reflects good practice for confidentiality protection and that the datawere collected with appropriate concern for informed consent and other
human research participant protection issues. With such a certificate, the
IRB would exempt from further review any analysis that proposes to use
only the data from the certified files.In supporting its recommendation, the panel noted (National Re-search Council, 2003b:138-139):We argue that IRB review of secondary analysis with public-usemicrodata is unnecessary and a misuse of scarce time and resources . . . If
the data in a file have been processed to minimize the risk of re-identify-ing a respondent by using widely recognized good practices for confi-dentiality protection, then the research is eligible for exemption under
the Common Rule. . . .Development of the process of certification assumes heavy participa-tion by the statistical agencies, the Office of Human Research Protections,
the Office of Management and Budget Statistical and Science Policy Of-
fice, and interested data archives and would clearly require an initial in-
vestment of significant amounts of time and money. But if IRBs through-
out the country accepted certification as sufficient to exempt from review
research involving data from a statistical agency or a nationally recog-
nized survey organization, access to research microdata would be consid-
erably enhanced. We therefore endorse the recommendations of the ear-
lier panel.Recommendation 6To enhance access to public-use files for second-ary analysis, we endorse the recommendations of the Panel on Insti-
tutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Science concerning es-
tablishment of a new system of confidentiality protection for
public-use microdata based on existing and new data archives and
statistical agencies. Statistical agencies and participating archives
would certify that public-use data sets obtained from them were suf-
ficiently protected against statistical disclosure to be acceptable for
secondary analysis, and IRBs would exempt such analyses from re-view on the basis of the certification provided.Extending Legal Obligations to Data UsersAt present, the obligation to protect individual respondents falls pri-marily on those who collect the data, thereby creating a disincentive for
providing access to other researchers. We believe this obligation should
be extended to the users of public-use data as well. All releases of statisti-
cal data by federal agencies, including public-use data files, should in-
clude a warning that the data are provided for research purposes onlyExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAand that any attempt to identify an individual respondent in the data fileis a violation of federal law and will result in penalties comparable to
those currently imposed only on agency personnel and licensed users.
Such a warning currently accompanies public-use records released by the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). Although such restric-
tions may be difficult to enforce, especially for public-use data, the legal
sanction will stand as an expression of professional norms regarding the
use of research data.The ability to seek penalties may require new legislation for mostagencies. The language that is in place for data sets from the NCES (P.L.
107-279, Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002, Section 183(d)(6)) is an
example of the kind of penalties that would be appropriate to invoke
against users of public-use data from federal statistical agencies who
breach confidentiality:Any person who uses any data provided by the Director, in conjunc-tion with any other information or technique, to identify any individual
student, teacher, administrator, or other individual and who knowinglydiscloses, publishes, or uses such data for a purpose other than a statisti-cal purpose, or who otherwise violates subparagraph (A) or (B) of sub-
section (c)(2), shall be found guilty of a class E felony and imprisoned fornot more than five years, or fined as specified in section 3571 of title 18,United States Code, or both.Recommendation 7All releases of public-use data should include awarning that the data are provided for statistical purposes only and
that any attempt to identify an individual respondent is a violation of
the ethical understandings under which the data are provided. Users
should be required to attest to having read this warning and in-
structed to include it with any data they redistribute.Recommendation 8Access to public-use data should be restricted tothose who agree to abide by the confidentiality protections governing
such data, and meaningful penalties should be enforced for willful
misuse of public-use data.At noted above, new legislation would be required for some agencies tohave the authority for such penalties.FACILITATING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA CENTERSOne key way to provide researcher access to confidential data isthrough research data centers (RDCs), including the eight centers main-
tained by the Census Bureau and those maintained at the headquarters ofExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS75the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the National Centerfor Health Statistics, in the Department of Health and Human Services,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the Department of Labor, and some other
agencies.2As noted in Chapter 2, the Census BureauÕs RDCs represent an im-portant step toward facilitating research access to confidential data; how-
ever, they are believed to be underused, and their use appears to be de-
clining. Two of the three reasons for this trend are the length of the review
process and the costs involved in doing research away from oneÕs home
institution. The third reason is a very stringent interpretation of the five
criteria for approving a research project, which must demonstrate:(1)a likely benefit to the Census Bureau under Title 13 and, indeed,
that its predominant purpose is to provide one or more Title 13 benefits,such as improving imputations for nonresponse (see www.ces.census.
gov/ces.php/guidelines);(2)scientific merit in terms of a projectÕs likelihood to contribute to
existing knowledge (which is similar to the criterion for research-funding
agencies, such as the National Science Foundation [NSF] and the National
Institutes of Health [NIH]);(3)a clear need for nonpublic data;

(4)feasibility; and

(5)from the applicant, a willingness to accept all confidentiality pro-
tection and disclosure review requirements, including strict limits placed
on how much and how often intermediate output can be taken out of the
RDC (e.g., by a graduate student for review by his or her professor) and
the requirement that the addition of new investigators to a project requires
a de novo review and approval.Stringent application of these criteria may discourage applications orthe withdrawal of proposals before a decision is reached and probably
contributes to the length of the review process. Yet such stringency argu-
ably does not enhance confidentiality protection nor forward the mission
of the Census Bureau to facilitate data use. In particular, the panel con-
cludes that the first criterion has been interpreted in a way that actually
impedes furtherance of the agencyÕs mission. Research that uses Title 13
data should be deemed eligible for approval so long as the researcher
agrees to provide information to the Census Bureau about the quality and
usefulness of the data, without the requirement to demonstrate that the2For a description of the Census BureauÕs RDC operations, see Hildreth (2003); see also thesummary of the panelÕs workshop, Appendix A.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAresearchÕs predominant purpose is for data improvement under Title 13(see Hildreth, 2003; see also discussion in Appendix A). The research use
of the data is a key part of the all-important feedback cycle that contrib-
utes to improvement of published statistics, public-use microdata, and
summary products, as well as the Census BureauÕs knowledge about its
data.With regard to the length of review, (incomplete) data from the Cen-sus BureauÕs RDC network indicate that it takes an average of 7 months
for approval of a project with economic data and an average of as much as
20 months for review of a project using matched administrative data, such
as state Medicaid and unemployment records matched with CPS or SIPP
data. (These figures do not include proposals that require revision and
resubmission or that are withdrawn from consideration.) One reason that
the use of matched data takes so long to approve is that the custodian of
the administrative data undertakes its review following that of the Cen-
sus Bureau. If a researcher is then asked to revise and resubmit the pro-
posal, and the researcher has, say, a 2-year grant period, the project is
impossible to carry out in the allotted time.Until recently, the process was further slowed because there were onlythree review cycles each year. In 2004, the Census Bureau implemented a
continuous review process in which reviews are being conducted on an
Òon demand basis.Ó Although it is too early to assess the effects of this
change, it is an important step in improving access to confidential data
under the RDC program. However, the Internal Revenue Service, because
of staff limitations, continues to have only three review cycles each year
for projects that propose to use data from Social Security earnings records
or income tax returns.3As noted in Chapter 2, the Census Bureau has indicated openness toother ideas for streamlining the application and review process for RDC
projects, and some ideas may also be relevant for RDC operations at other
agencies. For example, some research projects that are proposed for imple-
mentation at an RDC have already been reviewed and recommended for
funding by an agency (e.g., the NSF or NIH) through its own peer review
process. The Census Bureau (or other agency) could accept that funding
recommendation as part of its review process, concentrating only on the
appropriateness of the RDC for the work.3For a description of the agreement between the Census Bureau and the IRS regardingaccess to confidential IRS data, see ÒCriteria for the Review and Approval of Census Projectsthat Use Federal Tax InformationÓ (www.ces.census.gov/download.php? document=50[May 2005]). This document applies with full rigor only to proposals using both Title 13

(Census) and Title 26 (IRS) data. When the proposal uses only Title 13 data, the CensusBureau may interpret the statute without IRS review.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS77Recommendation 9To achieve the research potential and cost-effective operation of the Census Bureau data centers, the Census
Bureau should (1) broaden the interpretation of the criteria for as-
sessing the benefits of access to data; (2) maintain the continuous
review cycle; and (3) take account of prior scientific review of re-
search proposals by established peer review processes.If IRS data are involved, that agency would also have to agree on the newcriteria.Other steps to consider for stimulating use of research data centersinclude broader advertising of the centers and the procedures for using
them, and special proposal submission and review processes for junior
researchers. In addition, the Census Bureau and other statistical agencies
should explore ways to house confidential data from as many agencies as
possible in a single supervised location in a number of host institutions in
order to add to their value for research use. The 2002 Confidential Infor-
mation Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA) may facilitate
this process.Currently, statistical agencies have few resources to facilitate accessto confidential files by external researchers, which is a disincentive to
maintain, let alone expand, the operations of research data centers and
other modes of restricted access. Similarly, potential host organizations
often lack adequate resources to contribute to the operations of research
data centers, and they are unlikely to increase their contributions if the
access process is so cumbersome that it deters researchers from seeking to
use confidential data. In order to provide adequate access, research data
centers need funds for a range of tasks, from processing applications and
overseeing access, to preparing and updating user-friendly documenta-
tion and access tools, to checking researchersÕ work to ensure that breaches
of confidentiality have not occurred. We note that the Census Bureau
RDCs are supported in part through grants from the NSF and the Na-
tional Institute on Aging (see National Research Council, 2000:48). In-
creased funding through a variety of mechanisms, and from a variety of
agencies, should be explored, contingent on improved data access. EXPANDING AND IMPROVING REMOTE ACCESSOne way to reduce the costs in time and money involved in travelingto a research data center is to expand access to the confidential data stored
in those centers from a remote computer. Because the methodology used
by an agency in processing and archiving its data affects how remote ac-
cess to the data can be structured, there are no simple designs for remote
access (see Rowland, 2003). Furthermore, access from a remote computerExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAposes significant challenges to the maintenance of confidentiality becauseof the risk posed by repeated queries to the database and the potential
ability to infer individual attributes by comparing results for some table
cells against others (see Duncan and Mukherjee, 2000). At this stage of
software development for disclosure review, manual monitoring before
output is sent back to a user may be more effective at protecting confiden-
tiality. It may also, as in the NCHS system, allow users to request a broader
array of outputs (e.g., regressions of various types in addition to tables).
However, manual monitoring is more costly for the sponsor agency and
precludes rapid response to user submissions.Research that will permit expansion of this mode of access to confi-dential data is needed. The research should focus on efficient disclosure
limitation methods for remote access that allow users to request a wide
range of outputs and obtain output within reasonable time limits.Recommendation 10Statistical agencies and other agencies thatsponsor data collection should conduct or sponsor research on cost-
effective means of providing secure access to confidential data by
means of a remote access mechanism, consistent with their confiden-
tiality assurance protocols.LICENSING AGREEMENTSAn alternative to research data centers, one that reduces burden tousers because it does not require them to travel to a different location, is a
licensing agreement. Licensing agreements, which are a valuable means
of access to confidential data, have developed in different ways for differ-
ent datasets. Although the Census Bureau does not currently have the
authority to allow access to its confidential data under licensing agree-
ments, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the NCES, and NSFÕs Division of
Science Resources Statistics, among other agencies, license the use of con-
fidential data to researchers who meet certain criteria. The HRS, which is
carried out at the University of Michigan with funding from the National
Institute on Aging, also licenses researchers to use its data. These licenses
enable researchers to work at their home institution, without incurring
the costs of relocating.NCESÑwhich currently uses licensing more than any other agencyÑrequires potential users (such as state and local agencies, contractors, re-
searchers) to complete an application designed for the specific type of
user. The process involves preparing and submitting a formal letter of
request, a license document, an affidavit of nondisclosure, and a security
plan.4 Users of confidential HRS data must be affiliated with an institu-4For details, see ÒRestricted-Use Data Procedures ManualÓ (nces.ed.gov/statprog/rudman/[November 2004]).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS79tion that has a human subjects review process (including an IRB that isregistered with and has been approved by the Office for Human Research
Protections in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services) and be
a current recipient of federal research funds. Users of HRS data are re-
quired to submit for approval a research proposal and a data protection
plan, as well as IRB review and a signed agreement for use of restricted
data.5 Most licensing agreements are time limited and require users toreturn or destroy the confidential data files.Although potentially very useful for expanding access to confidentialdata, licensing is not yet widely used by statistical agencies. This mecha-
nism could be significantly expanded: agencies that currently lack author-

ity for licensing should investigate obtaining such authority, and agencies
that currently license only a few data sets should consider expanding the
number of data sets for which a license may be obtained. In expanding the
use of licensing agreements, agencies should sponsor consultations among
data users and producers in developing the standards governing such
agreements in order to assure the widest possible access consistent with
confidentiality protection. Implementation of CIPSEA will facilitateÑin-
deed, requireÑdeveloping relatively uniform procedures across agencies.Recommendation 11Statistical and other agencies that provide datafor research and do not yet use licensing agreements for access to
confidential data should implement such an access mechanism. Agen-

cies that use licensing for only a few confidential data sets should
expand the files for which a license may be obtained.For some agencies, such a mechanism may require new legislation.Recommendation 12Statistical and other agencies that provide datafor research should work with data users to develop flexible, consis-
tent standards for licensing agreements and implementation proce-
dures for access to confidential data.Both the NCES and the HRS licensing agreements include two impor-tant enforcement provisions. One is random auditing of the licensed re-
search site by a qualified auditor for adherence to the conditions of the
license, including storage of the data on secure servers, restriction of ac-
cess to personnel named on the agreement, and encryption of the data
when in transit. The second is severe penalties for serious violations of the
agreement. In the case of the HRS, for example, the penalties include for-
feiture by the investigatorÑand, possibly, the investigatorÕs entire insti-5For details, see ÒHRS Restricted Data: Application Materials: Basic RequirementsÓ(hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/rda/rdapkg_req.htm#reqoutline [November 2004]).Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAtutionÑof all current funding, and denial of future funding by the spon-soring agency.An early review of the results of audits by NCES revealed that theviolations uncovered resulted from simple carelessness, did not result in
confidentiality breaches, and did not trigger the imposition of penalties
(see McMillen, 1999). A more recent review concluded that enforcement
mechanisms throughout the government are quite weak (see Seastrom,
Wright, and Melnicki, 2003), contributing to violations; however, most if
not all of the violations resulted from carelessness or not following proper
procedures, rather than from willful misuse of data, and, again, there was
no evidence of disclosure of individual data.Although the panel recognizes that broadening access through licens-ing agreements may increase the risk of disclosure by increasing the num-
ber of people with access to confidential data, we believe that the risk is
outweighed by the benefits of wider access. In order to provide as much
protection as possible, we recommend that future licensing agreements
include the two key enforcement featuresÑauditing and penalties for vio-
lationsÑthat are designed to minimize that risk. We also recommend that
all data providers be informed that their data may be used in unantici-
pated ways, and by researchers other than those carrying out the data
collection, but only for research purposes (see Recommendation 14).Recommendation 13Licensing agreements should include auditingprocedures and appropriate legal penalties for willful misuse of con-
fidential data.INFORMING RESPONDENTS OF DATA USEAs we stress throughout this report, the foundation for achieving thebenefits of data for research and policy is the publicÕs willingness to sup-
ply the information requested. In turn, all agencies that collect data have
an obligation to inform respondents about the purposes for which the
data are being collected and how they will be used.Recommendation 14Basic information about confidentiality anddata access given to everyone asked to participate in statistical sur-
veys should include notification about:(1)planned record linkages for research purposes;
(2)the possibility of future uses of the data for other researchpurposes;
(3)the possibility of future uses of the data by researchers other than

those collecting the data;
(4)planned nonstatistical uses of the data; and
Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS81(5)a clear statement of the level of confidentiality protection that can
be legally and technically assured, recognizing that a zero risk of dis-
closure is not possible.This recommendation substantially mirrors one from Private Lives andPublic Policies (National Research Council, 1993:220-221).The following paragraph may provide a model for a brief statementthat responds to the spirit of items (1) Ð (5).6Your information is being collected for research purposes and for sta-tistical analysis by researchers in our agency and in other institutions.
Your data will not be used for any legal or enforcement purpose [unlessrequired by the Patriot Act]. The researchers who have access to yourdata are pledged to protect its confidentiality and are subject to fines and
prison terms if they violate it. Data will only be provided to researchersoutside our agency in a form that protects your identity as an individual.Some uses of your data may require linking your responses to other

records, always in a manner that honors our pledge to protect your con-fidentiality.The panel also believes that in formulating policies about data access,neither statistical agencies nor IRBs should assume that they know what
kinds of data members of the public consider sensitive or what disclosure
risks they are willing to tolerate. Instead, these policies should take the
views of the public into account.Recommendation 15Statistical and funding agencies should supportcontinuing research to monitor the views of data providers and the
general public about research risks and benefits, including such top-
ics as the sensitivity of questions, data sharing for statistical purposes,
methods of obtaining consent for survey participation, the importance
of privacy and confidentiality, and similar topics.SAFEGUARDING CONFIDENTIALITY:
TRAINING, MONITORING, AND EDUCATIONSo far, we have discussed ways of expanding research access whileprotecting confidentiality, focusing mainly on risks of statistical disclo-
sure and how to measure and safeguard against them. In this concluding
section, we address the issue of confidentiality protection more generally,6Guidance from the Office of Management and Budget on the wording of a confidentialitypledge to be given to respondents participating in data collections subject to CIPSEA iscurrently in draft form for comment.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAacknowledging, as we did in Chapter 4, that wider access to confidentialdata is likely to increase the risk of confidentiality breaches, but that sta-
tistical disclosure is not the only, or even the main, threat. We consider
three aspects of confidentiality protection: (1) training employees in pro-
cedures to safeguard confidential data, (2) research on violations of confi-
dentiality protection procedures and actual breaches of confidentiality,
and (3) educating researchers and staff in the ethical foundations of pri-
vacy and confidentiality.Training EmployeesOne common threat to confidentiality protection of research dataarises from simple carelessnessÑnot removing identifiers from question-
naires or electronic data files, leaving cabinets unlocked, not encrypting
files containing identifiers, talking about specific respondents with others
not authorized to have this information. Just as institutional review boards
currently require researchers to undergo training in human subjects pro-
tection issues before undertaking research involving human participants,
so statistical agencies and private survey organizations should provide
their employees with guidelines for confidentiality protection, as well as
regularly updated training in appropriate data management (such as se-
cure storage of identifiable information) to ensure that the guidelines are
observed. Data collection agencies that have such guidelines and training
should regularly review their procedures to ensure that they are up to
date and systematically enforced.Recommendation 16Statistical agencies and survey organizationsthat collect individually identifiable data should provide written
guidelines for confidentiality protection, as well as training in confi-
dentiality practices and data management that guard against disclo-
sure, for all staff who work with or have access to such data.Such training should include all aspects of data managementÑentering,storing, manipulating, and analyzing electronic records. Everyone who
handles electronic records needs to be fully aware of the need to protect
them, as they do with paper records.Research on Breaches of ConfidentialityJust as better information is needed about the use made of researchdata (see Chapter 3), information is also needed about violations of confi-
dentiality protection practices and the actual occurrence of confidentiality
breaches. Without knowing how many breaches occur in an agency, it isExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING THE BENEFITS AND RISKS OF EXPANDED DATA ACCESS83impossible to know, for example, whether laws and penalties designed toprevent improper disclosure of confidential information are effective or
whether other kinds of deterrents are needed. Statistical agencies and in-
dividual researchers have generally resisted suggestions for research on
confidentiality breaches, yet such research is necessary to evaluate the
effectiveness of data access mechanisms in preventing unwarranted dis-
closure.The Office of Research Integrity in the U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services is currently funding research into such violations of re-
search ethics as data fabrication and plagiarism; a few such studies have
been published (see, e.g., Swazey, Anderson, and Louis, 1993; Martinson,
Anderson, and de Vries, 2005). Research into the extent, nature, and causes
of confidentiality breaches is long overdue. If well-designed and executed
research and monitoring finds little evidence of such breaches, it would
do much to reassure the public and the agencies themselves that the ben-
efits accruing from wider dissemination of research data will not incur
undue costs in terms of breaches of confidentiality. The U.S. Government
Accountability Office has in the past expressed an interest in undertaking
such research.Recommendation 17Statistical agencies should set up procedures formonitoring, on an ongoing basis, violations of confidentiality protec-
tion practices and instances of confidentiality breaches that may oc-
cur. The system should be designed to obtain information on the
causes and consequences of these breaches.Education in Research EthicsLaws and procedures designed to prevent confidentiality breachesand punish their occurrence will not be optimally effective unless they are
accompanied by internalized norms of research ethics and fair informa-
tion practices (see Barquin and Northouse, 2003; Duncan, 2004). To incul-
cate these among current and future researchers and the staffs of the sta-
tistical agencies, universities as well as agencies that collect data from the
public should be encouraged to develop curricula (presented in courses,
workshops, and other educational forums) dealing explicitly with the re-
quirements of fair information practices, as well as with the requirements
for conducting ethical research with human beings. The two are not iden-
tical, and both have a role to play in the training of researchers and others
who will work in the field of government statistics. Such education pro-
grams should deal with ethical, legal, and data quality issues, as well as
with administrative and technical procedures for confidentiality protec-
tion, data security, disclosure limitation, and informed consent.Statistical agencies could make important contributions to the devel-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAopment of such training programs by providing advice based on theirexperience and expertise. Funding organizations, such as the NSF and the
NIH, could contribute to the necessary financial support. There is also an
important role in education for professional associations, many of which
have codes of professional conduct and ethical standards. Such associa-
tions as the American Statistical Association, the American Sociological
Association, the Population Association of America, the American Eco-
nomic Association, the American Association for Public Opinion Re-
search, and their counterparts for other disciplines and fields can contrib-
ute significantly to the development of strong norms for fair and ethical
practices in research and information gathering.Recommendation 18Training in ethical issues related to research,including fair information practices, as well as principles and prac-
tices related to research with human participants, should be part of
the professional training of all those involved in the design, collec-
tion, distribution, and use of data obtained under pledges of confi-
dentiality. Such training should be updated at intervals after the end
of formal schooling.Recommendation 19Professional associations should develop strongcodes of ethical conduct that reflect the need to protect the confiden-
tiality of personal data and make adherence to these codes an integral
part of their educational activities.In addition to encouraging educational and research institutions toadd training to their programs, consideration should also be given to re-
quiring completion of a specialized training program as a condition for
use of confidential data. Such a program might be designed along the
lines of the training and certification programs required of all researchers
who are subject to IRBs. Professional associations may be one kind of or-
ganization to provide such training.The challenge facing statistical and other data collection agencies indisseminating the best data as widely as possible in order to foster sound
public policy and research while protecting the confidentiality of those
data is formidable, but it can be met. With appropriate safeguards, and
recognizing that the technological and legal environment is likely to be
one of continual change, the nation can reap enormous benefits from the
information the public provides.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85References
Abowd, J.M., and J.I. Lane2003The Economics of Data Confidentiality. Unpublished paper presented at the Na-
tional Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Workshop on Confi-
dentiality of and Access to Research Data Files, October 16-17, Washington,
DC. Available: http://instruct1.cit.cornell.edu/~jma7/abowd_lane_CNSTAT_economics_ of_confidentiality_2003016.pdf [July 2005].2004New approaches to confidentiality protection: Synthetic data, remote access and
research data centers. Pages 282-289 in J. Domingo-Ferrar and V. Torra, editors.,Privacy in Statistical Databases. New York: Springer-Verlag.Abowd, J.M., and S.D. Woodcock2001Disclosure limitation in longitudinal linked data. In 
Confidentiality, Disclosure andData Access: Theory and Practical Application for Statistical Agencies, P. Doyle, J.I.Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, and L.V. Zayatz, editors. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:North-Holland.American Association of State Colleges and Universities2003Access for All? Debating In-State Tuition for Undocumented Alien Students. Available:http://www.aascu.org/special_report/access_for_all.htm [December 3, 2004].Bailar, J.C., III2003The Role of Data Access in Scientific Replication. Unpublished paper presented at
the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics ConfidentialData Access for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Barabba, V.1975The right of privacy and the need to know. In 
The Census Bureau: A Numerator andDenominator for Measuring Change. U.S. Census Bureau Technical Paper 37. Wash-ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.Barquin, R., and C. Northouse2003Data Collection and Analysis: Balancing Individual Rights and Societal Benefits.
Unpublished paper presented at the National Research CouncilÕs Committee onNational Statistics Confidential Data Access for Research Purposes Workshop, Oc-tober 16-17, Washington, DC.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATABates, N.A.2005Development and Testing of Informed Consent Questions to Link Survey Data
with Administrative Records. Proceedings of ASA Survey Research Methods Section.Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association.Battacharya, J., and D. Lakdawalla2003Does Medicare Benefit the Poor? New Answers to an Old Question. NBER WorkingPaper No. 9215 revised. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.Boisjoly, J., K.M. Harris, and G.T. Duncan1998Trends, events, and duration of initial welfare spells. Social Service Review72(4):466-492.Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz2001Measurement error in survey data. In Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5, J.Heckman and E. Leamer, editors. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland.Brown, C.2003Longitudinal Data and Public Policy. Unpublished paper presented at the Na-
tional Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data Ac-cess for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Cain, G., and D. Wissoker1990A reanalysis of marital stability in the Seattle-Denver Income Maintenance Ex-
periment. American Journal of Sociology 95(5):1235-1269.Clemetson, L.2004Homeland security given data on Arab-Americans. 
New York Times, July 30.Cohen, S.H., and W. Hadden2004Issues and Impediments to Expanding Access to Confidential Statistical Agency Data:Restricted Data and Restricted Access. Statistical Policy Working Paper No. 35, Fed-eral Committee on Statistical Methodology Seminar. Available: http://www.
fcsm.gov [September 2005].Consortium of Social Science Associations2004Behavioral and Social Science in the AdministrationÕs FY 2004 Budget. Available:www.aaas.org/spp/rd/04pch21.pdf [November 29, 2004].Couper, M.P., E. Singer, and R.A. Kulka1998Participation in the 1990 decennial census: Politics, privacy, pressures. 
AmericanPolitics Quarterly 26: 59-80.Dalenius, T., and S.P. Reiss1982Data-swapping: A technique for disclosure control. 
Journal of Statistical Planningand Inference (6):73-85.Dash, E., and T. Zeller2005MasterCard says 40 million files are put at risk. 
New York Times June 18:A1David, P.A.2001Digital Technologies, Research Collaborations and the Extension of Protection for
Intellectual Property in Science: Will Building ÔGood FencesÕ Really Make ÔGood
NeighborsÕ in Science? MERIT Research Memorandum No. 2001-004. MaastrictEconomic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology, Maastrict, The Neth-erlands.Dillman, D.A., M.D. Sinclair, and J.R. Clark1993Effects of questionnaire length, respondent-friendly design, and a difficult ques-
tion on response rates for occupant-addressed census mail surveys. Public OpinionQuarterly 57:289-304.Domingo-Ferrer, J., and V. Terra2001Disclosure control methods and information loss for microdata. In 
Confidentiality,Disclosure and Data Access: Theory and Practical Application for Statistical Agencies, P.Doyle, J.I. Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, and L.V. Zayatz, editors. Amsterdam, The Neth-erlands: North-Holland.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES87Doyle, P., J.I. Lane, J.J.M., Theeuwes, and L.V. Zayatz.2001Confidentiality, Disclosure, and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for Sta-tistical Agencies. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland.Duncan, G.T.2002Confidentiality and statistical disclosure limitation. In 
International Encyclopedia ofthe Social and Behavioral Sciences, N.J. Smelser and P.B. Baltes, editors. Oxford, U.K.:Pergamon.2004Exploring the tension between privacy and the social benefits of governmental
databases. In A Little Knowledge: Privacy, Security and Public Information After Sep-tember 11, P.M. Shane, J. Podesta, and R.C. Leone editors. New York: The CenturyFoundation.Duncan, G.T., S.E. Fienberg, R. Krishnan, R. Padman, and S.F. Roehrig2001Disclosure limitation methods and information loss for tabular data. In 
Confidenti-ality, Disclosure and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for Statistical Agen-
cies, P. Doyle, J.I. Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, and L.V. Zayatz, editors. Amsterdam, TheNetherlands: North-Holland.Duncan, G.T., S. Keller-McNulty, and S.L. Stokes2003Disclosure Risk vs. Data Utility: The R-U Confidentiality Map. Working Paper. Avail-able: http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/wpapers/detail.jsp?id=4386 [November 29,2004].Duncan, G.T., and D. Lambert1986Disclosure-limited data dissemination. 
Journal of the American Statistical Associa-tion 81:10-18.1989The risk of disclosure for microdata. 
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 7:207-217.Duncan, G.T., and S. Mukherjee2000Optimal disclosure limitation strategy in statistical databases: Deterring tracker
attacks through additive noise. Journal of the American Statistical Association(95):720-729.Duncan G.T., and R.W. Pearson1991Enhancing access to microdata while protecting confidentiality. 
Statistical Science6:219-239.Duncan, G.T., and S.L. Stokes2004Disclosure risk vs. data utility: The R-U confidentiality map as applied totopcoding. Chance 17:16-20.Duncan, K.2000Incentives and the work decisions of welfare recipients: Evidence from the Panel
Survey of Income Dynamics, 1981-1988. American Journal of Economics and Sociol-ogy 59(3):433-449.Dunton, N.2000PUMS. Pp. 311-312 in 
Encyclopedia of the U.S. Census, M.J. Anderson, editor.Washington, DC: CQ Press.Ferber, R.1966The Reliability of Consumer Reports of Financial Assets and Debt. Studies in ConsumerSavings # 6. Urbana, IL: Bureau of Economic and Business Research, University ofIllinois.Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C.J. Krizan2001Aggregate productivity growth: Lessons from microeconomic evidence. Chapter
8 in New Directions in Productivity Analysis, E. Dean, M. Harper, and C. Hulten,editors. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAFox, S., and O. Lewis2001Fear of Online Crime: Americans Support FBI Interception of Criminal SuspectsÕ Emailand New Laws to Protect Online Privacy. Pew Internet & American Life Project.Available: http://www.pewinternet.org.Gaquin, D.2000aData dissemination and use. In 
Encyclopedia of the U.S. Census
, M.J. Anderson,editor in chief. Washington, DC: CQ Press.2000bSummary tape files. 
Encyclopedia of the U.S. Census, M.J. Anderson, editor. Wash-ington, DC: CQ Press.Garber, A.M., T.E. MaCurdy, and M.C. McClellan1998Persistence of Medicare expenditures among elderly beneficiaries. Pp. 153-180 in
Frontiers in Health Policy, Vol. 1, A.M. Garber, editor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Gilheany, S.2000The Decline of Magnetic Disk Storage Cost Over the Next 25 Years. Available: http://www.berghell.com/whitepapers/Storage%20Costs.pdf [December 2, 2004].Gordon, R.1999Confidential data files linked to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979
Cohort: A case study. Unpublished paper presented at the National Research
CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Workshop on Confidentiality of andAccess to Data Research Files, October 14-15, Washington, DC.
Groenveld, L. P., N.B. Tuma, and M.T. Hannan1980The effects of negative income tax programs on marital dissolution. 
The Journal ofHuman Resources 15(4)(fall):654-674.
Groves, R., and J. Lepkowski1985Cost and error modeling for large-scale telephone surveys. Pp. 330-357 in 
Proceed-ings of the Bureau of the Census First Annual Research Conference. Washington, DC:U.S. Department of Commerce.Guarino, J.A., J.M. Hill, and H.F. Woltman2001Analysis of the Social Security Number - Notification Component of the Social SecurityNumber, Privacy Attitudes, and Notification Experiment. Washington, DC: U.S. De-partment of Commerce.Haltiwanger, J., S. Davis, and S. Schuh1996Job Creation and Destruction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Hawala, S., L. Zayatz, and S. Rowland2004American FactFinder: Disclosure limitation for the advanced query system. 
Jour-nal of Official Statistics 20(1):115-124.Hayes, B.2002Terabyte territory. 
American Scientist 90(3):212-216.Hildreth, A.K.2003The Census Research Data Center (RDC) Network: Problems, Possibilities and
Precedents. Unpublished paper presented at the National Research CouncilÕs
Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data Access for Research PurposesWorkshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Hillygus, S., N. Nie, and K. Prewitt with G. Pals2006Civic Mobilization and Privacy Concerns in the 2000 Census. New York: Russell SageFoundation.Hoynes, H., and T. MaCurdy1994Has the decline in benefits shortened welfare spells? 
American Economic Review84(2):43-48.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES89Hurd, M., F.T. Juster, and J.P. Smith2003Enhancing the quality of data on income: Recent innovations from the HRS. 
Jour-nal of Human Resources 38(3):758-772.Institute of Medicine2005Vaccine Safety Research, Data Access, and Public Trust. Committee on the Review ofNational Immunization ProgramÕs Research Procedures and Data Sharing Pro-gram, Board on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.Journal of Human Resources1995Vol. 30, No 5. Available:  http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/jhr/1995ab/loprest.html
[May 23, 2005].Klein, L., and A.C. Goldberger1955An Econometric Model of the United States, 1929Ð1952. Amsterdam: North-HollandPublishing Co.Kuhn, T.1962The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.Lambert, D.1993Measures of disclosure risk and harm. 
Journal of Official Statistics 9:313-333.Levitan, S.A., and F. Gallo1990Work and family: The impact of legislation. 
Monthly Labor Review, March, 34-40.Linet, M.2003Impact of HIPAA on Research. Testimony prepared for the National Committee
on Vital and Health Statistics Subcommittee on Privacy and Confidentiality, No-
vember 19-20, Silver Spring, MD.Little, R.J.A.1993Statistical analysis of masked data. Journal of Official Statistics 9:407-426.Marquis, K.H., and C.J. Moore1990Measurement errors in SIPP program reports. Pp. 721-745 in 
Proceedings of theBureau of the Census 1990 Annual Research Conference. Washington, DC: U.S. De-partment of Commerce.Martinson, B.C., M.S. Anderson, and R. de Vries2005Scientists behaving badly. 
Nature 435:737-738.McClellan, M., and J. Skinner2004The Incidence of Medicare. (Working Paper.) Available: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~economic/faculty/Skinner/Papers/ms%20medicare%206%20feb%
2004.pdf [November 30, 2004].McCullagh, D.2004Database nation: The upside of Òzero privacy.Ó 
Reason (June). Available: http://www.reason.com/0406/fe.dm.database.shtml [December 21, 2004].McGuckin, R.H.1992The Importance of Establishment Data in Economic Research. Discussion paper,
Center for Economic Studies. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC.1995Establishment microdata for economic research and policy analysis: Looking be-
yond the aggregates. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13(1):121-126.McGuckin, R.H., and S.V. Nguyen1990Public use microdata: Disclosure and usefulness
. Journal of Economic and SocialMeasurement 16(1):19-39.McMillen, D.2003Privacy, Confidentiality, and Data Sharing. Unpublished paper presented at the
National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data

Access for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAMcMillen, M.1999National Center for Education Statistics: Data licensing systems. Unpublished
paper presented at the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statis-tics Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to Data Research Files, October14-15, Washington DC.Menchik, P.L., and M. David1983Income distribution, lifetime savings, and bequests. 
American Economic Review73(4):672-690.National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and BehavioralResearch1979The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Proection of Human Sub-jects of Research. Office of Human Subjects Research, National Institutes of Health.Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.National Highway Traffic Safety Administration2001National EMS Research Agenda. Available: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/in-jury/ems/ems-agenda/toc.htm [December 6, 2004].National Research Council1979Privacy and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Response. Panel on Privacy and Con-fidentiality as Factors in Survey Response, Committee on National Statistics,Asssembly of Behavioral and Social Sciences. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press.1985Sharing Research Data. Committee on National Statistics. S.E. Fienberg, M.E. Mar-tin, and M.L. Straf, editors. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.1991Improving Information for Social Policy Decisions: The Uses of Microsimulation Model-ing. Volume I: Review and Recommendations. Panel to Evaluate MicrosimulationModels for Social Welfare Programs, C.F. Citro and E.A. Hanushek, editors. Com-mittee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.1993Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statis-tics. Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access,  G.T. Duncan, T.B. Jabine, and V.A
de Wolf, editors. Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.1997Assessing Policies for Retirement Income: Needs for Data, Research, and Models. Panelon Retirement Income Modeling, C.F. Citro and E.A. Hanushek, editors. Commit-
tee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Edu-cation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.1998People and Pixels: Linking Remote Sensing and Social Science. Committee on the Hu-man Dimensions of Global Change, Diana Liverman, Emilio F. Moran, Ronald R.Rindfuss, and Paul C. Stern, editors. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sci-ences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.2000Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a Workshop. Com-mittee on National Statistics, C. Mackie and N. Bradburn, editors. Commission onBehavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press.2001aCells and Surveys: Should Biological Measures Be Included in Social Science Research?Committee on Population, C.E. Finch, J.W. Vaupel, and K. Kinsella, editors. Com-
mission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: Na-tional Academy Press.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES912001bEvaluating Welfare Reform in an Era of Transition. Panel on Data and Methods forMeasuring the Effects of Changes in Social Welfare Programs, R.A.Moffitt and M.
Ver Ploeg, editors. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral andSocial Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.2002Access to Research Data in the 21st Century: An Ongoing Dialogue Among InterestedParties. Report of a Workshop. Science, Law, and Policy Panel, Policy and GlobalAffairs. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.2003aEnsuring the Quality of Data Disseminated by the Federal Government: Workshop Re-port. Ad Hoc Committee on Ensuring the Quality of Government Information,Science, Technology, and Law Program, Policy and Global Affairs. WashingtonD.C.: The National Academies Press.2003bProtecting Participants and Facilitating Behavioral and Social Science Research. Panelon Institutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Science Research, C.F. Citro,D.R. Ilgen, and C.B. Marrett, editors. Committee on National Statistics and Board
on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences, Division of Behavioral and SocialSciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.2004aMeasuring Racial Discrimination. Panel on Methods for Assessing Discrimination,R.M. Blank, M. Dabady, and C.F. Citro, editors. Committee on National Statistics,Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: TheNational Academies Press.2004bThe 2000 Census: Counting Under Adversity. Panel to Review the 2000 Census, C.F.Citro, D.L. Cork, and J.L. Norwood, editors. Committee on National Statistics,Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.2005Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, Third Edition. Committee onNational Statistics. M.E. Martin, M.L. Straf, and C.F. Citro, editors. Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The NationalAcademies Press.Ochas, S., J. Rasmussen, C. Robson, and M. Salib2001Reidentification of Individuals in ChicagoÕs Homicide Database: A Technical and
Legal Study. Unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.OÕNeill, J., D. Wolf, L. Bassi, and M. Hannan1984An Analysis of Time on Welfare. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.OÕRourke, J.M., and M.P. Gutmann2005Citations DatabaseÑHuman Subjects Protection and Disclose Risk Analysis,Project 3: Statistical Disclosure Control: Best Practices and Tools for the SocialSciences. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Ar-bor, MI. Available: www.icpsr.umic.edu/HSP/bibliography-keyword.htm. [Oc-
tober 2005].Paas, G.1988Disclosure risk and disclosure avoidance for microdata. 
Journal of Business andEconomic Statistics 6:487-500.Perrit, H.H., Jr.2003Protecting Confidentiality of Research Data through Law. Unpublished paper pre-
sented at the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Con-fidential Data Access for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washing-ton, DC.Prewitt, K.2000Remarks prepared for session on Census 2000 organized by the Census 2000 Ini-
tiative and the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, March 24, Washington DC.2004What if we give a census and no one comes? 
Science (676):1452-1453.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATARaghunathan, T.E.2003Evaluation of Inferences from Multiple Synthetic Data Sets Created UsingSemiparametric Approach. Unpublished paper presented at the National ResearchCouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data Access for ResearchPurposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Raghunathan, T.E., J.P. Reiter, and D.R. Rubin2003Multiple imputation for statistical disclosure limitation. 
Journal of Official Statistics19:1-16.Reiter, J.P.2003Estimating Probabilities of Identification for Microdata. Unpublished paper pre-
sented at the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Con-
fidential Data Access for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washing-ton, DC. [Submitted to Journal of the American Statistical Association.]Rhea, S., P. Eaton, D. Geels, H. Weatherspoon, B. Zhao, and J. Kubiatowicz2003Pond: The OceanStore prototype. 
Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX Conference on Fileand Storage Technologies (FAST 03). Available: http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~ebelding/courses/276/f04/papers/pond.pdf [August  2005].
Rindfuss, R.R.2002Conflicting demands: Confidentiality promises and data availability. 
Newsletter ofthe International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change, Feb-ruary. Available: http://www.ihdp.uni-bonn.de/html/publications/update/up-date02_02/Update02_02_art1.html [November 30, 2004].Rowland, S.2003Examination of Monitored, Remote Microdata Access Systems. Paper presented
at the National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential
Data Access for Research Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC.Rubin, D.B.1993Discussion of statistical disclosure limitation. 
Journal of Official Statistics (9):461-468.Ruggles, S.2000Data userÕs perspective on confidentiality. 
Of SignificanceÑJournal of the Associa-tion of Public Data Users 2:1-5.Schweinhart, L.J.2004The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. Available: www.highscope.org/Research/PerryProject/PerryAge40SumWeb.pdf [December 3, 2004].
Seastrom, M.2001Licensing. Pp. 279-296 in 
Confidentiality, Disclosure, and Data Access: Theory andPractical Applications for Statistical Agencies, P. Doyle, J.I. Lane, J.J.M. Theeuwes,and L.V. Zayatz, editors. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland, Elsevier Sci-ence.Seastrom, M.M., C. Wright, and J. Melnicki2003The Role of Licensing and Enforcement Mechanisms in Promoting Access and
Protecting Confidentiality. Unpublished paper presented at the National ResearchCouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data Access for Research
Purposes Workshop, October 16-17, Washington, DCSeltzer, W., and M. Anderson2000After Pearl Harbor: The Proper Role of Population Data Systems in Time of War.
Available: http://www.uwm.edu/~margo/govstat/integrity.htm [December 15,2004].Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES932003Government Statistics and Individual Safety: Revisiting the Historical Record of
Disclosure, Harm, and Risk. Paper presented at the National Research CouncilÕs
Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data Access for Research PurposesWorkshop, October 16-17, Washington, DC. Available: http://www.uwm.edu/~margo/govstat/WS-MAcnstat.pdf [December 8, 2004].Sieber, J.1991Sharing Social Science Data: Advantages and Challenges. Newbury Park, CA: SagePublications.Singer, E.2004Principles and practices related to scientific integrity. In 
Survey Methodology, R.M.Groves et al. New York: Wiley.Singer, E., N.A. Mathiowetz, and M.P. Couper1993The impact of privacy and confidentiality concerns on survey participation: The
case of the 1990 census. Public Opinion Quarterly 57(4):465-482.Singer, E., R.Y. Shapiro, and L.R. Jacobs1997Privacy of health care data: What does the public know? How much do they care?
In Health Care and Information Ethics, A.y Chapman, ed. Washington, DC: Ameri-can Association for the Advancement of Science.Singer, E., J. Van Hoewyk, and R. Neugebauer2003Attitudes and behavior: The impact of privacy and confidentiality concerns on
participation in the 2000 census. Public Opinion Quarterly 65(3):368-384.Singer, E., J. Van Hoewyk, and R. Tourangeau2001Final Report on the 1999-2000 Surveys of Privacy Attitudes. Contract No. 50-
YABC-7-66019, Task Order No. 46-YAB-9-0002. Washington, DC: U.S. CensusBureau.Singh, A.C., F. Yu, and G.H. Dunteman2003MASSC: A New Data Mask for Limiting Statistical Information Loss and Disclo-
sure. Paper presented at the Joint ECE/EUROSTAT Work Session on Data Confi-dentiality, Luxembourg. Available: Statistics Research Division, RTI International,
Research Triangle Park, NC.Soete, L., and Bas ter Weel2003ICT 
and Access to Research Data: An Economic Review. Unpublished paper(June). Maastrict Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology,
Maastrict, The Netherlands.Spruill, N.L.1983The confidentiality and analytic usefulness of masked business microdata. In 
Pro-ceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Association.Washington, DC: American Statistical Association.Swazey, J., M.S. Anderson, and K. S. Louis1993Ethical problems in academic research. 
American Scientist Online (originally ap-peared in November/December issue). Available: http://www.americanscientist.
org/template/AssetDetail/assetid/33432;jsessionid=baagLvqUb8uc7F?fulltext=true [May 31, 2005].Sweeney, L.1999Computational disclosure control for medical microdata: The datafly system. In
Record Linkage Techniques 1997: Proceedings of an International Workshop and Exposi-tion. Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics. Washington, DC: NationalAcademy Press.2001Information explosion. In 
Confidentiality, Disclosure, and Data Access: Theory andPractical Applications for Statistical Agencies, P. Doyle, J.I. Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, andL.V. Zayatz, editors. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATASweeney, L., B. Malin, and E. Newton2003Trail Re-identification: Learning Who You are From Where You Have Been. Data
Privacy Laboratory Technical Report, LIDAP-WP12. Carnegie Mellon University,School of Computer Science.Taueber, C.1981America enters the eighties: Some social indicators. 
The Annals of the AmericanAcademy of Political and Social Science (vol. 453). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publica-tions.Triplett, J.1991The federal statistical systemÕs response to emerging data needs. 
Journal of Eco-nomic and Social Measurement 17(3-4):155-177.U.S. Census Bureau2004U.S. Census Bureau Privacy Principles. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Com-merce.U.S. Office of Management and Budget2004Statistical Programs of the United States Government: Fiscal Year 2005. Washington,DC: Executive Office of the President. Also available: http://www.whitehouse.
gov/omb/inforeg/05statprog.pdf [September 2005].2005Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review. 70 FR 2664-02 (January 14).Willenborg, L., and T. de Waal1995Statistical Disclosure Control in Practice. (Lecture Notes in Statistics 111.) New York:Springer.Winkler, W.E.1988Using the EM algorithm for weight computation in the Fellegi-Sunter model of
record linkage. Pp. 667-671 in Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods.Washington, DC: American Statistical Association.1998Re-identification methods for evaluating the confidentiality of analytically valid
microdata. Research in Official Statistics 1:87-104.Woodbury, R., A. Gustman, L. Lillard, O. Mitchell, and R. Willis1999The Value of Linked Data in Aging Research. Paper prepared for April 17-18,
2000, meeting of the Panel on a Research Agenda and New Data for an AgingWorld, Committee on Population, National Research Council, Washington, DC.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95APPENDIXAWorkshop SummaryACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA:ASSESSING RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIESOCTOBER 16-17, 2003The panel held a workshop early in its deliberations to hear from ex-perts about how microdata can best be made available to researchers while
protecting respondent confidentiality. The workshop goals were to gener-
ate information for the panelÕs use and to provide a venue for the papers
commissioned by the panel to be presented and discussed in a public fo-
rum.This summary, following the workshop, is organized around the sixtopics that were the subjects of the commissioned papers:¥the changing legal landscape;¥facilitating data access;¥measuring the risks and costs of disclosure;¥the impact of multiple imputation on disclosure risk and infor-mation utility;¥assessing the benefits of researcher access to longitudinalmicrodata; and¥assessing research and policy needsÑthe economics of dataaccess.The papers, presenters, and discussants are listed at the end of theExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAAppendix. The papers are available electronically (www7. nationalacademies.org/cnstat/Data_Access_Panel.html).BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEWIn 1999 the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) held a work-shop focused on the procedures used by agencies and organizations for
releasing public-use microdata files and for establishing restricted access
to nonpublic files. Tradeoffs between research and other data user needs
and confidentiality requirements were articulated, as were the relative
advantages and costs of data alteration techniques versus restricted
(physical) access arrangements. The report of that workshop, ImprovingAccess to and Confidentiality of Research Data (National Research Council2000), provided a starting point for the panelÕs work.The panelÕs workshop followed up on many of the topics discussed inthe 1999 workshop, but the focus was less on what agencies are currently
doing and more toward emerging opportunities, specifically relating to
research access to longitudinal microdata. Participants provided an in-
depth look at a number of topics ranging from the role of licensing and
penalties for infringing on licensing agreements to the potential of data
linking (e.g., between survey and administrative data), particularly the
technical, legal, and statistical arrangements that would be needed to pro-
mote linking within and between agencies and between government and
private-sector data producers. The workshop also sought to promote dis-
cussion of how to measure the risks and costs associated with data use,
disclosure, and limiting access; what levels of risk are acceptable; and
public perceptions about privacy as they pertain to market data in com-
parison with government data.The first day was devoted to three topics on risks and opportunities:legal, technical and organizational, and normative. The papers and dis-
cussion in the first session examined various aspects of the legal land-
scape, emphasizing important recent changes, particularly the Confiden-
tial Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA).
The papers highlighted that the legal framework offers a range of oppor-
tunities for promoting wider access to research data. For example, through
the use of licensing agreements, some of the legal responsibility for main-
taining confidentiality can be shifted to data users by the agencies that
collect the data.The papers and discussion in the second session focused primarily ontechnical and organizational opportunities, both on a general level and as
manifested by special organizations like the Census BureauÕs Research
Data Centers and remote access to data that are stored centrally. The third
session was devoted to the difficult problem of accurately assessing dis-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A97closure risks associated with access to microdata and also to the questionof what if any harms have come to participants as a result of the disclo-
sure of the information they provided to government agencies.The second day of the workshop focused on ways of dealing withpotentially conflicting goalsÑinformation utility and confidentiality pro-
tection. Session four focused on one particular method for accommodat-
ing those two values, the creation of imputed data, and assessed how well
analyses based on such data might approximate models estimated from
unaltered data.Session five was devoted primarily to discussing the scientific andpractical benefits of providing restricted as well as unrestricted access to
research data. Participants also considered scientific replication and the
usefulness of access to data by multiple parties in that process. The final
session attempted to assess costs and benefits associated with different
approaches to providing data access and protecting confidentiality.SESSION I:THE CHANGING LEGAL LANDSCAPEDavid McMillen opened the session with the presentation of his pa-per ÒPrivacy, Confidentiality, and Data Sharing,Ó which reviewed new
legislation dealing with these issues. He also provided an overview of the
legislative history of CIPSEA, which is Title V of the E-Government Act of
2002, and offered some thoughts about its implementation.McMillen focused on the principle and application of informed con-sent agreements. He underscored the point that the legislative history on
privacy indicates that when people provide information to the govern-
ment, or to a private entity, they do not give up all rights to how those
data are used. Conversely, when the government receives information
from the public, it is not free to use that information for purposes other
than those for which the information was collected. The central issue for
McMillen, then, is what the terms of this implied contract between data
providers and their government are and what responsibility the govern-
ment has for making those terms clear and explicit.McMillen argued that agencies that collect information from the pub-lic should be as clear and detailed as possible in explaining to respon-
dents how the information will be used and what the limits of confidenti-
ality protection are. He concluded with the statement that government is
based on open access to the citizens it serves, and that openness should be
one of the principles that guide the development of policies about inform-
ing respondents of their rights and responsibilities when asked for infor-
mation.During the discussion of McMillenÕs paper, there was considerableExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAdivergence of opinion about how detailed informed consent agreementsshould or could be. Some participants articulated the view that McMillenÕs

prescriptions would lead to a serious decrease in the utility and value of
government-collected microdata.Marilyn Seastrom, Candice Wright, and John Melnicki then presentedtheir paper, ÒThe Role of Licensing and Enforcement Mechanisms in Pro-
moting Access and Protecting Confidentiality.Ó Licensing agreements al-
low researchers to use protected confidental data files in a secure environ-
ment at their home institution, subject to the terms and responsibilities
specified in an agreement. In the first part of their presentation, the au-
thors reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of various licensing arrange-
ments currently in practice in the United States and abroad. They also
described instances when enforcement has led to sanctions and when ad-
ministrative penalties have been implemented for misuse of data. The
authors also reviewed application procedures and data security plans and
the many types of data agreements in place.The authors concluded that the enforcement mechanisms are, for anumber of reasons, quite weak and that, consequently, there have been
violations, though most of them are relatively minor (e.g., computers left
unattended, failure to maintain a log for check in/out of data, or data not
properly stored when not in use). They concluded with three recommen-
dations: (1) more routine use of security inspections, (2) implementation
of termination procedures, and (3) maintenance of a tracking database.First, given the potential importance of security inspections as a means
of monitoring and enforcement of data-use agreements, all agencies that
license external researchers to use confidential microdata files should give
serious consideration to instituting security inspections on a regular ba-
sis. Second, to meet the legal requirements associated with individually
identifiable data, entities licensing the use of confidential data must have
procedures in place for monitoring the disposition of the data files at the
completion of a research project. This requirement can help ensure that
the data are not subsequently used for unauthorized purposes. Third, to
run an effective data-use agreement program, an agency must have and
maintain complete, accurate, and thorough records for each data agree-
ment. Such records are essential for monitoring the authorized users, the
approved uses of the data, and the security of the data.Henry H. Perritt, Jr., concluded the opening session with the presen-tation of his paper, ÒEfficacy of Different Theories of Enforcement.Ó The
paper suggests a framework within which the efficacy of legal protections
of confidentiality can be evaluated, offers qualitative standards for evalu-
ating the effectiveness of existing law, and identifies alternative ap-
proaches for strengthening legal protections. The paper begins with an
evaluation of the possibility that federal or state law might compel re-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A99searchers to disclose confidential data received from federal governmentsources. It identifies the two kinds of private interests that warrant shield-
ing data from disclosure and the sources of law that prohibit disclosure of
data identified as confidential by the government agency from which it
was received.Perritt concluded that legal liability is only a weak protection for dataconfidentiality because the principal privacy statutes do not recognize
private rights of action for wrongful disclosure, and the case law under
common-law legal theories provides sparse support, at best, for recovery
for disclosure. Moreover, difficulties in detection, proof, establishment of
damages, and the high cost of litigation make it unlikely that victims of
wrongful disclosure would seek relief in the courts. Perritt noted that at
least one respected commentator agrees with these shortcomings of exist-
ing privacy law.Perritt proposed two promising ways to afford legal protectionagainst wrongful research disclosure: (1) to require researchers who re-
ceive confidential data to establish internal protections, on pain of con-
tract cancellation and bars to receiving grants in the future, and (2) to put
nondisclosure language in license agreements that supports Òthird-party-
beneficiaryÓ recovery by data subjects.During the discussion of PerrittÕs paper, participants said that an ad-ditional protection exists because the institution at which the researcher
works has the ability to discipline the researcher further; bringing the in-
stitution into the arrangement can strengthen the potential sanctions for
disclosure. Perritt concurred, recommending that the design of the insti-
tutional mechanism should make clear that the individual researchers
have responsibility and accountability and that they will be subject to dis-
cipline or discharge if they violate their obligations under the agreement.
Furthermore, institutional liability itself is important since, in some sense,
the institution has more at risk then does an individual. This incentive can
be exploited to promote conformity to data protection rules.Joe Cecil, one of the formal discussants for the session, said he foundPerrittÕs argumentÑthat it would be difficult to create a meaningful right
of private action for an individual and have it work in a way that would
give agencies confidence that they are not left responsible for a breach of
confidentialityÑconvincing. He argued that the notion expressed at the
1999 workshop of transferring this responsibility to data users and at the
same time giving agencies greater confidence is perhaps a false hope. He
suggested that perhaps the focus should be on how to strengthen the in-
stitutional mechanisms that Seastrom and others explored and develop-
ing data-use agreements for researchers who want to download public-
use files.Katherine Wallman, the second formal discussant, provided exten-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAsive clarification about the specifications of CIPSEA. She noted thatCIPSEA is the culmination of the work of not just four Congresses, but
also almost 25 years of work by her, her predecessors as chief statistician
of the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, and many others. The leg-
islation is only the most recent in a long history of efforts to strengthen the
legal protection of confidentiality for statistical information collected by
the federal government.The other major objective addressed in CIPSEA concerns the sharingof information among agencies with various kinds of confidential protec-
tions and others who are legitimate users of the information, including
licensed researchers at universities, licensed researchers in public-sector
organizations and pro bono organizations, and others. She noted, how-
ever, that the dual objectives of protecting confidentiality and increasing
data sharing have sometimes caused confusion about what is in CIPSEA
and what is not and about who is covered and who is not covered. For
example, although only three named agencies are covered by the data-
sharing provisions of the legislation, CIPSEAÕs confidential protections
extend to all federal agencies that collect statistical data under a pledge of
confidentiality. Wallman concluded her remarks by briefly outlining the
plans for implementing CIPSEAÕs provisions.SESSION II:FACILITATING DATA ACCESSMichael Larsen gave a presentation on the technical, legal, and orga-nizational barriers to data linkage. Larsen first identified the benefits mo-
tivating the goal of data linkageÑhow such data would be used to en-
hance analyses. He then discussed technical and legal barriers inhibiting
data linkage. He concluded by discussing the role of data enclaves and
the example of data linking between the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) and Social Security Administration (SSA) records.Several themes emerged from the presentation. First, Larsen clearlyarticulated the importance of data access and data linkages to research,
noting examples of questions that could not be answered without access
to linked data. In addition to the technical challenges associated with ac-
curately matching records across sources, it is important when seeking
respondentsÕ permission at the beginning of a project to think carefully
about potential linkages. Proactive work is needed both to make linkage
possible and to have respondentsÕ support.The paper by Andrew Hildreth, ÒThe Census Research Data CenterNetwork: Problems, Possibilities and Precedents,Ó assessed the track
record of research data centers (RDCs) and the potential and problemsExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A101associated with them. The RDC system stems from the desire to permitaccess to confidential data sets housed at the U.S. Census Bureau. The
program started as a pilot in 1994; it was initially funded through the U.S.
National Science Foundation (NSF) in partnership with the National Bu-
reau of Economic Research (NBER). The goal was to make such data sets
as the longitudinal research database more accessible to researchers by
making them available in locations other than Washington, D.C.Hildreth began with an overview of how to apply for access, the kindsof research projects that are undertaken, and what applicants can expect
in terms of process, particularly how long it might take to get to an RDC
and start working with the data. He also discussed questions relating to
the long-term financial prospects of the data centers. The key problem
that Hildreth focused on was that of time delays. He spoke strongly in
favor of a system that allows continual review of project applications.In conclusion, Hildreth said his most important recommendation wasto improve the proposal submission and review process for junior users.
Wider access will bring wider recognition of what the research has meant
to the Census BureauÕs data programs and what work the RDCs do and
can do. Second, RDCs can be a way to achieve better alignment of the data
programs with the Census BureauÕs goals. Third, some kind of core fund-
ing would be very helpful, perhaps through local institutional support, so
that RDCs and the researchers who want to use them do not face yearly
worries around budget time.J. Bradford Jensen related his experiences Òfrom the trenchesÓ in try-ing to design a national framework for a data enclave model. He charac-
terized the RDC enterprise as expensive, fragile, and tenuous. He sug-
gested that the U.S. Census Bureau experience is representative of those
of other countries and other contexts. Jensen confirmed many of HildrethÕs
observations about the difficulties that lie ahead for the RDC system.
However, he, too, noted the immense potential to advance research at the
RDCs and was hopeful that the obstacles to their continued and improved
operation could be overcome.Sandra Rowland presented a paper, ÒAn Examination of Monitored,Remote Microdata Access Systems,Ó that focuses on monitored remote
(electronic) access to confidential microdata. Many national statistical of-
fices disseminate microdata in three ways: public-use microdata files on
CD-ROM or on-line, research centers or licensed sites, and remote access.
RowlandsÕ paper covers a sampling of systems in national statistical of-
fices that permit monitored remote access to confidential microdata. The
sample includes six foreign systems and three systems in the United
States. The foreign systems are the Luxembourg Income Study, Statistics
Canada, Statistics Denmark, Statistics Netherlands, the Australian Bureau
of Statistics, and Statistics Sweden. The U.S. agencies are the NationalExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATACenter for Health Statistics, the National Center for Education Statistics,and the Census Bureau.The paper reviews the type of methodology used in each of the sys-tems because the methodology influences the kinds of access and results
given to users. Rowland reviewed the use of each system and the kinds of
research that have benefited from remote access to the extent that such
information is available.Joseph Hotz, the formal discussant for the session, emphasized thetradeoffs associated with different confidentiality protection methods. He
said he was struck by the number of dimensions on which the various
approaches differ, which makes the process of making an ÒoptimalÓ deci-
sion difficult: there is no simple way of deciding on Òthe right method.Ó
Across these different modesÑfrom public access to data enclaves to re-
mote access to licensingÑthere are differences not only in terms of degree
of access, but also in ease of use, cost, appropriateness for the types of
data and information available, ability to customize versus having to rely
on standardized data, etc. The alternative methods also differ substan-
tially with regard to how they are financed and how they might be fi-
nanced. Hotz concluded that in evaluating different methods, one has to
consider much more than simply access.SESSION III:MEASURING THE RISKS AND COSTS OF DISCLOSUREThe paper by Jerome Reiter, ÒEstimating Probabilities of Identifica-tion for Microdata,Ó describes methods for measuring identification dis-
closure risks, including those associated with re-identifications from
matching to external databases with public-use microdata. The paper de-
scribes general methods for calculating sampled unitsÕ probabilities of re-
identification from the released data, given assumptions about intruder
behavior.When agencies release microdata to the public, intruders may be ableto match the information in those data to records in external databases.
Reiter presented specific methods for altering data to prevent such match-
ing, including global recoding of variables, data swapping, and adding
random noise. He illustrated the methods with data from the Current
Population Survey, including random swapping of a subset of the values
of variables needed to protect sample ÒuniquesÓ (across combinations of
variables such as age, sex, race, marital status) and using an age recode in
addition to swapping to provide the swaps with good protection . He
noted that knowing property taxes greatly increases probabilities of re-
identification, and adding noise to positive tax values is not sufficient for
eliminating uniques, though top coding helps.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A103William Seltzer and Margo Anderson presented the paper, ÒGovern-ment Statistics and Individual Safety: Revisiting the Historical Record of
Disclosure, Harm and Risk,Ó which examines the sparse but important
historical record of disclosure, harm, and risk. In the broadest terms, the
paper has two interrelated objectives: presentation of a body of facts and
presentation of a reconceptualization of a number of the issues related to
disclosure and statistical confidentiality in order to understand the impli-
cations of the facts assembled. The latter is rooted in the ethical, statistical
policy, and statutory origins of the idea of statistical confidentiality.The focus of the presentation was on issues of disclosure, harm, andrisk that have emerged from the use of government statistical agencies or
programs to assist in the nonstatistical task of targeting individuals or
population subgroups for administrative action. The paper sets out the
available evidence concerning such government efforts, which the authors
argued have led to serious human rights abuses. Seltzer and Anderson
also described a number of barriers to the study of disclosures, harms,
and risks associated with government activities.George Duncan, as the formal discussant, framed his comments onhow to evaluate disclosure limitation methods in the context of measur-
ing the risks and costs of disclosure. He cited limitations in current meth-
ods for measuring the presence of population uniques: most methods ig-
nore the knowledge state of data snoopers (e.g., a snooper may or may
not know that the target individual is in a sample); they provide little
information about continuous data; and they provide minimal guidance
for evaluating alternative disclosure limitation procedures. Duncan ap-
plauded ReiterÕs application (using data from the March 2000 Current
Population Survey) to demonstrate a framework based on probability of
identity disclosure and for rigorously exploring the efficiency of such dis-
closure limitation approaches as global recoding, data swapping, and add-
ing random noise.SESSION IV:THE IMPACT OF MULTIPLE IMPUTATION ONDISCLOSURE RISKThe presenter and discussants in this session focused on the advan-tages and disadvantages of using synthetic data as a method of protecting
confidentiality while at the same time providing greater access to data
and preserving their informational utility. The presentation and discus-
sion concentrated on three questions: Could use of a multiple imputation
method improve data confidentiality without significantly compromising
informational utility? How well do the statistical inferences from multi-
ply imputed data match the results that are obtained using the originalExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAdata? Do multiple imputations provide proper balance between data con-fidentiality and accessibility?The paper presented by Trivellore Raghunathan, ÒEvaluation of In-ferences from Multiple Synthetic Data Sets Created Using a Semipara-
metric Approach,Ó examined evidence on the difference in modeling re-
sults with original data and masked data. Techniques of data
alterationÑsuch as data swapping, post-randomization, masking,
subseparation, truncation, rounding, and collapsing categoriesÑmay
protect confidentiality, but they may also introduce bias in statistical in-
ferences. The idea of using multiple imputations to create synthetic data
sets for public release was introduced by Rubin (1993). The paper re-
views pioneering work by Rubin (1993) and Little (1993) developing the
methodology, presents extensions, and evaluates the methodology with
simulated data sets. Raghunathan outlined the general-purpose semi-

parametric approach for creating multiple synthetic data sets and showed
it to be especially useful when underlying relationships are nonlinear.
The goal of RaghunathanÕs approach was dual: to protect confidentiality
and to preserve the key statistical properties of the original data.Raghunathan mentioned several advantages of creating syntheticsamples. For example, one can link the data, synthesize the linked data,
and enhance the missing data in the original data file (as is currently be-
ing attempted for the HRS and Supplemental Security Insurance (SSI)
variables). For that application, the plan is to take some HRS public-use
data and the SSI data and then create a full synthesis of that data set.Although the method of generating synthetic data sets is compu-tationally intensive, Raghunathan emphasized that these multiple data
sets can be analyzed using existing software packages with little addi-
tional effort. Moreover, he suggested, users of synthetic data should be
able to construct an unbiased estimate from the altered data without
knowing what exact alteration procedure was used to protect confidenti-
ality.John Rust, serving as the formal discussant, agreed withRaghunathanÕs goal of being able to have some statistical procedure that
protects confidentiality without altering inference, but he expressed
strong distrust of any completely mechanistic procedure to generate syn-
thetic samples. He said that multiple imputation methods might work for
some data sets, but he sees many problems with the application of this
approach to such complex data as, for example, the HRS.During the general discussion, Michael Hurd suggestedÑand severalother discussants supportedÑthe idea of an experiment whereby mul-
tiple data sets are imputed from actual data, and then one group of re-
searchers analyses the actual data, while another group does the sameExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A105analysis on the synthetic data. Then the differences between their resultscould be compared. Discussants agreed that such a test would provide a
lot of valuable information. John Abowd said that such experiments are
already under way at the Census Bureau, with a link between data from
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and detailed So-
cial Security earnings records and other administrative data from the SSA.
An extension of the above experiment, proposed by George Duncan,
would be to also bring in data snoopers, using whatever tools they might
have, to try to identify records in both data sets.SESSION V:EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENTS OF THE BENEFITS OF RESEARCHACCESS TO LONGITUDINAL MICRODATA
John Bailar presented a paper, ÒThe Role of Data Access in ScientificReplication,Ó that describes the underlying issues raised by the role of
access to data in scientific replication and, more broadly, the value of sci-
entific replication. His focus was on data generated by nongovernmental
sources, primarily in academia, and balancing the concerns of those who
generate the data against the public interest in broader use. He noted that
the state of understanding about this aspect of academic research is no-
where near as advanced as thinking about confidentiality of and access to
federal microdata.Bailar addressed several conflicts that arise in the context of data ac-cess in scientific replication. One such conflict is that society has a strong
interest both in protecting privacy and confidentiality and in assuring that
scientific findings and interpretations are as close to correct as the state of
the art allows. Another conflict is that much research information has per-
sonal and proprietary value, which creates barriers to broad access to the
data. A third conflict reflects the fact that data are the stock in trade for
most research scientists, and scientific rewards are based almost exclu-
sively on the generation and interpretation of data.Bailar concluded with several propositions. First, few researchers
would be happy to give away their final dataÑand especially the inter-
mediate products of their investigationsÑif the products of their work
are going to be examined by hostile interests bent on destroying the cred-
ibility of the findings. Nor is hostile scrutiny likely to advance the state of
the science. It may discourage the best scientists from engaging in certain
kinds of work that could lead to loss of exclusive access to data. Bailar
strongly opposed the view that hostile examination is the best way to
uncover the truth. Broad data access also raises questions about being
scooped by competitors. Although this is certainly a big concern to re-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAsearchers and often a barrier to sharing the data, it may have little effecton practice for the simple reason that if nobody generates data, every-
body will soon be out of business.BailarÕs second proposition was that the people who are good at gen-erating data are not always the best at analyzing the data. He suggested
that there may often be good reasons (though with some limitations) for
separation of support for data generation from that for analysis. One limi-
tation is that such separation should be considered case by case. He also
noted that those who generate data are not always diligent about com-
pleting their own work and making the results public.Charles Brown presented the sessionÕs second paper, ÒThe Value ofLongitudinal Data for Public Policy Decisions that Have Been Taken over
Time,Ó which assessed the effects of research that uses longitudinal data
on public policy. Assessing the effects on policy is more difficult than
assessing the effects on academic research: legislators (and other decision
makers) rarely cite academic papers and, when they do refer to academic
work, it is fair to question whether the research changed the vote (or pro-
gram decision) or whether the vote (or decision) was based on other con-
siderations, which simply prompted reference to supporting research.
However, Brown did attempt to identify policy-related findings based on
longitudinal data and to ask whether policy appears to have responded to
such findings.Longitudinal data can make two contributions to research. First, theyallow more accurate reporting of transitions between states, durations in
a particular state, and changes in variables of interest than is typically
possible from a single cross-sectional data collection. Second, longitudi-
nal data allow a researcher to control for otherwise-omitted variation in
outcomes among individuals, as long as this variation is constant for given
individuals. Both of these contributions are evident in the examples dis-
cussed in BrownÕs paper, drawn from five policy areas: welfare reform,
job training, unemployment insurance, preschool programs, and retire-
ment.Though longitudinal data have played an important role in thesepolicy areas, the contribution of research is constrained by a fundamental
and inherent tensionÑpolicy research often demands prompt Òanswers,Ó
and longitudinal data take time to be collected. Brown made several sug-
gestions that he said would be particularly helpful for strengthening the
contributions of longitudinal microdata to policy analysis:¥Persistence in studying long-run effects. Often, because of fund-ing issues, data are not collected over a long enough period to fully ex-
ploit the opportunities to study long-run effects.¥Mining regulatory data. Academic researchers can make impor-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A107tant contributions to policy debates about regulatory activities if moredata can be made available.¥Matching. Data linking opens up many research opportunities.As an example, creation of data about firms matched to workersÕ records
would be extremely helpful to a range of research questions about busi-
ness dynamics and the economy.Dan Newlon, the formal discussant for the session, agreed with JohnBailar that researchers should, on publishing their results, make data
available at data archives, so that researchers who want to verify the re-
sults or extend them can do so. Newlon pointed out that the NSF funded
a study by Bill Dewald, then editor of the Journal of Money, Credit, andBanking, of the replicability of research results published in the journal.The disturbing surprise was that a third of the authors were unable or
unwilling to provide data to support their published results. Another third
of authors provided data, but without adequate documentation, so that it
was impossible to replicate the published results.Newlon disagreed with BailarÕs position that researchers should notbe forced to share their data with others and that the value of giving other
researchers access to data was outweighed by the possibility of critical
scrutiny that would require investigators to divert energy, time, and ef-
fort away from their own research. Newlon explained the essence of the
current NSF policy on data sharing: there is a grace period, but once a
researcherÕs grant is finished and the researcher has started publishing
results based on those data, then the data are expected to be in the public
domain so others can use the data and extend and check the validity of
the results.During the open discussion, Richard Suzman provided another ex-ample of when replication in the form of a meta-analysis has been done
and is neededÑresearch on the levels of disability in the older popula-
tion, and trends of disability. Many studies have been done, and they pro-
vide very different results. There have been concerns that some survey
results could not be replicated: the issue is not just one of making the data
available, but also of making the documentation clear.Keith Rust pointed out that the Journal of Applied Econometrics has anonline data archive, and the journal just introduced a replication policy as
well, which encourages submission of articles replicating results. Suzman
supported the idea of withholding some fraction of a grant award that
involves data collection (to ensure funds to make the data available), al-
though there are a few data sets that, if they had to be shared, would
never be collected in the first place. He also recommended reprinting both
ÒSharing Research DataÓ (National Research Council, 1985) and ÒPrivateLives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Sta-Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAtisticsÓ (National Research Council, 1993) and using them as a requiredcomponent in training grants.Richard Rockwell commented on the costs to data producers ofarchiving data. In his experience, almost all of these very real costs re-
volve around the documentation, not the data. For replication, and for
secondary analysis of all sorts, researchers and data producers need fund-
ing to enable them to archive their data in a usable form.Trivellore Raghunathan added the point that the current situation
with data sharing is much better in social science than in medical science,
where the prevailing attitude seems to be that Òit is my data, and I have a
25-year plan for the data analysis, and only after the data-analysis plan is
exhausted can I think about sharing the data.Ó He said he finds it disturb-
ing that policy decisions can be made on the basis of some data analyses,
but researchers and others cannot verify and replicate the findings that
underpin those decisions.SESSION VI:ASSESSING RESEARCH AND POLICY NEEDSAND CONFIDENTIALITY CONCERNSÑ
THE ECONOMICS OF DATA ACCESSThe final session of the workshop was designed to facilitate discus-sion of the tradeoff between societal benefits of data dissemination and
confidentiality concerns. It began with the presentation of a paper by
Ramon Barquin (coauthored by Clayton Northouse), ÒData Collection and
Analysis: Balancing Individual Rights and Societal Benefits.Ó Barquin fo-
cused on government data collections, which provide the basis for ana-
lyzing factors involved in such issues as poverty, health care, education,
traffic, public safety, and the environment. He described five benefits of
data dissemination:¥The wide dissemination of government statistical data informspolicy research.¥The findings that emerge from the analysis of statistical data un-dergo reexamination and reinvigoration when disseminated to the re-
search community; this process improves data quality by exposing errors.¥Data that are used for one purpose can be put to other uses with-out substantial investments in new data collection. In addition, data can
be combined and result in much more powerful tools for examining the
problems facing society.¥When research techniques are shared along with the data, the re-search community and other data centers improve and hone their own
techniques.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A109¥When data are shared with the research community, it will ac-tively involve researchers in the problems confronting the nation and
policy makers.Barquin outlined a framework for how government agencies can at-tempt to balance the privacy concerns of the individual with the societal
good generated from the use of data, offering three guidelines. First, es-
tablishing contractual relations with nongovernmental researchers offers
a wealth of opportunity without causing undue risks to privacy and con-
fidentiality. The process of applying for and receiving unfettered access to
limited sets of government statistical data should force researchers to fully
justify their projects and should demonstrate why it is necessary for the
researcher to have access to all the data, rather than to a restricted set of
the data with identifiers blurred or stripped. The contract should also rig-
orously uphold the principles of informational privacy, namely, security,
accountability, and consent. Second, the Census BureauÕs efforts to estab-
lish research data centers across the United States offer a fruitful opportu-
nity to share Census Bureau data and provide a good model for the shar-
ing of other types of government statistical data. Third, ultimately, in
balancing the public good and individual rights, data collection institu-
tions must effectively manage the three components of this balance: they
must supply the technology, provide the correct policy, and cultivate an
ethical environment of good will and trust.Julia Lane presented a paper (coauthored with John Abowd), ÒTheEconomics of Data Confidentiality,Ó in which she focused on cost-benefit
analysis of data dissemination and confidentiality. In considering how
statistical agencies might pursue optimal policies, Lane stated that this
goal relies on accurate assessment of the benefits derived from the use of
such data, the risks of access (and other costs), and the tradeoff between
the two.Lane noted the substantial social benefits associated with releasingmicrodata (benefits that are not always realized by the statistical insti-
tutes themselves), citing examples similar to those noted by other pre-
senters:¥it permits analysis of complex questions;¥it allow researchers to calculate marginal, not just average effects;¥it creates scientific safeguards when it ensures that other scien-tists can replicate research findings;¥it promotes improvements to data quality: although statistical in-stitutes expend enormous resources to ensure that they produce the best
feasible product, there is no substitute for actual research use of microdata
to identify data anomalies;Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATA¥it promotes development of a core constituency: the funding of astatistical agency depends on the development of a constituency and
greater use of data, which includes the creation of new products from
existing data and fosters a broader constituency beyond those who di-
rectly have access to the data.There are three costs of microdata use that must be weighed againstthe benefits of providing access. First is the cost of providing access.
Clearly, the cost of providing access depends on the modality, and several
have been developed by statistical institutes across the world: public-use
microdata, licensing, remote access systems, and research data centers.
The second cost is that of reputation. Most agencies expend enormous
effort to make sure that published statistics with their imprimatur are of a
high quality and take precautions to protect the confidentiality of the data;
they would also have to expend sufficient funds to provide access. The
third cost is that of the potential disclosure of respondent identities. The
ultimate cost to an agency is for an external researcher to disclose the
identity of a business or individual respondent. While the penalties for
this are typically substantialÑranging up to 10 years in jail and a $250,000
fine in the United StatesÑthe consequences of such a breach could be
devastating to respondent trust and response rates.Lane said it is clear that statistical agencies will increasingly be chal-lenged to provide more access to microdata. This pressure provides a
chance to fulfill a critical societal mission. However, since increased ac-
cess does not come without increased costs, it would seem reasonable to
try to control these costs by combining research efforts. Some areas in
which joint research and development might provide substantial divi-
dends, for example, include:¥the creation of inference-valid synthetic data sets;¥the protection of microdata that are integrated across several di-mensions (such as workers, firms, and geography);¥the quantification of the risk-quality tradeoff in confidentiality
protection approaches; and¥the effect on response rates of increased microdata access.Michael Hurd served as the discussant for the Barquin and Lane pre-sentations. Commenting on BarquinÕs paper, he expressed the view that,
although the issues of ethics and trust are important, self-interest is a pow-
erful mechanism limiting the risk of data disclosure. For an academic re-
searcher, being involved in data disclosure through improper use of data
would seriously impair that personÕs career.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A111Hurd noted that one omission from both papers is the role of trainingand education. Researchers ought to be trained in ethics, but they also
ought to be continually trained in proper procedures, so that they are
aware that this is a serious issue.On the Abowd and Lane paper Hurd remarked that, at the individuallevel, researchers want more data, and the reason they want more data is
that they get great benefits from more data but bear very little of the cost
if something goes wrong. In contrast, agencies are more or less in the op-
posite position. This creates the tension between the two groups. In econo-
mistsÕ terms, those interests need to be internalized in a utility framework
in which, as a society, people can make a more informed decision that
benefits society rather than the individual actors, namely, the researchers
and the agencies. John Rust suggested broadening the two dimensions
and including politics, which is another form of self-interest; it provides
incentives that determine not just what data are released, but what data
are collected. This political dimension can also drive the enterprise to in-
efficient solutions.Abowd argued that one of the distinctions that Lane and he are tryingto make is to distinguish the different analytic frameworks that econo-
mists and statisticians bring to this problemÑnot because they are in con-
flict, but because they actually are thinking about two different parts of
the problem. Abowd said that statisticians have helped enormously in
quantifying the tradeoffs in data production associated with risk mea-
sures and the information-loss measures from the basic data. But the eco-
nomic tradeoffs involve other considerations, such as the benefits to soci-
ety of research and the costs to individuals of disclosure.Newlon noted that one needs to distinguish between academic usersand other users. In the case of the academic user, there are reputational
effects. In the Nordic countries, an academic researcher does not have to
have a sworn status to access the data that government employees have
because the academic user is viewed as part of the same research and
policy advisory community. That is the kind of long-term goal he would
like to see emerge.Suzman raised the sociological issue of what sorts of data people donÕtwant to be released about themselves, and why. There seem to be huge
variations in what can and cannot be asked among different people or
groups. The ethos of what people consider to be confidential is simply not
understood. For example, in some states property values and property
taxes are publicly available on the Web, yet these appear to be Òconfiden-
tialÓ data in other states. That is an area that requires more study.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAPAPERS AND PARTICIPANTSAuthors and PapersJohn M. Abowd and Julia Lane, ÒThe Economics of Data ConfidentialityÓJohn Bailar, ÒThe Role of Data Access in Scientific ReplicationÓ
Ramon Barquin and Clayton Northouse, ÒData Collection and Analysis:Balancing Individual Rights and Societal BenefitsÓCharles Brown, ÒThe Value of Longitudinal Data for Public Policy Deci-sions that Have Been Taken over TimeÓAndrew Hildreth, ÒThe Census Research Data Center Network: Problems,Possibilities and PrecedentsÓDavid McMillen, ÒPrivacy, Confidentiality, and Data SharingÓ
Henry H. Perritt, Jr., ÒEfficacy of Different Theories of EnforcementÓ
Trivellore Raghunathan, ÒEvaluation of Inferences from Multiple Syn-thetic Data Sets Created Using a Semiparametric ApproachÓJerome Reiter, ÒEstimating Probabilities of Identification for MicrodataÓ
Sandra Rowland, ÒAn Examination of Monitored, Remote Microdata Ac-cess SystemsÓMarilyn Seastrom, Candice Wright, and John Melnicki, ÒThe Role of Li-censing and Enforcement Mechanisms in Promoting Access and
Protecting ConfidentialityÓWilliam Seltzer and Margo Anderson, ÒGovernment Statistics and Indi-vidual Safety: Revisiting the Historical Record of Disclosure, Harm
and RiskÓParticipantsJohn M. Abowd (panel member) is Edmund Ezra Day professor ofindustrial and labor relations at Cornell University, director of the Cornell
Institute for Social and Economic Research (CISER), and a distinguished
senior research fellow at the U.S. Census Bureau.Margo Anderson is a professor of history and director of the UrbanStudies Program at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.John Bailar is professor emeritus at the University of Chicago. Hisresearch is in the fields of medicine and statistics, and he has written ex-
tensively about science conduct and ethics.Ramon Barquin is president of Barquin International and was previ-ously the first president of the Data Warehouse Institute. His work is di-
rected to developing information system strategies and data warehousing
for the public and private sectors.Charles Brown is a professor of economics and program director atExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A113the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan whose researchfocuses on a wide range of topics in empirical labor economics.Joe S. Cecil (panel member) is project director in the Program on Sci-entific and Technical Evidence of the Division of Research at the Federal
Judicial Center. He is responsible for judicial education and training in
the area of scientific and technical evidence.George T. Duncan (panel member) is a professor of statistics in the H.John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management and the Depart-
ment of Statistics at Carnegie Mellon University.Andrew Hildreth is research director at the California Census Re-search Data Center and a professor in the Department of Economics at the
University of California at Berkeley.V. Joseph Hotz (panel member) is a professor and chair of the De-partment of Economics at the University of California at Los Angeles.Michael Hurd (panel member) is senior economist and director forthe RAND Center for the Study of Aging.J. Bradford Jensen is deputy director of the Institute for InternationalEconomics, having recently moved there from serving as director of the
Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Census Bureau. At the Census
Bureau, he directed the centerÕs internal and external research programs,
managed its Research Data Center network, and supervised its relation-
ships with collaborating universities and research organizations.Diane Lambert (panel member) is the director of statistics and datamining research at Bell Labs.  She has made seminal contributions to fun-

damental statistics theory and methods and has been a leader in defining
a role for statistics in data mining and massive data problems.Julia Lane is a principal research associate in the Labor and SocialPolicy Center at the Urban Institute, concentrating in the areas of income
and wealth distribution, labor markets, employment, and education. Michael Larsen is a professor in the Department of Statistics at IowaState, working in the areas of survey sampling, administrative records
and record linkage, missing data problems, finite mixture models
and latent class models, small-area estimation, and Bayesian statistical
modeling.David McMillen is the information and government organizationspecialist with the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight,
U.S. House of Representatives, and the government information special-
ist for Henry A. Waxman (D-CA). He covers issues involving the collec-
tion, dissemination, and preservation of government information, and
he has worked extensively on legislation relating to confidentiality and
data sharing.John Melnicki is president and CEO of Harbor Lane Associates, Inc.,Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAin Washington, D.C. In addition, he is the senior security advisor for re-stricted data for the U.S. Department of Education, the National Science
Foundation, and various research and educational institutions around the
world.Dan Newlon is program director for economic science at the U.S.National Science Foundation, where his job is to select directions for in-
vestment in research.Henry H. Perritt, Jr., is a professor of law and vice provost at theIllinois Institute of Technology and director of the Center for Law and
Financial Markets at Chicago-Kent College of Law.Jerome Reiter is a professor at the Institute of Statistics and DecisionSciences at  Duke University. He has worked with the U.S. Census Bureau

and recently joined the Digital Government Project of the National Insti-
tute of Statistical Sciences. Trivellore Raghunathan is a research professor at the Institute forSocial Research and professor of biostatistics, both at the University of
Michigan.Richard C. Rockwell (panel member) is a professor of sociology atthe University of Connecticut.Sandra Rowland recently retired from the U.S. Census Bureau, whereshe was the Internet data dissemination system team leader. Among other
duties, she managed the advance query interactive web system.John Rust is a professor of economics at the University of Maryland,with major research interests in numerical dynamic programming and
retirement behavior.Marilyn Seastrom is chief statistician and program director for theStatistical Standards Program at the National Center for Education Statis-
tics, U.S. Department of Education. She has written extensively on data
access, licensing, and confidentiality issues.William Seltzer is a senior research scholar at the Institute for SocialResearch of the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Fordham
University.Eleanor Singer (panel chair) is a research professor at the Survey Re-search Center of the Institute for Social Research at the University of
Michigan.  Her research focuses on motivation for survey participation

and has touched on many of the important issues in survey methodology,
such as informed consent, incentives, interviewer effects, and nonresponse
bias.Richard Suzman is associate director for Behavioral and Social Re-search at the National Institute on Aging (NIA). Suzman developed NIAÕs
Economics of Aging program, one of the first of its kind to look at socio-
economic factors and health.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A115Katherine Wallman is chief statistician at the U.S. Office of Manage-ment and Budget. She is responsible for overseeing and coordinating fed-

eral statistical policies, standards, and programs; developing and foster-
ing long-term improvements in federal statistical activities; and
representing the federal government in international organizations.Candice Wright is an analyst at the U.S. Office of Management andBudget. She recently completed her M.S. in public policy from Carnegie
Mellon University and holds a B.S. in management from Bentley College.
Her current interests include data privacy and information security.Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116APPENDIXBBiographical Sketches ofPanel Members and Staff
Eleanor Singer (Chair) is a research professor at the Survey Research Cen-ter of the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. Her
research focuses on motivation for survey participation and has touched
on many of the important issues in survey methodology, such as informed
consent, incentives, interviewer effects, and nonresponse bias. Two of her
major studies examined the role of privacy and confidentiality concerns
as factors in response to the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses, and she
was a member of the National Academies panel that produced PrivateLives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Sta-
tistics. She is most recently a coauthor of Survey Methodology (with RobertM. Groves and others) and a coeditor of Methods for Testing and EvaluatingSurvey Questionnaires (with Stanley Presser and others). She is a past presi-dent of the American Association for Public Opinion Research and a re-
cipient of its award for exceptionally distinguished achievement. She
holds a B.A. degree from Queens College and a Ph.D. degree in sociology
from Columbia University.John M. Abowd is the Edmund Ezra Day professor of industrial and la-bor relations at Cornell University and director of the universityÕs Insti-
tute for Social and Economic Research. He is also a distinguished senior
research fellow at the U.S. Census Bureau, a research associate at the Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, MA, and a research
affiliate at theCentre de Recherche en Economie et Statistiquein Paris,

France.Previously, he was also on the faculty of CornellÕs Johnson Gradu-

ate School of Management.Professor AbowdÕs current research focuses
Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B117on the creation and use of linked, longitudinal data on employees andemployers.His other research interests include international comparisons

of labor market outcomes; executive compensation, again with a focus on
international comparisons; bargaining and other wage-setting institutions;
and the econometric tools of labor market analysis.Joe C. Cecil is project director of the Program on Scientific and TechnicalEvidence in the Division of Research of the Federal Judicial Center (FJC),
in Washington, DC. In that position he is responsible for judicial educa-
tion and training about scientific and technical evidence and the lead staff
for the FJCÕs Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence, which is the pri-
mary source book on scientific evidence for federal judges. He is the au-
thor of numerous publications concerning legal standards affecting ex-
change of information for research purposes. Other areas of interest
include the use of scientific and technical evidence in litigation, variations
in procedures used by federal courts of appeals, and management of mass
tort litigation. He holds a Ph.D. degree in psychology and a J.D. degree,
both from Northwestern University.Constance F. Citro (Staff Director) is director of the Committee on Na-tional Statistics. She is a former vice president and deputy director of
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., and was an American Statistical Asso-
ciation/National Science Foundation research fellow at the U.S. Census
Bureau. For the committee, she has served as study director for numerous
projects, including the Panel to Review the 2000 Census, the Panel on Es-
timates of Poverty for Small Geographic Areas, the Panel on Poverty and
Family Assistance, the Panel to Evaluate the Survey of Income and Pro-
gram Participation, the Panel to Evaluate Microsimulation Models for So-
cial Welfare Programs, and the Panel on Decennial Census Methodology.
Her research has focused on the quality and accessibility of large, com-
plex microdata files, as well as analysis related to income and poverty
measurement. She is a fellow of the American Statistical Association. She
has a B.A. degree from the University of Rochester and M.A. and Ph.D.
degrees in political science from Yale University.George T. Duncan is a professor of statistics in the H. John Heinz IIISchool of Public Policy and Management and the Department of Statistics
at Carnegie Mellon University. His current research work centers on in-
formation technology and social accountability. He has lectured in Brazil,
Italy, Turkey, Ireland, Mexico and Japan, among other places. Duncan
chaired the Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access of the National
Academies (1989-1993), which produced Private Lives and Public Policies:Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statistics, and he chaired theExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAAmerican Statistical AssociationÕs Committee on Privacy and Confidenti-ality. He is a fellow of the American Statistical Association, an elected
member of the International Statistical Institute, and a Fellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1996 he was
elected Pittsburgh Statistician of the Year by the American Statistical Asso-ciation. He received B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Chicago
and a Ph.D. degree from the University of Minnesota, all in statistics.Eugenia Grohman (Study Director) is associate executive director of theDivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education at the National
Research Council. She served as study director for the panel during the
last stages of its work. She has worked on many previous reports of the
Committee on National Statistics, including Sharing Research Data and Pri-vate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government
Statistics. She attended the University of Chicago and received a B.A. de-gree in political science from the University of California at Los Angeles.V. Joseph Hotz is a professor in the Department of Economics at the Uni-versity of California at Los Angeles. He also serves as a principal investi-
gator of the California Census Research Data Center. His work concen-
trates on the economics of the family, applied econometrics, and the
evaluation of social programs. His extensive published work has exam-
ined the relationship between the labor force participation and childbear-
ing patterns of married women; the effect of working while in school on
the subsequent wages of men in the United States; and methods for as-
sessing the causal effects of social programs. His most recent work has
focused on assessing the effects of child care regulations on childrenÕs
accident rates; the effects of welfare-to-work programs on the labor mar-
ket successes of past welfare recipients; the strategic interactions of par-
ents and adolescents over the lattersÕ engagement in risky behavior; and
evaluation of the employment effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) Program.Michael Hurd is senior economist and director for the Center for theStudy of Aging of RAND and a research associate at the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Previously, he was professor of economics at the
State University of New York at Stony Brook. He is a member of the Na-
tional Academy of Social Insurance, the steering committee for the Health
and Retirement Study, and he was a member of the Technical Panel for
the Social Security Advisory Council in 1990-1991. He has served as con-
sultant to the National Institute on Aging on re-interviewing in the Retire-
ment History Survey and to the Social Security Administration on re-
interviewing in the New Beneficiary Survey. His research involves income
Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B119and wealth of the elderly and pensions and retirement economics. He re-ceived a Ph.D. degree in economics from the University of California at
Berkeley.Diane Lambert is the director of statistics and data mining research atBell Labs. She has made seminal contributions to fundamental statistics
theory and methods and has been a leader in defining a role for statistics
in data mining and massive data problems. She continues to introduce
significant technological innovations in statistics, as well as fostering a
close relationship between research and various business units. Lambert
holds five patents. She previously served as editor of the Journal of theAmerican Statistical Association, and she is a fellow of both the AmericanStatistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Sciences. She
holds a Ph.D. degree from the University of Rochester in New York.Christopher Mackie (Study Director) is on the staff of the Committee onNational Statistics and served as study director for most of the panelÕs
life. He served as study director for a number of economic measurement
projects, including those that produced the reports, At What Price? Con-ceptualizing and Measuring Cost-of-Living and Price Indexes, and Beyond theMarket: Designing Nonmarket Accounts for the United States. Prior to joiningCNSTAT, he was a senior economist with SAG Corporation, where he
conducted a variety of econometric studies in the areas of labor and per-
sonnel economics, primarily for federal agencies. He is the author of Can-onizing Economic Theory. He has a Ph.D. in economics from the Universityof North Carolina and has held teaching positions at the University of
North Carolina, North Carolina State University, and Tulane University.Kenneth Prewitt is the Carnegie professor of public affairs at the Schoolof International and Public Affairs at Columbia University. He was direc-
tor of the U.S. Census Bureau from 1998 to January 2001. His government
service followed a career in higher education and private philanthropy,
including: president of the Social Science Research Council, senior vice
president of the Rockefeller Foundation, director of the National Opinion
Research Center, based at the University of Chicago, and professorships
at the University of Chicago, Stanford University, Washington Univer-
sity, the University of Nairobi, and Makerere University in Uganda. His
current research is on the policy consequences of racial classification in
official statistics, and he recently published Science and Politics in Census-Taking. He holds a Ph.D. degree from Stanford University.Richard Rockwell is a professor of sociology at the University of Con-necticut. Previously, he was executive director of the Institute for SocialExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120EXPANDING ACCESS TO RESEARCH DATAInquiry/Roper Center for Public Opinion Research and director of theInter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research at the Uni-
versity of Michigan. One of the nationÕs foremost experts on social science
and public opinion research, he has published numerous articles on social
science methodology and has designed related software programs. He
holds a Ph.D. degree in sociology from the University of Texas at Austin.