DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11458Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology toEnhance Disaster Management39 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10037-3 | DOI 10.17226/11458Committee on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster Management;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; National Research CouncilSummary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on UsingInformation Technology to Enhance
Disaster ManagementCommittee on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.
www.nap.eduSummary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS    500 Fifth Street, N.W.    Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of 
the National Research Council, whose members 
are drawn from the councils of the National 
Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
neering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the repor
t were chosen for their special competences 
and with regard for appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by Battelle Memorial
 Institute under subcontract number 189936 to a 
contract between the Federal Emergency Manageme
nt Agency and Battelle Memorial Institute.  
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda
tions expressed in this publication are those 
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations and agencies that 
provided support for the project. 
 
International Standard Book
 Number 0-309-10037-2 (Book) 
International Standard Book Number 0-309-65436-X (PDF) 

 Cover designed by Jennifer M. Bishop. 
 
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, 

N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the 

Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu. 

 Copyright 2005 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 

  Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and e
ngineering research, dedicated to the furtherance 
of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the 
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to 
advise the federal government on scientific and t
echnical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel or
ganization of outstanding engineers.  It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the selec
tion of its members, sharing with the National 
Academy of Sciences the responsibility for ad
vising the federal government.  The National 
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
ing programs aimed at m
eeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes th
e superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. 
Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to 
secure the services of eminent members of appropr
iate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health of the public. 
 The Institute acts under the responsibility given to 
the National Academy of Sciences by its congressiona
l charter to be an adviser to the federal 
government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is 
president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 
furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance with 
general policies determined by the Academy, 
the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Scien
ces and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, an
d the scientific and engineering communities.  
The Council is administered jointly by both Academ
ies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph 
J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research 
Council.  www.national-academies.org 
. Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv COMMITTEE ON USING INFORMATIO
N TECHNOLOGY TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 RAMESH R. RAO, University of California, San Diego, 
Chair YIGAL ARENS, University of Southern California 
ART BOTTERELL, incident.com  

TIMOTHY X BROWN, University of Colorado, Boulder 

JOHN R. HARRALD, George Washington University 
RICHARD HOWARD, Rutgers University 
NANCY JESUALE, NetCity Engineering, Inc. 

DAVID KEHRLEIN, Environmental Science Research Institute 

WILLIAM MAHEU, San Diego, California, Police Department 

ROBIN R. MURPHY, University of South Florida 

ROBERT NECHES, University of Southern California 
MASANOBU SHINOZUKA, University of California, Irvine 
ELLIS STANLEY, City of Los Angeles 

PETER STEENKISTE, Carnegie Mellon University 

GIO WIEDERHOLD, Stanford University 

 
Staff 
 JON EISENBERG, Study Director and Senior Program Officer 
TED SCHMITT, CSTB Staff Consultant 
GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program Assistant 

JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD 
 JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair ERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC 

DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
CSTB Chair Emeritus WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University 

MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center 

DAVID J. DEWITT, University of Wisconsin, Madison 

DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles 
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University 
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation 

JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation 

MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley 

RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley 
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University 
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, 
CSTB Member Emeritus TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University 

TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University 

FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University 
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University 
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC 

JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University 

 
RICHARD E. ROWBERG, Acting Director  

JON EISENBERG, Acting Associate Director 
KRISTEN BATCH, Research Associate 
JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate 

JANET BRISCOE, Manager, Program Operations 

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate 

MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant 
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer 

JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant 

GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program Assistant 

BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff Assistant 

 For more information on CSTB, see its Web site
 at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,  National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, 
N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, 
or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu. 
 
  Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  vii  Preface   
   
 
 
   
 
 Section 214 of the E-government Act of 2002 called on the Administrator of the Office of 
Electronic Government in the Office of Management
 and Budget, in consu
ltation with the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), to ﬁen
sure that a study is conducted on using 
information technology to enhance crisis prepar
edness, response, and consequence management 
of natural and manmade disastersﬂ (Box P.1)
.  The section cited as a goal ﬁto improve how 
information technology is used in coordi
nating and facilitating information on disaster 
preparedness, response, and recovery, while ensu
ring the availability of such information across 
multiple access channels.ﬂ  In early 2005, FEMA,
 via a subcontract through Battelle Memorial 
Institute, asked the Computer Science and Tel
ecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National 
Research Council (NRC) to undertake a two-phase study on these issues. 
This report culminates phase 1 of the project.  CSTB established the Committee on Using 
Information Technology to Enhance Disaster 
Management, and a public workshop was held 
under the committee™s auspices on June 22-23, 2005.
  A variety of representatives of federal, 
state, and local government agencies, private indus
try, and the research community participated.  
The workshop agenda is given in Appendix A. 
 Appendix B includes biographical information for 
committee members and staff. 
The committee™s goal for the workshop was to 
establish a base of information for its 
study by hearing about present and future uses of 
IT from the perspective of federal, state, and 
local disaster management officials and users together with a sampling of relevant IT research 

and development activities.  Panelists at the workshop were given roughly 15 minutes to provide 
their views on a set of questions (listed by pane
l or topic in Appendix A) posed in advance 
regarding the use of information technology to 
enhance disaster management.  They presented a 
range of views on the present state of the art and practice and future opportunities to harness 
information technology to aid in the management
 of natural and human-made disasters.  The 
slides (unedited and unreviewed by the NRC) prepar
ed by many of the speakers for use in their 
presentations are available from CSTB™s Web site at http://www.cstb.org.   
This report summarizes some of the key points 
made by workshop participants.  In phase 
2 of its study, the committee will supplement the inputs received at the workshop with 
information gathered at several site visits 
and a series of additional briefings.  Phase 2 will 
culminate in a final report, expected in spring 2006, that provides findings and recommendations 
on requirements for effective use of informati
on technology for disaster management, research 
and development needs and opportunities, and 
related research management and technology 
transition considerations.   The committee thanks all of the workshop participants for their thoughtful presentations  
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii BOX P.1  Section 214 of the E-Government Act of 2002, Public Law 107-347 
 SEC. 214. ENHANCING CRISIS MANAGEMENT THROUGH ADVANCED 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  (a) PURPOSE
.ŠThe purpose of this section is to im
prove how information technology is 
used in coordinating and facilitating informa
tion on disaster preparedness, response, and 
recovery, while ensuring the availability of su
ch information across multiple access channels. 
(b) IN GENERAL.Š (1) STUDY ON ENHANCEMENT OF CRISIS RESPONSE
.ŠNot later than 90 days after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Admi
nistrator, in consultation with the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, shall ensu
re that a study is conducted on using 
information technology to enhance crisis 
preparedness, response, and consequence 
management of natural and manmade disasters. 
(2) CONTENTS.ŠThe study under this subsection shall addressŠ (A) a research and implementation strategy for effective use of 
information technology in crisis re
sponse and consequence management, 
including the more effective use of technologies, management of information 

technology research initiatives, and incorporation of research advances into the 
information and communications systems ofŠ 
(i) the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 

(ii) other Federal, State, and local agencies responsible for crisis 
preparedness, response, and consequence management; and 
(B) opportunities for research and development on enhanced 
technologies into areas of potential improvement as determined during the course 
of the study. 

(3) REPORT
.ŠNot later than 2 years after the date on which a contract is entered 
into under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall submit a report on the study, 

including findings and recommendations toŠ 
(A) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate; and 

(B) the Committee on Government Reform of the House of 
Representatives. 

(4) INTERAGENCY COOPERATION
.ŠOther Federal departments and agencies with 
responsibility for disaster relief and emergenc
y assistance shall fully cooperate with the 
Administrator in carrying out this section. 
(5) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
.ŠThere are authorized to be 
appropriated for research under this subsection,
 such sums as are necessary for fiscal year 
2003. 

(c) PILOT PROJECTS.ŠBased on the results of the r
esearch conducted under subsection (b), the Administrator, in consultation with 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall 
initiate pilot projects or report to Congress on othe
r activities that further the goal of maximizing 
the utility of information technology in disaster 
management. The Administrator shall cooperate 
with other relevant agencies, and, if appropriate, State, local, and tribal governments, in initiating 
such pilot projects. 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  ixand discussion, as well as FEMA for sponsoring the workshop, and it extends special thanks to 
Chip Hines at FEMA for all his help in making this project possible. 
While this report was being completed, Hurri
cane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast of the 
United States.  In the days following the hurri
cane™s landfall, damage to the communications 
infrastructure, together with a host of other co
mmunications and information concerns, was cited 
by decision makers and reported on in the press as among the major challenges facing those 

involved in response and recovery efforts.  Th
e tragic events occurring in Katrina™s wake 
underscore the importance of information tec
hnology in disaster management, the interplay 
between technical and organizational considera
tions, and the contributions that research and 
development in these areas could make to future disaster preparedness and response. 
  Ramesh R. Rao, 
Chair Committee on Using Information Technology 
to Enhance Disaster Management 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. x   Acknowledgment of Reviewers   
   
 
 
   
 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Research Council™s Report Review Committee.  Th
e purpose of this independent review is to 
provide candid and critical comments that will assist
 the institution in making its published report 
as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, 

evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain confidential to protect the integrity of 
the deliberative process. We wish to thank the 
following individuals for their review of this report: 
 
Otto Doll, Bureau of Information and Te
lecommunications, State of South Dakota, 
Deborah Estrin, University of California, Los Angeles, and 

William ﬁAlﬂ Wallace, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
 Although the reviewers listed above prov
ided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse th
e conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see 
the final draft of the report before its release. 
 The review of this report was overseen by Craig 
Partridge, BBN Technologies.  Appointed by the 
National Research Council, he was responsible 
for making certain that an independent examina
tion of this report was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that all re
view comments were carefully considered.  
Responsibility for the final content of this repor
t rests entirely with the authoring committee and 
the institution. Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xi  Contents   
   
 
 
   
 
 
SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS             1 
Topic 1:  The Critical and Evolving Role of Information Technology in Disaster 
Management, 2 
Topic 2:  Research Directions for IT in Disaster Management, 6 

Topic 3:  Collaboration, Coordination, and 
Interoperability: Pressing Issues in a Need-to-
Share World, 10 
 Appendix A Workshop Agenda                 15 

Appendix B  Biographies of Committee Members and Staff             21 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1   Summary of Remarks Made by Workshop Participants 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
On June 22-23, 2005, CSTB™s Committee on 
Using Information Technology to Enhance 
Disaster Management held a workshop in Washingt
on, D.C., to obtain perspectives on the use of 
information technology (IT)
 1 to enhance the management of natural and human-made disasters.  
Workshop participants invited as panelists incl
uded federal program managers and researchers, 
state and local officials and first responders, representatives from industry, and academic 

researchers from a variety of disciplines.  In 
addition to providing pe
rspectives on the current 
state of the art and practice, workshop presenters
 also described future opportunities to make 
better use of information technology to improve disaster management.
2 This report provides the committee™s summa
ry of key points made by workshop 
participants.  It does not aim to present co
mprehensively all the remarks made during the 
workshop.  Reflecting the workshop™s structure, 
this summary is organized to cover three major 
topic areas:  
1. The critical and evolving role of info
rmation technology in disaster management,  
2. Research directions for information technology in disaster management, and 

3. Collaboration, coordination, and interoperability: pressing issues in a need-to-share 
world.  Each topic area was covered by two or more 
panels. Highlights of the comments made by 
speakers in each topic area are pr
ovided in the sections that follow. 
One important issue that cut across all thr
ee topic areas is the capability for wireless 
communication, which plays a critical role in
 disaster management because in almost all 
situations, first responders will depend on wire
less links.  As discussed below under Topic 2, 
there are fundamental constraints to wireless communication, significant unsolved problems, and 
a number of areas of active research.  As di
scussed below under Topics 1 and 3, enhancing 
interoperability among current and future wireless sy
stems is also widely recognized as a pressing 
issue in disaster management and is the s
ubject of a number of current initiatives. 
                                                     
 1 IT is used as a shorthand in this report to 
cover both computing and communications capabilities.  
It should be understood in the context of this report as synonymous with the term information and 
communications technology, which appears at several places in the workshop program. 
2 The workshop agenda, including questions posed in advance for the panelists, is given in 
Appendix A. 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
2 TOPIC 1:   THE CRITICAL AND 
EVOLVING ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 Three panels discussed lessons learned about the effective use of IT in disaster management, technological and organizational barrier
s to the introduction and adoption of new IT 
systems, and types of IT that could be 
of particular use in disaster management. 
Panelists made a number of points charact
erizing the challenges of providing more 
interoperable communications for disaster management across federal, state, and local agencies: 
 • Most communications interoperability issues are not technical.  Better human 
organization, willingness to cooperate, and a 
willingness of government at higher levels to listen to those at local levels who really
 do the work and who are the actual responders 
are all critical factors in making better use of information technology for disaster 

management. • Adoption of new equipment and systems that 
provide greater interoperability will take a 
long time.  A speaker estimated at more than
 $60 billion the total amount invested by 
localities in their public safety communications 
infrastructure.  Such an investment can 
be replaced only over decades.  

 Discussing the federal role in improving in
teroperability, panelists observed that:  • Disaster managementŠand the supporting IT infrastructureŠis firmly rooted at the local 
level.  Local organizations provide most 
of the infrastructure, personnel, and other 
resources.  More than 90 percent of wirel
ess public safety infrastructure is owned, 
operated, and maintained by localities.  A speaker estimated that the total federal 
investment in interoperable communications represents something less than 3 percent of 

what the nation spends on public safety wire
less communications.  Local first responders 
make up the vast majority of day-to-day user
s.  Even in an event on the scale of the September 11, 2001, attacks on New York City
 and the Pentagon, the federal presence, 
which was massive by normal standards, 
represented a fraction of 1 percent of all personnel involved.  By virtue of their prim
ary responsibility and reflecting long-standing 
organizational culture, localities and their police and fire services have, and generally 
seek to maintain, control of their communications systems.   
• As a result, the federal role in improving in
teroperability is limited largely to providing 
guidance, coordination, and technical assista
nce.  The federal government could, for 
example, provide a road map, a policy framework, and an architectural framework to 
create a system of systems.  It could also support initiatives that motivate local agencies 
to move toward standards-based systems.  A number of federal programs, including the 

Department of Homeland Security™s SAFECOM, are aimed at providing such support.   
• Federal interoperability activities are diverse and themselves require coordination.  For example, the Homeland Security Act identif
ies no less than three separate agencies as 
responsible for aspects of interoperability.  Indeed, more than 60 programs deal with 
interoperability across the federal government.  The Department of Homeland Security™s 
Office for Interoperability and Compatibilit
y has created an umbrella program to 
coordinate these federal interoperability efforts.
  Interagency efforts are also underway to 
address the need for coordination.  Still needed are a road map and a more coherent 

policy framework within which federa
l agencies can work together.   
 Commenting on activities at the state and local level, panelists noted that: 
 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 3• Interoperability and coordination issues are also
 evident at the state level.  A number of states have developed statewide communications
 interoperability plans, but many thus far 
involve only the state police. 
• Localities have begun to recognize the need
 to better coordinate planning and 
communications.  This work began in the 1990s and was accelerated by the events of 
September 11, 2001.   
 A panelist also noted that interoperability and 
coordination issues also arise in the context 
of public alert systems.  The technology may exist today to create an all-hazards warning system, 
but fragmented responsibility and lack of coordina
tion would likely lead to inconsistent messages 
and/or overly broad messages instead of the desired authoritative and targeted warnings.   
Several speakers pointed to standards in 
areas such as syntax (the organization and 
structure of data) and semantics (the meaning of the data) for representing, storing, and 
transferring information as critical to better use of IT in disaster management, noting that: 
 • Standards ease interoperability and can foster
 increased information exchange and help 
lower costs.   • Even good standards will have to be changed as circumstances evolve, which places a 
premium on processes and methods that tolera
te extensibility and both incremental and 
rapid change. 
• The lack of common semantics is a huge i
nhibitor for more effective use of IT.
 3  The 
issue of data semantics boils down to the 
problem of reconciling terminology used by 
different organizations and systems so that 
data can be properly integrated.  Different 
first-responder communities (e.g., fire protecti
on, medical services, law enforcement) as 
well as different levels of government have 
different names for the same things or 
different definitions for the same terms.
  Semantics can also be different among 
neighboring jurisdictions, creating additi
onal impediments to communications and 
information sharing. 
• Implementing standards broadly is a slow process, given the time it takes to build 

consensus among the relevant communities a
nd the resources and planning required to 
replace legacy systems.  
• There are opportunities to build momentum fo
r adoption of standards as localities seek to 
reduce costs by pooling resources with regional neighbors. 
• One effective approach to bridge-building among systems and communities is to use a 

distributed architecture that is glued together by common semantics. 

 Several comments by panelists addressed th
e importance of coordinated information 
technology planning and acquisition to achieve 
greater interoperability and better-integrated 
disaster management capabilities: 
 • As jurisdictions upgrade their technology to fulfill their own acquisition plans, a stair-
stepping effect occurs, with the result that lo
calities™ systems are fre
quently incompatible 
with their neighbors™ systems.  Overcoming the effects of these mismatches requires 
better-coordinated and synchronized acquisition cycles. 
• Strategic planning on a multi-jurisdictional,
 cross-agency basis eases the burden on 
individual jurisdictions and agencies by givi
ng them a common framework within which 
                                                     
 3 A reviewer of this report in draft form ca
utioned, however, that one should not expect 
semantic problems to be resolved by significantly changing the behaviors of individual 

communities and that one should instead expect  
IT systems to adapt to this reality.   
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 4 to identify particular technologies that would be able to meet their individual 
requirements and would also be interoperable with the technologies of other communities 

and agencies.   • Localities are increasingly working together 
in regional organizations to leverage 
expertise, improve training and planning, and coordinate technology acquisition. 
Effective examples of such coordination 
cited by speakers include the Automated 
Regional Justice Information System for the San Diego region and activities under the 

auspices of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments. 
 Panelists offered several observations about the impacts of new IT on disaster 
management. 
 • Responders and emergency managers should fo
cus on the goals to be achieved rather 
than on acquiring and using technology for its own sake.  
• New IT capabilities can have a major impact 
by changing how information is used in a 
disaster.  For example, systems that are ar
chitected appropriately could allow decision 
makers at the local level to directly access (
pull) the information they seek rather than having to depend on (sometimes inappropriate
) information being pushed to them.  
 Regarding successful introduction and adoption of new information technology, the 
panelists noted the following issues: 
 • To be useful in a disaster, IT must be in rou
tine use.  In a crisis situation, people tend to 
fall back on what they are comfortable with.  Technology that is not included in planning, 
training, exercises, and standard operating procedures will not be used in an actual 
disaster.  Similarly, it is also important to 
use during routine operations those systems and 
procedures that would be needed in a crisis.    • The rate at which IT changes continues to outpace the rate at which public safety 
organizations are adapting to it.  In a number
 of instances visionary leadership has helped overcome the political, economic, and organi
zational challenges, but these are the 
exception, not the rule.     • The location of a jurisdiction™s emergency ma
nagement agency within its government 
structure varies widely and affects what aspects of emergency management are 

emphasized and how successfully a jurisdiction acquires and adopts IT.   
• First responders and emergency ma
nagers must be able to rely on the technology they use 
to accomplish their work.  As a result, they
 are very reluctant to depend on commercial 
infrastructure such as the public switched telephone network or cellular telephone 
systems, which historically have become very
 congested or collapsed quickly after major 
disasters. • Being at the cutting edge in the use of IT is widely understood to have a number of 

drawbacks, including higher up-front acquis
ition costs, greater resources required to 
customize software and systems, and a tendency to customize systems beyond what is 
necessary.  
• The cost of new technology is a major inhibitor of its adoption. The public safety 
community is primarily dependent on local 
revenue, which must also cover such local 
needs as education and roads.   
• Life-cycle costs, including the ongoing expen
se of maintenance, training, and operations, should be factored in from the beginni
ng and understood by all involved. 
• The integration and deployment of technology sh
ould not be a one-shot event.  Rather, it 
should be an iterative, ongoing process that 
involves all stakeholders, especially first 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 5responders.   • Creating a feedback loop among those who 
use, acquire, implement, and develop 
technology is critical to both the development of useful capabilities and their successful 
adoption.  Exercises, drills, live simulations (such as those employed by the military), and 
shadow operations (such as those conducted in
 conjunction with the 2003 Super Bowl in 
San Diego) help build the user community™s confidence and trust in the technology and 

also provide essential feedback 
to technology developers and providers on actual user requirements and how existing tec
hnologies could be improved.   
 In addition, speakers noted several practical 
challenges to introducing new technologies: 
 • Making updates to IT systems can be difficult.
  For example, technical barriers (such as 
limited wireless bandwidth that constrains ove
r-the-air updates) and logistical challenges 
(such as scheduling appointments to update 
systems) can complicate the process of 
updating maps and other large databases deployed in the field.   
• Training responders to use new technologies pr
esents significant challenges.  Responders 
must be taken away from their daily duties, and motivating them to receive training can 

be hard, especially when responders do not see an immediate practical use for the training 

or technology.  
• Incident reporting systems and other systems that collect field data provide useful 
information for developing future techno
logy as well as assessing current technologies 
and operations.  However, the data provided 
by responders is sometimes of little or no 
value.  Responders who do not see a connection between data and practical results are 
unlikely to invest the effort 
to ensure that the data entered is complete, accurate, and 
timely. 
• The introduction of new information technology
 that makes users™ actions more readily 
observed or recalled raises concerns regarding 
exposure of those users to legal liability or 
to the professional risk of being second-guessed.   
 Panelists offered several comments regarding 
the growing use of data (in addition to 
voice) communications in disaster management: 
 • Systems that allow data to be accessed from th
e field are valuable in a number of settings.  
For example, access to effective directories 
of information could enhance the decision-
making capabilities of first responders.   • Visual data such as pictures, video, and maps are increasingly complementing and being 

integrated with voice and text data.     
• However, reliable voice communications are, 
and will continue to be, the unequivocal 
highest priority for the public safety community.  For the firefighter entering a burning 
building or a police officer in a high-speed pursuit, for example, entering text or reading a 

screen would be distracting and dangerous.  
 • Wider adoption and use of data services will 
require cultural change.  This process has already begun, as exemplified by police officer
s™ common use of mobile data terminals in 
patrol cars.   • Wider use of data communications will creat
e new interoperability challenges relating to protocol, syntax, and semantics that 
go well beyond those associated with voice 
communications.   
 Several panelists underscored the importa
nce information technology for improved 
situational awareness and command and control, which were characterized as force multipliers 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 6 that would greatly improve what could be done 
with limited resources.  They noted that: 
 • The importance of better situational awareness is illustrated by the observation that 
responders run the risk of becoming casualties themselves because they do not know 
enough about an incident scene when they arrive.   
• A variety of situational awareness initia
tives have been undertaken by various 
organizations.  For example, the U.S. milita
ry has a long history of investment in 
information technology capabilities to provide s
ituational awareness.  The U.S. Forest 
Service™s Situation Awareness Firefighting Equipment (SAFE) programŠwhich includes 
wearable computer, wireless communications, global positioning satellite, night vision, 
and software componentsŠis another example. 
 Several panelists also discussed opportunities 
to employ sensors and other surveillance 
capabilities for disaster management.  Their observations included the following: 
 • Sensor systems provide new opportunities to detect hazards and gather other vital 
information in a disaster.    
• The widespread availability and use of open,
 Internet Protocol-based technologies makes 
it easier and cheaper to link already depl
oyed sensors such as video cameras. 
• Surveillance capabilities raise privacy and civ
il liberties concerns that those deploying 
these technologies will need to carefully address. 
• Better sensors and better detection, analysis
, and filtering technologies do not, however, 
obviate the need for humans to be in the loop.  Indeed, it is generally believed that only 

humans, not IT systems, should issue warnings or take similar actions in a disaster. 
 Panelists also noted that existing and poten
tial future technologies can improve the ability 
of responders to act in hostile 
environments and to extend where and when they can operate.  For 
example, better sensors and IT systems that ma
ke use of them could aid night operations and 
urban search and rescue. TOPIC 2:   RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
 FOR IT IN DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Five panels discussed current research programs and potential directions for new research 
in information technology.
   Commenting on the nature of those efforts and describing lessons 
learned, several speakers made the following observations:   
 • IT research for disaster management is of an
 applied nature, reflecting challenges unique 
to the application and often requiring interd
isciplinary efforts emphasizing coordination 
and collaboration among researchers and practitione
rs.  As a result, the National Science Foundation™s Digital Government program, which has supported work in disaster 

management, has employed atypical research management approaches.
4  • Field research, which provides feedback and he
lps build community acceptance, is vital.  
Panelists cited the Disaster Management 
Interoperability Services program and the 
Biological Warning and Incidents Characterization project as examples of programs that 

have had success in carrying out field research that involved the public safety 

community. 
• Successful development is iterative.  It is im
portant to provide responders with initial                                                      
 4 A reviewer of this report in draft form offere
d as another example of interdisciplinary work the 
Infrastructure Management and Hazard Response progr
am in NSF™s Engineering 
Directorate, which seeks 
to integrate engineering, social, behavioral, political, and economic research. 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 7prototypes to bootstrap the iterative process.  
• Testbeds and exercises are particularly critical in developing IT for disaster management 
because they provide opportunities for f
eedback from actual users about critical 
requirements of responders that may not otherw
ise be apparent.  In some cases, large-
scale testbeds are required for understanding issues that emerge only at a large scale.  

Simulations present opportunities not only for training but also for observation and 

assessment of IT capabilities such as decision support tools. 
• Operational facilities that permit instrument
ation, experimentation, and iteration are 
needed.  Instrumentation is important for both real and synthetic environments.  
• The Department of Defense, which is con
fronting many of the same interoperability 
challenges that face the public safety comm
unity, is in the process of researching, 
developing, and implementing a network-cen
tric approach to communications and 
information management that would overc
ome existing stovepipes among systems and 
organizations.  Several panelists also made a number of more
 general observations about what kinds of 
information technologies and research are appropriate in what circumstances: 

 • Different information technologies are appropr
iate in the various phases of the disaster 
management life cycle, i.e., preparati
on, response, mitigation, and recovery. 
• Researchers tend to look for overarching them
es, but experience has shown that it is 
critical, in applying IT to disaster management, to start with real problems faced by real 

end users, to find solutions, and then to work back from there to overarching themes.  

Starting with overarching themes will lead 
to dead ends, and unimplemented and 
unimplementable technology. 
• False positives are the bane of any system providing critical functionality and will result 

in technology not being used.  Even if is
 seems that a few false positives ought to be 
tolerated, the reality is often that false pos
itives will not be tolerated, especially when the 
consequences are great.  
 Several speakers focused on the topic of
 wireless and mobile communications.
5  They 
identified some general issues as well as areas of
 promising research and challenges related to 
this technology.  Panelists noted several attri
butes of both commercial and governmental wireless 
technologies that are important in disaster management: 
 • In addition to being untethered, wireless communications are highly and dynamically 
reconfigurable without physical linking, whic
h allows reprovisioning of communications 
infrastructure on the fly.  • Its dynamic nature makes wireless communication especially suitable for reaching areas 

not served well by fixed infrastructure, as well as places where the fixed infrastructure 

has been compromised or damaged.  
 As noted by panelists, several areas of wireless technology merit further research:   
 • Wireless communication is very challenging at th
e physical layer.  Connectivity is often 
poor, and bit error rates are high.  As a result, protocols that are robust and efficient in the 
                                                     
 5 Some of the comments of Nader Moayeri (manager, Wireless Communications Technologies 
Group, National Institute of Standards and Technology) who spoke in a later panel session, are also 
included in this section. 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 8 face of disconnections are important.  The tradeoff between high data rates but limited 
reception, and low data rates but longer-distance reception, results in part from a 

shadowing effect, in which obstacles make reception more difficult at higher frequencies.  
Power consumption and limits on battery capac
ity can significantly constrain the use of 
mobile communications. 
• Of particular interest for disaster response is the fact that it is hard to communicate 
through metal frame buildings or metal-c
ontaining debrisŠeither low frequencies (with 
little capacity) or repeaters must be used.  
Options for deploying repeaters include pre-
installing them in structures (like sprinklers) or having first responders leave them behind 
(like a trail of bread crumbs). 
• Wireless networking is an active area of research
.  Ad hoc and mesh networking is being 
deployed and used today (especially by the 
Department of Defense), but there are many 
unsolved problems associated with complex wireless networks.   For example, how can 
information be moved reliably through a comp
lex network of unreliable nodes and links?  
How can such a network be set up and managed? 
• Because network capacities are limited in co
mparison with those of wired networks, 
wireless networks are much more susceptible
 to overload if the wrong data is transmitted 
or is sent to the wrong people at the wrong time.  Sending video to someone who does 

not want or need it not only distracts the human but uses up network bandwidth that 

cannot be used for something more useful. 
 One approach is content routing, which 
attempts to move data to where it is need
ed for analysis or decision making without 
overloading wireless links.  A
nother strategy is to anticipate the locations where many 
people will need to look at a particular piece of information, and then move that 
information to a local server for later asynchronous access.    
• Network trustworthiness is important.  If a ne
twork cannot be relied on, because of either 
technical or security problems, it will not 
be used.  Improved network management capabilities are similarly important. 
• Cognitive radios and other devices that hide
 complexity from users and move that 
complexity into the devices or the network ha
ve great promise, but they require more 
research. 
• Wireless technologies can be used to provide
 location information independent of the 
Global Positioning System.  Better techniques of that kind are needed for applications 

indoors, in dense urban environments, and so forth. 
 Several panelists spoke about general issues 
and promising research areas in information 
integration and data fusion.  Several comments outlined the general problem area: 
 • A growing number and variety of sensors a
nd other data sources are generating ever-
larger volumes of data, including text, 
numeric, geospatial, and video data.   
• Most information is manually processed todayŠmeaning in practice that most data is 

ignored and is not analyzed even if it actually contains actionable information. 
• Automation is essential to process, filter, a
nd correct this flood of data, to present it as 
accurate and actionable information for hum
an decision makers.  Improved analysis, 
synthesis, and fusion of data will require 
progress on both the syntax and semantics.   
 Several comments described particular research topics of interest in information 
integration and data fusion: 
 • Considerable research has been done in data
 semantics.  Progress has been made on a 
number of fronts in several different research communities, but many challenges remain.  
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 9For example, given the past lack of success 
in forging agreement on global schemas, it is 
widely believed today that a multiple schema 
approach is required that maps schemas to 
each other.  A major technical challenge is
 how to reason about the relationship among 
what may be a large number of different schemas.  
• A problem of particular interest for disaste
r management is the ability to fuse data from 
disparate sources.  For example, how can geos
patial data about the location of victims be 
integrated with online data about the locati
on of medical facilities to provide information 
needed by emergency managers
, first responders, and others. 
• Adjudication management is an important ar
ea of potential value for data fusion.  As 
information from multiple sources flows up to hi
gher levels, a more complete picture can 
be created, enabling adjudication at the higher 
level to correct erroneous information that 
has arisen at lower levels.  Adjudication 
also helps reduce the volume of information being pushed up, which can overwhelm decision makers. 
• Another challenge is dynamic selection and co
mbination of sources of data. Sources have 
varying quality and credibility, due to both 
human- and technology-related issues. Data 
may be redundant or contradictory. Data fusi
on has to advance to the point that multiple 
data streams of heterogeneous 
and often confusing data can 
be converted into actionable information.  
• Detection of change is an area potentially ripe for research.  It has been looked at 
primarily by database people concerned chie
fly about detecting anomalies in database 
joins (a common database operation in which 
data from multiple sources is combined).  
With respect to disaster management, the interest is really detection of anomalies and 

determination of whether a change is significant or not.   

 
Several panelists spoke about decision support: 
 • The type of technology useful for deci
sion making varies depending on whether it is 
being applied at the phase of preparation for, response to, or recovery from a disaster.  To 
create and deploy the right technology so
lutions, it is critical to understand the 
differences between these situations, as well 
as the different time lines for decision 
making.  Strategic risk management involves discussion, analysis, and long time lines.  
Effective operational risk management requir
es doing something now, based on whatever 
information is immediately available. 
• Decision support currently is focused largely 
on optimization, or determining the optimal 
plan for achieving a goal. Experience has show
n (based primarily on Defense Department 
efforts) that decision makers need ﬁgood enoughﬂ solutions produced in the time 

available rather than optimal solutions that arrive too late.  It is important that the 
implications of decision makers™ criteria for assessing outcomes be factored in and 
presented to them, to prevent the undesirable 
situation of having a solution that does a good job of meeting ill-advised criteria. 
• Decision making is both planned and improvised
.  Sometimes, for example, the formal 
organizational structures prove too rigid a
nd obstruct information sharing, prompting 
improvisation.  One technical challenge is how to make it easier and more natural for 

people to improvise.  Building such capabilities requires new models to predict and 

explain improvised roles, processes, and structures. 
• It is critical to find the balance between wh
at machines can do most effectively and what 
humans can do most effectively.  That the balance may change over time as technology 
advances must be understo
od and managed as well. 
• Advances in visualization of information are 
critical.  Humans process visual data very 
efficiently but text data slowly.  (For a computer system, the reverse is generally true.)    
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 10• Context (including a user™s location, task lo
ad, and environment) is critical to decision 
support and situational awareness.  What inform
ation people need or the form in which to 
present it cannot be determined in isolation if systems are to provide actionable 
information without overloading users.   
• Even good information delivered at the right time may not be appropriate if it is delivered 
in the wrong way.  An example that also
 illustrates the importance of sensitivity to 
context was provided by a panelist who noted that in a recent training exercise, Marines 

who were using personal digital assistants to 
work with map data rather than focusing on 
immediate dangers were the first ones to be ﬁshot.ﬂ   
 Several panelists focused on sensors, sen
sor networks, and autonomous devices:  • Unmanned aerial vehicles, especially when combined with improved network 

communications, have tremendous promise be
cause they can carry weather and other 
types of cameras and sensors to places that 
human responders cannot reach safely or at 
all. • The distance between a remote device a
nd the human interpreting the device™s 
information output to make decisions introduces major complications, with respect to 

both human processing and communications infrastructure. 
• It can be very difficult to build and mainta
in situational awareness when information is 
delivered by remote devices, in what percep
tual psychologists call a mediated presence. 
The brain tries to treat the information it is 
receiving as if it is being seen directly, which 
can introduce subtle mistakes.  This so-ca
lled keyhole effect leads to a deconstructed 
environment for people trying to analyze the information they are receiving.  Training 

can help alleviate, but will not eliminate, 
fundamental perceptual problems. These must 
be addressed by research that considers the entire data-information-knowledge cycle. 
• An important aspect of autonomous, remote-presence devices is that they are active, not 

passive.  If people stop focusing on the task 
at hand and instead concentrate on managing the technology (e.g., driving the robot, poin
ting the camera), the result can be tunnel 
vision. • Sensor data may be especially useful fo
r immediate response and mitigation efforts 
involving critical infrastructure, such as bridges.  Deployment of sensors so that they are 

in place in advance of an event implies thei
r integration into the design and maintenance 
cycles of the infrastructureŠan effort that 
is beginning to happen but has to become 
ubiquitous.  Further research is required to op
timize deployment of sensors integral to 
critical infrastructure.  
• The military is an important source of lessons in how to build computer simulations that 

can incorporate sensor data.  Methods for cost-effective virtual prototyping and virtual 

exercises are critical to advancing the state 
of the art. Although the military has done 
much work in this area, which should be le
veraged as much as possible, making this type 
of research cost-effective for civilian disaster 
management is a challenge that will require 
innovative approaches.  
TOPIC 3:   COLLABORATION, COORDINATION, AND INTEROPERABILITY: PRESSING ISSUES IN A NEED-TO-SHARE WORLD 
Two panels considered current and future a
pproaches to interoperability and information 
exchange.  Several presentations focused on inte
roperability and wireless 
infrastructure activities being undertaken at the state level.  A numbe
r of major trends were noted by panelists: 
 • New organizational models are being adopted th
at balance the roles of state-level bodies, 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF REMARKS MADE BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 11which coordinate communications activiti
es, and local agencies, which retain 
responsibility for most acquisition and deployment decisions. 
• Increasingly, states are building and operating statewide public safety communications 
networks.  In some cases, subscriber equipment (radios) to access the network must be 
purchased by public safety agencies; in others 
the state supplies the equipment at no cost.  
In some states access to the network is free, whereas others charge access fees.  

According to panelists, these efforts to 
get localities to acquire and use more 
interoperable equipment have been relatively successful. 
 Panelists also offered a variety of perspec
tives on lessons learned about how to achieve 
interoperability: 
 • Regardless of the approach, major change will 
take many years.  Systems that can be 
deployed in the short term to provide ev
en limited capabilities to bridge existing 
communications systems are a useful interoperability tool. 
• Achieving the goal of widespread deployment of interoperable systems requires a long-
term strategy for migrating from today™s systems to the desired capabilities.  The 

migration strategy should be de
veloped and refined in consu
ltation with all the relevant 
stakeholders.   • Mandates, whether funded or 
unfunded, have not proved effective as means to achieve 
interoperability.  Effective approaches require considerable consensus building and leave 
as much autonomy as possible at as low a level as possible. 
 Several comments were made about organi
zational and cultural challenges associated with increasing sharing of information for disaster management: 
 • Non-governmental organizations and other private entities (such 
as hospitals or operators 
of critical infrastructure) are increasingly seen as major players in disaster management.  
Many of these organizations have significan
t amounts of relevant data and information 
that is currently made available for di
saster management only in a very ad hoc, 
unintegrated manner.    
• Much work will be required to allow non-tr
aditional sources to supply data for use in 
emergency operations.  The reliability of sources 
is a critical issue.  Data from a hospital, 
for instance, may have a higher level of relia
bility than that supplied by an individual 
eyewitness report.    
• Indicators of the reliability of sources should be part of the data collected and distributed 
to emergency managers so that informati
on can be assessed properly.  The military long 
ago adopted this practice, but indicating the 
reliability of data is largely not done in 
current disaster management operations, at least not in any systematic fashion. 
 
Finally, several speakers focused on opport
unities and challenges for building future interoperable networks.  Their comments included these: 
 • Adaptive technologies, such as cognitive radios, that sense their environment and modify 

their frequency, waveform, and even their pow
er consumption to fit the situation will 
continue to evolve and play a growing 
role in public safety communications.  
• Insufficient availability of radio frequency sp
ectrum remains a constraint to realizing 
future public safety and disaster manageme
nt networks.  A number of approaches may 
provide practical improvements in spectrum allocation issues.  ﬁLights and sirensﬂ 

priority access allows public safety users to
 signal other users aside, much as an 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 12ambulance does with road traffic.  Time- and 
spatial-sharing can be further exploited.  
Spectrum rights obtained in secondary markets could be subject to preemption by 
communications for public safety.  
• Envisioning, enabling, and building networks of the future will be facilitated by the 

availability of test beds and simulation envi
ronments that allow disparate technologies to 
be designed, built, and tested.  Testbeds a
nd capabilities for simulation will also facilitate 
the ability to analyze such technologies in relation to an information architecture and 

strategy. 
• Information systems are increasingly network-
centric rather than hierarchical.  In 
network-centric operations, information is 
shared horizontally, among tactical-level 
peers, as well as vertically up and down the command chain.  To move in this direction, 

the Department of Defense has had to ove
rcome cultural obstacles and make a major 
investment in new technologies.  Similar cha
llenges can be expected for the public safety 
community. 
• Information systems that provide access to state and federal databases are of growing 

importance for public safety and disaster management.  Databases of interest range from 

motor vehicle records to weather foreca
sts to public health information.   
• The availability of information in the form of
 Internet Protocol-based data will continue 
to be a driver for future networks. As the 
availability of data increases and its usefulness becomes better understood, networks will ha
ve to integrate and incorporate it.  
• The Web services model is catching on as a way 
of exchanging and integrating data for 
disaster management. 
• The Disaster Management Interoperability Serv
ices toolkit that is being supplied to the 
disaster management community by FEMA provides a way of exchanging information 

among systems and organizations.  It is anticipat
ed that this toolkit will help enable the 
building of a common operating picture during disasters.   
• A culture of information technology tool shar
ing, which will help make use of future 
networks more effective, is beginning to take
 root in the disaster management community 
but needs further nurturing.  Public-private pa
rtnerships are an important part of this 
effort, as are laboratories and test beds where vendors, researchers, and public safety and 

emergency management organizations can work 
to integrate their products and services.   
• Increased trust among the various stakeholders is critical if their IT systems are to be 

more closely integrated. 
 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Appendixes Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 Appendix A  Workshop Agenda
6   
   
 
 
   
 
 WORKSHOP ON USING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 June 22-23, 2005 Washington, D.C.   Wednesday, June 22  9:00Œ10:00 a.m.  Continental Breakfast 
 10:00Œ10:30  
Welcome to the Workshop     Jon Eisenberg, Study Director and Senior Program Officer,
 Computer 
Science and Telecommunications 
Board/National Research Council (NRC) Charles Brownstein, Director,
 Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board/NRC 

Ramesh Rao, Chair, NRC Committee on Enhancement of Crisis 
ManagementŠImproving the Use of Information Technology in Disaster 

Preparedness, Response, and Recovery and
 Professor, University of 
California, San Diego  Barry West, Chief Information Officer/Dir
ector Information Technology 
Services Division, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
                                                      
 6NOTE: Copies of the slides used in the presentations and made available by the panelists 
to CSTB for public distribution can be viewed at
 CSTB™s Web site at www.cstb.org. The slides 
have not been viewed or edited by the Nati
onal Research Council, and opinions expressed and 
statements made in them are solely those of th
e individual panelists and 
have not been endorsed 
or verified as accurate by the National Academies.  
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 16Topic 1: The Critical and Evolving Role of Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICTs) in Disaster Management  
 Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists:  How 
might we better manage future crises?  What 
impact will major technology trends have on how di
saster management is handled in the future?  
How can we leverage commercial technology 
cost-performance curves yet meet special 
requirements?  What new technologies, approach
es, and policies would help, and what research 
directions are promising?   

 10:30Œ12:00 noon 
Context for and Visions of the Future, Grand Challenges for ICTs in 
Disaster Management 
   15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  John Harrald
, Director, Institute for Crisis, Disaster, and Risk 
Management, George Washington University (
Moderator) David G. Boyd, Director, Office for Interoperability and Compatibility, 
Science and Technology Directorate,
 U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security 
Helen Wood
, Senior Advisor, NOAA Satellites and Information Service 
and Chair, National Science and Technology Council™s Subcommittee on 
Disaster Reduction 

Jack Potter, Director, Emergency Medical 
Services, Valley Health and 
Vice Chair, COMCARE Board of Directors 

Peter Miller, Program Manager, Mission Support Office, HSARPA, 
Science and Technology Directorate,
 U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security 
 
12:00Œ12:45 p.m. Lunch 

 
Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists:  What 
lessons have been learned from past crises and 
exercises?  What gaps in IT capabilities are evident, and how might they be addressed?  Where is 
the state of the art not sufficient to meet our needs? 

 
12:45Œ2:00 
Perspectives on the Current State of the Art: ICTs in Disaster 
Management Practice  15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A  
   Ellis Stanley
, General Manager, Emergency Preparedness Department, 
City of Los Angeles, California (
Moderator) Mark Deputy
, Senior IT Specialist and Urban Search and Rescue Team 
Assistant Task Force Leader, Montgomery County, Maryland 

William Maheu, Executive Assistant Chief of Police, San Diego Police 
Department Robert Roth, Fire Technology Specialist, U.S. Forest Service, USDA 
 2:00Œ2:15  Break 

 Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists: What
 are especially demanding aspects of disaster 
management?  What initiatives are under way to 
address them?  What specific requirements are 
there from specific groups or application areas?
 What general lessons can be learned?  
 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP AGENDA 
 172:15Œ3:30
  Emerging Applications and Other Drivers for ICTs in Disaster 
Management
    15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A  
  William Maheu, Executive Assistant Chief of Police, San Diego Police 
Department (Moderator) William Metz,
 Director, Center for Integrated Emergency Preparedness, 
Argonne National Laboratory 
Jaime Gomezjurado, Project Manager and VP, Business Development, 
Medical Emergency Response Network Research Project, Semandex 

Networks, Inc. 
Lois Clark McCoy, President, National Institute for Urban Search and 
Rescue 
Peter Brooks, Institute for Defense Analyses 
 
3:30Œ3:45  Break 

 
 
 
Topic 2: Research Directions for ICTs in Disaster Management 

 Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists:  What
 research areas have application to disaster 
management?  How might leading-edge research
 be applied to disaster management?  How 
should the research agenda be established and e
volved?  How can research results best be 
transitioned into deployed capabilities?  Wh
at are the commonalities between commercial, 
civilian, and military capabilities and research
 and development activities, and how can 
technology advances and knowledge be tr
ansferred from one to the other? 
 3:45Œ5:00  
Current ICT Research Programs Related to Disaster Management 
   15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  Peter Steenkiste
, Professor, Carnegie Mellon University (
Moderator) Larry Brandt, Program Manager, Digital Government, National Science 
Foundation 
Gary Ham, Senior Research Scientist, Battelle Memorial Institute 
Earnest Paylor, Program Director, Pacific Disaster Center (PDC) and 
Senior Advisor for Interagency Programs, Office of the Special Assistant 

and NASA Liaison to the Assistant Secretary of DefenseŒNetworks and 

Information Integration (NII) 

Pamela Sydelko, LeaderŒModeling, Simulation and Visualization Group, 
Decision and Information Sciences Division, Argonne National 
Laboratory  
      5:00Œ6:00 
ICT Everywhere: Ubiquitous and Pervasive Mobile (ad hoc) 

Communications and Networking 
   15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
 Timothy Brown, Associate Professor, University of Colorado Boulder 
(Moderator) Richard Howard, Research Professor, WINLAB, Rutgers University
  Scott Midkiff, Professor, Virginia Tech  Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 18Mani Chandy
, Simon Ramo Professor of Computer Science, California 
Institute of Technology 
  Thursday, June 23  Topic 2: Research Directions for ICTs in Disaster Management (continued) 
 8:00Œ8:30 a.m.  Continental Breakfast  

 8:30Œ9:45 
Identifying and Aggregating Useful DataŠInformation Integration 
and Fusion    15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  Gio Wiederhold
, Professor (Emeritus), Stanford University (
Moderator)  Yigal Arens, 
Director, Intelligent Systems Division, Information Sciences 
Institute, University of Southern California 
Craig Knoblock
, Research Associate Professor, University of Southern 
California Peter Scott, Associate Professor, University of Buffalo
 Zachary Ives, Assistant Professor, University of Pennsylvania  
 9:45Œ10:45 
Information Overload: Making Useful Data ActionableŠDecision 
Support, Collaboration, Situational Awareness
   15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  Robert Neches
, Director, Distributed Scalable Systems Division, 
Information Sciences Institute, Un
iversity of Southern California (Moderator) David Mendonça
, Assistant Professor, New Jersey Institute of 
Technology 
 William Wallace
, Professor, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  
 10:45Œ11:00   Break 

 
11:00 a.m.Œ12:15 p.m. 
Sensor Networks, Autonomous Devices, and GIS  15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  Robin Murphy, 
Professor, University of South Florida and Director, 
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Safety Security 

Rescue (Moderator) Ayman Mosallam
, Professor, Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of California, Irvine 

Susan McGrath
, Associate Research Professor of Engineering, 
Dartmouth College 

David Kehrlein, Senior Consultant, Environmental Science Research 
Institute (ESRI), formerly GIS Manage
r, California Governor™s Office of 
Emergency Services 

 12:15Œ1:00  Lunch 

 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKSHOP AGENDA 
 19Topic 3: Collaboration, Coordination, and Int
eroperability: Pressing Issues in a Need-to-Share 
World  Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists:  Wh
at policy and technical initiatives are currently 
under way to improve wireless interoperability acro
ss federal, state, and local levels?  What 
results are anticipated, and over what time frames?
  How is data (including voice) generated, 
used, and shared across organizational boundaries 
today? What can be learned in terms of 
technology and practice from efforts to forge mo
re interoperable systems? How are standards 
helping/not helping? What kinds of interoperab
ility are desired in the future? What technical, 
operational, economic, and policy challenges are 
likely to be unresolved, and merit further 
research? How do communication systems relate to other information management systems 
related to disaster management?  What obstacles to
 technology transition must be overcome?     
 
1:00Œ3:00 
Current Initiatives, Technical and Organizational Obstacles and 

Opportunities in ICT Interoperability    15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A  
  Art Botterell, Associate Director, Emergency Information Systems 
Consultant, incident.com (
Moderator) Ellis Kitchen, Chief Information Officer, Maryland Office of Information 
Technology and Member, Interopera
bility and Integration Committee, 
National Association of State Chie
f Information Officers (NASCIO) 
Steve Cooper, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer, Red Cross 
Lloyd (Gene) Krase, Administrator, Kansas Division of Emergency 
Management
 Otto Doll, Commissioner
, Bureau of Information and Telecommunications, South Dakota 

Dave Smith, Implementation Director, Indiana Integrated Public Safety 
Commission 
Robert Fletcher, President, Readiness Consulting Services LLC and 
Member, National Fire Protection 
Association NFPA 1600 Technical 
Committee 
  3:00Œ3:15  Break 

 Questions Posed in Advance to Panelists:  What
 should communications and other IT capabilities 
look like in the future?  How do wireless communi
cations systems relate to the emerging broader 
architecture for public safety, national security, and 
Disaster response?  What are the implications 
of major information and communications technolo
gy trends for how we respond to crises?  How can these opportunities better be exploited?  What
 kinds of research, experimentation, and pilot 
programs would help?   
 
3:15Œ4:30 
Envisioning, Enabling, and Building Networks of the Future
    15 minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15 minute Q&A 
  Nancy Jesuale
, President, NetCity Engineering (
Moderator) Nader Moayeri
, Manager, Wireless Communications Technologies 
Group, National Institute of Standards and Technology  
James Morentz
, VP, Homeland Security Technology and Director, 
Public Safety Integration Center, 
Science Applications International Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 20Corporation Chip Hines, Program Manager, Disaster Management eGov Initiative, 
Office of the CIO, Emergency Preparedness and Response/FEMA, 
Department of Homeland Security 
 4:30Œ4:45  
Concluding Remarks
 Ramesh Rao, Chair, NRC Committee on Enhancement of Crisis 
ManagementŠImproving the Use of Information Technology in Disaster 

Preparedness, Response, and Recovery 
 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 Appendix B  Biographies of Committee Members and Staff 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 COMMITTEE MEMBERS  Ramesh R. Rao
, Chair, is currently a professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, and director of the San Diego Division of the California Institute of 

Telecommunications and Information Technology, at 
the University of California, San Diego.   
His research interests include architectures, protoc
ols, and performance analysis of wireless, wire 
line, and photonic networks for integrated multime
dia services.  Prior to his appointment as the 
Director of the San Diego Division of the Ca
lifornia Institute of Telecommunications and 
Information Technology (
Cal-(IT)²), he served as director of the UCSD Center for Wireless 
Communications 
(CWC) and was the vice chair of Instructional Affairs in the Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering.  Rao did his undergraduate work at the Regional 

Engineering College of the University of Madr
as in Tiruchirapalli, obtaining a B.E. (honors) 
degree in electronics and communications in 1980. He
 did his graduate work at the University of 
Maryland, College Park, Mary
land, receiving his M.S. in 
1982 and his Ph.D. in 1984. 
 Yigal Arens is director of the Intelligent Systems Division of the University of Southern 
California™s Information Science Institute in Calif
ornia. He is also co-director of DGRC, the 
USC/Columbia University Digital Government 
Research Center, and a research professor at 
USC™s Daniel J. Epstein Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering.  His primary 

research interests have been digital government, in
formation integration, planning in the domain 
of information servers, knowledge representati
on, and human-machine communication.  In 1983, 
he joined the faculty of the Computer Scien
ce Department at the University of Southern 
California.  He joined USC™s Information Scien
ces Institute (USC/ISI) in 1987, where he first 
worked on the Integrated Interfaces project, a 
multimedia presentation design system combining 
text, tables, maps, and other graphics. For almost 10 years he headed the Single Interface to 

Multiple Sources (SIMS) research group specializi
ng in integration of he
terogeneous databases and other information sources. Arens has been direct
or of the Intelligent Systems Division, one of 
the largest artificial intelligence research laboratories in the United States, since 1999. Also, since 
1999, he has been co-director of the DGRC. In 
1999, together with two colleagues from ISI, 
Arens founded Fetch Technologies, a company that sp
ecializes in extracting data from Web sites.  
In 2002, he joined the Daniel J. Epstein Depa
rtment of Industrial and Systems Engineering as 
research professor. In 2003, Arens founded USC™
s Center for Research on Unexpected Events 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 22(CRUE), which he headed for its first year. Dr. 
Arens also was a part of the National Research 
Council™s Committee on Information Technology a
nd the States: Public Policy and Public 
Interests.  Arens received his Ph.D. from the 
University of California at Berkeley.   
 Art Botterell is an internationally recognized expe
rt in emergency communications who has 
served on the front lines of some of the biggest national disasters in recent U.S. history. Former 
FEMA director James Lee Witt hailed him as a ﬁnati
onal asset.ﬂ  He has served as a consultant to the Department of Homeland Security and a numbe
r of other state, federal, and international organizations.  He led the development of 
the Common Alerting Protocol (CAP)Šthe first 
international standard format for all-haza
rd public warning across multiple media. An 
experienced analyst, broadcast and multimedia
 producer, writer, and manager, Mr. Botterell 
studies the ways communities use information t
echnology to manage the effects of sudden 
change. 
 
Timothy X Brown is an associate professor at the Univer
sity of Colorado, Boulder. He received 
his B.S. in physics from Pennsylvania State Univer
sity and his Ph.D. in electrical engineering 
from California Institute of Technology in 1990,
 when he also joined the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory. In 1992 he joined Bell Communications Research.  Since 1995 he has held a joint 

appointment with the Electrical Engineering and Interdisciplinary Telecommunications 

Departments at the University of Colorado, B
oulder. His research interests include adaptive 
network control, machine learning, and wireless communications systems. His laboratory has 

developed extensive experience in the design, implementation, and testing of wireless networking 
protocols. He has published over 50 papers in ne
tworking and wireless systems. He is a recipient 
of the NSF CAREER Award and was selected as the GWEC Wireless Educator of the year. 

 
John R. Harrald is the director of the George Washingt
on University (GWU) Institute for Crisis, 
Disaster, and Risk Management and a professor of
 engineering management in the GWU School 
of Engineering and Applied Science. He is a 
founding member, director, and immediate past 
president of the International Emergency Manage
ment Society (TIEMS).  Dr. Harrald has been 
actively engaged in the fields of emergency, c
onsequence, and crisis management and maritime 
safety and port security.  He was the former director of the Disaster Recovery Institute (DRI) and 
served as the associate director of the National Po
rts and Waterways Institute for 10 years.  Dr. 
Harrald was the principal investigator for maritime
 risk and crisis management studies in Prince 
William Sound, Alaska, the Port of New Orleans, and Washington State and for earthquake 
vulnerability studies funded by the National Scie
nce Foundation and the American Red Cross.  
He has studied the response to the Exxon Valdez 
oil spill, the Loma Prieta earthquake, Hurricane 
Hugo, Hurricane Andrew, the Northridge eart
hquake, the 1999 Turkey earthquakes, and the 
September 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade 
Center and the Pentagon.  He has also written 
and published in the fields of crisis manageme
nt, emergency management, management science, 
risk and vulnerability analysis, and maritime safet
y.  He was a reviewer for the committee that 
produced the report 
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government
.  Harrald received his B.S. in engineering from the U.
S. Coast Guard Academy, an M.A.L.S. from 
Wesleyan University, an M.S. fro
m the Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology, where he was an 
Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, and an M.B.A. and a 
Ph.D. from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  
 
Richard Howard
 is a researcher at Wireless Information Network Laboratory (WINLAB) at 
Rutgers University.  He is also a principal at 
Research Innovations, LLC, and he is the founder 
and Sr. V.P. of Technology at PnP Networks, a 
start-up company focused on applying artificial 
intelligence techniques to the problem of making co
mputers and computer networks truly simple 
for people to use.  Howard was formally the 
wireless research vice president at Lucent Bell 
Laboratories, where he did  research on wireless technology from materials, components, 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND STAFF  
 23packaging, antennas, modeling, analysis, communi
cation theory, and integrated circuit design to 
systems-level projects like fixed wireless loop and 
advanced cellular base st
ations.  His work has emphasized multiple antennas, signal processing, and system performance from basic 
communication theory to field deployment.  Howa
rd™s key achievements include new theory (and 
practical demonstrations) for dramatically incr
easing wireless system capacities based on multiple 
antennas.  Other achievements have included algorithms and tool suites for optimization of 
cellular networks and applicati
on of advanced signal processing to linear power amplifiers for 
dramatic cost/size reduction and efficiency impr
ovements.  Howard received his Ph.D. in physics 
at Stanford University in 1977.  

 Nancy Jesuale has worked in local and state government since 1976 as a telecommunications 
strategic planner, and as director of public saf
ety networks, telecommunications networking and 
network operations. Ms. Jesuale is the president of NetCity Engineeri
ng, Inc., a consulting 
practice dedicated to strategic planning and solu
tion sets for government in public safety and fiber 
optic telecommunications systems.  Current client
s of NCE include the City of Los Angeles, the District of Columbia, the State of Oregon, the Ci
ty of Charlotte, NC, and the Center for Wireless 
Network Security. As program manager for Public
 Safety for WiNSeC at Stevens Institute of 
Technology, Ms. Jesuale is responsible for est
ablishing relationships, research programs, and 
public policy support.  Ms. Jesuale has been an 
innovator in telecommunications strategies for 
local government since 1984.  She is an appointee 
to the National Task Force on Interoperability 
and the Oregon State Interoperability Executive Comm
ittee.  She is a past chair of the Public 
Technology Inc. Task Force on Information Tec
hnology and Telecommunications.  She has been 
the director of strategic planning for telecomm
unications for the City of Los Angeles and has 
served on the Oregon Statewide Interoperability Executive Council. 

 David Kehrlein,
 now with Environmental Science Research Institute (ESRI), was the 
geographical information systems (GIS) manage
r for the California Governor™s Office of 
Emergency Services (OES) for over 9 years. Before
 that he worked in the Forest and Rangeland Resource Assessment Program (FRRAP) of the Ca
lifornia Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.   Kehrlein was active on the Governor™s 
GIS task force in 1992.  He is a past director 
of the California Geographic Information Association (CGIA), and he is the chairman of the data standards committee.  He was also chair of the 
Firefighting Resources of California Organized for 
Potential Emergencies (FIRESCOPE) GIS Specia
list Group.  He has organized response and 
recovery GIS support for 16 presidentially decl
ared disasters from incident-level response to 
decision support at the state and federal levels.  His group at OES also deployed a 
response/training GIS trailer that is equipped w
ith large format plotting and scanning capabilities, 
a statewide GIS data repository, as well as satellite
 cell phone and a high-speed satellite Internet 
downlinking capability.  Kehrlein received his B.
A., graduating with honors in geography, from 
California State University, Sacramento. 

 
William Maheu is chief of operations of the San Di
ego, California Police Department.  A 
member of the police department for 23 years, Ma
heu is currently in charge of Child Abuse, 
Domestic Violence, Sex Crimes, Vice Operations, Mid City Division, Southeastern Division, 

Southern Division, Records, Property and various other programs.  During his tenure with the 

department, he has had many assignments, including commanding officer of field 

operations/special resources, executive lieutenant of the Special Weapons and Tactics Team, 
special projects/long-range planning lieutenant, and 
narcotics sergeant. He h
as also been involved 
in several major projects, including the 2003 Super Bowl, the Republican National Convention, 

the Presidential Debate, development of the 
Psychiatric Emergency Response Team, and the 
development of the Homeless Outreach Team.  Maheu graduated from the University of San 

Diego in 1983 with a B.A. in psychology. 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 24Robin R. Murphy is a professor in the Computer Science and Engineering Department at the 
University of South Florida with a joint appoint
ment in Cognitive and Neural Sciences in the 
Department of Psychology.  
She is an associate editor for IEEE Intelligent Systems
 and a member 
of the 1998-1999 Defense Science Study Group and is currently a member of the U.S. Air Force 
Scientific Advisory Board and the DARPA ISAT.  She recently served on DoD Air Platforms 

FY2004 Technology Area Review.   In addition, she is also a member of the board of directors 
for Continental Divide Robotics, which provides 
GPS and intelligent agent software for tracking 
parolees.  From 1992 to 1998, she was an assistan
t professor in the Department of Mathematical 
and Computer Sciences at the Colorado School of 
Mines.  Murphy joined USF in 1998, and in 
January 2002 she became director of the 
Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue 
(CRASAR).  In March 2003, she helped start th
e industry/university cooperative research center 
on Safety Security Rescue (SSR-RC) with the Univ
ersity of Minnesota and is the overall director. 
She leads the CRASAR rescue robot response team, 
the only such team in the world, and is a 
technical search specialist with Florida Task 
Force 3.  Since 1995, she has focused on Urban 
Search and Rescue (USAR) as the test domain for he
r research, leading to her participation in the 
first known use of robots for urban search and rescue at the WTC disaster. Her USAR robotics 

work has earned a NIUSR Eagle award, and sh
e serves on the executive board of the National 
Institute for Urban Search and Rescue.  She 
has also won a USF Outstanding Faculty Research 
Achievement Award (2003), and the Honor Societ
y of Phi Kappa Phi, USF Chapter Artist and 
Scholar of the Year Award (2004).   Prior to
 graduate work, Murphy worked in the process 
control industry as a software project engineer.  
Murphy has also served as a member of the Army 
Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology Committee at 
the National Academies.  Murphy received 
a B.M.E. in mechanical engineering, and an 
M.S. and a Ph.D. in computer science (minor: 
computer integrated manufacturing systems) in 1980, 1989, and 1992, respectively, from Georgia 

Tech, where she was a Rockwell International Doctoral Fellow.
  Robert Neches
 is director of Information Sciences Institute™s Distributed Scalable Systems 
Division and a research faculty member of the University of Southern California Computer 
Science Department.  He received his Ph.D. from Ca
rnegie Mellon University in 1981 for work in 
machine learning, spent a year at the Univ
ersity of Pittsburgh™s Learning Research and 
Development Center, and has been at USC ISI since 1982 (with the exception of service at the 

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency from 1994-1997). His personal interests span 
control and coordination in distributed system
s; collaboration and visualization aids for information management; and ﬁsystem of systemsﬂ 
frameworks for information integration.   The 
Distributed Scalable Systems Division looks at the full range of issues bearing on organizations 

gathering information, assessing it, making decisions, de-conflicting, and effecting resulting actions.  Research within the division addresses 
distributed software systems engineering, 
information management, intelligent human-c
omputer interaction, computer-supported 
cooperative work, resource management, and decision
 support. Applications within the division 
include all levels of command-and-control, cris
is management, intelligence analysis, logistics, 
design and manufacturing, and space applications. 
 Masanobu Shinozuka
 is a distinguished professor and chair of the Department of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering at University of 
California, Irvine, and Norman Sollenberger 
Professor Emeritus of Civil Engineering at Princeton University.  He is a member of the National 

Academy of Engineering (NAE). His research activities involve random vibration, reliability of 

structural systems, structural dynamics, st
ructural control, continuum mechanics, and 
infrastructure systems, including lifeline networks.  In particular, his pioneering and original 

research on digital simulation of stochastic waves is noteworthy. He has more than 500 

publications in refereed journals and proceedings of national and international conferences in mechanics, structural engineering, and natural/ma
n-made disaster mitigation. His contributions to 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND STAFF  
 25these areas have been recognized with a numbe
r of prestigious awards, such as Newmark, Freudenthal, and Von Karman Meda
ls from the American Society of Civil Engineers, of which he 
is an honorary member.  Shinozuka™s recent research
 deals with the detection of damage and its 
locations within a network of utility and highway
 transportation systems subject to natural and 
man-made disturbances. In this regard, his mo
st recent effort, under the sponsorship of the 
National Science Foundation, focuses on the deve
lopment of energy-efficient and self-powered 
sensor networks and wireless data transmission syst
ems that can be applied to real-time diagnosis 
of these systems after serious security breaches.  He has a long history of working relationships 
with engineers and managers at Caltrans (Ca
lifornia Department of Transportation), LADWP 
(Los Angeles Department of Water and Power), and MLGW (Memphis Light, Gas and Water), 
and more recently with SCE (Southern California 
Edison) to estimate the seismic performance of 
their systems. He also served as president and executive vice president of the International 

Association of Structural Safety and Reliab
ility (IASSAR).  Shinozuka received his Ph.D. from 
Columbia University from the Department of 
Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics in 
1960 and an M.S. in civil engineering (1955) and a B.S. (1953) from Kyoto University. 

 
Ellis Stanley is the general manager for the Emergency Preparedness Department of the City of 
Los Angeles.  Currently he serves as an adviso
r to the Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake 
Engineering Research (MCEER) and is a member 
of the center™s Industry Advisory Board, and 
he chairs the Metro Emergency Manager™s Forum 
of the International Association of Emergency 
Managers.  He is vice-president for the pub
lic sector of the Business and Industry Council on 
Emergency Preparedness and Planning (BICEPP) 
and is on the Emergency Services Committee 
of the American Red Cross Los Angeles chapter.  The city council has also appointed him to the 
Emergency Preparedness Commission for the county and city of Los Angeles, and he is a 

member of the city™s Emergency Operations Board.
  Ellis was recently appointed to the board of 
directors of the National Institute of Urban Search and Rescue (NIUSR).  He was the director of the Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management Agency and has been the director of an 

emergency management program for the city of
 Durham, Durham County, North Carolina and 
Brunswick County, North Carolina. In addition, he
 also served as a county fire marshal, fire and 
rescue commissioner, county safety officer; as president of the International Association of 
Emergency Managers (IAEM), the American So
ciety of Professional Emergency Planners 
(ASPEP), the National Defense Transportation Association (NDTA), and the Metropolitan 
Atlanta chapter of the National Forum for Black
 Public Administrators (NFBPA); and as vice 
chair of the Association of Contingency Pla
nners (ACP). He also chaired the Certified Emergency Managers Certification 
Commission.  Stanley is a 1973 graduate of the University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill with a degree in political science.   
 Peter Steenkiste 
is a professor of computer science and of electrical and computer engineering at 
Carnegie Mellon University.  His research interest
s are in the areas of networking and distributed 
computing. After joining CMU, he worked on a number of high-performance computing and 

networking projects, including Nectar, the fi
rst workstation clusters built around a high-
performance, switch-based local area network. He 
has also done research in the areas of network 
quality of service, large-scale self-configurin
g network services, and network measurements. 
Steenkiste™s current research is in the areas of pervasive computing and wireless networking. For 

example, he is working on technologies that will 
support the widespread deployment of context-aware services for mobile users.  In the wireless 
area, he is developing 
protocols and algorithms 
for a ﬁself-managingﬂ wireless network and he is 
also looking at better techniques and methods 
for evaluating and testing wireless networks.  Steenkiste received the degree of electrical engineer 

from the University of Gent in Belgium in 19
82, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical 
engineering from Stanford University in 1983 and 1987, respectively. 
 Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON USING IT TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 26 Gio Wiederhold
 is an emeritus professor of computer 
science at Stanford University, with 
courtesy appointments in medicine and in electri
cal engineering.  His current research includes 
privacy protection in collaborative settings, large-scale software composition, access to 
simulations to augment decision-making capabiliti
es for information systems, and developing 
algebra over ontologies.   Prior to his academic career he spent 16 years in the software industry. 
His career followed computer technologies, starting with numerical analysis applied to rocket 

fuel, FORTRAN and PL/1 compilers, real-time data
 acquisition, and a time-oriented database 
system; eventually he became a corporate software 
architect.  He has been elected a fellow of the 
ACMI, the IEEE, and the ACM.  He spent 199
1-1994 as the program manager for knowledge-
based systems at DARPA in Washington, D.C. 
He has been an editor and editor-in-chief of 
several IEEE and ACM publications.  Wiederhold 
served as a reviewer for several CSTB reports, including 
Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government
; Youth, Pornography, and the Internet; Technical, Bu
siness, and Legal Dimensions of Protecting Children from Pornography on the Internet: Proceedings of a Workshop; Non-technical 
Strategies to Reduce Children™s Exposure to Inappr
opriate Material on the Internet: Summary of 
a Workshop
; Review of the FBI™s Trilogy Information Technology Modernization Program
; and a letter report to the FBI.   Wiederhold received a degree in aeronautical engineering in Holland in 
1957 and a Ph.D. in medical information science from the University of California at San 

Francisco in 1976. 
  STAFF  Jon Eisenberg is a senior program officer with the 
Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board of the National Academies. At CSTB, he has been study director for a diverse body of 

work, including a series of studies exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and 
communications technologies. Current studies include an examination of emerging wireless 

technologies and spectrum policy and a study of how to use information technologies to enhance 

disaster management.  In 1995-1997 he was an 
AAAS Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy 
Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International De
velopment, where he worked on environmental 
management, technology transfer, and informati
on and telecommunications policy issues. He 
received his Ph.D. in physics from the University
 of Washington in 1996 and a B.S. in physics 
with honors from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988. 

 
Ted Schmitt is a consultant for the Computer Scie
nce and Telecommunications Board of the 
National Academies. He is currently involved 
in the CSTB projects providing a comprehensive 
exploration of cybersecurity and the use of IT 
to enhance disaster management.  Before working 
at CSTB, Ted was involved in the development of 
the digital publishing industry and has taken an 
active role in various standards groups related to
 digital rights management. Prior to that, he 
served as technical director at a number of small technology companies in Germany, Sweden, and 

the United States. He started his career in 1984 as a software engineer for IBM, earning two 
patents.  Ted is currently working on his M.A. 
in international science and technology policy at 
George Washington University. His graduate
 work is supported by a fellowship from the 
Diplomat and Consular Officers Œ Retired. He recei
ved a B.S. in electrical engineering in 1984 
and a B.A. in German in 1997 from Purdue Univer
sity and studied at the Universität Hamburg, 
Germany. 
 Jennifer M. Bishop is a program associate for the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board of the National Academies. She is curre
ntly involved in several studies, including 
Telecommunications Research and Developmen
t, Information Technology for Enhancing 
Disaster Management, and an inquiry into the in
formation needs of citizens during a disaster. She 
Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster ManagementCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND STAFF  
 27also maintains CSTB™s contact database, handles 
updates to the CSTB Web site, coordinates the 
layout and design of 
Update, the CSTB newsletter, and designs
 book covers and promotional 
materials. Prior to her move to Washington, Bi
shop worked for the City of Ithaca, New York, 
coordinating the Police Department™s transition 
to a new SQL-based time accrual and scheduling 
application. Her other work experience includes 
maintaining the police r
ecords database for the City of Ithaca, designing customized hospitality 
industry performance reports for a research firm, 
and freelance publication design. She is a visual artist working in oil and mixed media. She holds 
a B.F.A from Cornell University. 

 Gloria Westbrook joined the Academies with 7 year
s of administrative experience. She 
previously served as the executiv
e assistant to the directors of the Office of Youth Programs and 
the Youth Opportunity Grant Program at the D.C. Department of Employment Services (DOES). 
While serving in the Director™s Office Gloria received the Meritorious Service Award and the 

Workforce Development Administrator™s Award of 
Appreciation for Dedicated Service. She also 
became a member of the National Association 
of Executive Secretaries and Administrative 
Assistants.  Gloria is currently a senior program
 assistant for the CSTB project titled ﬁSufficient 
Evidence? Building Certifiably Dependable System
s.ﬂ  She attended Duke Ellington School of 
the Performing Arts for ballet and went on to furthe
r her dance education at the University of the 
Arts in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
  