DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11453(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics:Unsolved Problems and Challenges58 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10029-8 | DOI 10.17226/11453Organized by Samuel Karlin, David Eisenberg and Russ Altman, National Academy ofSciences(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
  Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and 
Challenges   
    
 
National Academy of Sciences Washington, DC 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ArthurM.Sackler,M.D.
1913Œ1987BorninBrooklyn,NewYork,ArthurM.Sacklerwasedu-
catedinthearts,sciences,andhumanitiesatNewYork
University.Theseinterestsremainedthefocusofhislife,ashe
becamewidelyknownasascientist,artcollector,andphilan-

thropist,endowinginstitutionsoflearningandculturethrough-

outtheworld.
Hefeltthathisfundamentalrolewasasadoctor,avocation
hedecideduponattheageoffour.Aftercompletinghis

internshipandserviceashousephysicianatLincolnHospitalin

NewYorkCity,hebecamearesidentinpsychiatryatCreed-

moorStateHospital.There,inthe1940s,hestartedresearch

thatresultedinmorethan150papersinneuroendocrinology,

psychiatry,andexperimentalmedicine.Heconsideredhis

scientificresearchinthemetabolicbasisofschizophreniahis

mostsignificantcontributiontoscienceandservedaseditorofthe
JournalofClinicaland
ExperimentalPsychobiology
from1950to1962.In1960hestartedpublicationof
MedicalTribune
,aweeklymedicalnewspaperthatreachedoveronemillionreadersin20countries.He

establishedtheLaboratoriesforTherapeuticResearchin1938,afacilityinNewYorkforbasic

researchthathedirecteduntil1983.
Asagenerousbenefactortothecausesofmedicineandbasicscience,ArthurSacklerbuilt
andcontributedtoawiderangeofscientificinstitutions:theSacklerSchoolofMedicine

establishedin1972atTelAvivUniversity,TelAviv,Israel;theSacklerInstituteofGraduate

BiomedicalScienceatNewYorkUniversity,foundedin1980;theArthurM.SacklerScience

Centerdedicatedin1985atClarkUniversity,Worcester,Massachusetts;andtheSacklerSchool

ofGraduateBiomedicalSciences,establishedin1980,andtheArthurM.SacklerCenterfor

HealthCommunications,establishedin1986,bothatTuftsUniversity,Boston,Massachusetts.
Hispre-eminenceintheartworldisalreadylegendary.AccordingtohiswifeJillian,oneof
hisfavoriterelaxationswastovisitmuseumsandartgalleriesandpickoutgreatpiecesothers

hadoverlooked.Hisinterestinartisreflectedinhisphilanthropy;heendowedgalleriesatthe

MetropolitanMuseumofArtandPrincetonUniversity,amuseumatHarvardUniversity,and

theArthurM.SacklerGalleryofAsianArtinWashington,DC.Truetohisoft-stated

determinationtocreatebridgesbetweenpeoples,heofferedtobuildateachingmuseumin

China,whichJillianmadepossibleafterhisdeath,andin1993openedtheArthurM.Sackler

MuseumofArtandArchaeologyatPekingUniversityinBeijing.
Inaworldthatoftenseesscienceandartastwoseparatecultures,ArthurSacklersawthem
asinextricablyrelated.InaspeechgivenattheStateUniversityofNewYorkatStonyBrook,

Somereflectionsonthearts,sciencesandhumanities,
ayearbeforehisdeath,heobserved:
‚‚Communicationis,forme,the
primummovens
ofallculture.Inthearts...Ifindtheemotional
componentmostmoving.Inscience,itistheintellectualcontent.Botharedeeplyinterlinked

inthehumanities.™™TheArthurM.SacklerColloquiaattheNationalAcademyofSciencespay

tributetothisfaithincommunicationastheprimemoverofknowledgeandculture.
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED PROBLEMS AND 
CHALLENGES        OCTOBER 
15-17, 2004  The Beckman Center, Irvine, CA Organized by Samuel Karlin, David Eisenberg and Russ Altman 
  Table of Contents   Program.....................................................................................Pages 1-2 
 Presentation Abstracts...........................................................Pag
es 3-24  
Poster Session.......................................................................Pag
es 25-26  
Poster Abstracts....................................................................Pag
es 27-46  
Participant Roster..................................................................P
ages 47-54   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Cover Art courtesy of Samuel
 Karlin, Stanford University
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1   FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES
  October 15-17, 2004 Beckman Center of the National Academies 100 Academy Drive, Auditorium 
Irvine, California Organized by Samuel Karlin, D
avid Eisenberg and Russ Altman   PROGRAM Friday, October 15
 7:45 pm Buses Depart Hyatt Newporter for Beckman Center 
8:00-10:00 pm   Registration, Welcome Reception, and Poster Session 

10:00 pm Buses Depart Beckman Center for Hyatt Newporter 
 Saturday, October 16
 7:15 am and  
7:45 am Buses Depart Hyatt Newporter for Beckman Center 

7:30 am Breakfast 

 Opening Comments 
 8:30 am Samuel Karlin (Stanford University) 
 
Session I:  Informatics of the Human Genome
 (8:35 am Œ 12:10 pm) 
Chair  Samuel Karlin (Stanford University) 
8:35 am George Miklos (Secure Genetics Pt
y Limited and Human Genetic Signatures Pty 
Limited), Clinical Challenges for Bioinformatics
 9:20 am Mark Gerstein (Yale University), 
Human Genome Annotation 
10:05 am Break 

10:35 am David Haussler (University of California, Santa Cruz), 
Using Evolution to Explore 
the Human Genome 
11:20 am Pavel Pevzner (University of California, San Diego), 
Transforming Men into Mice 
(and into Cats, Dogs, Cows, Rats, Chimpan
zees, etc.):  Evolutionary Lessons 
from Mammalian Sequencing and Comparative Mapping Projects 
12:10 pm Lunch 
 Session II:  Motifs and Genomics
 (1:30 Œ 3:00 pm) 
Chair Russ Altman (Stanford University) 
1:30 pm Peer Bork (European Molecular Biology Laboratory), 
Genome Evolution and 
Protein Networks 2:15 pm Phil Green (Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute and University of Washington), 
Signal and Noise in Genomic Sequences 
3:00 pm Break 

 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2  Session III:  Protein-Protein Interactions
 (3:30 Œ 6:00 pm) 
Chair Valerie Daggett (University of Washington) 

3:30 pm David Eisenberg (University of California, Los Angeles), 
Protein Interactions 
4:15 pm Hanah Margalit (The Hebrew University of Jerusalem)
, From Cellular Networks to 
Molecular Interactions and Back 5:00 pm Shoshana Wodak (Hospital for Sick Children), 
Protein-Protein Interactions: The 
Challenge of Predicting Specificity
  6:15  Reception and Poster Session 

8:00 Dinner 

 Russell F. Doolittle (University of California, San Diego), 
Regarding Irreducible 
Complexities
, Introduced by David Eisenberg (University of California, Los 
Angeles) 
 
10:30 Buses Depart Beckman Center for Hyatt Newporter 

 Sunday, October 17
 7:15 am and  
7:45 am Buses Depart Hyatt Newporter for Beckman Center 

7:30 am Breakfast 

 
Session IV:  Regulation with RNA and Aspects of Splicing
 (8:30 Œ 10:45 am) 
Chair  David Eisenberg (University of California, Los Angeles) 

8:30 am Sean Eddy (Washington University, St. Louis), 
The Modern RNA World:  
Computational Screens for Noncoding RNA Genes 
9:15 am Christopher Burge (Massac
husetts Instittue of Technology), 
Toward an RNA 
Splicing Code 10:00 am  Christopher Lee (Univers
ity of California, Los Angeles), 
Discovering Evolutionary 
Mechanisms from Multiple Metr
ics of Molecular Evolution
 10:45 am Break 
 Session V:  Protein Structure
 (11:00 am Œ 12:30 pm) 
Chair George Miklos (Secure Genetics Pty 
Limited and Human Genetic Signatures Pty 
Limited) 11:00 am Helen Berman (Rutgers University), 
Probing the PDB 
11:45 am Michael Levitt (S
tanford University), 
Structural Alignment and Classification of all 
Known Protein Structure 
12:30 pm Lunch 
 Session VI:  Transcription and Translation in Eukaryotic Genomes 
(1:30 Œ 4:45 pm) 
Chair George Miklos (Secure Genetics Pty 
Limited and Human Genetic Signatures Pty 
Limited) 1:30 pm Volker Brendel (I
owa State University), 
Comparative Plant Genomics:  Evaluation 
of the Model Genome Concept 
2:15 pm Terry Gaasterland (Rockefeller Univer
sity and University of California, San 
Diego/SIO), 
Lessons from the Arabadopsis Genome:  Decoding Evidence for 
Novel Transcription 
3:00 pm Break 
3:15 pm Russ Altman (St
anford University), 
Building Genotype Phenotype Data 
Resources 
4:00 pm Samuel Karlin 
(Stanford University), 
Highly Expressed Genes Based on Codon 
Usage Biases in Archaeal and Eukaryotic Genomes
   5:00 pm  Buses Depart Beckman Center for Hyatt Newporter and Orange County Airport 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3        FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED 
PROBLEMS AND 
CHALLENGES
    October 15-17, 2004   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PRESENTATION  ABSTRACTS  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4    
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 This page is intentionally left blank.  
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5  Presentation Abstract  Session I Œ 1) George Miklos   Clinical Challenges for Bioinformatics
    
George L Gabor Miklos Secure Genetics Pty Limited and 
 Human Genetic Signatures Pty Limited, Sydney, Australia
   The clinical validation of mathematically and 
statistically rigorous bioinformatic models in 
the prognostic contexts of human diseases, and in 
the evaluation of methylation signatures, is a 
difficult endeavor. However, if transcriptomic 
and proteomic data are to significantly enhance 
therapeutic protocols, they 
must provide an improvement on 
current treatments, where for 
example, adjuvant systemic admin
istration of anti-cancer drugs generally yields net gains in 
survival of only a few months, and where in the case
 of breast cancers, only 10% or so of patients 
benefit from such treatments. 
    Genome wide analyses, exemplified by
 microarrays, have become a backbone of 
molecular research, but difficulties are emergi
ng in their applications to cancers and complex 
diseases (Ein-dor et al., 2004, 
Bioinformatics
, in press; Miklos and Maleszka, 2004, 
Nature 
Biotechnology
, 22, 615; Yeung et al., 2004, Genome Biology
, 5, R48). For example, analyses of 
the same
 lung cancer data by 
different bioinformatic pipelines, implemented by computer experts, 
statisticians and bioinformaticians from acad
emia and the pharmaceutical sector, have found 
almost no commonalities between the gene sets that 
are claimed to be of prognostic significance 
to patient survival (Critical Assessment of Microarray Data Analysis
 meeting 2003). In addition, 
these new analyses revealed little overlap with t
he genes that were considered to be of most 
importance in the original studies. A similar si
tuation holds from microarray data on leukemias. 
The use of different commonly used preprocessing packages, such as MAS5.0, RMA and 
GCRMA, (Bumgarner, 2004), on data from smokers 
versus non-smokers, also yields largely non-
overlapping gene sets. Furthermore, analysis of 
breast cancer survival datasets demonstrates 
that prognostic gene cohorts are not unique and that 
equally predictive lists can be produced from 
the same data. Thus, the ﬁtopﬂ genes cannot be considered as the main candidates for anti-
cancer treatment, since there are many different 
groups of ﬁtopﬂ genes. Similarly, the genes that 
have been prioritized in neuropsychiatric disord
ers such as the schizophrenias, barely overlap 
with those that have emerged from clinical, 
in situ
, SNP, drug perturbation, knockout and 
association studies. Finally, data from 
Saccharomyces
, where genome-wide knockouts and 
phenotypic data have been compared to expression 
data, have shown that no simple relationship 
exists between genes selected on the basis of thei
r expression level changes and the biology of 
the perturbed system (Birrell et al., 2002, 
PNAS, 99, 8778).  
        At the clinical level, continuing impediment
s to therapeutic progress are the ill-defined 
boundaries of most diseases at the level of t
he individual and the extensive phenotypic variation 
of human diseases; for example, different sample
s from the same tumor are molecularly highly 
heterogeneous. We are faced with broad categories such as the dementias, the cancers and 
AIDS, all of which are heterogeneous collections 
of perturbed biological systems that have 
undoubtedly reached their phenotypic endpoints by diffe
rent trajectories in different individuals. 
Despite the implications of this heterogeneity
, ultra-sensitive transcriptomic and proteomic 
technologies are nevertheless enthusiastically app
lied to human tissue samples, in many cases, 
inappropriately chosen ones. This is particularly dangerous when the etiology and the clinical 
symptoms are separated by decades, or when genomes, and hence cellular networks and 
attractor basins are massively imbalanced or rerouted owing to aneuploidogenic processes. A 

major challenge therefore, is to derive a r
obust mapping between the phenotypic space defined 
by physicians and the perturbed networks which occu
r at different levels from the molecular, 
developmental and neuroanatomical through to t
he cognitive. A second challenge involves 
deconvoluting the dynamics of c
hange; how does the initial perturbation set in motion the 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6  cascade of events which percolate 
and modify the various levels until some form of altered 
trajectory becomes clinically recognizable?  
   Finally, at the epigenetic level, each cell ty
pe has a different methylation signature that 
characterizes that cell type. However, there is a 
semi-fluid modulation of methylation signatures 
that characterizes each cell which is a result
 of all the epigenetic changes that have occurred 
since fertilization and the current
 tissue niche in which that cell resides. The unique cellular 
signature of an individual can alter owing to die
t, age, stress, drugs and so forth. Hence, at the 
methylation coalface, we face a far more interesting and complex clinical situation than the 
current emphasis on hardware changes such as mutations, SNPs, and gross genomic 

imbalances, since methylation signatures 
are dynamic and context dependent. They provide 
snapshots of the 
current network status
 and hence of our current cellular operating systems. The 
rewards of rigorous bioinformatic analyses in this sphere are likely to be profound.
   
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7  Presentation Abstract  Session I Œ 2) Mark Gerstein 
 Human Genome Annotation 
 Z Zhang, P Harrison, Y Liu, N Carriero, D Zhang, P Bertone, J Karro, D Milburn, N Echols, J Rinn, M Snyder, M Gerstein 
Yale University   A central problem for 21st century science 
will be the analysis and understanding of the 
human genome.  My talk will be concerned with topics
 within this area, in particular annotating 
pseudogenes (protein fossils) in the genome. I will discuss a comprehensive pseudogene 
identification pipeline and storage database we hav
e built. This has enabled use to identify >10K 
pseudogenes in the human and mouse genomes and analyze their distribution with respect to 
age, protein family, chromosomal location.  One interesting finding is the large number of 
ribosomal pseudogenes in the human genome, with 80 f
unctional ribosomal proteins giving rise to 
~2,000 ribosomal protein pseudogenes.  At end I 
will talk broadly about pseudogenes, in terms of 
their composition and mutation rates and I will compare pseudogenes in the human with those in 
a number of other model organisms, including worm, fly, yeast, and various prokaryotes. I will 

also talk about the problem of identifying pseudogenes
 in relation to the overall problem of finding 
genes in genome. 
 
http://bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu http://pseudogene.org  
Comparative analysis of processed pse
udogenes in the mouse and human genomes. 
Z Zhang, N Carriero, M Gerstein (2004) Trends Genet 20: 62-7. 
 
Identification of pseudogenes in the Drosophila melanogaster genome. 
PM Harrison, D Milburn, Z Zhang, P Bertone, M Ge
rstein (2003) Nucleic Acids Res 31: 1033-7. 
 
Millions of years of evolution preserved: a co
mprehensive catalog of 
the processed pseudogenes in the human genome. 
Z Zhang, PM Harrison, Y Liu, M Gerstein (2003) Genome Res 13: 2541-58. 
 Patterns of nucleotide substitution, insertion and deletion in the human genome inferred from 

pseudogenes. 
Z Zhang, M Gerstein (2003) Nucleic Acids Res 31: 5338-48. 
 
Studying genomes through the aeons: protein fa
milies, pseudogenes and proteome evolution. 
PM Harrison, M Gerstein (2002) J Mol Biol 318: 1155-74. 
 
Identification and analysis of over 2000 ribosoma
l protein pseudogenes in the human genome. 
Z Zhang, P Harrison, M Gerstein (2002) Genome Res 12: 1466-82. 
 
Digging for dead genes: an analysis of the char
acteristics of the pseudogene population in the 
Caenorhabditis elegans genome. 
PM Harrison, N Echols, MB Gerstein (2001) Nucleic Acids Res 29: 818-30. 

   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8  Presentation Abstract  Session I Œ 3) David Haussler 
 Using Evolution to Explore the Human Genome  David Haussler University of California, Santa Cruz
   The reference sequence of the human genome was recently produced, along with drafts of 
the chimp, mouse, rat, dog, chicken and other gen
omes. Data and analysis of these is available 
on the genome browser at http://genome.ucsc.edu, 
a site that now averages more than 5,000 
distinct users per day. This is the site where t
he first publicly accessible working draft of the 
human genome was posted. The site currently feat
ures an interactive ﬁmicroscopeﬂ on the human 
genome and its evolution, via cros
s-species comparative genomics. 
  In 2002, a statistical estimate based on a simple measure of similarity between short 

orthologous segments in the human and mouse gen
omes suggested (very roughly) that about 
5% of the human genome shows signs of being un
der purifying selection. Purifying selection 
occurs in the most important functional segment
s of the genome, where random mutations are 
mostly deleterious and hence are rejected by natur
al selection, leaving the orthologous segments 
in different species more similar than would be expected under a ﬁneutralﬂ mutation model. With 
more genomes now available, we find that this
 rough estimate of the fraction of the genome 
under purifying selection is holding up, and we are 
better able to pinpoint specific segments in the 
human genome that are evolving under this type of selection. 

  We are using new ﬁcontext dependentﬂ models of 
molecular evolution to find regions of the 
human genome that are not only under purifying se
lection, but are specifically evolving like 
protein-coding regions in genes. Here evoluti
onary analysis leads to a functional prediction. 
These methods have led to the prediction of m
any new human genes. Related analysis led to the 
discovery of a host of previously unexplored 
non-coding elements in the human genome that are 
under extremely strong purifying selection as well.
 We call these ﬁultraconservedﬂ elements.  
Their function is currently unknown. 
 
 This work brings up an interesting informat
ion theoretic question: how well can we use the 
genomes of our present day animal relatives to 
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the 
individual bases of our genome, or, in other wo
rds, how much information about the ancestral 
state of our DNA bases was irrevocably lost? Th
is depends a lot, but not exclusively, on how far 
back in time you want to go. Via simulation, we 
estimate that most of the DNA sequence of the 
common ancestor of all placental mammals can 
be predicted with 98% accuracy. This placental 
ancestral genome can in fact be reconstructed 
better than that of some more recent human 
ancestors because of the favorable phylogenetic 
tree topology present in 
the rapid radiation of 
species of placental mammals in the last part of
 the Cretaceous period. The full theory of the 
reconstructability of ancestral DNA bases, via a 
mutual information analysis, appears to be non-
trivial.  References: see http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/pubs.html 
   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9  Presentation Abstract  Session I Œ 4) Pavel Pevzner 
 Transforming Men into Mice (and into Cats, Dogs, Cows, Rats, Chimpanzees, etc):  
Evolutionary Lessons from Mammalian Sequencing and Comparative Mapping 
Projects  Pavel Pevzner 
University  of California at San Diego 
  In a pioneering paper, Nadeau and Taylor, 1984 estimated that surprisingly few genomic 
rearrangements have happened since the diverg
ence of human and mouse 80 million years ago. 
Every genome rearrangement study involves solving 
a combinatorial puzzle to find a  series of 
genome rearrangements to transform one genome into another. I will briefly describe some 
genome rearrangements algorithms and show how th
ese algorithms shed light on previously 
unknown features of mammalian evolution. In parti
cular, they provide evi
dence for extensive re-
use of breakpoints from the same relatively short regions and reveal
 a great variability in the rate 
of micro-rearrangements along the genome. Our anal
ysis also implies the existence of a large 
number of very short ``hidden'' synteny blocks that
 were invisible in comparative mapping data 
and were ignored in previous studies of chromo
some evolution. These results suggest a new 
model of chromosome evolution that postulates t
hat breakpoints are chosen from relatively short 
fragile regions that have much higher propensity 
for rearrangements than t
he rest of the genome. 
     This is a joint work with Glenn Tesler. 
 
      (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10  Presentation Abstract  Session II Œ 1) Peer Bork  Genome Evolution and Protein Networks 
 Peer Bork European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg
    Although with the availability of many completely sequenced metazoan genomes our 
understanding of functionality encoded therein increa
ses, there are still numer
ous features in the 
genomes that need to be exploited for functional and 
evolutionary purposes. Here, I start off by 
describing an emerging, so far undescribed, new g
ene family in human that appears to drive the 
shaping of up to 10% of human chromosome II. T
hen I illustrate more generally the dynamics of 
gene content in metazoan genomes and how it correlates with various other measurements of 
genome evolution such as intron content, protein ar
chitecture or synteny. All of these measures 
indicate that the speed of evolution differs in some
 lineages. Over larger time scales some of the 
genomic features such as gene neighborhood indicate
 functional constraints that can be used for 
function prediction and for the construction of 
protein interaction networks with remarkable 
accuracy. Analysis of such networks reveals the 
functional modularity therein and how it changes 
in time.  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11  Presentation Abstract  Session II Œ 2) Phil Green  Signal and Noise in Genome Sequences 
 Phil Green Howard Hughes Medical Institute and University of Washington
  Interpreting genome sequences requires distinguish
ing `signal', i.e. encoded functional elements, 
from `noise', i.e. non-functional, neutrally evolving sequence. We are working towards an 

improved understanding of bot
h sides of this dichotomy. 
 The characteristics of non-functional sequence 
reflect underlying mutational processes, which 
remain poorly understood. Previous studies of mammalian pseudogene data by several 
investigators have revealed that transitions 
occur more frequently than transversions, G:C 
mutates to A:T at a higher rate than the reverse,
 and rates depend significantly on the flanking 
nucleotide context, with methylated C's in CpG 
dinucleotides being notable hotspots. Studies of 
synonymous coding substitutions have suggested a 
'generation time effect' consistent with the 
idea that most mutations occur in conjunction with
 DNA replication.  Recent work of Duret and 
others points to an important role for recombination in the substitution process, likely reflecting 
the effects of biased gene conversion. 
 Using data from the NISC project (www.nisc.ni
h.gov/), we have discovered (Nat Genet 33, 514-
517 (2003)) a mutational asymmetry associated with transcribed regions that we believe reflects 

an asymmetry in DNA polymerase errors that is 
unmasked by transcription-coupled repair. This 
mutational asymmetry has acted over long evol
utionary periods to produce a compositional 
asymmetry within transcribed regions of mammalia
n genomes. In more recent work, Dick Hwang 
in my lab has developed a powerful Bayesian Mark
ov Chain Monte Carlo approach that allows 
systematic exploration of variation in cont
ext-dependent rates and mutational asymmetry with 
respect to position within an evolutionary tree and within a sequence.  We have applied this to 

investigate variation in mutational patterns in ma
mmalian evolution, finding in particular that CpG 
mutations show a reduced generation time effect
 relative to other mutation types (Hwang and 
Green, PNAS in press).  I will discuss ongoing wo
rk investigating the extent to which context-
dependent mutations and biased gene conversion can 
explain the compositional characteristics 
of non-functional DNA in mammals. 
 
Our work on signals currently focuses on the co
mputational identificati
on of coding sequences 
and splicing-related motifs.  We have recently beg
un systematic large-scal
e experimental testing 
of gene predictions (via sequencing of RT-PCR 
products) in selected regions of eukaryotic 
genomes, with the goal of determining all gene struct
ures in these regions. The results are then 
used to improve our computational mode
ls. I will describe our initial work in 
C. elegans
.   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12  Presentation Abstract  Session III Œ 1) David Eisenberg 
 Protein Interactions 
 David Eisenberg, Peter Bowers, Michael Strong, Huiying Li, Lukasz Salwinski, 
 Robert Riley, Richard Llwellyn, Einat Sprinzak, Todd Yeates 
 UCLA-DOE Institute of Genomics and Proteomics, UCLA 
 Protein interactions control the life and deat
h of cells, yet we are only beginning to 
appreciate the nature and complexity of their 
networks. We have taken 
two approaches towards 
mapping these networks.  The first is the synthe
sis of information from fully sequenced genomes 
into knowledge about the network of functional interactions of proteins in cells.  We analyze 

genomes using the Rosetta Stone, Phylogenetic 
Profile, Gene Neighbor, Operon methods to 
determine a genome-wide functional linkage map.  This map is more readily interpreted when 

clustered, revealing groups of proteins partic
ipating in a variety of pathways and complexes.  
Parallel pathways and clusters are also revealed,
 in which different sets of enzymes operate on 
different substrates or with different cofa
ctors.  These methods have been applied genome-wide 
to Micobacterium tuberculosis
 and 
R. Palustris
, as well as to more than 160 other genomes.  
Many results are available at: 
http://doe-mbi.ucla.edu/pronav
  The outcome is increased 
understanding of the network of interacting pr
oteins, and enhanced knowledge of the contextual 
function of proteins. The information can be applied 
in structural genomics to find protein partners 
which can be co-expressed and co-crystallized to give
 structures of complexes.  These inferred 
interactions can be compared to directly measured 
protein interactions, collected in the Database 
of Interacting Proteins: 
http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/
. These observed networks constitute a 
second approach to detailing protein networks.   
    References 
 Visualization and interpretation of protein networks in 
Microbacterium tuberculosis 
based on 
hierarchical clustering of genome-wide functional
 linkage maps.  M. Strong, T.G. Graeber, M. 
Beeby, M. Pellegrini, M.J. Thompson, 
T.O. Yeates, & D. Eisenberg (2003). 
Nucleic Acids 
Research
, 31, 7099-7109 (2003). 
 
Prolinks: a database of protein functional linkage
s derived from coevolution. P.M. Bowers, M. 
Pellegrini, M.J. Thompson, J. Fierro, 
T.O. Yeates, and D. Eisenberg (2004). 
Genome Biology
, 5:R35. 
 
In silico simulation of biological network dynam
ics.  L. Salwinski & D. Eisenberg (2004), Nature Biotechnology
, 22, 1017-1019. 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13  Presentation Abstract  Session III - 2) Hanah Margalit 
 From Cellular Networks to Molecular Interactions and Back 
 Hanah Margalit 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
 The recent large-scale functional genomic 
and proteomic experiments provide various 
types of genome-scale information, such as bi
nding sites of transcript
ion factors and protein-
protein interactions.  Representing these various 
types of data as networks of molecular relations 
opens new ways for exploring the mechanistic m
odules and the underlying evolutionary forces 
that shape the cellular circuitry. 
 To study the mechanistic modules responsible for the switching (on or off) of a variety of 
cellular processes we integrated the networks of 
protein-protein interaction and transcription 
regulation in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
.  Recent studies have focused on either regulatory or 
proteomic interactions. Yet, analyzing each of thes
e networks separately hides the full complexity 
of the cellular circuitry, as many processes 
involve combinations of these two types of 
interactions. To this end we developed a new algorithm for detecting composite motifs in 

networks comprising two or more types of connect
ions. Analysis of the integrated network of 
protein-protein interaction and transcription regulation in 
S. cereviaiae
 revealed several 
composite network motifs that may constitute 
the functional building blocks of various cellular 
processes.   
 Network methodology can be used to study other
 aspects of the cellular circuitry.  By 
representing chromosomal adjacency of genes as
 a network and integrating it with the 
transcriptional regulatory network we
 revealed links between transcription regulation and 
chromosomal organization in both 
Escherichia coli
 and 
S. cerevisiae
. Our findings suggest that in 
both organisms transcription regulation has shaped 
the organization of transcription units on the 
chromosome. Differences found between the organisms reflect the inherent differences in  
transcription regulation between pro- and eukaryotes. 

 Detailed examination of the net
works provides insight into 
the characteristics of the 
molecular interactions comprising them.  In turn, the knowledge gained from known interactions 
can be used in the development of predictive 
algorithms for identifying novel interactions. 
Application of these algorithms 
genome-wide will enrich t
he repertoire of molecular interactions and provide a more complete picture of the cell
ular networks. I will describe our algorithm for 
predicting target genes of novel 
transcription factors, based on t
heir amino acid sequence and on 
knowledge of the binding pattern of other proteins in their family. It is possible that in the future 

such approaches may enable the determination of
 the regulatory networks in the cell based on 
genomic sequence data alone. 
  
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14  Presentation Abstract  Session III - 3) Shoshana Wodak 
 Protein-Protein Interactions:  
The Challenge of Predicting Specificity 
 Shoshana J. Wodak 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto Ontario, Canada
  Protein-protein interactions are probabl
y amongst the most ubiquitous types of 
interactions and play a key role in all cellular processes. Determining the interaction network of 

whole organisms has therefore become a majo
r theme of functional genomics and proteomics 
efforts.  Computational methods for inferring pr
otein interactions are likewise attracting much 
interest. Particularly remarkable has been the se
tup of CAPRI (Critical Assessment of PRedicted 
Interactions), a community-wide experiment analo
gous to CASP (Critical Assessment of Structure Predictions), but aimed at assessing the performan
ce of protein-protein 
docking procedures. To 
this day seventeen complexes offered by crystallo
graphers as targets prior to publication, have 
been subjected to structure prediction by docking 
their two components. Hu
ndreds of predictions 
for these complexes were submitted by an av
erage of 20 predictor groups and assessed by 
comparing their geometry to the X-ray structure a
nd by evaluating the quality of the prediction in 
the regions of interaction. Over
 the four years of CAPRI™s exis
tence progress in the prediction 
quality was clearly observed, but major challenges remain. One is the ability to handle 

conformational flexibility, which often plays a majo
r role. Another key challenge is to single out 
specific from non-specific association modes, 
a problem for which computational analyses are 
still seeking solutions. Various aspects of 
these challenges will be discussed and possible 
avenues for future progress will be outlined. 

  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15  Presentation Abstract  Session IVŒ 1) Sean Eddy 
 The Modern RNA World: Computational Screens for Noncoding RNA Genes 
 Sean R. Eddy 
Washington University, St. Louis 
  Some genes produce RNAs that function dire
ctly as RNA rather than encoding proteins. 
The diversity of noncoding RNAs in nature is 
largely unknown, because RNA genes have been 
difficult to detect systematically, and most curre
nt genefinding approaches focus exclusively on 
protein coding genes. Genome sequence analysis, 
functional genomics, and new computational 
algorithms have enabled several recent experiment
s that have begun to show that RNA genes 
and RNA-based regulatory circuits are 
more prevalent that we suspected. 
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16  Presentation Abstract  Session IVŒ 2) Christopher Burge 
 Towards an RNA Splicing Code 
 Christopher Burge Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 Most human genes are transcribed as precur
sors containing long introns that are 
removed in the process of pre-mRNA splicing.  T
he specificity of splicing is defined in part by 
splice site and branch site sequences located near the 5' and 3' ends of introns.  However, even 
considering transcripts with only very short in
trons, these sequences contain only about half of 
the information required for accurate recognition 
of exons and introns in human transcripts.  
Indeed, it is well known that human transcripts cont
ain a vast excess of sequences that match the 
consensus splice site motifs as well as authentic 
sites yet are virtually never used in splicing Œ so-
called ‚decoy™ splice sites and pairs of decoy splice sites know
n as ‚pseudoexons™.  The ability of 
the splicing machinery to reliably distinguish authentic exons and splice sites from a large excess 
of these imposters implies that se
quence features outside of the canonical splice site/branch site 
elements must play important roles in splicing of
 most or all transcripts.  Prime candidates for 
these features are exonic or intronic 
cis-elements that either enhance or silence the usage of 
adjacent splice sites.  My lab is using a co
mbination of computational and experimental 
approaches to understand the elements that contro
l the specificity of splicing.  Recently 
completed efforts have focused on: (i) improved mode
ling of the classical splice site motifs using 
constrained maximum entropy models
(1)
; (ii) predictive identificatio
n and SNP-based validation of 
exonic splicing enhancer
s (ESEs) in human genes
(2,3); and (iii) studies of variations in the 
sequence and organization of splicing regulatory elements between different vertebrates
(4).  I will 
briefly summarize this work and 
related work from other labs and describe in more detail the 
results of a screen for exonic splicing silencer
s (ESSs) and the development of a first-generation 
RNA splicing simulation algorithm
(5). To systematically identify ESSs, an 
in vivo
 splicing reporter 
system was developed and used to screen a library of random decanucleotides.  Screening of 

cells representing between one- and two-fold coverage of the ~ one million possible 
decanucleotides yielded 1
41 ESSs, 133 of which were unique.  
The silencer activity of over a 
dozen of these sequences was also confirmed 
in a heterologous exon context and in a second 
cell type.  Of the unique ESS decamers, 21 pairs 
differed by only a single nucleotide, and most 
could be clustered into groups to yield seven 
putative ESS motifs.   Some of these motifs 
resemble known motifs bound by the hnRNP proteins H and A1, while others appear novel.  

Motifs derived from the ESS decam
ers are enriched in 
pseudoexons and in al
ternatively spliced 
exons, suggesting roles in suppressing pseudoexon sp
licing and in regulating alternative splicing.  
Potential roles of ESSs in constitutive splic
ing were explored using an algorithm, ExonScan, 
which simulates splicing based on known or putat
ive splicing-related motifs.  ExonScan analysis 
suggests that these ESS motifs 
play important roles in both su
ppression of pseudoexons and in 
splice site definition.  Synergistic combinati
ons of computational and experimental approaches 
appear most promising for making further progress towards complete understanding of the RNA 
splicing code. 
 1. Yeo, G. and  Burge, C. B.  (2004).  J. Comp. Biol.
 11, 377-394. 
2. Fairbrother, W., Yeh, R.-F., Sharp,
 P. A. and Burge, C. B.  (2002).  
Science  297,
 1007-1013. 
3. Fairbrother, W. G., Holste, D., Bur
ge, C. B. and Sharp, P. A.  (2004).  
PLoS Biol. 
2, e268. 4. Yeo, G., Hoon, S., Venkatesh, B. and Burge, C. B.  (2004).  
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA 
(in press). 
5. Wang, Z., Rolish, M., Yeo, G., Tung, V., Maws
on, M. and Burge, C. B.  (2004).  (unpublished 
data).  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17  Presentation Abstract  Session IV Œ 3) Christopher Lee 
 Discovering Evolutionary Mechanisms from Multiple Metrics of Molecular 
Evolution  Christopher Lee University of California, Los Angeles 
 The availability of multiple genome sequences is 
the first essential ingredient for obtaining a 
detailed history of the evolutionary mechanisms 
that have constructed modern organisms.  A 
second key ingredient is the development of multip
le metrics of rates for different evolutionary 
processes, and of different types of selection pr
essure.  We have used metrics for a wide variety 
of evolutionary processes--exon creation and loss
; splice site movement; protein reading frame 
preservation; point substitution rates and select
ion pressures; premature termination codons, and 
conditional selection pressures--t
o examine the role of alternativ
e splicing in the evolution of 
mammalian genomes.  These data show that al
ternative splicing can produce a striking 
acceleration in evolution of a single exon of 
a gene, by reducing negative selection pressure 
against changes to that exon.  This accelerati
on in the evolution of a specific protein 
subsequence shows clear independent evidence 
of adaptive benefit, that has been strongly 
selected for during recent evolution.  Human gen
ome data suggest that up to half of recently 
created exons may have been introduced through such an alternative splicing mechanism.  We 

have also used new metrics of selection pressure
 to automate discovery of drug resistance 
mutations in HIV, and to analyze the evolut
ionary pathways of the viral population.  
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18  Presentation Abstract  Session V Œ 1) Helen Berman  Probing The PDB  Helen M. Berman 
Protein Data Bank; Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics, 
aRutgers, the State University of New Jersey 
 The RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB; www.pdb.or
g) is a publicly accessible information 
portal for researchers and students interested in stru
ctural biology.  At its center is the PDB 
archive Œ the sole international repository fo
r the 3-dimensional structure data of biological 
macromolecules.    
 This talk will focus on the tools provided 
by RCSB PDB to browse and explore these structures.  Structures can be searched and review
ed using a variety of parameters.  Data from 
related resources, including Gene Ontology, EC, KEGG Pathways, and NCBI are mapped to 
structures and loaded into the database.  Structures
 are also linked to their corresponding entry in 
other databases, including Swiss-Prot, SCOP, and PubMed.   

 The RCSB PDB is managed by three RCSB memb
ers - Rutgers, The St
ate University of New Jersey; the San Diego Supercom
puter Center at the University
 of California, San Diego; and 
the Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnol
ogy/UMBI/NIST.   Support is from the NSF, 
NIGMS, the Office of Science, DOE, NLM, NC
I, NCRR, NIBIB, and NINDS.  The RCSB PDB is a member of wwPDB.  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19  Presentation Abstract  Session V Œ 2) Michael Levitt  Structural Alignment and Classification of all Known Protein Structures 
 Rachel Kolodny, Patrice Koehl and Michael Levitt 
Stanford University  We have carried out the largest and most
 comprehensive comparison of protein 
structural alignment methods.  Specifically, we 
evaluate six publicly available structure alignment 
programs: SSAP, STRUCTAL, DALI, LSQMAN, CE and SSM by aligning all 8,581,970 protein 
structure pairs in a test set of 2,930 protein 
domains specially selected from CATH v.2.4 to 
ensure sequence diversity.  Our own method STRUCTAL has also been run on SCOP v. 1-65. 

 Here we use this data to discuss the importance of having an objective different 
geometric match measures with which to evaluate an alignment.  With this improved analysis we 

show that there is a wide variation in the perform
ance of different methods; the main reason for 
this is that it can be difficult to find a good st
ructural alignment between 
two proteins even when 
such an alignment exists.  Methods that do best
 in our study are neither the most popular nor 
those that are generally accepted to work well. 
 We find that STRUCTAL and SSM perform best, 
followed by LSQMAN and CE.  Our focus on the intrinsic quality of each alignment allows us to 
propose a new method, called ‚Bes
t-of-All™, which combines the be
st results of all methods.  
Some commonly used methods miss almost hal
f of the good ‚Best-of-All™ alignments.  
 We discuss the differences between a set of st
ructural alignments and a classification of 
structures.  We compare the most common classi
fications of protein structures (CATH, SCOP 
and DALI/FSSP) and show that they are really qui
te different.  We also present preliminary 
results on an objective method that derives a classi
fication of structures from a series of pair-wise 
alignments. 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20  Presentation Abstract  Session VI Œ 1) Volker Brendel  Comparative Plant Genomics: Evaluation of the Model Genome Concept 
 Volker Brendel Iowa State University   The first plant genome was made available to near completion in 2000.  Arabidopsis 
thaliana continues to be an important mo
del system for studying genome content and 
organization and for functional genomics.  Four years later, the rice genome is essentially 
finished, representing the first monocot genome and a size scale-up of threefold compared to the 
Arabidopsis genome.  The fast expansion of the number of prokaryotic and animal genomes over 

a short period of time appears to have jumped over into the plant genome research field:  the 
genome of Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus are also soon to be finished, sequencing 
projects for tomato and Physcomitrella patens 
have been announced, and a request for proposals 
is out for sequencing the maize genome (which is
 approximately the size of the human genome).  
I will discuss efforts of my group to catch up with
 the computational analysis of all these data.  
While the excitement is always with respect 
to the novel projects, how well do we actually 
understand the current genome data?  How many gene models are solidly established?  How 
large is the error rate in computational gene struct
ure predictions?  In view of inevitable transitive 
gene structure annotation when comparing genomes, 
assessments of accuracy are of paramount 
importance.  I will discuss various tools to fac
ilitate gene structure annot
ation and evaluation and 
present arguments for the f
easibility and necessity of co
mmunity-based annotation. 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21  Presentation Abstract  Session VI Œ 2) Terry Gaasterland 
 Lessons from the Arabidopsis Genome: Decoding Evidence for Novel 
Transcription  Terry Gaasterland The Rockefeller University and Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Genome Research 
Center, University of California, San Diego   Several recent surveys of gene expression indicate
 that genome transcription activity extends well 
beyond mRNA, tRNA and rRNA gene expression. Lar
ge scale studies that completely tiled human 
chromosomes 21 and 22 onto 2-color or 1-color mi
croarrays and hybridized with total RNA found 
considerable transcriptional activity in intergenic
, intronic, and UTR antisense regions (Rinn et al 2003; 
Kapranov et al 2002).  Studies that used chroma
tin immuno-precipitation to isolate DNA bound to 
selected transcription factors followed by hybridizat
ion on DNA microarrays ("ChIP-chip" studies) have 
found unexpected binding events in 
regions annotated as intergenic 
(Euskirchen et al 2004; Martone 
2003; Kampa et al 2004; Cawley et al 2004).  In cont
rast, ChIP-chip studies of POL-II binding sites have 
tended to identify primarily previously annotated 
coding regions (Ren & Dynlacht 2004). Other data 
sources include SAGE-like surveys 
of gene expression using the Mass
ively Parallel Signature Sequence 
(MPSS) technology, which invariably yield substantial ev
idence for transcription 
outside of previously 
annotated genes as well as quantitative 
gene expression levels for annotated genes.  
  Some of the additional transcription is explained by the presence of small non-coding RNA genes 
in intergenic regions.  In the case of microRNAs,
 transcripts from these ~1
50-350 nucleotide (nt) genes 
fold into secondary structures with long, imperfect hai
rpins that are processed by a protein complex that 
recognizes and cleaves double-stranded RNA to release short ~19-23 nt single-stranded RNA molecules.  
These microRNAs are complementary to mRNA tr
anscripts and suppress protein expression by 
repressing translation or by triggering mRNA degr
adation. In plants, microRNAs tend to bind within 
coding regions; in animals, they bind to the 3'UTR.  
 
 This talk presents observations about contro
l of gene and protein expression in Arabidopsis 
thaliana based on the following data sources: tissue 
specific MPSS data and Affymetrix gene expression 
data on stress response, genome-wide prediction of binding
 site clusters for known transcription factors, 
evaluation of alternative splicing evident in cD
NA and EST sequences, and microRNA identification and 
mRNA target prediction (Hoth et al 2003).  These 
data have all been combined to yield a model of 
microRNA regulation of gene and 
protein expression in plants. 
 1. Rinn JL, Euskirchen G, Bertone P, Martone R, Luscombe NM, Hartman S, Harrison PM, Nelson FK, Miller P, 

Gerstein M, Weissman S, Snyder M. The transcriptional ac
tivity of human Chromosome 22. Genes Dev. 2003 17(4):529-
40. 2. Kapranov P, Cawley SE, Drenkow J, Bekiranov S,
 Strausberg RL, Fodor SP, Gingeras TR. Large-scale 
transcriptional activity in chromosome
s 21 and 22. Science. 2002 296(5569):916-9.  
3. Euskirchen G, Royce TE, Bertone P, Martone R, Rinn JL, Nelson FK, Sayward F, Luscombe NM, Miller P, 
Gerstein M, Weissman S, Snyder M. CREB Binds to Multiple Loci on Human Chromosome 22. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 

24(9):3804-14.  

4. Martone R, Euskirchen G, Bertone P, Hartman S, Royce TE, Luscombe NM, Rinn JL, Nelson FK, Miller P, 
Gerstein M, Weissman S, Snyder M. Distribution of NF
-kappaB-binding sites across human chromosome 22. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2003 100(21):12247-52. 

5. Kampa D, Cheng J, Kapranov P, Yamanaka M, Brubaker 
S, Cawley S, Drenkow J, Piccolboni A, Bekiranov S, 
Helt G, Tammana H, Gingeras TR. Novel RNAs identified from an in-depth analysis of the transcriptome of human 
chromosomes 21 and 22. Genome Res. 2004 14(3):331-42. 

6. Cawley S, Bekiranov S, Ng HH, Kapranov P, Sekinger
 EA, Kampa D, Piccolboni A, Sementchenko V, Cheng J, 
Williams AJ, Wheeler R, Wong B, Drenkow J, Yamanaka M, Pate
l S, Brubaker S, Tammana H, Helt G, Struhl K, Gingeras 
TR. Unbiased mapping of transcription factor binding si
tes along human chromosomes 21 and 22 points to widespread 
regulation of noncoding RNAs. Cell. 2004 116(4):499-509.  
7. Ren B, Dynlacht BD. Use of chromatin immunoprec
ipitation assays in genome-wide location analysis of 
mammalian transcription factors. Methods Enzymol. 2004;376:304-15. 

8. Hoth S, Ikeda Y, Morgante M, Wang X, Zuo J, Hanafey MK, Gaasterland T, Tingey SV, Chua NH. Monitoring 
genome-wide changes in gene expression in response to endogenous 
cytokinin reveals targets in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
FEBS Lett. 2003 554(3):373-80.  
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22   Presentation Abstract  Session VI Œ 3) Russ Altman  Building Genotype Phenotype Data Resources 
 Russ Altman 
Stanford University   In the post-genome era, one of the major challenges to informatics is to support the 
association of genotype with phenotype.  In parti
cular, methods are required to represent and 
analyze data in standard formats using agreed semantics, in order to build a useful public 

database.   Such standards may require that 
methods for collecting certain types of data 
(particularly high-throughput data) be standardized to allow for integration of data across multiple 
conditions.   The best progress has been made 
in standardizing exchange of genotype and some 
types of phenotype data, most notably microarr
ay expression data.  However, there are 
significant challenges in representing other ph
enotype data, because the experimental methods 
used to collect this data are diverse, and because  many biologists are not willing to constraint 
their scientific programs in order to be compatible
 with standards.   This can lead to individually 
powerful data sets that stand alone, difficu
lt to integrate with other data sources. 
 
 We are building the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB, 
http://www.pharmgkb.org/) as an initial example of a diverse post-genome database.  
Pharmacogenomics is the study of 
how variation in the genome leads to variation in the response 
to drugs.  The PharmGKB contains information 
about genotypic variation in a set of populations, 
and associates these with variation in phenotypes at molecular, cellular, organ and organisms 

levels.  The PharmGKB currently contains 
genotyping information from more than 5000 
individuals and phenotype information from more than 3000 individuals. 
 
 The goals of PharmGKB include the developmen
t of new tools for pharmacogenomics, and 
the mining/integration of existing databases. We
 have developed a method for defining haplotype 
tagging SNPs, and have shown that these htSNPs ca
n be used to  efficienctly recover the full 
genotype.  We have also developed text mining algorithms to catalog all published gene-drug 
interactions, in order to provide comprehensiv
e coverage of the literat
ure in PharmGKB. The current challenges to PharmGKB include 1) 
defining standards for exchange of phenotype 
information, 2) supporting association studie
s for finding genotype-phenotype correlations, 3) 
defining and supporting the definition of drug-rela
ted pathways, 4) linking high-throughput data 
sources with genes, drugs and diseases of interest, and 5) linking molecular structural and 

cheminformatics information to pharmacogenetic variation. 
   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23  Presentation Abstract  Session VI Œ 4) Samuel Karlin  Highly Expressed Genes Based on Codon Usage Biases in Archaeal and 
Eukaryotic Genomes 
 Samuel Karlin and Jan Mrázek 
Stanford University  Based on rRNA sequence criteria, life has been broadly divided into the three domain:  
bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes, which are believ
ed to reflect phylogenetic relationships.  The 
archaea are further classified into Crenarch
aea and Euryarchaea and recently possibly nano-
archaea.  For most bacterial organisms durin
g exponential growth, ribosomal proteins (RP), 
transcription/translation processing factors (TF)
, and the major chaperone/degradation genes 
(CH) functioning in protein folding and trafficking tend to be highly expressed. The gene classes 
(RP, CH, and RF) serve as representative of 
highly expressed genes, and our method specifies 
genes with rather similar codon usages as PHX genes.  These assignments are reasonable 
under fast growth conditions, where there is 
a need for many ribosomes, for proficient 
transcription and translation, and for many CH prot
eins to ensure properly folded, modified, and 
translocated protein products. The co
don usage difference of the gene group
 F with respect to 
the gene group
 G is calculated by the formula 
BFG
paaFfx.y.zgx,y,zx,y,za, where
 paF are the average amino acid frequencies of the genes of 
F.  Predicted expression 
levels with respect to individual standards can be based on the ratios
 ERPgBgC
/BgRP
, ECHgBgC
/BgCH
,  and ETFgBgC
/BgTF
, where 
C is the totality of all genes of the genome. 
 Using these gene classes as standards, a 
gene is Predicted Highly eXpressed (PHX) if its codon 
usage is rather similar to at least two of the 
RP, TF, and CH gene classes and deviates strongly 
from the average gene of the genome.   An 
overall estimate of the expression level of the gene
 g is Eg defined by the equation
 BgC
Eg13BgRP
BgTF
BgCH
.  The criterion
 Eg1 and where at least two of the values
 ERPg, ETFg, ECHg exceed 1.05 provides an excellent benchmark in
 reflecting high protein molar abundance in a 
rapid growth environment. 
 In all currently available archaeal genome
s, the thermosome chaperonin genes rank 
among the top PHX.  DnaK (HSP70) is found PHX 
virtually only in archaeal mesophiles or in 
archaeal moderate thermophiles.  The Lon protea
se is absent from the Crenarchaea but usually 
PHX among the euryarchaea.  Archaea genomes are also pervasive with proteasome units.  

Other distinctive proteins of archaea generally
 PHX and absent from bacteria highlight PCNA 
(proliferating cell nuclear complex) a replicat
ion auxiliary factor (sliding clamp subunit) 
responsible for tethering the catalytic subuni
t of DNA polymer to DNA during high-speed 
replication.  The ribosomal protein
 P0 (acidic, regulatory)
 whereas the ribosomal machinery in 
eukaryotes contains
 P0,P1,P2 featuring a hyperacidic run at its 
carboxyl end.  Other distinctive 
PHX genes found in all archaea:  Cdc48 Cell divi
sion control protein 48; Cdc6 Replication 
initiation; RadA DNA repair and 
recombination protein in archaea.
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24  In prokaryotes, the maximum
 Eg level correlates negatively with the doubling time of 
the organisms.  Compared to bacterial genomes
, relatively few RP genes of archaea are PHX 
and many are expressed as avera
ge genes.  A clear exception is 
M. maripaludis
.  The yeast genome parallels 
E. coli
 in PHX genes plus the addition of actin, cofilin and related genes.  The 
most PHX genes of 
Drosophila
 encode the cytoskeletal proteins. 
    
 
   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25    FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED 
PROBLEMS AND 
CHALLENGES
 October 15-17, 2004  Poster Session   1. Chen, Lamei (University of California, Los Angeles); 
Analyze HIV-1 Mutation Evolution as 
a Conditional Selection Pressure Network. 
 2. Chuang, Jeffrey (University of California, San Francisco); 
Mutation Rates are Correlated 
in Mammalian Lineages. 
 3. Day, Ryan (University of Washington); 
Molecular Dynameomics
.  4. Kechris, Katherina (Universit
y of California, San Francisco); 
Analysis of human 
alternative splices predicted 
from exon junction arrays. 
 5. Liang, Mike (Stanford University); 
Integrating Sequence and Structure Data for 
Annotating Functional Sites on Protein Structures. 
 6. Liu, Shuo (Stanf
ord University); 
Processes and Functions Potentially Regulated by 
Alternative Splicing Uncovered Through Study of Protein Domains. 
 7. Lotan, Itay (University of California, Berkeley); 
Real Space Protein Model Completion: an 
Inverse Kinematics Approach. 
 8. Mrázek, Jan (Stanford University); 
Genomic Comparisons among 
-proteobacteria. 
 9. Naughton, Brian; 
MotifCut: Motif Finding and Spectral Graph Theory. 
 10. Reyes, Vicente M. (University of California, San Diego); 
Whole Proteome Functional 
Annotation via Automated Detection of Ligand 
3-D Binding Site Motifs:  Application to 
ATP-  and GTP-Binding Sites in Unannotated Proteins of Dictyostelium discoideum. 
 11. Saxonov, Serge (St
anford University); SampleScan: A Sampling Approach to Motif 
Discovery in Nucleotide Sequences. 
 12. Veretnik, Stella (University of California, San Diego); 
Assignment of structural domains in 
proteins:  why is it so difficult. 
 13. Wang, Qi (University of California, Los Angeles); 
Detecting Tissue-Specific Regulation of 
Alternative Splicing as a Qualitative Change in Microarray Data. 
 14. Xing, Yi (University of California, Los Angeles); 
alternative splicing opens neutral paths 
for genome evolution. 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26  15. Xu, Na (University of California, Berkeley); 
Identifying functional importance of NCS 
conserved across multiple species. 
 16. Yeh, Iwei (Stanford University); 
A Cellular Architecture Ontology for Analyzing Protein-
Protein Interactions Based on Subcellular Localizations. 
 17. Zhao, Keyan (University 
of Southern California); 
Genome-wide association mapping of 
flowering time in model plant - Arabidopsis thaliana. 
 
    (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 27     FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED 
PROBLEMS AND 
CHALLENGES
 October 15-17, 2004   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 POSTER  ABSTRACTS(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 28      
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   This page is intentionally left blank.  
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29   Poster Abstract  
1) La-Mei Chen 
  Analyze HIV-1 Mutation Evolution as a Conditional Selection Pressure Network 
 L. Chen, C.J. Lee Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles 
 Antiretroviral therapy of HIV-1 frequently results 
in the emergence of drug resistant variants from 
the viral quasispecies. The development and mainte
nance of drug resistance usually requires the 
accumulation of 2 or more mutations.
 Many drug resistant mutation patterns have been reported, 
but this information is limited and static. It is useful
 to obtain a global picture of all the ways the 
viral population could respond to the current drug 
treatment. To address this problem, we have 
developed a conditional selection pressure (
Ka/Ks) approach that measures how mutation at one 
site alters the selection pressure at another site. The conditional 
Ka/Ks analysis shows that different evolutionary paths to the same final genot
ype can have very different rates, so some 
paths are preferred whereas the others are not
 favored. We have generated a directed diagram 
to represent the mutation network of HI
V-1 protease based on the conditional 
Ka/Ks analysis. This 
diagram shows the speeds of all possible paths 
of evolution the viral population will follow under 
the pressure of current drug treatmen
t. This evolution network also reveals 
kinetic traps
, individual sites (or groups of sites) that accumulate
 mutations rapidly, but which lack fast paths to 
drug resistance mutations (i.e. the rate constant
s are much slower than from wildtype). We can 
combine the kinetic map with existing information 
about specific drug resistance relationships and 
this may reveal general strategies for slowing the evolution of drug resistance.  
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30  Poster Abstract  
3) Ryan Day 
 Molecular Dynameomics 
 Ryan Day, David A. C. Beck, Stephen Edwards, Daigo Inoyama, R. Dustin Schaeffer, 
Robert E. Steward, George W. N. White, and Valerie Daggett 
 Molecular dynamics simulations allow effective ch
aracterization of the dynamics of proteins in 
water. They have been useful both in characterizing
 the native state dynamic
s of proteins and the 
unfolding process. Simulations have also led to 
models of the partially 
unfolded disease states of 
certain proteins. Molecular dynamics simulati
ons have generally only been considered in the 
context of the particular syst
em under study, however, limiti
ng their applicability to broader questions of protein folding and dynamics. We have 
begun an effort to simulate a large number of 
proteins with different topologies under native 
and denaturing conditions in order to address this 
shortcoming. These simulations 
will be analyzed in a broader context in order to determine general dynamic properties of amino acids and prot
eins in water. We are calling this effort 
molecular dynameomics. The thirty most populat
ed folds in the PDB represent 50% of the 
structures deposited. We have begun our work with
 simulations of thirty target proteins from 
these thirty folds. Here we present
 preliminary results from this set. 
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31   Poster Abstract  
4) Katherina Kechris 
 Analysis of human alternative splices predicted from exon junction arrays 
 Katherina Kechris, Jean Yee Hwa Yang, Ru-Fang Yeh 
University of California, San Francisco 
 Following transcription, alternative splicing of ex
ons in a pre-mRNA transcript can create multiple 
different protein products. This process is an 
important mechanism which contributes to the 
protein complexity found in humans. Sequence
 elements in exons and adjacent introns are 
critical for regulating alternative splicing. To 
discover these elements genome-wide, we use the 
experimental results from Rosetta's exon-juncti
on array (Johnson et al., 2003) to first identify 
alternatively and constitutively spliced exons. By applying a variation of their linear model to the 
data, we specify a score that measures the oc
currence of alternative splicing in each gene. 
Based on a ranking using this score, we identif
y genes, with their corr
esponding exons, that are 
either alternatively or constitutively spliced. 
Then, by comparing the word counts between these 
two sets of exons, and their neighboring introns,
 we find motifs that are associated with 
alternative splicing and are potential regulators. In
 particular, we find that adjacent introns of 
alternatively spliced exons are A/T rich, while 
those from constitutively spliced exons are G/C 
rich. For alternatively spliced exons, the motifs di
scovered tend to be A/G rich and are similar to 
known exonic sequence enhancers that are nat
urally occurring or discovered by SELEX. 
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32  Poster Abstract  
5) Mike Liang  Integrating Sequence and Structure Data for Annotating Functional Sites on Protein Structures  Mike Liang Stanford University  Structural genomics initiatives are devel
oping high-throughput methods for large-scale 
determination of all protein struct
ures. The biological roles for m
any of these proteins are still 
unknown, and high-throughput computational 
methods for determining their function are 
necessary. Understanding the f
unction of these proteins will have profound impact  
in drug development and protein engineering. 
 
Current methods for functional annotation of thes
e protein structures are based on sequence only 
or structure only analysis. Although sequence 
based methods have been quite powerful, they 
often have limited use when sequence similarity is 
low. Structure base methods are less sensitive 
to sequence similarity, but many of the stru
cture based methods require manual creation of 
models and are thus limited by the number of ava
ilable functional models. Methods for function 
annotation at a structural
-genomics scale will require both greate
r sensitivity than what sequence 
only methods provide and more functional models than what the structural models offer. 
 To address the requirements for structural-g
enomics scale function annotation, we have 
developed a method, SeqFEATURE, for automatically constructing a three-dimensional (3D) 
model of the functional site by integrating sequ
ence and structure data. The 3D models describe 
the physicochemical environment around sequence
 motifs and identify the significant properties 
that are statistically conserved or absent in 
the functional site. These 3D models have better 
sensitivity than one-dimensional (1D) sequence moti
fs in function annotation. By automatically 
creating these 3D models from sequence motifs, we have developed a method for building a 

library of models that can be used in context 
of a structural genomics pipeline for functional 
annotation of protein structures. 
 SeqFeature is available on the web at 
http://feature.stanfor
d.edu/webfeature. Biologists can 
rapidly annotate their structure with the curr
ently available library of functional models. 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33  Poster Abstract  
6) Shuo Liu  Processes and Functions Potentially Regulated by Alternative Splicing Uncovered 
Through Study of Protein Domains 
 Shuo Liu Stanford University  Alternative splicing plays an important role in 
processes such as development, differentiation, and 
cancer. With the recent increase of the estima
tes of the number of human genes that undergoes 
alternative splicing from 5% to 74%, it becomes 
critical to develop a better understanding of its 
functional consequences and regulatory mechanis
ms. We conducted a large scale study of the 
distribution of protein domains in a curated dat
a set of several thousand genes and identified 
protein domains disproportionately distributed 
among alternatively spliced genes. We also 
identified a number of protein domains that tend 
to be spliced-out. Both the proteins having the 
disproportionately distributed domains as well as those with spliced-out domains are 
predominantly involved in the processes of
 cell communication, signaling, development
 and apoptosis. These proteins function mostly as
 enzymes, signal trans
ducers, and receptors. 
   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34  Poster Abstract  
7) Itay Lotan 
 Real Space Protein Model Completion: an Inverse Kinematics Approach 
 Henry van den Bedem* Itay Lotanƒ, Jean-Claude Latombeƒ and Ashley Deacon* 
* Joint Center for Structural Genomics, Stanford Synchrotron Radiation 
Laboratory, SLAC, ƒ Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
 Rapid protein structure determination relies great
ly on software that can automatically build a 
protein model into an experimental electron density
 map. In favorable circumstances, various 
software systems are capable of building over 90%
 of the final model. However, completeness  
falls off rapidly with the resolution of the di
ffraction data. Manual completion of these partial 
models is usually feasible, put is time-consumi
ng, and prone to subjective interpretation.  
Except for the N- and C-termini of the chain, 
the end points of each missing fragment are known 
from the initial model. Hence, fitting fragment
s reduces to an inverse kinematics problem. 
 We have combined fast, inverse kinematics algorith
ms with a real space, torsion angle refinement 
procedure in a two stage approach to fit missing main-chain fragments into the electron density 
between two anchor points. The first stage samples a large number of closing  
conformations, guided by the electron density. Th
ese candidates are ranked according to density 
fit. In a subsequent refinement stage, optimiz
ation steps are projected onto a carefully  
chosen subspace of conformation space to
 preserve rigid geometry and closure. 
 
In a test set of 103 structurally
 diverse fragments within one protei
n, the algorithm closed gaps of 
12 residues in length to within, on average, 
0.52Å all-atom Root Mean Square Deviation 
(aaRMSD) from the final, refined structure at a 
resolution of 2.8Å. The algorithm has also  
been tested and used to aid protein model completion in areas of weak or ambiguous 
experimental electron density, where an initial m
odel was built using ARP/wARP (Perrakis et al., 
1999) or RESOLVE (Terwilliger, 2002). At a reso
lution of 2.4Å, it closed a 10-residue gap 
to within 0.43Å aaRMSD of the final, refined structure. In another case, a 14-residue gap in a 
51%-complete model built at 2.6Å was closed
 to within 0.9Å aaRMSD. Our method was 
furthermore used to correctly identify and build multip
le, alternative main-chain conformations at a  
resolution of 1.8Å 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35  Poster Abstract  
8) Jan Mrázek  Genomic Comparisons among -proteobacteria  Jan Mrázek1, Alfred M. Spormann
2 and Samuel Karlin
1 1Department of Mathematics and 
2Departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering, of 
Biological Sciences, and of Geological and Environmental Sciences, Stanford University 
 Highly expressed genes in most unicellula
r and some multicellular organisms exhibit 
characteristic codon usage biases that distinguish
 them from the bulk of genes in a genome. We 
have developed a method to identify predicted 
highly expressed (PHX) genes in complete 
genomes. Predicted highly expressed (P
HX) genes are compared for sixteen 
-proteobacteria 
and their similarities and differences are interpreted with respect to known or predicted 
physiological characteristics of the organisms. 
PHX genes often reflect the organism™s lifestyle, 
habitat, nutrition sources and metabolic propensities. This technique allows to predict 
predominant metabolic activities of the microor
ganisms operating in their natural habitats. Among 
the most striking findings is an unusually high number of PHX enzymes acting in cell wall 
biosynthesis, amino acid biosynthesis and replication in the ant endosymbiont 
Blochmannia 
floridanus
. We ascribe the abundance of these PHX genes to specific aspects of the relationship 
between the bacterium and its host. 
Xanthomonas campestris
 is also unique with very high 
number of PHX genes acting in flagellum biosynthesis, which may play a special role during its 
pathogenicity. 
Shewanella oneidensis
 possesses three protein complexes which all can function 
as complex I in the respiratory chain but only the Na
+-transporting NADH:ubiquinone 
oxidoreductase
 nqr
-2 operon is PHX. The PHX genes of 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
 are consistent 
with the microorganism™s adaptation for extremely 
fast growth rates. Comparative analysis of 
PHX genes from complex environmental genomic sequences as well as from uncultured 
pathogenic microbes can provide a novel, useful t
ool to predict global flux of matter and key 
intermediates, as well as specific
 targets of antimicrobial agents. 
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36  Poster Abstract  
9) Brian Naughton 
 MotifCut: Motif Finding and Spectral Graph Theory 
 Brian Naughton   Computationally identifying conserved motifs in
 DNA sequences is important for understanding 
gene regulation. For example, it is used to find 
conserved DNA motifs in the upstream sequences 
of co-expressed genes from microarray and chro
matin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) experiments. 
We have approached the motif-finding problem in a novel way, taking inspiration from an image 
analysis algorithm used to identify the foreground of an image and separate it from the 
background. We build a graph wher
e all of the words k bases long (k-mers) in the sequence are 
represented as nodes. K-mers that are similar to
 each other are then connected with an edge in 
the graph. Usually, motif finding algorithms search
 the DNA sequence for a set of k-mers that are 
as similar to each other as possible. More advance
d algorithms may also ensure that the motif is 
different from a model of the background sequen
ces. We identify groups of k-mers that are 
similar to each other (the "foreground") but also as
 different as possible from all of the other k-
mers in the graph (the "background"). This problem 
is computationally difficult (NP complete), so 
we use an eigendecomposition as an approximati
on to the exact solution. MotifCut shows 
improved results over other motif-findi
ng methods under many conditions.  
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37  Poster Abstract  
10) Vicente M. Reyes 
 Whole Proteome Functional Annotation via Automated Detection of  Ligand 3-D Binding Site Motifs:  Application to ATP-  and GTP-Binding Sites in 
Unannotated Proteins of Dictyostelium discoideum  Vicente M. Reyes University of California, San Diego 
 The first few years of the new millennium have 
seen the avalanche of genome sequence data, a 
trend that is predicted to continue for the nex
t 10 to 15 years.  Assignment of function 
("annotation") to these mostly novel sequences is
 fast becoming top priority, for obvious basic 
and medical reasons. However, due to the sh
eer number of sequences to be annotated, 
conventional functional assay techniques in
volving gene cloning, protein expression and 
purification, etc., become extremely impractica
l even if implemented in high-throughput fashion 
including robotics.  The solution lies in tapping
 the ever-increasing pow
er of computers and the 
versatility of "smart" databases to predict the func
tion of novel sequences, especially proteins, on 
the basis of their primary sequences alone. 
 The present study, a part of the grand-challenge in
itiative "The Encyclopedia of Life" at the San 
Diego Supercomputer Center, nicely illustrate
s whole proteome functional annotation using 
computational techniques.  Unlike DNA, which 
generally function at the level of primary 
sequence, and RNA, which (generally) function at 
the level of secondary structure, proteins 
function at the level of tertiary structure. The firs
t step in our study is therefore the prediction of 
the 3-D structure of all the ORFs in the genome of our test organism, 
Dictyostelium discoideum
, via a combination of homology modeling and threading algorithms, and a final step of model 

completion using the program Modeller6v2.  Thes
e predicted 3-D structur
es will then be screened 
in a later step for various ligand 3-D binding site 
motifs.  The second step in our study is therefore 
the construction of the 3-D binding site motif of a given ligand using as "training set" several 

(typically 8-12, but see below) experimentally solv
ed protein structures with the ligand of interest 
bound.         
     
As mentioned, the third and final step in our stud
y is the screening of the predicted 3-D structures 
of the D. discoideum proteins (from step 1) for the 3-D binding site motif (from step 2) using a set 
of Fortran 77 and 90 programs we developed. The progr
am set treats the motif as a tree structure 
with a root, nodes, branches and edges, and searches
 for such ﬁtreeﬂ in the protein structures.  
Since the latter are predicted and as such carry si
gnificant degrees of uncertainty, we have tried 
to minimize the effects of such uncertainties 
by incorporating fuzzy logic into the screening 
process. This was done by using two types of reduc
ed representation of the 
proteins in the test 
set, namely: (a.) representing the protein as a coll
ection of the centroids of its constituent amino 
acids, and (b.) representing the protein as the 
aggregate of its backbone atoms and the centroids 
of the side chains of its constituent amino acids. 
Another quality assurance step is the use of the 
program FADE, which detects crevice and pocket residues in protein 3-D structures. In building 

the binding site motif, we make sure that at least one (preferably two or more) residues making it 
up is/are located in crevices/pockets
 in an effort to reduce false positives, the rationale being that 
binding site residues are almost always found in such locations.   

 We chose ATP and GTP as the pilot ligands for th
is study. As the ATP-binding protein family is 
quite heterogeneous, we first narrowed down our st
udy to (1) ser/thr protein kinases (PKs), (2) 
cAMP-dependent PKs, and (3) ABC transporters. The training set for (1) contained sufficient 
members, but those of (2) and (3) contained only one member each, as there was only one 
experimentally solved structure each of a cA
MP-dependent PK and an ABC transporter, with 
bound ATP, on deposit in the PDB. Nevertheless, binding site motifs for all three families were 
successfully built.   
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38  Control screens were then perfo
rmed. Positive controls composed of ser/thr PKs of available 
experimental 3-D structures, and negative controls 
composed of proteins known not to bind ATP, 
also with available experimental 3-D structures, 
were subjected to the screening procedure. Both 
yielded the expected results, albeit with a small proportion of false negatives, and an even 

smaller proportion of false positives.  
 The 400 previously unknown and unannotated proteins of 
D. discoideum
 were then chosen as 
the pilot test set. Two binding site motifs were deduced from the ser/thr PK training set, one with 
the two ribose hydroxyls ﬁboundﬂ to a single pr
otein residue centroid (type 1), and a second 
where the two hydroxyls are separately ﬁboundﬂ (t
ype 2). Screening the test set for the ser/thr 
ATP binding site motif type 1, our program det
ected 32 putative ATP-binding proteins, which on 
closer human inspection, revealed that only 15 ar
e true positives.  Screening for type 2, the 
program picked up 25 putatives, which on closer inspection revealed that all but 1 may be false 
positives.  It now remains to be seen whether the 16 true positives (15 type 1 and 1 type 2) 
picked up by our program above indeed bind ATP vi
a actual laboratory experimental techniques. 
 Interestingly, our program did not detect any 
putative cAMP-dependent PK nor ABC transporter 
from the test set.  This may be due to the fact t
hat the training sets for these two families each 
contained only one member (as those were the onl
y ones available from the PDB), making the 
screen overly specific and t
herefore quite insensitive.   
 
Similar work on GTP is underway.  We are also 
currently trying to incorporate all the different 
programs for all the different steps in the entire procedure into one main calling script in order to 
streamline the screening procedure and make
 it less dependent on human intervention, and 
therefore more amenable to complete automation, an
d, in turn, more suited to large-scale, whole-
proteome screening. 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39  Poster Abstract  
11) Serge Saxonov 
 SampleScan: A Sampling Approach to Motif Discovery in Nucleotide Sequences 
 Serge Saxonov, Serafim Batzoglou, Douglas L Brutlag 
Stanford University  When looking for DNA motifs on a genomic scale on
e is faced with two main challenges. One is 
that most motifs are likely to be present in onl
y a small number of sequences, making it harder for 
conventional motif finders to spot them. The seco
nd is that the sheer size of the data often 
precludes the application of many well-established algorithms. In this work we present a 

sampling-based method geared specifically toward 
discovery of motifs in large sequence sets. 
 In an outline, the method works by constructing 
many small subsets of sequences by sampling 
from the whole set, followed by an application of 
a motif-finder  to each of the subsets.  The 
motivation behind the approach is that a motif t
hat is present in too small a fraction of the 
sequences to be discovered by a conventional motif-finder, will be enriched in some of the 

subsets, allowing it to be discovered. Each of
 the candidate motifs is tested and refined by 
scanning the entire sequence set.  To help with th
is approach we constructed a new motif finder 
that outperforms other programs when run on small data sets. 

 As a test case we have applied the SampleScan 
approach to the set of yeast upstream regions. 
We have shown that the method can recover a su
bstantial fraction of known yeast motifs. In 
addition, we have used comparative genomics in
formation and location bias to validate the 
motifs.
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40  Poster Abstract  
12) Stella Veretnik 
 Assignment of structural domains in proteins:  why is it so difficult? 
 Stella Veretnik
1, Ilya N. Shindyalov
1.  Nickolai N. Alexandrov and Phillip E. 
Bourne,
 1,2 1 San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego, 
2 Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego 
  Structural domains are often considered to be bas
ic units of protein structure.  Assignment of 
structural domains from atomic coordinates is crucial for understanding protein evolution and 

function. Currently there is no good agreement among different assignment methods for what 
constitute the basic structural unit, underscoring the complexity of structural domain 
assignment.  This work discusses tendencies of individual methods and highlights the 

problematic areas in assignment of structural domains by experts as well as by fully automated 
methods. 
 Domain assignments were analyzed for three 
automatic methods (DAL
I[1], DomainParser[2], 
PDP[3]) and three expert methods (AUTHORS[4], CATH[5], SCOP[6]), using a 467-chains 
dataset assigned by all 6 methods.  The following features were investigated: agreement on the 

number of assigned domains, agreement on domain boundaries, distribution of domain sizes 
and tendency toward assignment of discontinuous domains.  Consensuses among automatic, 
expert and all methods were defined and used during comparison to tease out the behaviors 
specific to individual assignment methods or groups of methods.    
 We observe that unambiguous domain assignments (when all methods agree on domain 

assignment) are confined predominantly to one-domain chains.  Agreements among all 
methods in multi-domain chains are infrequent; in all cases the domains are compact and 

clearly spatially separated.  For the majority of
 multi-domain proteins, there is no agreement on 
domain assignment among all methods.  From the consensus analysis we observe that the 
majority of the difficulties of fully automated methods stem from overwhelming reliance on the 

structural cues (compactness/contact density) during domain assignments and the lack of 
functional/evolutionary information. Thus the cases in which domains are positioned close 
together are difficult or impossible for automatic methods to resolve.  On the other hand, the 

differences in expert methods arise from different philosophical approaches underlying the 
specific methods.  Authors of the structures (AUTHORS method) tend to define domains based 
on functionality, which may produce small and structurally not clearly defined domains.  The 

creators of SCOP, on the other hand, often look for the largest common structure (fold) as a 
domain, which often consists of several distinctive structural units. The CATH method appears 
to strike a balance between sometimes contradi
ctory structural, functional and evolutionary 
information.  The inconsistencies in expert assignments are well reflected in the propensities of 
different fully automated methods, as those are trained and validated using a specific expert 
method, thus reflecting its philosophical biases.  Detailed analysis of structures which do not 
have consensus between the assignment methods 
regarding the number of assigned domains 
indicates the following problematic areas: (1) assignment of small domains, (2) discontinuous 

domains and unassigned regions in the structure, (3) splitting of the secondary structure 
elements between domains (if required), (4) convoluted domain
 interfaces and complicated 
architectures.  Comprehensive domain re-definitio
n, which takes into account the above issues 
is overdue and will be a great step toward improvement of domain definitions in multi-domain 
proteins, which represent (by an estimation [7]) 66-75% of the sequence database. Also, the 
intensive growth of 3D protein data demands fully automated approaches to be used to 

maintain currency and uniformity of domain information relative to the PDB. 
                                                  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41   REFERENCES
 [1]  Holm L., S. C. 1996   Mapping the protein universe. 
Science 273, 595-602. [2]  Guo, J-T. Xu, D. Kim, D. Xu, Y. 2003  Improving the Perf
ormance of DomainParser for Structural Domain Partition Using 
Neural Network,  
Nucleic Acids Res
.31(3), 944-952. 
 [3].  Alexandrov, N. & Shindyalov, I.  2003 .PDP: protein domain parser. 
Bioinformatics 19, 429-430. [4]  Islam, S. A., Luo, J. & Sternberg, M. J. 1995 
  Identification and analysis of domains in proteins. 
Protein Eng 8, 513-25. 
[5]  Orengo, C. A., Michie, A. D., Jones, S., Jones, D. T., Sw
indells, M. B. & Thornton, J. M. 1997   CATHŠa hierarchic 
classification of protein domain structures. 
Structure 5, 1093-108. 
[6] Murzin, A. G., Brenner, S. E., Hubbard, T. & Chothia, C. 
1995. SCOP: a structural classi
fication of proteins database 
for the investigation of sequences and structures. 
J Mol Biol
 247, 536-40. 
 [7]  Chothia C, Gough J, Vogel C, Teichmann SA. 2003 Evol
ution of the protein reprertoire.  Science 300, 1701-03. 
  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42  Poster Abstract  
13) Qi Wang  Detecting Tissue-Specific Regulation of Alternative Splicing as a Qualitative Change in 
Microarray Data 
 Qi Wang 
University of California, Los Angeles 
 Alternative splicing has recently emerged as 
a major mechanism of regulation in the human 
genome, occurring in perhaps 40-60% of human gene
s. Thus microarray studies of functional 
regulation should in principle be extended to detect 
not only changes in the overall expression of 
a gene, but changes in its splicing pattern between 
different tissues. However, since changes in 
the total expression of a gene and changes in its 
alternative splicing can be mixed in complex 
ways among a set of samples, separating these e
ffects can be difficult, and is essential for their 
accurate assessment. We present a simple and general approach for distinguishing changes in 

alternative splicing from changes inexpression, 
based on detecting systematic anti-correlation 
between two different samples™ log ratios versus
 a pool containing both samples. We have tested 
this analysis method on microarray data for five human tissues, generated using a standard 

microarray platform and experimental
 protocols previously shown to
 be sensitive to alternative 
splicing. Our automatic analysis was able to detec
t a wide variety of tissue-specific alternative 
splicing events such as exon skipping, mutually 
exclusive exons, alternative 3™ and alternative 
5™splicing, alternative initiation and alternative 
termination, all of which were validated by 
independent reverse-transcriptas
e PCR experiments, with vali
dation rates of 70 - 85%.Our 
analysis method also enables hierarchical clustering of genes and samples by the level of 

similarity of their alternative splicing patterns, re
vealing patterns of tissue-specific regulation that 
are distinct from those obtained by hierarchic
al clustering of gene expression from the same 
microarray data.  
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43  Poster Abstract  
14) Yi Xing 
 Alternative Splicing Opens Neutral Paths for Genome Evolution 
 Yi Xing University of California, Los Angeles 
 The role of alternative splicing in evolution has 
become a subject for many recent investigations. 
It has been proposed that alternative splicing can 
reduce negative selection pressure within 
selected portions of a gene, accelerating its rate 
of evolution. Here we discuss several lines of 
evidence that support this hypothesis. Alternativ
e splicing is frequently associated with recent 
creation and loss of exons in mammals. Alternat
ive splicing relieves negative selection pressure 
against premature protein truncations, to the ex
tent similar to that produced by diplody. 
Alternatively spliced regions undergo relaxed puri
fying selection pressure compared to other 
portions of the gene. Our data suggest that alter
native splicing is able to open neutral paths for 
evolution, a principle that can add significantly
 to current theory of molecular evolution.  
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44  Poster Abstract  
15) Na Xu  Identifying functional importance of NCS conserved across multiple species 
 Na Xu University of California, Berkeley 
  One of the goals in computational biology is
 to identify the functional elements in genomes. 
Highly conserved non-coding sequenc
es (NCS) across multiple spec
ies are good candidates for 
functional regulatory regions. We examined 2094 NCS conserved among human, mouse and 

Fugu, explored their features, and attempt
ed to pick out true functional regions. 
 
We gathered Gene Ontology (GO) and gene expression data for the neighbor genes of the NCS. 

With high statistical significance, we found t
hat NCS neighbor genes ar
e over-represented in 
several GO categories: transcription regulator 
activity, development and binding. Further analysis 
using expression data showed that the NCS genes 
are more likely to be over-expressed in nerve 
and brain tissues. 
 
We related the two analyses and combined these with other factors such as NCS density. Simple 

significance tests and clustering me
thods have provided us with an 
initial filtering of NCS based on the functional annotation and experimental inform
ation. These results provide a  promising first 
set of NCS examples for further exploration. 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45  Poster Abstract  
16) Iwei Yeh 
 A Cellular Architecture Ontology for Analyzing Protein-Protein Interactions Based 
on Subcellular Localizations  Iwei Yeh and Russ B. Altman 
Stanford University  We introduce a cellular architecture ontology t
hat encodes knowledge about cellular components, 
including membranes, spaces, and membrane-bound compartments, and their spatial 
relationships to each other.  This ontology fac
ilitates computational reasoning based on protein 
localization on a large scale and in a systematic 
fashion.  To demonstrate the usefulness of our 
ontology in automatic reasoning, we developed rules to define the accessibility of cellular 
components and to define the accessibility and loca
tion of proteins.  Using these rules, we 
automatically evaluated the physical accessibility of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
proteins based on 
localizations provided by Saccharomyces Genome
 Database (SGD) and t
he accuracy of protein-protein interactions from the Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP).  We found areas of 

inconsistency between these data resources and pr
oposed refinement of protein localizations 
based on localizations of interacting proteins.  In 
some cases our ontology allowed us to propose 
novel localizations using simple logical rules.  Ou
r cellular architecture ontology contains links to 
the Gene Ontology (GO), but provides a much ri
cher framework for sup
porting computational 
inference.   
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46  Poster Abstract  
17) Keyan Zhao 
 Genome-wide association mapping of flowering time in model plant - Arabidopsis 
thaliana Keyan Zhao1, María-José Aranzana1, Sung Kim
1, John Molitor
2, Paul Marjoram
2, Fengzhu Sun
1, Magnus Nordborg1 1Molecular and Computational Biology Program; 
2Department Of Preventive Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles 
  A genome-wide association mapping study was co
nducted to search for genes controlling 
flowering time in Arabidopsis thaliana. We hav
e applied several algorithms based on haplotype 
sharing. Using 906 fragments of sequenced po
lymorphism data from 95 accessions, we found 
some strong peaks in genes known to control floweri
ng time in A. thaliania. Increasing the sample 
size to 192 still gave strong signals in genes FR
I and other genes. The clustering algorithms 
successfully detected 2 known functional allele
s in FRI gene. We have also found some other 
interesting regions associated with flowering 
time by our algorithm, although they may need 
further validation through experimental crosses. 
Population structure remains a challenging issue 
producing spurious associations between genot
ype and phenotype. This study demonstrates the 
promise of using LD mapping to study the genetic 
basis of complex traits and potentially genome-
wide disease association.  
   (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 47   FRONTIERS OF 
BIOINFORMATICS
:  UNSOLVED PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES
  Participant Roster  Bruce Alberts 
President 
National Academy of Sciences 
500 Fifth Street NW 

Washington, DC  20001 
Phone:  (202) 334-2100 
Fax:  (202) 334-1647 

E-mail:  balberts@nas.edu 
 Russ Altman 

Assistant Professor of Medicine 
Stanford University Section on Medical Informatics 

251 Campus Drive 
MSOB X-215 
Stanford, CA  94305 

Phone:  (650) 725-3394 
Fax:  (650) 725-7944 
E-mail:  russ.altman@stanford.edu 

 Chitta Baral Professor 
Arizona State University 
Department of Computer Science and 

Engineering 
699 S. Mill Avenue Tempe, AZ  85281 
Phone:  (480) 727-6047 
Fax:  (480) 965-2751 
E-mail:  chitta@asu.edu 

 Helen Berman 
Professor 

Rutgers University 
Department of Chemistry 
Wright-Reiman Labs 

610 Taylor Road 
Piscataway, NJ  08854 
Phone:  (732) 445-4667 

Fax:  (732) 445-4320 
E-mail:  berman@rcsb.rutgers.edu 
 Peter Bickel 
Professor of Statistics 
University of California, Berkeley 
Evans Hall 
Berkeley, CA  94720 Phone:  (510) 642-1381 
Fax:  (510) 642-7892 

E-mail:  bickel@stat.berkeley.edu 
 Peer Bork 
European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
Meyerhofstrasse 1 
Heidelberg    

Germany 
Phone:  49 [0] 6221 3870 
Fax:  49 [0] 6221 3878306 

E-mail:  bork@embl-heidelberg.de 
 Serdar Bozdag 
University of California, Riverside 
3131 Watkins Drive 
Apartment 231 
Riverside, CA  92507 
Phone:  (951) 276-0470 

E-mail:  sbozdag@cs.ucr.edu 
 Volker Brendel 

Bergdahl Professor of Bioinformatics 
Iowa State University Department 

of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology 
and Department of Statistics 
2112 Molecular Biology Building 

Ames, IA  50011-3260 
Phone:  (515) 294-9884 
Fax:  (515) 294-6755 

E-mail:  vbrendel@iastate.edu 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 48  Roy Britten Professor Emeritus 
California Institute of Technology 
101 Dahlia Avenue 

Corona del Mar, CA  92625 
Phone:  (949) 675-2159 
Fax:  (949) 675-1837 

E-mail:  r.britten@comcast.net 
 Christopher Burge 

Assistant Professor of Biology 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Room 68-223A 
Cambridge, MA  02138 
Phone:  617-258-5997 

E-mail:  cburge@mit.edu 
 Huangming Chen 

Research Assistant III 
The Salk Institute 
10010 North Torrey Pines Rd 

La Jolla, CA  92037 
Phone:  (858) 453-4100 
E-mail:  hchen@salk.edu 

 Lamei Chen University of California, Los Angeles 
MBI #609 Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (310) 794-4206 

Fax:  (310) 267-0248 
E-mail:  lchen@chem.ucla.edu 
 Jeffrey Chuang 
Postdoctoral Fellow 

University of California, San Francisco 
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics 
600 16th Street 

San Francisco, CA  94143-2240 
Phone:  (415) 514-2616 
Fax:  (415) 514-2617 

E-mail:  jchuang@genome.ucsf.edu 
 Valerie Daggett 

Professor of Medicinal Chemistry 
University of Washington 
H165B, Box 357610 

Seattle, WA  98195-7610 
Phone:  (206) 685-7420 
Fax:  206) 685-3252 

E-mail:  daggett@u.washington.edu 
 Ryan Day University of Washington, Seattle 
Biomolecular Structure and Design Program 
Department of Medicinal Chemistry 

Seattle, WA  98195-7610 
E-mail:  rd@u.washington.edu 
 
Russell F. Doolittle Research Professor 
University of California, San Diego 

Department of Chemisry and Biochemistry 
9500 Gilman Drive 
2040 Urey Hall Addition 
La Jolla, CA  92093 
Phone:  (858) 534-3575 

Fax:  (858) 534-6255 
E-mail:  rd@zeus.ucsd.edu 
 
Debojyoti Dutta 
University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place 

Los Angeles, CA  90089 
Phone:  (213) 248-3656 
Fax:  (213) 740-2437 

E-mail:  ddutaa@usc.edu 
 Sean Eddy 
Professor of Bioinformatics 
Washington University School of Medicine 
Department of Genetics 

4566 Scott Avenue St. Louis, MO  63110 Phone:  (314) 362-7666 
E-mail:  eddy@genetics.wustl.edu 
 
David Eisenberg 
Professor of Biological Chemistry and 
Molecular 
Biology and Director 
UCLA-DOE Laboratory of Structural Biology 
and Molecular Medicine 

University of California, Los Angeles 
Box 951570 Los Angeles, CA  90095 

Phone:  (310) 825-3754 
Fax:  (310) 206-3914 
E-mail:  david@mbi.ucla.edu 

 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 49  Iddo Friedberg 
The Burnham Institute 
10901 North Torrey Pines Road 
La Jolla, CA  92037 

Phone:  (858) 646 3100 x3516 
Fax:  (858) 713 9930 
E-mail:  idoerg@burnham.org 

 Terry Gaasterland 
Assistant Professor and Head 

Laboratory of Computational Geonomics 
The Rockefeller University 
1230 York Avenue 
New York, NY  10021 
Phone:  (212) 327-7755 

Fax:  (212) 327-7765 
E-mail:  gaasterland@rockefeller.edu 
 
Mark Gerstein 
Principal Investigator 
Yale University 

Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry 
Bass 432A, 266 Whitney Ave. 
New Haven, CT  06520 

Phone:  (203) 432 6105 
Fax:  (360) 838 7861 
E-mail:  mark.gerstein@yale.edu 

 Margaret Goodman 
Associate Professor of Biology 

Wittenberg University 
Box 720 Springfield, OH  45501 
Phone:  (937) 327-6142 
Fax:  (937) 327-7522 

E-mail:  mgoodman@wittenberg.edu 
 Phillip Green 
Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute University of Washington Medical School 

Department of Molecular Biotechnology 
Box 357730 (HSB K343B) 
1959 Pacific Street, N.E. 

Seattle, WA  98195 
Phone:  (206) 685-4341 
Fax:  (206) 685-9720 

E-mail:  phg@u.washington.edu 
 David Haussler 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Investigator. Director, Center for 
Biomolecular Science & Engineering. 

Professor, Computer Science 
Univesrity of California, Santa Cruz 
Center for Biomolecular Science and 

Engineering 
321 Baskin Engineering Bldg 
Santa Cruz, CA  95064 

Phone:  (831) 459-2105 
Fax:  (831) 459-4829 
E-mail:  haussler@cse.ucsc.edu 
 Haiyan Hu 

University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 202 
Los Angeles, CA  90007 

Phone:  (213) 399-6627 
E-mail:  hhu@usc.edu 
 
Yu Huang 
University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 202 

Los Angeles, CA  90089 
Phone:  (213) 821-3167 
E-mail:  yuhuang@usc.edu 

 Steve Jacobsen 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Department of Mole
cular, Cellular and Developmental Biology 
P. O. Box 951606 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (310) 825-0182 

E-mail:  jacobsen@ucla.edu  Rui Jiang 

University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 289 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 

Phone:  (213) 821-2229 
Fax:  (213) 740-2437 
E-mail:  ruijiang@usc.edu 
 Jason Johnson 
Scientific Director 

Rosetta Inpharmatics 
401 Terry Avenue N. 
Seattle, WA  98109 

Phone:  (206) 802-6499 
Fax:  (206) 802-6411 
E-mail:  jason_johnson@merck.com 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 50  Samuel Karlin Professor 
Stanford University Department of Mathematics 

Stanford, CA  94305 
Phone:  (650) 723-2204 
Fax:  (650) 725-2040 

E-mail:  karlin@stanford.math.edu 
 Katherina Kechris 

Post-doctoral Researcher 
University of California, San Francisco 
Department of Chemistry and Biophysics 
600 16th Street, Room S441 
San Francisco, CA  94143-2240 

Phone:  (415) 514-2617 
Fax:  (415) 514-4140 
E-mail:  kechris@genome.ucsf.edu 

 Chris Lee 
Professor 

University of California, Los Angeles 
Molecular Biology Institute 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 

Phone:  (310) 825-7374 
Fax:  (310) 267-0248 
E-mail:  leec@mbi.ucla.edu 

 Michael Levitt 
Professor of Structural Biology and Chair 

Department of Structural Biology 
Stanford University School of Medicine 
Room D109 
Stanford, CA  94305 
Phone:  (650) 723-6800 

Fax:  (650) 723-8464 
E-mail:  michael.levitt@stanford.edu 
 
Peter Li Celera Genomics 
45 W. Gude Drive 

Rockville, MD  20850 
E-mail:  lipw@celera.com 
 
Huiying Li University of California, Los Angeles 
Molecular Biology Institute 

Box 951570 Los Angeles, CA  90095-1570 
Phone:  (310) 825-1402 

Fax:  (310) 206-3914 
E-mail:  huiying@mbi.ucla.edu 
 Mike Liang 
Stanford University 300 Pasteur Drive MC 5120 
Stanford, CA  94305-5120 

Phone:  (650) 725-8010 
Fax:  (650) 725-3863 
E-mail:  mliang@stanford.edu 

 Herb Lin Senior Scientist 

National Research Council 
500 Fifth Street NW 
Washington, DC  20001 
Phone:  (202) 334-3191 
Fax:  (202) 334-2318 

E-mail:  hlin@nas.edu  Shuo Liu 
Stanford University MSOB Room X215 
251 Campus Drive 

Stanford, CA  94305-5479 
Phone:  (650) 996-7820 
E-mail:  sliu@smi.stanford.edu 

 Stefano Lonardi 
Assistant Professor 

University of California Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 

Riverside, CA  92507 
Phone:  (951) 827-2203 
Fax:  (951) 827-4693 
E-mail:  stelo@cs.ucr.edu 
 
Itay Lotan University of California, Berkeley 
Donner Lab 472 

Berkeley, CA  94720 Phone:  (510) 486-6284 
E-mail:  itayl@cs.stanford.edu 

 Bruce A. Luxon Professor 

University of Texas Medical Branch 
301 University Boulevard Route 1157 

Galveston, TX  77555-1157 
Phone:  (409) 747-6876 
Fax:  (409) 747-6850 

E-mail:  bruce@nmr.utmb.edu 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 51  Xiaotu Ma University of Southern California 
1429 W. 23rd Street 
Los Angeles, CA  90007 

Phone:  (213) 740-2414 
Fax:   E-mail:  xma@usc.edu 

 Hanah Margalit 
Associate Professor 
in Computational 
Molecular Biology 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
Department of Molecular Genetics and 
Biotechnology 
Hadassah Medical School 

P.O.B. 12272 Ein Kerem Jerusalem,   91120 
Israel 
Phone:  972-2-6758614 / 6758647 
Fax:  972-2-6784010 / 6757308 
E-mail:  hanah@md.huji.ac.il 

 Shipra Mehta University of Southern California 

1042 West 36th Place, DBR287 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (213) 740-2410 

E-mail:  shiprame@usc.edu  George L Gabor Miklos 

Director 
Secure Genetics Pty Limited 
81 Bynya Road 
Palm Beach Sydney,    
Australia 
Phone:  61 2 9974-3000 
Fax:  61 2 9974-3111 

E-mail:  gmiklos@securegenetics.com 
 Jan Mrazek 

Stanford University Department of Mathematics 
Stanford, CA  94305-2125 

Phone:  (650) 723-2923 
Fax:  (650) 725-2040 
E-mail:  mrazek@stanford.edu 

 Mustumi Nakamura Arizona State University 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 

699 S. Mill Avenue Tempe, AZ  85281 Phone:  (480) 727-6047 

Fax:  (480) 965-2751 
E-mail:  mutsumi@asu.edu 
 
Brian Naughton 
Apartment 208, Building 94 
1094 Tanland Drive 
Palo Alto, CA  94303 Phone:  (650) 213-8266 

E-mail:  briannau@stanford.edu 
 Jim Noyes 

Professor 
Wittenberg University 
Box 720 
Springfield, OH  45501 
Phone:  (937) 327-6142 
Fax:  (937) 327-7511 

E-mail:  jnoyes@wittenberg.edu 
 Debnath Pal 

University of California, Los Angeles 
Molecular Biology Institute #105 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 

Phone:  (310) 206-3907 
Fax:  (310) 206-3914 
E-mail:  dpal@mbi.ucla.edu 
 Ranjan Perera 

Associate Director 
ISIS Pharmaceuticals 
2292 Farraday Avenue 

Carlsbad, CA  92008 
Phone:  (760) 603-2638 
E-mail:  rperera@isisph.com 

 Pavel Pevzner 
Ronald R. Taylor Professor of Computer 

Science 
University of California, San Diego 
Department of Computer Science & 

Engineering 
APM 3132 La Jolla, CA  92093-0114 

Phone:  (858) 822-4365 
Fax:  (858) 534-7029 
E-mail:  ppevzner@cs.ucsd.edu 
 (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 52  Sylvia Plevritis 
Stanford University Radiology Department 
Lucas MRSI Center, Room P267 

1201 Welch Road, Mailcode 5488 
Stanford, CA  94305 
Phone:  (650) 498-5261 

Fax:  (650) 723-5795 
E-mail:  sylvia.plevritis@stanford.edu  
Vicente M. Reyes Postdoctoral Fellow 
University of California, San Diego 
San Diego Supercomputer Center 
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0505 

La Jolla, CA  92093-0505 
Phone:  (858) 822-3638 
Fax:  (858) 822-3610 

E-mail:  vreyes@sdsc.edu 
 Meenakshi Roy 

Postdoctroal Fellow 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Room 601 Boyer Hall 

611 Charles E. Young Drive 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (310) 794-4026 

Fax:  (310) 267-0248 
E-mail:  meenakshi@mbi.ucla.edu 
 
Quansong Ruan 
University of Southern California 
Computational Biology 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 289 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 

Phone:  (213) 740-2409 
Fax:  (213) 740-2437 
E-mail:  ruan@usc.edu 

 Lukasz Salwinski 
University of California, Los Angeles 
205 Boyer Hall 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (310) 825-1402 

Fax:  (310) 206-3914 
E-mail:  lukasz@mbi.ucla.edu 
 
Serge Saxonov Stanford University Beckman Center B403 

279 Campus Drive 
Palo Alto, CA  94305 Phone:  (650) 723-5976 
E-mail:  saxonov@stanford.edu 
 Bradley K. Sherman 
Director of Bioinformatics 
Mendel Biotechnology, Inc. 
21375 Cabot Boulevard 

Hayward, CA  94545 
Phone:  (510) 259-6111 
Fax:  (510) 264-0254 

E-mail:  bsherman@mendelbio.com 
 Al Shpuntoff 
IEEE CSB Conference 49 Showers Drive T408 
Mountain View, CA  94040 
Phone:  (650) 208-8690 
Fax:  (650) 941-2015 

E-mail:  al@afs4dna.com 
 Elnat Spriznak 

University of California, Los Angeles 
105 Molecular Biology Inst. 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 

Phone:  (310) 206-3907 
Fax:  (310) 206-3914 
E-mail:  elnat@mbi.ucla.edu 

 Nam Tran 
Arizona State University 

Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Tempe, AZ  85281-8809 

Phone:  (480) 921-1296 
E-mail:  namtran@asu.edu 
 Zhidong Tu 
University of Southern California 

Department of Computational Biology 
1042 West 36th Place, DBR297 
Los Angeles, CA  90089-1113 

Phone:  (213) 821-2231 
Fax:  (213) 740-2437 
E-mail:  ztu@usc.edu 
 Stella Veretnik 
University of California, San Diego 

9500 Gilman Drive 
La Jolla, CA  92093-0537 
Phone:  (858) 534-8366 

Fax:  (858) 822-0873 
E-mail:  veretnik@sdsc.edu 
 
Li Wang 
University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 202 
Los Angeles, CA   
Phone:  (213) 821-3167 

E-mail:  wang7@usc.edu 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 53  Qi Wang 
University of California, Los Angeles 
609 Boyer Hall 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 

Phone:  (310) 794-4026 
Fax:  (310) 267-0248 
E-mail:  wangqi@ucla.edu 

 Shoshana Wodak 
Senior Scientist 

The Hospital for Sick Children 
Structural Biology and Biochemistry 
Program 555 University Avenue Toronto, Ontario  M5G 1X8 

Canada 
Phone:  (416) 813-5724 
Fax:  (416) 813-5085 

E-mail:  shoshana@sickkids.ca 
 John C. Wooley 

Professor 
University of California, San Diego 
700 University Center, Mail Code 0043 

9500 Gilman Drive 
La Jolla, CA  92093-0043 
Phone:  (858) 822-3604 

Fax:  (858) 822-4767 
E-mail:  jwooley@ucsd.edu 
 
Yi Xing University of California, Los Angeles 
609 Boyer Hall 
Los Angeles, CA  90095 
Phone:  (310) 794-4026 

Fax:  (310) 267-0248 
E-mail:  yxing@ucla.edu  
Min Xu University of Southern California 
1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 202 

Los Angeles, CA   
Phone:  (213) 821-3167 
E-mail:  mxu@usc.edu 

 Na Xu University of California, Berkeley 

367 Evans Hall 
Berkeley, CA  94720-3860 
Phone:  (510) 791-6289 

E-mail:  naxu@stat.berkeley.edu 
 Hua Yang 
University of Southern California 
1042 West 36th Place, DBR287 
Los Angeles, CA  90007 

Phone:  (213) 740-2410 
Fax:  (213) 740-2437 
E-mail:  huayang@usc.edu 

 Yuzhen Ye 
The Burnham Institute 

10901 North Torrey Pines Road 
La Jolla, CA  92037 
Phone:  (858) 646-3100 x3634 
Fax:  (858) 713-9930 
E-mail:  yye@burnham.org 

 Iwei Yeh Stanford University 
Clark Center S242 
318 Campus Drive 
Stanford, CA  94305 

Phone:  (650) 725-8010 
E-mail:  iyeh1@stanford.edu 
 
Xiaoyu Zhang 
University of California, Los Angeles 
Department of Mole
cular, Cellular and Developmental Biology 
PO Box 951606 
Los Angeles, CA  90095-1606 

Phone:  (310) 206-3336 
E-mail:  xiaoyu@plantbio.uga.edu 
 Kangyu Zhang 
University of Southern California 

1042 W. 36th Place, DBR 202 
Los Angeles, CA  90007 
Phone:  (323) 363-5935 

E-mail:  kangyuzh@usc.edu 
 Keyan Zhao 
University of Southern California 
Molecular and Computational Biology 
Program 
835 West 37th, SHS 172 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 
Phone:  (213) 821-2819 

Fax:  (213) 740-8631 
E-mail:  kzhao@usc.edu 
(Sackler NAS Colloquium) Frontiers of Bioinformatics: Unsolved Problems and ChallengesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 54  Lei Zhuge 
Postdoctoral Fellow 
University of Southern California 
Computational Biology, DBR 289 

1042 W. 36th Place 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 
Phone:  (213) 821-2229 

Fax:  (213) 740-2437 
E-mail:  lzhuge@usc.edu 
 
  