DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11477The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectiveson the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children andYouth60 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10072-4 | DOI 10.17226/11477Institute of MedicineThe Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE RICHARD AND HINDA 
ROSENTHAL LECTURES 
2004   Perspectives on the Prevention of  
Childhood Obesity in 
Children and Youth   
     
  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, N.W. Wa
shington, DC 20001 
  NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the 
Governing Board of the National Resear
ch Council, whose members are drawn 
from the councils of the National Acad
emy of Sciences, the National Academy 
of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee 
responsible for the report were chosen 
for their special competences and with 
regard for appropriate balance. 
 Support for this project was provided by the Richard and Hinda Rosenthal 

Foundation. 
 International Standard Book Number 0-309-10072-0 

 Additional copies of this report are available from the Institute of Medicine 500 
Fifth Street, N.W., Washin
gton, DC 20001 For more information about the 
Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page at: 
www.iom.edu. 
  Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 

 Printed in the United States of America. 
 The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among 
almost all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The 

serpent adopted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving 
from ancient Greece, now held by 
the Staatliche Museen in Berlin. 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro
fit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, 

dedicated to the furtherance of science 
and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of 
the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that
 requires it to advise the federal 
government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of 
outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection 
of its members, sharing with the 
National Academy of Sciences the 
responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of 
Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 
needs, encourages education and re
search, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of em
inent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 

by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of 
medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broa
d community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 

government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has 
become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 

providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and 
engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. 

Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectivel
y, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v Foreword    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In 1988, an exciting and important new program was launched at the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Through 
the generosity of the Richard and 
Hinda Rosenthal Foundation, a lecture series was established to bring to 

greater attention some of the critical health policy issues facing our 

nation today. Each year a subject of particular relevance is addressed 
through three lectures presented by ex
perts in the field. The lectures are 
published at a later date fo
r national dissemination. 
 The Rosenthal lectures have attracted an enthusiastic following 
among health policy researchers and decision makers, both in 

Washington, D.C., and across the count
ry. Our speakers are the leading 
experts on the subjects under discussion and our audience includes many 

of the major policymakers charged with making the U.S. health care 

system more effective and humane. The lectures and associated remarks 

have engendered lively and productive dialogue. The Rosenthal lecture 

included in this volume captures a panel discussion on the IOM report, 
Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance
. There is much to 
learn from the informed and real-world perspectives provided by the 
contributors to this book. 

 I would like to give special tha
nks to our Dr. Jeff Koplan and the 
committee. In addition, I would like to express my appreciation to 

Bronwyn Schrecker, Jennifer Bitticks, Jennifer Otten, Shira Fischer, 
Cathy Liverman, Vivica Kraak, Linda Meyers, and Shannon Wisham for 
ably handling the many details associated with the lecture programs and 

the publication. No introduction to this volume would be complete, 

however, without a special expression of gratitude to the late Richard 

Rosenthal and to Hinda Rosenthal
 for making this valuable and 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi FOREWORD 
  important education effort possible and whose keen interest in the themes 
under discussion further enriches this valuable IOM activity. 
 Harvey V. Fineberg, M.D., Ph.D. 
   President 

   Institute of Medicine 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii Contents    
   
      INTRODUCTION 1
  Harvey V. Fineberg  OVERVIEW OF PREVENTING 5 

HEALTH IN THE CHILDHOOD OBESITY: BALANCE  
 Jeff Koplan  FRAMEWORK FOR PREVENTION AND ON  15 

PERSPECTIVES ADDRESSING HEALTH DISPARITIES  
 Shiriki Kumanyika  INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 21
  Brock Leach 
 GOVERNMENT PERSPECTIVE 33
  William Dietz  DISCUSSION 41
  
BIOSKETCHES 49
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  1 Welcome 
Harvey V. Fineberg   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DR. FINEBERG:
 Good evening, and welcome to the Institute of 
Medicine (IOM) and tonight's Rose
nthal lecture program. It is a 
pleasure to welcome all of you to this evening's event. We have a 

tradition, now going back
 16 years, of annual lectures funded by 
the Rosenthal Foundation. Richard and Hinda Rosenthal are great 
friends of the IOM. Richard Rosenthal had been very active in the 

President's Circle of the National Academies until his passing 

some years ago. His widow, Hinda Ro
senthal, continues to this day to be actively interested in th
e work and activity at the IOM. 
 This lecture series, named in
 Richard and Hinda™s honor, is 
part of the program and effort of
 the IOM to reach out to a little 
larger public to discuss issues of great moment and consequence in 

health and health care. We are very
 privileged this evening to be 
able to talk together with a ma
rvelous panel on the subject of pre-
venting childhood obesity. As I thi
nk all of you are aware, this 
topic was the subject of a report 
that was released by the IOM the 
end of September. It is a repor
t that was the product of many 
months of work by a very active and energetic committee, chaired 

by the chair of our program this
 evening, Dr. Jeffrey Koplan, 
whom I will introduce in just a moment. 

 I want to acknowledge and thank Dr. Shirley Watkins and 

Dr. Shiriki Kumanyika, in addition to Dr. Koplan. Also with us 

this evening we have several members of our Food and Nutrition 

Board who oversaw the effort to create the report. Members of our 
Board on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention are also with 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  us tonight. We are very happy to have all of you with us this eve-
ning as well. 
 This project was made possi
ble by a number of funders 
from both the government and the pr
ivate sector. They include the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Office of 

Disease Prevention and Health Pr
omotion in the Department of 
Health and Human Services, the Na
tional Institute of Diabetes, Di-
gestive, and Kidney Disease, th
e National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Devel-

opment, and the NIH Division of 
Nutrition Research Coordination.  We also were very fortunate
 to garner support from the 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
 Not only has the foundation 
played a part in the support of th
e project that led up to the report, 
but it has also undertaken with us 
an activity to pr
omote the ideas 
generated by the report to solv
e the problem of childhood obesity 
in the United States and to work together to eliminate and reverse 
this epidemic. 
 The obesity epidemic hasn't always existed, but it is an epi-

demic that has emerged so rapi
dly that it is stunning when you 
think about its impact in demographic terms. In the last 30 years in 

the United States, the prevalence 
of obesity has more than doubled 
in children aged 2 to 5 years; in adolescents, age 12 to 19 years, it 

has also doubled. In children aged 
6 to 11 years, it has tripled. The 
frequency of the problem has increased in very dramatic terms. 

Defining the scope and nature of
 the problem, describing the mul-
tiple approaches necessary to so
lving it, particularly the impor-
tance of approaching the problem simultaneously as a community 

and population-based activity, was a hallmark of the work of the 

committee that Dr. Koplan chaired. 

 Dr. Koplan is an individual 
whose preparation for this work was as ideal as one could imag
ine. His own background in medi-
cine and public health includes work in the United States and over-

seas on a whole range of disease 
and health promotion concerns. 
Dr. Koplan also served as the di
rector of the CDC and Prevention 
from 1998 to 2002. In recent years, I have been especially privi-

leged to be able to closely work with him because of his agreement 

to serve, and his election to, the c
ouncil of the IOM. Because of his The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WELCOME 3 
  many capacities, and particularly tonight, for his leadership of our 
committee on preventing childhood obes
ity, it is a real pleasure to 
introduce and to welcome Dr. Koplan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5 Overview of Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance Jeff Koplan   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DR. KOPLAN:
 Thank you very much, Dr. Fineberg. Thank you 
all for coming out in inclement 
conditions and spending some time 
with us to talk about what we think is an important subject. I am 

sure you think it is important as 
well; it is the reason you are here.  We are calling this a lecture, and it 
is officially a lecture, 
but it is really a group of speaker
s sharing thoughts. We would like 
your active involvement in the discussion afterward as well. 

 Looking around this crowd, I s
ee people with true expertise 
in this field and in germane fields as well. I think such a mix will 

enrich our evening, and we hope to
 have plenty of time for every-
one to ask their questions before the evening is over.  I want to review the nature of this obesity epidemic in chil-

dren, some of the factors that put 
us where we are, and then I want 
to spend some time discussing 
the report™s recommendations for 
leading us out of this problem 
we™ve found ourselves in and what 
we need to do to reverse the epidemic. 

 I think a striking aspect of th
e epidemic of obesity in chil-
dren is that for most all of our 
lives we have lived in a period of 
continual advances in health a
nd health outcomes, both for chil-
dren and adults. 
 We have had intermittent setbacks, some of them major, 

such as the ongoing HIV/AIDS epidemic. There are, obviously, 

problems that we have not yet conqu
ered, but overall, our life span 
and our quality of life has, for the most part, increased, and in-

creased in a rather remarkable way. You only have to think about 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 vaccines and their impact, seat be
lt use, the control of tobacco, 
fluoridated drinking water, and decr
eased infant mortality to real-
ize the progress we have made. 
These improvements have all had 
huge impacts on our life span and our quality of life. Now we have 

an epidemic of obesity, which is unique and alarming. 

 If you will indulge me for a few moments as part of this 

discussion, I would like to reflect
 a bit on the concept of being 
healthy. Only recently do we have some kind of scientific parame-
ters to offer for what healthy is, and we are still learning more 

about how to better define this. The concept of being healthy has 

changed remarkably over many decades, largely based on a mix-

ture of unscientific opinion, cultu
ral preferences (our people do 
this and that is why we are healthy), and occasional elements of 

data and fact. What does healthy mean in terms of where we live 

and how we live, what and how mu
ch we eat, how we look at our-
selves, and how we look at others? 
This has been an evolving con-
cept, and it continues to evolve. 
 Similarly, the concepts of ove
rweight and obesity has been 
seen in different ways by different cultures at different times. It is 

an aesthetic issue; in some cultu
res being overweight is seen as a 
sign of prosperity and well being,
 and in other cultures it is not. 
The concepts of health, obesity, 
and being overweight change with 
time and place.  

 Where we live and what makes our living environment 

healthy has shifted. There was a time 
when cities were seen as the 
least healthy of places to live: too much smoke, overcrowding, in-

adequate sewage and water faci
lities, and so on. People started 
moving to the suburbs because they were seen as being more 

healthy. But one of the things we 
will talk about is the built envi-
ronment: living in the suburbs may now be far less healthy, at least 

in terms of physical activity, than
 living in the city. The suburbia 
of Leave It to Beaver
 and 
Father Knows Best 
is not the suburbia 
that is currently being developed. 
The structure and the nature of 
community affect the health habits
 that directly 
lead to childhood 
obesity. 
 Diet has obviously changed as well. A healthy diet in 1900 

on a farm in Wisconsin would not s
eem very healthy to us today: 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW 7 
 lots of whole fat dairy, lots of 
red meat, bacon, eggs, and so on. It 
is making me hungry. 

 Now, I would like to use my
 own exemplary youth as an 
illustration to help you reflect on ho
w our life styles have changed. 
I would urge you just to think about your own growing up and 

some of these changes that
 have occurred since then.  It is not so much what we
 did, but the elements of the 
American lifestyle have changed and have contributed to where we 
are now in this epidemic. 

 Growing up in the 1950s, I lived in a suburban neighbor-

hood of Boston. In this neighborhood th
e streets were laid out in a 
grid, and sidewalks ran on both sides of the street. The neighbor-
hood was near a golf course that was used for outdoor activities.  All throughout our school live
s, we walked to school in 
relative safety. Car pools were
 an unknown commodity in our 
community, and there was no busing to school. 
 Gym class, unfortunately, was 
a regular part of our school 
days. I detested gym and, to this
 day, I don't see what climbing a 
rope to the ceiling of the gym has 
to do with fitness. I thought gym 
class was made to torture students, of which I was one. I abhorred 

it and feared it every day. 
 We had recess and played games. Even though I was one of 

the last children picked for all spor
ts teams, I have retained an in-
terest in physical activity. 

 We walked to and from school, and to and from the library, 

and used public trans
portation. In fact, by fifth and sixth grade my 
parents let me take public 
transportation all over Boston.  From where we lived south of Boston, I would walk to a 

bus stop, take a bus to Matapan, pick up what is now the Red Line 

in the Boston subway system, take it into downtown Boston, wan-

der around all day, and come back the same way. This makes the 

point of how using public transport is healthy. The people who 

promote public transport are partners with us in public health in 

promoting physical activity and combating obesity. 

 When I was in Boston, I went looking for stamps on Brom-

field Street, which I collected. Every 
trip I couldn™t help but stop at 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 Little Jack Horner's Joke S
hop for the latest hand buzzer and 
whoopee cushion.  
The children in the neighborhood were of various shapes, 
sizes and interests, but after 
school everyone was outside. There 
was nothing to do in the house. Children went outside. I want to 

emphasize that I was not an athl
etic child; you know the type, 
glasses in the third grade, bookis
h, not excelling in sports. It did-
n't matter. Everybody went outside, and you stayed out until it was 
dark. In the winter, we played in the snow and threw snowballs and built forts and sledded. In the other seasons, we got into trouble at 

building sites, trespassing, and ge
nerally creating mayhem. In any 
event, we were outside, and it wasn
't like our parents were saying, 
ﬁYou have to stay in.ﬂ When we came in, we were usually tired, 

and it was just time to eat when we came through the door. 

 I am not trying to paint this as
 an idyllic, wonderful time. I 
think many things are much better today than they were then. What 

I™ve just described are features of
 society and life 
from 50 years 
ago that are different now. You can begin to see, as you think of 

your own times and things you did, how society and the culture 

were different, and how some of the changes that have occurred 

might contribute to an epidemic of obesity. 

 A highlight of my youth was be
ing named to the safety pa-
trol in the sixth grade. My si
ngle duty was to walk around and 
make sure the other children walked to school safely. I can still 

remember that I was given a special belt. I put it on and was really 

excited. I haven't seen one of those white belts in years. I think 

they are used as trusses in the hospital now where I work. 
 Our television was a 7-inch Ph
ilco. There were a couple of 
hours of programming a day to wa
tch. No DVDs, no CDs, nothing. 
We also had a radio for music and such. There was never any 

competition between watching or lis
tening and doing other things. 
 The diet I described for that
 farm in Wisconsin was not 
much different from the diet in 
our home. If someone were to say 
to my mother, ﬁWhy isn't there margarine in the refrigerator?ﬂ do 

you think she would have said, ﬁI 
don't care for trans-fatty acidsﬂ? 
She didn't know anything about trans-fatty acids. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW 9 
  There was little snacking. For one, there were very few 
commercial products for snacking and, in addition, they just were-

n't in the house. Carbonated, swee
tened beverages were not part of 
our daily life. There were treats 
to be had at some places and at 
some times, and when you had them, the portion sizes were much 

smaller than today™sŠthe Pepsis were 8 ounces and no more. If 

you went to a movie, the popcorn serving you had was a couple of 
cups. It wasn't the 20 gallon bucket that is served today. 
 People make a point about cu
ltures and how some cultures 
are at odds with issues that w
ould promote leanness and physical 
activity. This is not unique. I come from a culture, basically middle 
European Jewish, in which eating is
 a way in life and social events 
involved eating. My culture ha
d a starvation background. Every time my grandmother saw me, even 
if she had seen me five min-
utes before, she would say, ﬁYou are so thin. You need to eat 

something.ﬂ 

 ﬁBut Grandma,ﬂ I™d say, ﬁI just ate!ﬂ  

 ﬁIt doesn't matter,ﬂ she™d say. ﬁI made this for you special.ﬂ 

 In many of our traditions th
ere are some long-standing is-
sues about both physical activity 
and food. Physical activity was 
not encouraged by my family and the culture. In fact, some mem-

bers of my family considered swea
ting to be a preterminal event.  
 The result of all these social and characteristics of the times 

was that we ended up having lots of activity in our lives. Our 

community was designed, unintenti
onally, in a relatively healthy 
way to promote that. But there wa
s lots of eating, and many of our 
concepts about food and diet were
 not particularly healthy ones, 
even then. 
 There wasn't an epidemic of obesity at that time. That epi-

demic, as Dr. Dietz will show during his talk, has occurred in a 

very short period of time in a very dramatic fashion. 

 I think, for all of us, it has been a learning experience over 

the last decade or so to realize 
that weight has a significant nega-
tive impact on a wide range of health
 parameters. It has also been a 
shock to realize that all segmen
ts of our population are becoming 
increasingly obese, especially ch
ildren, and this change has oc-
curred in an epidemic manner 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  Myself and other epidemiologists don't use the term 
epi-demic lightly. If an epidemic is defined as an unpredicted and un-
expected increase in the occurrence 
rate of a certain illness, then 
obesity is clearly an epidem
ic and continues to be one.  Obesity has crept up on us as a major public health prob-

lem, and it has left us, unfortuna
tely in many instances, seeking 
simple and uni-dimensional causes 
and, thus, answers to the prob-
lem. We have seen frequent articles in the press or scientific papers 
that would make the case that one element or another is the cause 

of the obesity epidemic: carbonate
d, sugared beverages, vending 
machines, lack of physical education, nontraditional family struc-

tures, El Niño, liberals, immigrati
on, or whatever. Actually, as the 
report emphasizes, the obesity epidemic is a multifactorial             

problem. 

 We have developed what is, in many ways, an unhealthy 

environment for children to grow
 up in: not enou
gh physical activ-
ity and a poor diet. This is a stri
king difference from the trend in 
health over the last 100 years. We have made great strides toward 

promoting health and having a heal
thier environment for our chil-
dren, whether it is in regard to sa
fety, nutrients, or a wide range of 
things. We have failed in this pa
rticular regards, with dire out-
come. 

 What has changed in the last 30 years? American society 

and American lifestyles have changed. Portion sizes are larger. 

Families are eating more meals outside the home and fewer meals 

together at a table. There are more televisions and video games in 

the average home. More time is being spent sitting in front of a 

screen. Children are not walking or biking to schools with the same 
frequency. There is no physical 
education in many schools. The 
changes in the types of foods 
and beverages being offered, pro-moted, and consumed are remarkable, 
and this is true in schools as 
well. There are competitive food options in schools that did not 

previously exist.  
 These are considerable cha
nges in the lifestyle, environ-
ment, and behaviors of children, and 
they have had the impact that 
we are talking about today. The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW 11   One of our society™s reactions has been a certain sense of 
helplessness, not so much for the 
individual, but for the problem as 
a whole, a feeling like ﬁThere is
 nothing we can do;ﬂ ﬁThis is the 
way modern life is;ﬂ or ﬁThis is beyond our control.ﬂ 

 I think such helplessness is one of the things this report can 

remedy, because such statements of futility are just not true. There 

is plenty we can do.  We have a track record of 
over 100 years of public health that proves we can solve what previously seemed to be insur-
mountable problems. When we grew
 up, there were no seat belts in cars; there was no sense of safety. Drinking and driving was sim-
ply considered the way you sometimes drove. Those concepts have 

been changed, and with remarkable differences in health outcomes. 

Tobacco is another example. If you were to examine the early days 

of anti-tobacco efforts, you would see the same kind or reactions 
we get now when we talk a
bout childhood obesity: ﬁAmericans 
like to smoke;ﬂ ﬁIt is part of our culture;ﬂ ﬁIt is part of our econ-

omy;ﬂ ﬁThere are huge economic for
ces against it;ﬂ ﬁThat is just the way life is here;ﬂ or ﬁYou are trying to alter our sociocultural values by combating smoking.ﬂ 
 You will hear the same thing about the obesity epidemic, 

and we all should reject such statements. There are things that we 
can and will do about obesity. And the sooner we do it, the better. That is what this report is about. It is to set a blueprint for all our efforts to come. I want to briefly 
mention some ideas in the report. 
You will hear about them in much 
greater detail from our panelists. 
 One of these ideas is the nature of the epidemic. As Dr. 

Fineberg said, it is a doubling and, in some age groups, a tripling 
of obesity in children. It is an outbreak that occurs across the na-

tion. No region is safe from it. It occurs in all ethnic and racial 

groups. It occurs in all ages. We
 are focusing on children, but it occurs in all ages. It is rampant and growing at a remarkable rat, as 

Dr. Dietz will show in his slides.  
 The committee's approach was to gather as much evidence 

as possible, assemble it in a 
range of different subtopics around obesity, and sum everything up with a set of recommendations for 

how to deal with the epidemic. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  I think a striking aspect of the report is that we identified 
what is known, and we identified what is not known but would be helpful to know, but we didn™t limit our recommendations by say-

ing, ﬁUntil we learn about this, we can't do anything.ﬂ We rejected 
that as being an irresponsible approach. Being responsible means 
we have to act as if there were 
a SARS epidemic starting in this 
community: we don't know much about SARS, but we have to take 
some steps to combat it. 
 What we don't know about the childhood obesity epidemic 

we will learn as we make attempts to deal with it. We will make 

improvements as we go along. That 
is why careful evaluation is a feature of everything we advocate. 

 There are many recommendations in the Institute of Medi-

cine™s (IOM™s) report for stakeholders. There are recommendations 

for parents and families: encourage children to engage in regular 

physical activity, provide them with healthy foods, and serve as 

good role models. We recommend that parents limit TV and other 

recreational screen time to 
no more than two hours a day. 
 There are recommendations for schools, from preschool 

through high school. They should implement nutritional standards, 
set at the national level, for all foods and beverages served on school grounds, including those dispensed from vending machines. 
Schools should also expand opportunities for their students to en-gage in at least 30 minutes of m
oderate to vigor
ous physical activ-ity every day. 
 The report calls on the food, beverage, and entertainment 

industries to develop innovations related to healthier food and bev-
erages. The report calls for cha
nges in packaging and providing clear and consistent media messages about the energy contents. 

Further, the report calls for the relevant industries to voluntarily develop and implement guidelines for advertising and marketing 

directly to children. There is so
me controversy over this. Some 
people feel that the industry is not going to make these changes on 
their own. Some members of our co
mmittee felt that way. Here is 
an opportunity to engage in a partnership, to encourage a collegial 
approach before resorting to more
 regulatory means. But, if neces-
sary, regulations may be imposed over time. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW 13 
  The report calls for a stronger 
role for community organiza-
tions and state and lo
cal governments. They should expand their 
programs and coordinate them w
ith programs run by other organi-
zations. These organizations can 
lead the way by looking at the 
built environment, including bike paths, sidewalks, and play-

grounds, and make the necessary changes through capital invest-

ment and local zoning. 
 There is a huge economic play in this. We either make the 
investment up front, which would be
 relatively modest, or we will 
pay huge prices down the road in health care costs. 
 Of course, health care profe
ssionals have a role to play, 
much as they did in controlling 
tobacco or when pediatricians ad-
dressed injury prevention. There is a history of successful interven-tions by health care professionals, 
and we urge them to play an 
active role in combating the obesity epidemic. 

 The federal government must provide the leadership 

needed to make all this work. Th
e federal government needs to go 
beyond rhetoric and allocate resources
 to fight this epidemic. Be-
cause so many departments of government will have important 

roles in combating this epidemic, coordinating the efforts of the 

departments of Transportation, Ed
ucation, Defense, Housing and 
Urban Development, Health and Human Services, and others will 

be an absolute necessity. 

 There are no easy solutions to the problem of obesity. That 

is why the report is more than 
three or four pages long. Unfortu-
nately, the danger of many recomm
endations is that everyone will 
wait for some other group to step 
forward and act. However, it is 
exciting to already see some of th
e activities and efforts that are 
underway, both before the report 
came out, and some that have be-
gun since the report, particularly at the grassroots level.  It has helped that, much as we have made changes in the 

social norm and other aspects that 
have made our society healthier, 
the changes in the social norms will take place in food consump-

tion and physical activity as well. 
 We will flesh out this overview of the report with more 

specific discussions from our panelists, and each will be providing 

a somewhat different perspective. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  My colleague on the report, introduced briefly by Dr. Fine-
berg, is Dr. Shiriki Kumanyika, an international expert in obesity. 
Dr. Kumanyika is a professor of epidemiology at the University of 

Pennsylvania. She is also associate dean for health promotion and 
disease prevention. She has been working in this area for years and has been a very effective person on a wide range of government 

panels, including U.S. dietary guidelines advisory committees, 
IOM's Food and Nutrition Board, 
and the National Institutes of 
Health's clinical obesity task fo
rce. She is a member of the IOM 
and was extraordinarily important in crafting the report. So, let me 

turn the podium over to Dr. Kumanyika. 

  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 15 Framework for Prevention and Perspectives on Addressing Health Disparities 
Shiriki Kumanyika    
 
 
 
 
 
 DR. KUMANYIKA:
 Contrary to Dr. Kopl
an™s feelings about 
physical education, I loved physical 
education, but we had to wear 
green bloomers. Anybody here who is old enough knows what I 

mean. The rest of you, you are just lucky that you came along after 

the green bloomer phase. 
 It is nice to have a chance to
 give some perspectives on the 
report and to discuss where I think our challenges lie. These are 

challenges that are implied in the 
report and perhaps left open for 
the community to address as effo
rts to combat obesity in youth 
move forward. If we are going to rea
lize the potential that is in this 
report, I see three chal
lenges ahead of us.   My perspective is that we
 are in the honeymoon phase now. 
We have created a report that 
has made a lot of people happy. 
There have been some criticisms 
of it, but it is good to see people 
say, ﬁNow we have the full story al
l together, and we are ready to 
go forward.ﬂ But there are going to be some challenges. 

 Dr. Koplan gave an excellent overview of our situation, so 

this will be a quick summary of 
what I think we have actually ac-
complished by creating the report. We emphasized in the report a 

population health perspec
tive. We need a broa
d base of interven-
tion in the population at
 large to succeed in 
stopping this epidemic. 
This is not a medical problem that
 is going to be solved by the doc-tors, and everybody else can forget about it. On the very first page 

of this report, the high-risk gr
oups are mentioned, the ethnic mi-
nority populations: African Americ
ans, Hispanics, Native Ameri-
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 cans, and children in low-income families. There are groups in the 
population that have more than thei
r share of this problem, and any 
solution we implement has to espe
cially address these populations.  After reading the report, ma
ny people have said, ﬁWe know 
all these things, but wh
ere do we start? How do we get our arms 
around a problem this big?ﬂ We offer an ecological model to not 

only interpret the problem, but to manage the complexity of the 
problem as well. We lay out the laye
rs that are global or national in 
their influence on the obesity pr
oblem by influencing the environ-
ments in which choices are made
 about eating and physical activ-
ity.The ecological model can s
how how everything filters down 
and relates to the balance of ener
gy at the base of the problem. 
What we have to ultimately affect
 in growing children is the bal-
ance of energy going in and energy going out. 
 We have offered the ecologica
l model as a useful tool, and 
I think it really is help
ful as a way of thinking
 about how it all fits 
together. We also included in the report the concept of social trans-

formation, not social reform. We 
are not going to turn society up-
side down, but if this action plan on childhood obesity is going to 

succeed, it is going to both require
 and drive changes in social 
norms. In that sense, even though 
we talk about th
e solution play-ing out in the long term, we don't b
ack away from the idea that we 
are talking about social change. 
Again, we are not talking about a 
technical solution that can be ke
pt in a box and that is going to 
flow out and spill over and affect everybody. 

 By analyzing the efforts made in the past to increase auto-

motive safety, to recycle wastes
, and control tobacco use, we 
learned that, indeed we can accomplish widespread changes and 

transformations. 

 We took an inclusive approach, which Dr. Koplan called a 

ﬁcollegial approach.ﬂ We avoided 
trying to determine who was to 
blame by spreading the responsibilit
y for the problem and its solu-
tions as widely as possible across 
society. Yes, there are some ob-
vious players here, but all sector
s of society contribute to the 
causes of obesity. So, we all have to be a part of the solution.  To show how you to go a
bout thinking through these dif-
ferent environments in the ecological model, we use two levels. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMEWORK FOR PREVENTION AND PERSPECTIVES 17 
 There is the micro level, or micro environment, which encom-
passes the behavioral settings 
in which people actually make 
choices and live. Next, there are the macro environments, which 

control the micro environments. 
These include the physical, the economic, the policy or political, a
nd the social or cultural envi-
ronments. 

 This is from Boyd Swinburn
1 and his colleagues in Austra-
lia and New Zealand, the ANGELO m
odel, which is an analysis 
grid of influences and stands fo
r an Analysis Grid for Environ-
ments Linked to Obesity. The idea helps us to organize the envi-

ronmental influences is where the environment is affecting the 

problem of childhood obesity. The so
lutions, then, will be different 
depending on which environment you examine. If you put the 

problem in the physical environment,
 the solutions are going to be 
different from those found in th
e economic environment. Policy 
and political environments are di
fferent from social and cultural 
environments, which often can't be
 changed directly but require 
changes in social norms. 

 In the micro environment, for example, the policy makers 

are the parents. There are lots of 
policies and rules in the home that 
affect how children eat and whether they are active. There are 

many examples in the report of how the different environmental 

factors become operational when yo
u start thinking about where to 
intervene. And, of course, all the factors are related.  

 The ecological model is being used globally to help find 

where we have leverage or where the low-hanging fruit is. Is there 

something going on in one of these environments that we can use 

to influence the obesogenic environment? 

 As I said, there are three challenges I want to point out. The 

first one deals with private sector issues, and I put here a ﬁcommit-

tee of dreamers.ﬂ We have been criticized the most by health advo-

cates and policy analysts, observers
 who think that we were naive 
                                                 1 Swinburn B, Egger G, Raza F. Dissectin
g obesogenic environments: the development 
and application of a framework for identifyi
ng and prioritizing environmental interven-
tions for obesity. Prev Med. 1999;29(6 Pt 1):563-70. 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 and too optimistic because we did not ask for regulatory solutions 
or because we did not try to force changes to happen tomorrow. 

 I like to think that if we were a committee of dreamers, we 

might also have been a committee 
of visionaries. We decided not 
to recommend new laws to force ch
anges. We decided that the so-
lutions have to be seen as win/wi
n situations by a broad base in 
society, including the private sector. When you look at history, 
there was always a sector
 or sectors of industr
y that saw a profit in 
the changes that led to the health
ier environment. That is why we 
laid out our recommendations in a more positive way. Time will 

tell if we were naive or visionary, and it is going to be incumbent 

upon us, we who think that this is a good plan, to make sure that 

the recommendations aren't viewed as just something that bought a 

certain vested interest more time to avoid taking the steps they 

need to take. 
 The second challenge is the high-risk populations, and I 

think we need to apply this term both to the traditional minority 

populations and to the new immigran
ts arriving in this country. It 
is very clear that moving to this country is fattening for people. 

There is a report titled The Future of Our Children
2 that shows that 
children of immigrants are heavier in succeeding generations and 

have the health problems that go along with obesity. 

 We have to think of the minority populations as they are 

now characterized as being at high 
risk. What are the factors that 
determine the excess risk? What is
 it about these factors? Is it 
quantitative factor? Do minority 
populations simply have more 
problems and fewer safe neighbo
rhoods? Or are there qualitative 
differences in life in these communities that is driving the prob-

lem? These are important questions. 
But even if we think it is sim-
ply a higher-intensity 
version of the problem that we have in the 
mainstream community, the way th
at we go about changing it may 
be very different. For example, 
if you were in a low-income com-
munity and were finally able to afford fattening foods and bever-

ages, you wouldn™t see the problem in the same way as somebody 
                                                 2 Fuligni AJ, Christina C. Preparing Diverse 
Adolescents for the Transition to Adulthood.  
The Future of Our Children
. 2004; 14(2):99-120. www.futureofchildren.org
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMEWORK FOR PREVENTION AND PERSPECTIVES 19 
 who says that you are not supposed to have it. Or think of the low-
income family that has been saving for three generations for a car 

or to find jobs in which the work
 was not physically
 intensive, the 
idea of running around in spandex or
 gym shorts exercising and to 
be healthy doesn't make a much se
nse. We have to look at the dif-
ferent world views, the different life perspectives, that families in 

this communities might have. 
 The third challenge has to do with how the epidemic of 
childhood obesity is linked to the epidemic of adult obesity. I think 

we focused on children because th
e epidemic of childhood obesity 
was the only thing we could agree on where we would take action.  We have left latent this whol
e problem of obesity in adults. 
The questions that came to my 
mind were: Can we solve the prob-
lem in children without addressing 
the problem in adults? Or will 
our attempts to solve the problem in children inadvertently solve 

the problem in the adult population? One way or another, I think 

we have to have a plan for dealing with the obesity epidemic in the 

adult population at some point in the 
future. As I said, we are in the honeymoon phase. 

 It may be that the adult popul
ation will wake 
up and realize 
that this is going to affect their 
lives too, not just the children™s. 
There could be a backlash. I don't think that we can assume that 

the adults who are targeted in 
all of these recommendations are 
going to not notice that their lives 
have to change too. We have to 
make sure we are ready for when that happens. 

 We talk about changing food programs, subsidies, review-

ing subsidies, advertis
ing, and building coalitions. Adults do all of 
these things. The recommendations are for children, but adults are 

in control of all of these things. 
Do we need an action plan for how 
to get adults to accept that doing this for children is something that 

is worth changing their own behavior? 

 What have we accomplished so far? If we ask this question 

jumping forward to 2010, I think the answer will depend on how 

well we meet these challenges in the area of the private sector, the 

high-risk populations, and the link
ed epidemics of children and 
adults. These are interrelated pr
oblems. Eighty pe
rcent of black 
women are overweight, and 50 percen
t are obese. Obesity is rising 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 faster in African American children than in the rest of the           
population. 
 So, in the very communities where we are talking about 

making a change in the children, the adults model the problem to 

an extreme degree, and their own behavior is going to have to be a 

part of the solution.  Thank you.  DR. KOPLAN:
 Thank you, Dr. Kumanyika. I think I 
would have enjoyed gym more if I had worn green bloomers. 

 Our next speaker, offering a sl
ightly different perspective, 
is someone who has been active in the food industry for many 

years. He is currently the senior vice president for new growth 

platforms and chief innovation officer for PepsiCo. Brock Leach is 

responsible for identifying and de
veloping new platforms for busi-
ness growth beyond those already 
in PepsiCo™s operating units, 
and for building new capabilities 
to support innovative work in all 
divisions. He previously held the positions of president and CEO 

of Tropicana Products. He is a memb
er of the national board of the 
YMCA and works for many children's agencies in Florida. We are 

eager to hear him and glad he could join us. 

  
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  21 Industry Perspective Brock Leach   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MR. LEACH: Thank you. It is a privileg
e to be here tonight, and 
it is a real opportunity to share an
 industry perspective. I say that 
because I suspect I may be the fi
rst industry representative who has ever been at a Rosenthal Lecture. 
I hope that after 
tonight I am not 
the last, but I will let you be the judge of that.  

 I want to open with two things
. The first is a caveat, and the 
second is a commendation. On the ca
veat side, I am going to share 
the industry perspective through the lens of one company,              

PepsiCo. I do that knowing that what
 we are doing is a drop in the 
bucket; it is the tip of the iceber
g. I can tell you from my work on 
the grocery manufacturers committee 
that this is going to be the 
kind of thing that most of the 
leading food companies are going to take on. I can see that starting to happen as we speak. I am going to 
present what we are doing at Pe
psiCo as a case study, but be aware 
that it is not the only company that is doing these things. Most of 

the other leading companies are doing similar things. 

 The second point is, I want to commend you on the work 

that was completed here, and actual
ly the work that is beginning. I 
think this is a fantastic piece of work. The diligence with which all 

the facts were brought to bear, th
e comprehensiveness of the rec-
ommendations, the fact that they 
have come so far down the path 
toward implementationŠthese are a
ll huge steps in 
the right direc-
tion. For those of us in the food 
business, we want nothing more 
than to see real solutions take hold.  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
   Tonight I will talk about what our role in those solutions 
can be. We are at the beginning of the game. I hope you will be 

proven right in your judgment that 
you are visionary, not naive, in 
thinking that the private sector ha
s a role to play, if for no other 
reason than that we know how to 
make healthy products attractive, 
and we know how to market them 
in ways that make people want 
to adopt healthy lifestyle habits. 
 Let me give you a sense of how we are thinking about that 

right now. For those of us who have
 spent our careers in the food 
business, obesity is the largest issu
e we are ever going to deal with. 
No doubt about it, it is revolutioni
zing the way we think about our 
business. It is also the largest oppo
rtunity to add value. Wellness is 
the largest opportunity to add value that we have in front of us.   Let me tell you about the way food companies think about 

adding value. We recognize the population is getting more diverse. 

We recognize that time constrai
nts are putting a bigger premium 
on convenience. By the way, wellness, not only the obesity epi-
demic but the aging of the population and what we see as a shift 

toward prevention, is creating 
opportunities to add value.  
 So, my job is to figure out 
new growth platforms for the 
company. I am looking for things th
at offer wellness in convenient 
forms that are accommodated to
 specific individual needs and 
tastes. That is my role. We th
ink convenience has probably been 
the largest driver of 
growth in the food busin
ess over the last 15 
years. We think wellness is going to be bigger than that for the 

next 15 years. So, we are working on it with everything we have 

got. 
 About three quarters of what
 we are doing in product inno-
vation qualifies as being good for 
you. And that is just the begin-
ning. 
 This is a context problem a
nd, within a food company, it is 
easy to get distracted and not be sure what to do. So, we have some 
simple things we say in the office. First of all, we say, ﬁThere is a 

solution to obesity, and it is called energy balance.ﬂ  It is no more complicated than that. It is about helping peo-

ple get the right mix of foods, and 
it is about helping people pursue 
the right activities. The challenge is
 that it is an i
ndividual choice. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 23 
  What is our role in helping indi
viduals make the right choices? 
There are lots of thi
ngs that can be done to
 clean up the environ-
mentŠbetter marketing practices and what we do in schools, for 

instance. 

 What is really going to help 
is to offer healthy products that 
people are excited about consuming, market them in a way that 

promotes a healthy lifestyle as we
ll, and for the products to provide the emotional benefits to support making the changes that are re-

quired. 
 That is something we know how to do. That is something 

we have of years of experience doing. That is why we think we can 
be at least a part of the solution. 
 Now, a lot of people say, 
ﬁOkay, PepsiCo, what do you 
know about health and wellness?ﬂ In 
reply, I have to explain a lit-
tle bit about who we are. In No
rth America today, about 38 percent 
of our business qualifies as better for you or good for you, 
better 
for you meaning it has reduced amounts, according to the FDA 
standards, of sugar, calories, fat, and so on. It is 
good for you means it is made out of essentially
 healthy ingredients that would 
meet the FDA requirements for hea
lthy. The most important fact is 
that in the first half of this year that part of our business collec-

tively grew 10 percent. It was almost 60 percent of our revenue 

growth in North America. 

 Is there a business case for health and wellness? Abso-

lutely, and that is why we are putting the resources into it. 

 We also have the three best brands in nutrition from a con-

sumer™s point of view: Quaker, Tr
opicana, and Dole, along with 
Gatorade, which is number seven. We also have leading share po-

sitions in a lot of these market segments, which is why we are will-

ing to go after it, because we ha
ve an opportunity to further our 
share position. 
 Our whole approach is about determining what we can do 

that is at the intersection of business interest and public interest. 

Our approach is about marketing 
healthy products in conjunction 
with healthy lifestyles. Our expe
rtise is making consuming a prod-
uct more attractive, easier, and 
more fun. That is what we know 
how to do across our product portfolio. The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
   I am going to give you a very
 quick snapshot of the kinds 
of things we are doing and have done this year, beginning with 

healthy choices. Starting about two 
years ago, we set the goal of 
having half of our new product revenues come from better for you 

and good for you products. We have 
far surpassed our goal. Right 
now, a little more than 70 percent 
of our products that will be 
available in three years will qualify 
as either good for you or better 
for you. 
 We have had a lot of successes. For example, Quaker 

Breakfast Squares supply all the nutr
ition of a bowl of oatmeal in a 
square, and Propel fitness water was one of the largest beverage 
introductions a year ago. A lot of the work is manifesting itself in 

some good ideas. One of my challenges is to figure out how do you 

get value-added proteins, whole grains, fruits, and vegetables into 
convenient forms. It can be done. 
It™s not easy or it would have 
been done long ago, but it can be done. Food technology, packag-
ing technology, and distribution technology has advanced to the 
point where it can be done. 
 To improve the healthfulne
ss of our existing products, we 
pledged we would go through and look 
for things that needed to be 
changed. Our first and largest target was eliminating trans-fats. We 

did that at Frito-Lay. We took 55 
million pounds of trans-fats out 
of the American diet, not just the 
oil, but the actual
 trans-fats. We 
did it because we didn't want to be
 the poster child for trans-fats as 
the issue progressed over the next 10 years. The science was com-

pelling. We actually think it has he
lped our business too. Now that 
people are more aware of trans-fa
ts, they are looking for choices 
that don't have them, and we offer those choices. It was not a small 

decision to change the oils, but it is one that was a calculated risk 

that we felt was worth taking. 
 We have done some work around nutrition standards, 

which I will address. We are cu
rrently proving to ourselves and 
others that portion control can be
 sold. People are willing to pay 
for convenience and portion control. One example of this are the 8-
ounce cans that we are putting in multipacks that we are selling at 

Wal-Mart. We cannot keep them in stock. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 25 
   We are selling the same number of ounces of soda per mul-
tipack as a single large container, 
but at a slightly higher price be-
cause of the packaging costs, and people are buying it because they want to be able to limit their consumption to 8 ounces. 

 Another example is in Frito-Lay, where we offer 12 sacks, 

which are 12 ounces in individual 1-ounce bags. Women, in par-

ticular, are saying, ﬁI want to be 
able to control the amount of 
chips I am eating in one setting.ﬂ That section of the business is 

growing by leaps and bounds. 
 We are one of three companie
s to say we are going to go to 
total calorie labeling on all of our
 single serving products, and that 
will be up to three racks or four racks, depending on what category 

it is, but we are in the pro
cess of putting that in place.  We are doing a lot in schools, but the emphasis on schools 

is getting our healthier 
products in distribution. So, some of that is 
new product SKUs, stocking keeping units, of about 30. Some of 
that effort are our specifically 
designed products for schools. We 
have a product called Sobe Synergy 
that is 50 per
cent juice plus filtered water and Splenda fortific
ation. It™s actually better nutri-
tion than 100 percent juice and has 
fewer calories. We have a simi-
lar milk product that is a 12-ounce can that has only 130 calories. It 

is flavored, it has Splenda, and te
st results put it on parity with 
Nesquik or Hershey Chocolate Mil
k, which have much more calo-
ries. So, progress is being made in
 getting the formulations right. 
 There is a lot of effort to ge
t water and Gatorade in vending 
machines, and our policies continue to evolve about what we rec-

ommend selling in schools. We want
 100 percent of what we sell 
in elementary school cafeterias 
to be better for you and good for 
you products, because children don't have a choice anyway. Be-

cause there is a question about what
 is the right developmental age 
to give them a choice, we don't 
vend foods in elementary schools 
as a policy. For secondary schools, 
we would like half of the vend-
ing slots and half of th
e a la carte placements 
to be our better for 
you and good for you products. 
 We are also working to promot
e healthy lifestyles for chil-
dren. We have worked closely wi
th youth sports over the years, 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  recognizing, however, that by and large our efforts are not reaching the children most in need of help.  So, we have been working on how can we help children 

understand about energy balance. We became a presenting sponsor 

of America On The Move, founded by Jim Hill in Colorado, and 

we continue to do a lot with that. 

 The largest application is taking the principle of energy 

balance into a curriculum, called Balance First that we have dis-

tributed this fall. We set out to have 2.5 million children sign up 

for this curriculum, and we
 have 3 million signed up.  We are also working closely 
with food service workers. All 
of these things I™ve mentioned are 
just an indication of the kind of changes we™ve made this year. Many of our accomplishments have 

centered around reducing fat in our products, but we™ve also been adding protein and doing things like adding fruit and nuts to oat-meal. The majority of what we 
are doing now is reducing the sugar in most if not all of our beverage
s, bars, ready-to-eat cereals, and 
instant oatmeals. We are also 
offering sugar reduction options. Splenda, it turns out, is a great performing product, enabling many 
people to reduce their sugar intake. 
 Another one of my projects ha
s been to make fruit more 
accessible. We are currently testing 
this in Whole Foods stores in 
the northeast. 

 The idea here is this: what 
if we took fruit and put it in convenient packaging? It turns 
out, by the way, there is a fair amount of consumer dissatisfaction 
with fresh fruit, especially when the consumer is on the 
go. How many times have you had an 
apple, and it didn™t taste as good as it looked? How many times 

have you been in an airport and you were reluctant to pick up the 
orange, because you weren't sure who sneezed on it or who 

touched it, or where it had been? That™s why we are developing a method to put nothing but the fruit in convenient forms, have it 

taste very good, and have it be consistent and hygienic. We are off 
to a good start. It is too early to claim victory, but we are heading down the right path. 
 Two years ago we realized 
there was a lot we don't know 
about how to deal with this problem and opportunity. So we de-The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 27 
  cided to find some people who coul
d advise us. We had a terrific 
list of people. What we tell them is, you don't have to go out and 
stump for us. You don't have to be a spokesperson. 
Instead we asked them to tell us what we needed to hear be-
fore we heard it elsewhere, and they have been bold in doing that. Reducing the trans-fats in our products came about partly because 

Dr. Cooper and Dr. Reiner said, ﬁYou have to do this.ﬂ We knew 
that, but they were the impetus to get us moving. They told us, 

ﬁYou have to confront this, and you have to do it fast.ﬂ  I would say, across everything 
we are doing, this has been a really good idea. We are yet to 
have any reason why we thought this was a problem. One of the first things they said is, okay, you 

guys are doing good stuff, but what are you doing to take this mainstream? What are you doing to take your marketing muscle 

and help people make healthier 
choices? Those questions evolved 
into a program that we launched September 1, that we call Smart 
Spot. The idea is putting a simple
 device on our better for you and good for you products that will allow consumers to make healthier 
eating selections. The way this works is a little green dot is placed 
on the front panel of all these different products. On the back panel is a box that says, ﬁTropicana light and healthy,ﬂ for example, ﬁis a 

smart choice because it has half the sugar of regular orange juice.ﬂ 

It also states that the product is one of more than 100 smart choices 
from PepsiCo, and if you want more information, go to Smart-

spot.com, where you can learn abou
t healthy lifestyles, nutrition information, or government standard
s, and so on. A lot of people want to know more, so we provide
 them more information through 
the World Wide Web. 

 We held 20 focus groups on this idea, and we performed 

four quantitative studies, the last of which was with 1,600 people. Over and over we heard the same 
thing: Keep it simple. We looked 
at star systems, we looked at stop
light systems, some of which we 
weren't excited about, I will sa
y at the front end. Consumers re-peatedly said, ﬁJust direct me to 
a good choice, tell me why it is a 
good choice, and then encourage me. Keep it on the positive side.ﬂ 
So, that is what we have attempted to do. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
   We are in the process of pu
tting this on all of our packag-ing. We will be finished by the end of the year. That is 230 items. 
It is a total business worth $6.5 billion, so it is taking us some time 
to change the packaging. 

 This is the way we are advertising it. We are doing it in the 

context of our brands. It is a delicious way to help lower choles-
terol, it is a family tradition that warms you all over, is it the Smart 

Spot, the symbol of smart choices
 made easy. You can find Smart 
Spot on Quaker oatmeal: ﬁProven to help lower cholesterol after 

just 30 days as part of a healthy diet. It™s one of over 100 smart 
choices from PepsiCo.ﬂ The mark
eting all follows the same for-
mat, but is highlighted diffe
rently on different products.  We are getting ready to do 
our first ever PepsiCo-wide Smart Spot program at retail. We 
have lined up all 16 of our largest 
retail customers to do this program. It is going to be, for the most 

part, in the first two weeks afte
r the Super Bowl. We are going to 
be out there doing a national insert at 50 million newspapers that 

introduces smart spot an
d healthy life styles. We
 are going to be on display with pamphlets that talk 
about getting started, the simple 
steps to getting started, with access to signing up for America On 
The Move, as well as products. 
 It is our first attempt. We haven't done a test market on this. 

We are not exactly sure how it is going to be received, but it is our 
first attempt to market simple, 
good choices and a healthy lifestyle. These are the products we are 
going to feature in schools, both in the programming and in th
e vending locations and so forth. To do it, we recognized that we 
had to be real; we had to have standards. This is somewhat cont
roversial in a food company at the 
front end, because people say, we are doing a lot of good things 

that are healthy, like we took trans-fats out and we have natural and organic and so on and so forth. But we wanted to be provably 
genuine. A product has to be truly good for you or it has to be bet-ter for you to qualify for Smart Spot. To accomplish this, we re-

ferred to authoritative statements from the FDA and supplemented 
those with reports from the National Academies. 

 There are three ways a produc
t can qualify for Smart Spot. 
The first way is for the product to be healthyŠmeaning the FDA 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 29 
  definition of healthy. The only change
s we made to that definition 
were that the product had to have
 zero trans-fats
, and we set a 
sugar limit by using the National Academies 25 percent added 

sugar limit. Then we applied that
 to our different
 categories of 
food. Interesting things happen 
when you do that, by the way. 
Items such as chewy granola bars, which people think of as 

healthy, do not qualify because they have too much sugar and too 

little granola. Almost our entire 
pretzel line was disqualified be-
cause it has too much sodium. Our pr
etzels may be low in fat, but 
they have too much sodium. Our 
Twister juice drink was disquali-
fied because it has too much adde
d sugar, which is caused by the 
fact that it has too little juice. 

 We felt that our standards passed the common sense test. 

Another way for a product to qualify for Smart Spot is for the 

product to have a functional benefit confirmed by significant scien-
tific agreement. That would t
ypically be a f
ood that the FDA 
claimed was beneficial. Whole grains
 are an example. It can't be 
any worse in any other regard, a
nd with this, meeting FDA stan-
dards for reduced sugar and calories. 
 We want the Smart Spot progr
am to be robust. We don't 
think there is anything that qualif
ies for the designation that you 
would question. We are supplying co
mplete information about our 
nutritional standards on the Smart 
Spot website. We ultimately 
want smartspot.com to be a portal for consumers who are not oth-

erwise aware of healthy choices and healthy lifestyles to come in 

and begin learning about staying healthyŠthink of it as a paint-by-

numbers approach that could rea
lly help the average consumer. 
 As part of buying media on 
Discovery, they are going to 
run public service announcements with healthy snacking remind-

ers. These will run at 3:00 p.m. across all six of their channels. It is 

the first time they have
 done that. They are 
going to run healthy 
breakfast reminders during prime ti
me as well. We are sponsoring 
such efforts as their National B
ody Challenge that are held during 
Fit TV's Fit Family Week held in March. 

 One of the things I am really excited about is they are going 

to take our Balance First curric
ulum into every middle school in 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  America as part of thei
r schools distribution program. It is a way of 
bringing media scale to the activity. 

 We are incorporating these effo
rts in our internal operations to unite all of our health and we
llness efforts, including a new pro-
gram for our employees called Heal
th Rows. It is powered by Web 
MD and provides individualized in
teractions after an employee 
completes an online health assessment. We have 60,000 U.S. em-

ployees. Twenty thousand of them
 have taken the health assess-
ment so far, and many of them are active in the program.  

 My wish, as a marketer, is that we can bring economies of 

scale to the effort to persuade people to adopt healthy lifestyles. 

We think about new product intr
oductions. We want to be un-
avoidable. We want our message 
to be seen everywhere. I would 
encourage everyone who is interested
 in this issue 
to help figure 
out how can we bring economies of
 scale to this
 message. I know 
that the messages pertaining to diab
etes, heart disease, and cancer 
are working. How can we work together to create a message that 
we all can reiterate? Similarly, how can we widely disseminate in-

terventions such as America On The Move. How can we take the 

great work that has been done in the Institute of Medicine™s 

(IOM™s) report and build a consensus around the key implementa-

tion strategies for schools? Right
 now, every school district in 
every state is encouraging healthy lifestyles, but each one is doing 

it in a different manner. Can we build some consensus around what 

is the best way to do that well? 

 We are actively looking for ways to pilot interventions in 

African American and Latino communities, particularly in the in-

ner city. Our Latino and African American advisory boards told us, 
you don't know what you are doing when it comes to marketing 

health in these communities. You 
need to get some practical lab 
experience. We would like to do some marketing lab work at the 

same time that we are doing intervention lab work. So, we are in-

vestigating ways to accomplish that. 

 We are in favor of anything 
that helps bring economies of 
scale to the message and to the 
solutions. I hope that gives you a 
sense of where we are in our efforts. A year from now it will look 

differently, but the journey continues.  The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVE 31 
   DR. KOPLAN: 
Thank you, Mr. Leach. Our final speaker is Dr. Bill Dietz. Dr. Dietz is the director of the Division of Nutri-

tion and Physical Activity at the Center for Disease Control and 

Prevention (CDC). Prior to coming to the CDC, he was professor 

of pediatrics at Tufts School of Me
dicine and direct
or of clinical 
nutrition at the floating hospital in Boston. He is a past president of the American Society for Clinical 
Nutrition and past president of 
the North American Association for the Study of Obesity. He is a 

member of the IOM and an international figure in the fields of nu-

trition and obesity, and we are delighted to have him here. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 33 Government Perspective 
William Dietz   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DR. DIETZ:
 Thank you, Dr. Koplan. It really is a pleasure to be 
here with you this evening at the Rosenthal lecture.   I would like to comment on my
 agenda item. I am not go-
ing to give you the entire ﬁgovern
ment perspective,ﬂ but rather, the 
perspective of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention 

(CDC) on this problem. What I am 
going to try to demonstrate is 
that one of the CDC™s most important functions is to catalyze 

change. Many of our efforts in the 
field of obesity, 
I think, have 
been directed toward that end. 
 I would like to begin by comparing the obesity epidemic 

with the spread of tobacco, which 
can be divided into three phases. 
This first phase was a rapid increase in the use of per capita to-
bacco consumption. The second phase was a plateau in tobacco 

consumption, which occurred when tobacco became a visible 

health problem. The third phase wa
s a decline in tobacco consump-
tion that was driven by multiple overlapping interventions. 

 From the perspective of the 
CDC, our efforts have paral-
leled in some respects the developments that led to the decline of 

tobacco. Our first efforts focused on increasing the visibility of this 
problem. In our second focus, we focused on the disease burden, 

which has particular implications
 for the pediatric population. The 
third effort, we began to identify interventions and to develop the 

partnerships necessary to move
 those interventions forward. The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  Those are the main areas which I would like to focus on 

tonight. Our efforts to increase visibility began with a series of 
maps which I think are known to
 many of you. We published these 
maps beginning in 1999, when Dr. K
oplan was the chief author of an editorial announcing that obesity was epidemic. As you know, all of these maps look the same
. There are the obesity trends among U.S. adults from the Beha
vioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System, a state-based annual su
rvey. Prevalence estimates are 
down here. An estimate of less than 
10 percent is this light blue, 10 to 14 percent is this medium blue
, and the dark blue is 15 to 19 percent. As the epidemic progressed, the number of states that 

were affected rapidly increased until 2003. There was no question in anyone's mind that this was an 
epidemic. The impact of this se-
ries of maps has been striking. 
More than anything else, it has made this epidemic visible. 

 You don't have to look further than the issue of 
Time maga-
zine that followed the 
Time/ABC conference in Williamsburg. In 
addition, who would ever have thought that National Geographic would have an issue on obesity, or that Sports Illustrated would begin to talk about obesity and physical fitness, or that Vogue would address obesity in a lengthy, but somewhat scary article for 
women who are afraid of turning into the shapes that 
Vogue in-cluded in this particular article. 
 All of this has accomplished 
the goal of making the obesity 
issue visible. That is behind us. Now, in many respects, I think we 

are confronting an even bigger cha
llenge, and that is, what do we 
do? How do we begin to change be
haviors that lead to obesity? 
 Our focus, with respect to
 the pediatric population, has been to look hard at what the im
plications of pediatric obesity are for adult disease. 

 These are data from Bogalusa, Louisiana; they are the only 

data of their kind, which looked at the course obesity in childhood and its impact on adult disease. 
I think you can see that only 25 percent of adults were overweight children but, among overweight 
children who went on to become obese adults, there was a dispro-

portionate representation of that group among the severely obese. 
Half of the all adults with a BMI over 40Šthat is, half of all adults The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT PERSPECTIVE 35 
 who are 100 pounds or more overweightŠwere overweight prior 

to eight years of age. 
In our view, that is a 
disproportionate contri-
bution to the burden of disease.
 Ultimately, whether childhood on-
set obesity that persists into adulthood it is more expensive than 

adult-onset obesity is not yet re
solved, but the contribution of 
childhood onset obesity to adult obe
sity provides a sound rationale 
for dealing with obesity in children. 
 Over the last four years, we have channeled funds to 28 

states to develop interventions. Five
 of these states are funded at a 
basic implementation level. These 
states are looking for solutions. 
At the same time, the Steps Program, which is a program initiated 

by Secretary Thompson, is focusing 
on dealing with diabetes, obe-
sity, and asthma through nutriti
on, physical activity, and tobacco 
control. 
 So, what do we recommend? 
What actions does the evi-
dence justify today? We spent a lo
t of time, and more needs to be 
spent, in identifying reasonable effo
rts that are likely to be effec-
tive for this problem. The most ev
idence exists for the role of 
physical activity, which reduces 
obesity-associated comorbidities. 
That is, if you were overweight, 
hypertensive, and inactive, and 
you become active, then your 
blood pressure would improve. 
Physical activity has a relativel
y modest impact on weight loss, 
and the dose of physical activity nece
ssary to prevent obesity is not 
known. Nonetheless, physical activity is a strategy that we can em-

ploy today, if only for its impact on the comorbidities. We also 

have a sound evidence 
base included in the 
Guide for Community 
Preventive Services, with recommended strategies to increase 
physical activity, both at the individual and community level. 
 Television viewing was mentione
d earlier. There is a strong relationship of television viewi
ng to both the prevalence and sever-ity of obesity in children, and there is increasing evidence that re-

ductions in television time reduce childhood obesity. 

 Finally, children who were 
ever breast fed and children 
who were breast fed for longer peri
ods of time have a reduced risk 
of early childhood overweight. Alth
ough the effects of breastfeed-
ing may be confounded by other variab
les, for all the other reasons 
for which we should be supporting 
breast feeding, weight control 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
 may be an additional strategy, particularly insofar as it may affect 

those children who are most vulnerabl
e and most likely to go on to 
severe adult disease. 
 These are promising interventions. We have less evidence 

to support these interventions, but 
they can be rationally and logi-
cally implemented with no adverse effects. 

 In addition to all the reasons we support fruit and vegetable 

intake, consuming fruits and vegetables may also have an impact 

on obesity. 
 Satiety seems to be regulat
ed by volume, not
 by calories, 
and foods that have a large volume and are relatively low in calo-

ries may reduce subsequent calori
c intake and, thereby, reduce 
obesity. Soft drink consumption accounts for about 13 percent of 

daily caloric intake for adolescents
, and reductions in soft drink 
intake or substitutions of low-calorie beverages seems a logical 

strategy to reduce obesity. Already mentioned by Dr. Koplan and 
Dr. Kumanyika is the strate
gy of reducing portion size.  Because of the urgency of the epidemic, we can't wait, in 

these areas, for the substantial body of randomized clinical trials 

necessary to meet the evidentiar
y standards of something like the 
Guide for Community Preventive Services. The strategy that we are 
now pursuing is nicely summarized by this quote from Larry 

Green: ﬁTo obtain more evidence-b
ased practice, we need more 
practice-based evidence.ﬂ We need to understand the impact of the 

natural experiments that are 
going on around us. When a school 
changes the products in its vendi
ng machines, or eliminates vend-
ing machines, what impact does that have on the quality of the diet 

or on weight? When the Texas school system reintroduces physical 

education in its elementary school 
programs, what impact does that 
have on weight? To build more ev
idence-based practice, we need 
more practice-based evidence. 

 We have also been actively 
looking at interventions deliv-
ered through different venues. The first of these is medical settings, 
which we still see as a public h
ealth intervention, because medical 
settings are where the 16 percent of children and adolescents who 

are overweight are going to go to ob
tain their health care. We have 
partnered with Kaiser Permanente
 to begin to explore how to 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT PERSPECTIVE 37 
 change the delivery of care for a chronic disease such as obesity. 

The chronic care model involves ch
anging such things as the in-
formation systems available in medical settings so that BMI, or 

body mass index, becomes a vital sign, and is entered in the medi-

cal record just like bl
ood pressure but, in th
is case, could be linked 
to an algorithm for the care of obesity. 

 Changes in decision support ar
e represented by this poster, 
which Kaiser Permanente developed and posted in all their pediat-

ric examining rooms. It is designed to engage children and parents 

in conversations about how to ge
t more energy. No
tice that it is 
about energy, not about obesit
y. Many of the recommendations 
that I emphasized, such as being 
physically active for 60 minutes a 
day, reducing television time, substituting water for soft drinks, 

and increasing fruit and vegetable consumption are reiterated in 
this poster. In addition, along the 
bottom of this poster is a scale 
for readiness to change, which the health care providers can use to 
engage patients in discussing behavior ch
ange around these               
behaviors. 
 Increasingly, medical system
s are recognizing that changes 
in the medical system delivery alone are not sufficient to achieve 

optimal patient self-management.
 The most recent development 
has been the recognition by enlight
ened groups such as Kaiser 
Permanente and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts that they 

need to partner with public hea
lth systems that address nutrition, 
physical activity, and obesity in 
schools, at work sites, and in 
communities. As a result of this
 recognition, Kaiser Permanente 
has partnered with a number of the Steps Program applicants, and 

is actively partnering w
ith some of those recipients to develop 
community-based approaches. These partners have introduced a 

community health initiative that 
provides funds for communities to 
invest in nutrition and physical 
activity interventi
ons to address 
obesity in schools and communities. 

 Blue Cross Blue Shield in 
Massachusetts has developed a 
program called 5-2-1 in collaborat
ion with our state program in 
Massachusetts. 5-2-1 stands for fi
ve fruits and vegetables a day, 
two hours or less of television a day, and one hour of physical ac-

tivity a day. The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  These kinds of partnerships, I think, are going to be essen-

tial to achieve optimal patient self-management. Not only will this 

require shifts in the medical system, but complementary shifts in 

the environment as well if thos
e changes are to be achieved. 
 I am not going to talk about
 schools. You have already 
heard something about this from both Mr. Leach and Dr. Kumany-

ika, and we can talk about more of this in the discussion. 

 I want to spend the last 
two minutes on communications 
strategies. One of the most important 
deficits that I feel we have in 
this field is that we don't have
 redundant messages about weight 
control. 
 The strategies I outlined earlie
r need to be heard both in the 
health care provider's office, in sc
hools, and echoed in work sites 
and communities. We need that kind of redundancy and consis-

tency. 
 One of the most important CDC efforts in this arena has 
been a campaign known as VERB. This is a media campaign 
aimed at ﬁtweens,ﬂ children rangin
g from 9 to 13 years old. It is 
called VERB because there are 10,000 active verbs in the English 
language. You can run, jump, swim, play, throw, and so on. The 

campaign is aimed at getting childre
n to pick their own verb. One 
of the most important aspects of th
is campaign is that it is a paid 
advertising campaign. It is a paid
 media campaign rather than a 
campaign that relies on public 
service announcements. At its out-
set, the campaign had sufficient funding to do the kind of neces-

sary focus group work to develop specific ads aimed at the five 

major groups of children in the co
untry. So, there are ads specific for children who are Caucasian, African American, Mexican 

American, Native American, and Asian American children. 

 I would like to show you one of 
these ads. This is the ad for Native American children. 

  
[Video shown] 
  
 The VERB campaign has been 
one of the more effective 
advertising campaigns, probably be
cause it has been one of the 
most well supported. There have been very significant improve-
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT PERSPECTIVE 39 
 ments in physical activity levels 
among target populations who are 
considered most vulnerable, name
ly, girls, inner-city children, and 
children from low-income families. 

 In closing, I think we know some of the things we need to 

do. Now the challenge is how do we begin to implement these 

strategies more broadly? 
 I think that the quote that 
summarizes our challenge and 
commitment best is this quote from Margaret Mead who said: 

ﬁNever doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people 

can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.ﬂ 
 My belief is that we have a small and committed group of 

people who are focused on the issue of childhood obesity, and this 
is a world that can change. My belief is that it will not take us the 

80 years it took the Red Sox to win the World Series. Thank you. 
 DR. KOPLAN:
 Thank you, Dr. Dietz.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  41 Discussion   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  DR. KOPLAN:
 We are at our time
™s end. Does anyone 
have comments or questions for our panelists?
  DR. FINEBERG:
 I have a question about economies of 
scale. I want to get back to th
at point, Mr. Leach that you made. 
Economies of scale require resour
ces, coordination, and a broad 
scope. Just out of curiosity, Dr. Diet
z, what is the entire investment 
that has gone into the VERB program? And Mr. Leach, I would be 

interested if you could share with us what your companyŠ
admittedly a big oneŠinvested in 
the first year of your program.  DR. DIETZ:
 In the first year, the VERB campaign re-
ceived $125 million. To give you a sense of scale against other 

products aimed at child
ren, $100 million annual
ly is spent on Bar-
bie. In the second year, I think 
we received $70 million, and in this 
year's budget we have $45 million. 

 DR. KOPLAN:
 A quick comment on this: Congressman 
John Porter, a visionary, saw the need to fund the VERB cam-

paign, though it was not called that 
at the time. His belief, and I 
think it is one that is shared by public health people, was to com-

pete against state-of-the-art a
dvertising and marketing agencies 
with pro bono work or efforts that
 were not state of the art was a 
losing cause. That funding permitte
d Dr. Dietz and his colleagues 
to hold a competition. They had the best advertising firms in the 

world working on this effort, and were able to pay for the advertis-

ing to be placed crucial times of the day. The VERB campaign had 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  adequate support with Chairman Po
rter. It had somewhat adequate 
support the next year, but you can see what is happening to a suc-

cessful campaign in the amount of 
funding that it is retaining.  DR. DIETZ:
 Let me just add that 
two of the partners, the 
Disney Channel and Nickelode
on Channel, provided additional 
advertising at their cost, pro bono. 
 MR. LEACH: I would just say that $125 million is a really 
strong advertising effort. There are not too many brands that are 
spending at that rate. There are a fe
w, but that is a high figure. This 
year we are going to spend about $26 million on our Smart Spot 

program. We are budgeting for this campaign as we would for any 

new product launch. Obviously, in a
ddition to that, we are doing a 
whole lot of brand advertising as well.  We have big brands. Tropicana has a $50 million advertis-

ing budget. Gatorade is well over th
at. AquaFina is significant. I 
don™t know what Quaker oatmeal is, but
 it is far more than that. If 
you look at it collectively, we are 
spending a slightly dispropor-
tionate amount on our better fo
r you and good for you brands. That effort, in particular, is like a $25 million budget. 

 PARTICIPANT:
 I just want to compliment you. Dr. Fine-
berg, this is the best Rosenthal Le
cture I have been to, and I have 
been to a number of them. I just think it is terrific.  

 My question is this: It is my understanding that this epi-

demic is hardly limited to the Unit
ed States. It seems to be a global 
problem, or at least in well-develop
ed countries. Is that true? If so, 
how are other countries waging battle against this problem? 
 DR. KUMANYIKA:
 I will answer that. One of my other 
roles is chair of the prevention group of the international obesity 

task force. There is a lot of interest in countries, not just the afflu-

ent countries, but in lower-incom
e countries, because the health 
budgets in some of the countries 
where obesity is beginning to 
emerge cannot support the care fo
r the comorbidities associated 
with obesity. Diabetes shows up very soon after you begin to get 

high rates of obesity, and it is a very costly disease to treat. 
 So, yes, indeed, it is global, and there is a lot of interest. 

WHO has taken this on. They ha
d a report in 2000 on the global 
epidemic, getting together 20 or 
so countries, in
cluding some of 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DISCUSSION 43 
  the ones you wouldn't expect. It is very interesting. Because this is 
a socially embedded problem, the culture and the economy of each 

country determines the types of 
solutions they choose and what 
types of things they will do. 
 All the marketing and multinational issues do link the prob-

lem across the globe, but within each country there is a filter of 

culture that determines what ca
n be done with advertising or 
whether, for example, people actually
 ride bicycles, and so forth. It 
is very interesting to look at a
nd compare efforts across societies. 
 DR. DIETZ:
 In China the rates of obesity in the major cit-
ies along their eastern seaboard has 
more than triple
d in the last 
decade and is increasingly seen as a health problem there. 

 PARTICIPANT:
 You don't have to go too far. In Mexico, 
in the 1990s, the rate 
of obesity in women 
tripled. So, you have a 
big problem there. Do you think it is
 nature or is it nurture? Or 
perhaps more important, does it really matter? Is that an academic 

question from the point of view of public health interventions? 
 DR. KUMANYIKA:
 I think that there are genetic predis-
positions. I mean, the ethnic groups are not considered to be ge-

netically defined categories. It 
is combination of certain gene 
frequencies and a common history and a common environment. 
There are genetic predispositions to obesity generally. I don't think 

that we have identified any factor
 that predisposes these groups to 
obesity so strongly that it is str
onger than the environmental fac-
tors. So, the baseline risk is ther
e, but there are c
ounterparts of all 
these populations that ar
e not obese and that have the same genetic 
make up. In black girls, for instan
ce, obesity was not a problem in 
the 1960s, but it has increased yet 
the genetics have not changed. I 
think we agree that there is a pred
isposition, but it is really a com-
bination of these environmental fact
ors that is causing the excess 
risk, and it is much easier to expl
ain it systematically on the basis 
of your environment than it is on any kind of genetic factor, even 

though people have been looking. 
 PARTICIPANT:
 I would just like to know what you think 
of these diets that emphasize high 
protein intake. An example is a 
granddaughter of ours who runs on th
e fat side, unlike her parents, who are slim. She went on this diet, 
the original Atkins diet. It was 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  effective before she started college. Then she started college and 
she blew up worse than she ever did. 

 DR. DIETZ:
 Actually, the comparison of carbohydrate-
free and carbohydrate-containing diets was the topic of my thesis, 
and I only wish that I had rename
d my findings the ﬁDietz Diet.ﬂ 
There are a couple of rele
vant points. The first 
is that the putative 
mechanism that explains why car
bohydrate free diets cause more 
weight loss is not correct. That 
is, the mechanism that is proposed 
is that, in the absence of carbohydr
ates, insulin levels fall. That 
means you rely more on fat for your metabolism and you lose more 

weight. That is not true.  
 That is not to say these diets aren't effective. I think they 

are, and they are effective for two reasons. First, they are boring. 

You can only have eggs and bacon, 
or eggs and ham, or steak and 
eggs for breakfast so many times before it really gets tiring. People 

get tired of eating the same food 
over and over again. In addition, 
protein, which is at the heart of th
ese diets, is very satiating. It 
makes you full. There is no other food that makes you as full as 

protein. So, people lose weight on those diets.  I think that one of the remain
ing questions is that although 
lipid levelsŠcholesterol levelsŠimp
rove on these diets, it is not 
clear that the improvement is mo
re than you would expect for the 
weight loss that is achieved. 
 Now, that said, the way these diets are used in practice is 

that nobody really stays on them fo
r a long period of time. People 
go on and off them. To me, the mu
ch more important concern is 
how one achieves weight mainte
nance after loss, because people 
lose weight all sorts of different 
ways. However, they tend to use a 
narrower base of strategies to 
maintain their weight over time. 
People who have lost weight and 
sustain those weight losses tend 
to eat breakfast, they consume a low-fat diet, they are physically 

active for about 60 minutes a day, an
d they monitor their weight on 
a regular basis. Those, I think, 
are the more important long-term 
strategies than whatever it ta
kes for people to lose weight.  Now, with respect to children and adolescents, I think that 

there are potential hazards of these diets, because children and ado-

lescents are growing. Our data sh
ows that there can be sustained 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DISCUSSION 45 
  protein losses on these diets. I worried a lot when I used these diets 
clinically. 

 PARTICIPANT:
 [Question off microphone.] 
 DR. DIETZ:
 Yes, paradoxically enough. Protein utiliza-
tion is a function of energy intake as well as protein intake. If you 

lower the energy, you have to ra
ise the protein, but even under 
those circumstances, some of the 
adolescents we studied had very 
sustained protein losses. I always worry about adolescents who fol-low this diet for a week or two and then suddenly have a carbohy-

drate binge, because of the potential electrolyte shifts that could 

occur. The salts in the blood might
 shift in and out of the heart 
muscle and cause an arrhythmia. That is a theoretical problem and 

one which I never saw, but I always
 worried about it. I think in the 
case of adolescents, it is not an 
appropriate diet, unless they are 
under the care of a physician who k
nows what he or she is doing 
with respect to management 
of these low-calorie diets. 
 PARTICIPANT:
 I also would like to commend the panel 
and Dr. Koplan for what I thought 
was an excellent report and an 
excellent presentation. I had two po
ints: One, I was surprised there 
was no mention about the effects 
of stress and sleep on obesity. 
I™m an uninitiated person in the world of obesity, other than having 

personal experience. I would think th
at stress and sleep seem to be 
related to obesity. I wondered if you could comment on that.  The second part is, Dr. Dietz, when you mentioned the 

need for redundancy in the messages to think more about obesity, 

it makes me think about anorexia 
and eating disorders, which are 
very, very prevalent. I would thi
nk it is hard to find a college popu-lation where less than half the people are not bothered by that. I 

wonder what you think about balancing the need for redundancy of 

the message and, on the other hand,
 the bad effects of too much 
message, or what might be the bad effects of too much message. 

 DR. DIETZ:
 The first articles related to sleep just ap-
peared, and I haven't actually read them, but they show that re-

duced sleep may be associated with increased obesity and that 

leptin levels are decreased and ghr
elin levels are increased, which 
tend to drive food intake. The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 PREVENTION OF OBESITY IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
   The role of stress may have a greater impact on where fat is 
deposited than on the deposition of
 fat, because it really depends 
what you are consuming and how mu
ch. In fact, the epidemiologic 
data that suggests that stress is re
lated to obesity is pretty sparse. 
There are biochemical or metabo
lic explanations for how that 
could happen, but not a lot of good data. 
 In reply to your second poi
nt, the focus on the redundancy of those messages doesn't say what those messages should be. It 

only says they should be heard in
 a variety of places. Mr. Leach, I 
think, from his marketing persp
ective knows better than I how one 
can craft a message like Pepsico 
has done and McDonalds is doing, which talk about what is good for 
you or wholesome and that fo-
cuses on the benefits of healthy 
behaviors and not weight control 
as the reason for adopting these behaviors. 
 MR. LEACH: We are learning that
 encouraging people to 
get started in simple ways is really important. The majority of peo-
ple are overwhelmed at the prospe
ct of radically changing their 
diet and radically changing their 
physical activity. So, if you can 
get to them with a message that 
says, ﬁYou can do this. It is sim-
ple. Just get started, and you will fe
el better,ﬂ you can have a real 
impact. At least, that has been the findings of our market research. 

The right kind of message can r
each a large number of people who 
are contemplating behavior changes. That is what we have learned 

so far. 
 DR. KOPLAN:
 I know we have other good questions here. I am sure the panelists will be glad 
to stay and chat, but to preserve 
your own caloric intake tomorrow; we want you to get enough 

sleep tonight. Dr. Fineberg, do 
you want to make a closing com-
ment? 

 DR. FINEBERG
: I would just like to add my thanks to 
each of the panelists, and to you,
 Dr. Koplan, for your work here 
tonight, and for the things that 
you have done over the years in 
your respective capacities to bri
ng better nutrition and better life-styles to children and to everyone
 in our country. I want to thank 
all of you.  
 I also want to acknowledge pa
rticularly our staff, Cathy 
Liverman, Vivica Kraak, Linda Meyers, and Rose Martinez. 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DISCUSSION 47 
   DR. DIETZ:
 Howie and Ron were responsible for that 
video running. It took us four com
puters to get it to go. So, thank 
you. 
 DR. FINEBERG:
 Well, done, and thank you. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 
 
 The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  49 Biosketches   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 William H. Dietz, M.D., Ph.D. 
is the Director of the Division of 
Nutrition and Physical Activity in
 the Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion 
at the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC). Prior 
to his appointment to the CDC, 
he was a Professor of Pediatrics at
 the Tuft™s University School of 
Medicine and Director of Clinical
 Nutrition at the Floating Hospi-
tal of New England Medical Center
 Hospitals. He received his 
B.A. from Wesleyan University
 in 1966 and his M.D. from the 
University of Pennsylvania in 
1970. Following an internship at 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, he spent three years in the 

Middle America Research Unit of the National Institute of Allergy 

and Infectious Disease in Panama
, studying insect borne viruses. 
After the completion of his reside
ncy at Upstate Medical Center, 
he received a Ph.D. in Nutriti
onal Biochemistry from Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology. He 
served as a councilor and past 
president of the American Society for Clinical Nutrition and as 

past president of the North American Association for the Study of 

Obesity. In 1995, he received the John Stalker award from the 

American School Food Service Association for his efforts to im-

prove the school lunch. Dr. Di
etz served on the 1995 Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committee. 
In 1998, Dr. Dietz was elected to 
the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Dietz™s research has focused on the 

epidemiology of childhood obesity, 
the clinical consequences of 
childhood and adolescent obesity, optimal dietary therapy for 
overweight children and 
adolescents, and the implications of re-
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 PREVENTION OF OBESITY 
IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  duced energy expenditure for the development of overweight in 
children and adolescents. He is th
e author of over 150 publications 
in scientific literature and the 
editor of three 
books, including A Guide to Your Child™s Nutrition
.   Jeffrey P. Koplan, M.D., M.P.H. 
is the Vice President for Aca-
demic Health Affairs at the Woodr
uff Health Sciences Center at 
Emory University in Atlanta. He received a B.A. from Yale Col-

lege, an M.D. from Mt. Sinai Sc
hool of Medicine
, and a M.P.H. from the Harvard School of Public 
Health. He is board certified in 
internal and preventive medici
ne. From 1998 to 2002, Dr. Koplan 
served as the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-

vention (CDC). He worked in th
e area of enhancing the interac-
tions between clinical medicine 
and public health by leading the 
Prudential Center for Health Ca
re Research, a 
nationally recog-nized health services research 
organization. In his 26 years at 
CDC, Dr. Koplan worked on a broad range of major public health 

issues, including infectious di
seases such as smallpox and 
HIV/AIDS, environmental issues such as the Bhopal chemical dis-

aster, and the health toll of tob
acco and chronic diseases, both in 
the United States and globally. Dr
. Koplan is a Master of the 
American College of Physicians, 
an Honorary Fellow of the Soci-
ety of Public Health Educators, 
and a Public Health Hero of the 
American Public Health Associatio
n. He was elected to the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM) in 1999. 
He has served on many advisory 
groups and consultancies on public 
health issues in the United 
States and overseas and authored 
more than 185 scientific papers. 
Dr. Koplan chaired the IOM Co
mmittee on Prevention of Obesity 
in Children and Youth.   Shiriki K. Kumanyika,
 Ph.D., M.P.H., R.D.
 is Professor of Epi-
demiology in the Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, 

Associate Dean for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, and 

the Director of the Graduate Progr
am in Public Health Studies at 
the University of Pennsylvania Sc
hool of Medicine. She received 
her B.A. from Syracuse University, M.S.W. from Columbia Uni-

versity, Ph.D. in human nutrition from Cornell University, and 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOSKETCHES 51   M.P.H. from Johns Hopkins Univer
sity. The main themes in Dr. 
Kumanyika™s research concern the ro
le of nutritional factors in the 
primary and secondary prevention of chronic diseases with a par-

ticular focus on obesity, sodium re
duction, and related health prob-
lems such as hypertension and diabetes. She directs an NIH-funded 

EXPORT (Excellence in Partnerships for Community Outreach, 

Research, and Training) Center th
at focuses on reduction of obe-
sity-related health disparities. Dr
. Kumanyika is the lead investiga-
tor or a collaborator on several fe
derally-funded studies of obesity 
prevention and treatment in adu
lts and children, of which some 
focus specifically on African Americans. She has served on a 

number of expert panels, incl
uding the 1995 and 2000 U.S. Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committees, 
and she served on the NIH Ad-
visory Committee for the Nationa
l Children™s Study in 2002-2003. 
She was vice-chair of the Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation on 

Diet, Nutrition, and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases in 2002, 
and also chaired the 2002 WHO Ex
pert Consultation on Appropri-
ate BMI Standards for Asian Populations. Dr. Kumanyika™s current 

activities include serving on the Institute of Medicine™s (IOM™s) 

Food and Nutrition Board, the NIH Clinical Obesity Research 

Panel, and the Prevention Group of the International Obesity Task 

Force. She was elected to the IOM in 2003. Dr. Kumanyika served 

as a member of the IOM Committ
ee on the Prevention of Obesity 
in Children and Youth.   Brock Leach 
is Senior Vice President, 
New Growth Platforms and 
Chief Innovation Officer for PepsiC
o, an assignment he undertook 
in March 2003. Mr. Leach is res
ponsible for identifying and devel-oping new platforms for business 
growth beyond those already be-
ing pursued by PepsiCo™s operati
ng units and for building new 
capabilities to support the innovation work of the divisions. As part 

of this responsibility, Mr. Leach 
also directs the company™s strate-
gic focus on health and well-bein
g, in partnership with Dr. Ken 
Cooper of the renowned Cooper Clinic, Dr. Dean Ornish, and other experts, to broaden PepsiCo's of
ferings of nutritious products and 
to encourage healthy lifestyles. 
Previously Mr. Leach was presi-
dent and CEO of Tropicana Products
, Inc. and was responsible for 
The Richard and Hinda Rosenthal Lectures 2004: Perspectives on the Prevention of Childhood Obesity in Children and YouthCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 PREVENTION OF OBESITY 
IN CHILDREN AND YOUTH 
  overseeing the operations of the wo
rld™s largest marketer and pro-
ducer of branded juices. 
Prior to that, he was president of the Frito-
Lay Development Group, a global team focused on the company™s 

innovation and development. He has also served as the president of 

Frito-Lay North America, the la
rgest operating profit segment of PepsiCo and the largest manufactur
er and distributor of snack 
foods with $7.5 billion in sales in 1998. Mr. Leach joined Frito-

Lay North America in 1982 as assistant product manager and as-

sumed positions of increasing re
sponsibility in 
marketing and 
sales, including vice president of
 brand marketing and senior vice 
president of marketing. Mr. Leach is a member of the National 

Board of the YMCA and serves on
 the boards of several Florida 
children™s agencies. He received 
his Bachelor™s degree in Econom-
ics.    