DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11516Network Science124 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10026-7 | DOI 10.17226/11516Committee on Network Science for Future Army Applications; Board on Army Scienceand Technology; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; NationalResearch CouncilNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Network Science for Future Army ApplicationsBoard on Army Science and TechnologyDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesNETWORK SCIENCENetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS    500 Fifth Street, N.W.    Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of theNational Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard
for appropriate balance.This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. DAAD19-03-D-0002, between the National Acad-emy of Sciences and the Department of the Army. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recom-
mendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the organizations that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-10026-7 (Book)International Standard Book Number 0-309-65388-6 (PDF)
Library of Congress Control Number 2005936575Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street,N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washing-
ton metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2005 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholarsengaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and totheir use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the
Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academyof Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and inthe selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engi-neers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the servicesof eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of
the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congres-sional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate thebroad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advis-
ing the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, theCouncil has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the NationalAcademy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineer-
ing communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr.Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National ResearchCouncil.www.national-academies.orgNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NETWORK SCIENCE FOR FUTURE ARMY APPLICATIONSCHARLES B. DUKE, Chair, Xerox Innovation Group, Webster, New YorkJOHN E. HOPCROFT, Vice Chair, Cornell University, Ithaca, New YorkADAM P. ARKIN, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California
ROBERT E. ARMSTRONG, National Defense University, Washington, D.C.
ALBERT-LASZLO BARABASI, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana
RONALD J. BRACHMAN, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Arlington, Virginia
NORVAL L. BROOME, MITRE Corporation (retired), Suffolk, Virginia
STAN DAVIS, Brookline, Massachusetts
RICHARD A. De MILLO, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
WILLIAM J. HILSMAN, Institute for Defense Analyses, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
WILL E. LELAND, Telcordia Technologies, Inc., Piscataway, New Jersey
THOMAS W. MALONE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
RICHARD M. MURRAY, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
JACK PELLICCI, Oracle Public Sector, Reston, Virginia
PAMELA A. SILVER, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
PAUL K. VAN RIPER, LTG, United States Marine Corps (retired), Williamsburg, Virginia
DUNCAN J. WATTS, Columbia University, New YorkStaffROBERT J. LOVE, Study DirectorNIA D. JOHNSON, Research Associate
TOMEKA N. GILBERT, Senior Program Assistant (until May 23, 2005)
LEON A. JAMES, Senior Program Assistant (after May 23, 2005)ivNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vBOARD ON ARMY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYJOHN E. MILLER, Chair, L3 Communications Corporation, Reston, VirginiaHENRY J. HATCH, Vice Chair, Army Chief of Engineers (retired), Oakton, VirginiaSETH BONDER, The Bonder Group, Ann Arbor, Michigan
JOSEPH V. BRADDOCK, The Potomac Foundation, McLean, Virginia
NORVAL L. BROOME, MITRE Corporation (retired), Suffolk, Virginia
ROBERT L. CATTOI, Rockwell International (retired), Dallas, Texas
DARRELL W. COLLIER, U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command (retired), Leander, Texas
ALAN H. EPSTEIN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
ROBERT R. EVERETT, MITRE Corporation (retired), New Seabury, Massachusetts
PATRICK F. FLYNN, Cummins Engine Company, Inc. (retired), Columbus, Indiana
WILLIAM R. GRAHAM, National Security Research, Inc., Arlington, Virginia
PETER F. GREEN, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
EDWARD J. HAUG, University of Iowa, Iowa City
M. FREDERICK HAWTHORNE, University of California, Los Angeles
CLARENCE W. KITCHENS, Science Applications International Corporation, Vienna, Virginia
ROGER A. KRONE, Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
JOHN W. LYONS, U.S. Army Research Laboratory (retired), Ellicott City, Maryland
MALCOLM R. OÕNEILL, Lockheed Martin Corporation, Bethesda, Maryland
EDWARD K. REEDY, Georgia Tech Research Institute (retired), Atlanta
DENNIS J. REIMER, DFI International, Washington, D.C.
WALTER D. SINCOSKIE, Telcordia Technologies, Inc., Piscataway, New Jersey
JUDITH L. SWAIN, University of California, San Diego
WILLIAM R. SWARTOUT, Institute for Creative Technologies, Marina del Rey, California
EDWIN L. THOMAS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
BARRY M. TROST, Stanford University, Stanford, CaliforniaStaffBRUCE A. BRAUN, DirectorWILLIAM E. CAMPBELL, Manager, Program Operations
CHRIS JONES, Financial Associate
ROBERT J. LOVE, Senior Program Officer
MARGARET NOVACK, Senior Program Officer
HARRISON T. PANNELLA, Senior Program Officer
DONALD L. SIEBENALER, Senior Program Officer
DEANNA P. SPARGER, Program Administrative CoordinatorNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPrefaceThis study was an exercise in coping with complexity.The subject matter is complex. Important networks like the
Internet and the power grid are becoming ever larger, en-
compassing up to hundreds of millions if not billions of
nodes. They exhibit complex and often dynamic patterns of
links between the nodes. Networks interact with one another
and are recursive. Social networks are built upon informa-
tion networks which are built upon communications net-
works which in turn are built on physical networks. More-
over, this layered structure of interacting networks built on
top of other networks is reflected directly in the diversity of
communities that study networks: sociologists, management
theorists, warfare strategists, economists, biologists, chem-
ists, physicists, and a wide variety of engineers. Getting such
a diverse group to agree on a common core of knowledge
about networks, i.e., the content of network science, is a sig-
nificant challenge. Last but by no means least, the customer
community for this study is equally diverse. Military plan-
ners and strategists, operational commanders (Òwarfight-
ersÓ), logistics commanders, and R&D managers each have
their own points of view on what network science ought to
provide in order to be useful to the military.The extent to which the committee did manage to copesuccessfully with these complexities will be judged by you,
the reader. In order to comprehend the topical scope, com-
mittee members were selected who are actively publishing
experts on physical, biological, engineered, and social net-
works. Systematic efforts at outreach to interested commu-
nities were undertaken, including a survey of extant courses
on networks and a questionnaire sent to members of as di-
verse a group of communities as the committee could iden-
tify. Committee members also were selected to encompass
various constituencies in the military that have an interest
in the design, procurement, deployment, and use of net-
works. Representatives of each of these groups made pre-
sentations to the committee. Value creation scenarios were
prepared to address the concerns of these constituencies.
Thus, the composition of the committee, the data that it col-lected, and the analyses that it generated are broadly repre-sentative of the inherent complexities of the subject of the
study.The committee was able to lay out the scope of the topic,organize an overview of the diverse streams of activity and
knowledge into a synthetic whole, and survey the sorts of
options that the Army might want to explore to create value
from investments in network science. As a result, it is my
hope that this report will broaden the horizons of its read-
ers, stimulate them to think about the role of network sci-
ence in todayÕs connected world, and, hopefully, act upon
their enhanced understanding of this role.The committee learned three major things of overarchingimportance about the role of networks in modern society and
the availability of the knowledge necessary to create and
operate them. First, networks lie at the core of the economic,
political, and social fabric of the 21st century. The demand
for structured knowledge that can be used to design, pro-
cure, and operate networks is ubiquitous and growing rap-
idly. Moreover, social and communications networks lie at
the core of both conventional military operations and the
war on terrorism. Thus, investment in network science is
both a strategic and urgent national priority.Second, the current state of knowledge about the struc-ture, dynamics, and behaviors of both large infrastructure
networks and vital social networks at all scales is primitive.
A lot is known about the design, construction, and use of
the components of physical networks. The science of inte-
grating these components into large, complex, interacting
networks that are robust and whose behaviors are predict-
able is uncharted ground. Communications networks that
are being built today exhibit unpredictable behavior and ro-
bustness. For social networks, even the characteristics of the
components are largely unexplored. The development of

predictive models of the behavior of large complex net-
works is difficult. It is basically an unsolved problem that
will require focused attention from the best brains in the na-
tion to make significant progress on it.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEThird, the United States is not on track to consolidate theinformation that already exists about the science of large,
complex networks, much less to develop the knowledge that
will be needed to design the networks envisaged by the mili-
tary to realize futuristic warfare concepts like network-cen-
tric operations. Current research on networks is highly frag-
mented, usually conducted in disciplinary settings. The
committee did observe an encouraging preliminary consen-
sus on the part of practitioners about the broad outlines of
the core of knowledge that allows them to practice their art
in a wide variety of applications areas. Nevertheless, indi-
vidual researchers are naturally more interested in market-
ing their own work than in collaborating on larger projectsof the scope that would have a realistic chance to impact theArmyÕs aspirations. Major changes in the funding and orga-
nization of activities on network science are required before
the knowledge that can realistically be expected from re-
search in this area will be available in a form that is useful
for the design and procurement of the capabilities envisaged
by the Army.The committee does not expect its report to change any ofthese things. It does, however, aspire to articulate its learn-
ings clearly and to document the data and analysis on which
they are based. It also aspires to provide specific answers to
the questions in the statement of task. I hope that the readers
will find that these aspirations were accomplished.Charles B. Duke, ChairCommittee on Network Sciencefor Future Army ApplicationsNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgmentsThe committee thanks the organizations and guest speak-ers that provided support. The presentations from the mili-
tary on network-centric operations (NCO), on the procure-
ment and deployment of operational capabilities of NCO in
the field, and on the ArmyÕs R&D portfolio of network-re-
lated research were especially helpful.The committee also thanks the various academic and mili-tary researchers with whom it conducted personal interviews
over the telephone. Their candid comments were instrumen-
tal in the committeeÕs achieving a realistic understanding of
the complexities of current research on networks.The committee is deeply grateful to Katy Bırner of Indi-ana University for her analysis of the data acquired from our
outreach questionnaire and her permission to use this mate-
rial in its report.The excellent support of the National Research Councilstaff is especially appreciated. Special thanks go to Bob
Love, who worked closely with the chair and vice chair
during the entire study process. The cheerful and effective
assistance of Tomeka Gilbert, Nia Johnson, Deborah
Kuzmanovic, and Leon James was indispensable to accom-
plishing this study.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersxThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individu-als chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical exper-
tise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NRC
Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent
review is to provide candid and critical comments that will
assist the institution in making its published report as sound
as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript
remain confidential to protect the integrity of the delibera-
tive process. We wish to thank the following individuals for
their review of this report:Anthony Ephremides, University of Maryland,Gerald J. Iafrate, North Carolina State University,
Leonard Kleinrock, NAE, University of California,Los Angeles,Scott E. Page, University of Michigan,Lawrence G. Roberts, NAE, Anagran, Inc.,Alan B. Salisbury, U.S. Army (retired), and
Judith L. Swain, IOM, University of California,San Diego.Although the reviewers listed above have provided manyconstructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked
to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they
see the final draft of the report before its release. The review
of this report was overseen by Stewart D. Personick, NAE,
Drexel University. Appointed by the National Research
Council, he was responsible for making certain that an inde-
pendent examination of this report was carried out in accor-
dance with institutional procedures and that all review com-
ments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final
content of this report rests entirely with the authoring com-
mittee and the institution.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION7
Scope of the Study, 8
Study Approach and Constraints, 8
Report Organization, 9
References, 102NETWORKS AND NETWORK RESEARCH IN THE 21ST CENTURY11
References, 183NETWORKS AND THE MILITARY19
Networks and the Army, 19
Network-Centric Warfare and Network-Centric Operations, 19
Challenges, 22
Optimizing Warfighting Organizations, 22
Network Research of Special Interest to the Military, 24
References, 254THE DEFINITION AND PROMISE OF NETWORK SCIENCE26
What Is Network Science?, 26
Positioning of Network Science, 28
References, 295THE CONTENT OF NETWORK SCIENCE30
How Do We Know?, 30
Content, 30
References, 326STATUS AND CHALLENGES OF NETWORK SCIENCE33
Key Messages, 33
Questionnaire Process, 33
The Respondents, 33
Dissenting Voices, 34
Defining the Field, 34Attributes of a Network, 34
Derived Properties of Networks, 35
Future Evolution of the Definition of Network Science, 36xiNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSResearch Challenges, 36The Social Structure of Network Science, 37
Reference, 387CREATING VALUE FROM NETWORK SCIENCE:39
SCOPE OF THE OPPORTUNITY
Creating Economic Value from Research Knowledge, 39
Scenarios for Value Creation, 39Scenario 1, Building the Base, 39
Scenario 2, Next-Generation R&D, 40
Scenario 3, Creating a Robust Network-centric Warfare/Operations Capability, 41
Implication of the Scenarios, 42Findings from Scenario 1, 42
Findings from Scenarios 2 and 3, 44
References, 458CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS46
Overarching Conclusions, 46
Specific Conclusions, 48
Recommendations, 49APPENDIXESABIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS55
BCOMMITTEE MEETINGS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES58
CCONTENT OF NETWORK SCIENCE COURSES60
DQUESTIONNAIRE DATA65
EOPPORTUNITIES FOR CREATING VALUE FROM NETWORK SCIENCE93
FRECOMMENDED READING LIST107
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiFigures, Tables, and BoxesFIGURES2-1Number of papers with the term Òcomplex networkÓ in the title, 15
2-2Magazines and journals with articles on networks, 16
3-2-1Representative activities and networks involved in responses to a bioterrorist attack, 23

6-1Reasons for saying there is no field of network science, 35
6-2Share of responses that mention an attribute, 35

6-3Responses identifying driving applications, 36

6-4Major research challenges, 36

6-5Relationships among invitees, respondents, and collaborators, 37

6-6Network science researchers network, 37
D-1New names by response ID, 72
D-2Countries where respondents were located, 73

D-3States where respondents were located, 75

D-4Fields selected by respondents, 77

D-5Most frequently mentioned fields, 78

D-6Reasons for saying there is no field of network science, 79

D-7Responses identifying network attributes, 80

D-8Derived properties of networks mentioned by respondents, 81

D-9Driving applications identified by respondents, 84

D-10Number of responses to driving applications question, 84

D-11Major research challenges, 86

D-2-1Relationships among invitees, respondents, and collaborators, 88

D-2-2Network science researchers network, 89

D-2-3Researchers with high BC values and low BC values, 90

D-2-4Largest component of the NSRN, 91

D-2-5Disciplinary heterogeneity of the NSRN, 92
E-1Schematic depiction of next-generation model for Army R&D showing the
relationship between the main entities in this model, 99Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivFIGURES, TABLES, AND BOXESTABLESES-1Network Research Areas, 5
2-1Representative Networks, 12
2-2Maturity, Structure, Characteristics, and Impacts of Some Networks, 13
3-1Network Research Areas, 24

8-1Network Research Areas, 50

C-1Representative List of Courses on Computer Science, 61
C-2Real-World Networks Appearing in Courses, 62

C-3Content of a Typical Network Science Course, 62

C-4Network Models Commonly Used to Generate Network Topologies and
Analytical Tools Used to Characterize and Study the Properties of Models, 63D-1RespondentÕs Country, 74
D-2Canadian Respondent Provinces, 74

D-3Respondent States, 76

D-4Responses Per Field, 77

D-5Respondent Affiliations, 78

D-6Is Your Work Potentially Part of an Emerging Field of Network Science?, 78

D-7Is There an Identifiable Field of Network Science?, 79

D-8Summary Decomposition of the Input Attributes of Networks, 80

D-9Summary Decomposition of the Derived Properties of Networks, 82

D-10Summary Decomposition of Constraint Models, 83

D-11Summary Decomposition of the Problem Dimensions of Networks, 83

D-12Major Players and Cited Applications, 85

D-2-1Researchers Who Are Frequently Mentioned and Listed as Collaborators, 88

D-2-2Researchers Who Act as Gatekeepers, 89

D-2-3Components in the NSRN, 90
BOXESES-1Summary of Responses to the Statement of Task, 2
1-1Network Science: Foundation of Our Connected Age, 8
1-2Statement of Task, 8
2-1Books Relevant to Network Science, 17

3-1Case Studies in Net-centric Operations, 21
3-2Dependence of Army Operations on Networks: An Example, 23
8-1Summary of Responses to the Statement of Task, 47

D-1NRC Network Science Survey, 66
D-2Mapping the Social Network and Expertise of Network Science Researchers, 88
E-1Case Study from the World Health Organization: Avian Influenza, 103
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acronyms and AbbreviationsAAASAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science
AIDSacquired immunodeficiency syndrome

APSAmerican Physical Society
BASTBoard on Army Science and Technology
BCTbrigade combat team

BFTBlue Force Tracker
C3command, control, and communications
C4ISRcommand, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissanceCDCCenters for Disease Control

COPcommon operational picture
DARPADefense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DODDepartment of Defense

DOEDepartment of Energy
FBCB2Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below
FCSFuture Combat System
GIGGlobal Information Grid

HIVhuman immunodeficiency virus

IEDimprovised explosive device

JCIJoint Combat Identification
JNNJoint Network Nodes

JTFJoint Task Force
MASmedical aid station

NASNational Academy of Sciences
NASANational Aeronautics and Space Administration

NCENetworked Center of Excellence

NCOnetwork-centric operations

NCWnetwork-centric warfare
xvNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONSNIHNational Institutes of Health
NRCNational Research Council

NSFNational Science Foundation

NSRNnetwork science researcher network

NTCNational Training Center
OCPOpen Control Platform
OFTOffice of Force Transformation

OPFORopposing force

OSIopen system interconnection
PIprincipal investigator

R&Dresearch and development
RFPRequest for Proposal
S&Tscience and technology
SARSsevere acute respiratory syndrome

SBIRSmall Business Innovation Research

SECSoftware-Enabled Control

SIAMSociety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
TCP/IPTransmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol

UAVunmanned aerial vehicle
UGCunmanned ground vehicle

URLUniform Resource Locator
WHOWorld Health Organization
wwwWorld Wide Web
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummarySociety depends on a diversity of complex networks forits very existence. In the physical sphere, these include the
air transportation network, highways, railroads, the global
shipping network, power grids, water distribution networks,
supply networks, global financial networks, telephone sys-
tems, and the Internet. In the biological arena, they include
genetic expression networks, metabolic networks, our bod-
ies, ant colonies, herds, food webs, river basins, and the glo-
bal ecological web of Earth itself. In the social domain, they
include governments, businesses, universities, social clubs,
churches, public and private school systems, and military
organizations. The militaryÕs dependence on interacting net-
works in the physical, information, cognitive, and social
domains is clear from its effort to transform itself into a force
capable of network-centric operations (NCO).In spite of societyÕs profound dependence on networks,fundamental knowledge about them is primitive. Many
physical networksÑfor example, global communication and
transportation networksÑhave quite advanced technologi-
cal implementations, but their behavior under stress still can-
not be predicted reliably. For biological and social networks,
scientists do not understand what they are, much less how
they operate. There is a huge gap between what we need to
know about networks to ensure the smooth working of soci-
ety and the primitive state of our fundamental knowledge.
This gap makes the military vision of NCO problematic, at
best.STUDY APPROACHThe present study was commissioned by the Army to findout whether identifying and funding a new field of investiga-
tion, Ònetwork science,Ó could help close this gap. The chair
worked with the NRC staff to nominate committee members
representative of the broad scope of efforts in network re-
search and also of the interests in this topic on the part of the
Army.At its initial meetings the committee focused on data col-lection tasks. Members were invited to present their ideas
about the definition and content of network science. This
exercise was expanded to encompass telephone interviews
with a number of distinguished researchers and a question-
naire distributed inquiring about the role of networks in

todayÕs global economy and the military in particular. The
committee also collected data on the use of networks in the
military, learning from extensive reading and presentations
at its second and third meetings. The results of these data-
gathering tasks are reported in Chapters 2 through 4.The committee formed two special task teams. One teamsurveyed academic courses on network research to deter-
mine the content of core knowledge about networks. The
results of this effort are reported in Chapter 5 based on the
data presented in Appendix C. The other task team devel-
oped and circulated the questionnaire to as broad a cross
section of the network research community as possible given
the time and financial constraints of this study. The com-
mitteeÕs analysis of the responses is reported in Chapter 6
and Appendix D.After characterizing the importance and content of net-work science, the committee turned its attention to the mat-
ter of how the Army might create value by investing in re-
search on networks. This task was complicated by the fact
that Òthe ArmyÓ is shorthand for a diverse group of constitu-
encies with multiple agendas and priorities. The committee
formed into new task teams to formulate three different in-
vestment scenarios that span the various interests and agen-
das. The scenarios are reported in Appendix E and are sum-
marized, along with specific findings, in Chapter 7.Representative literature used over the course of the studyis listed in Appendix F. The body of the reportÑChapters 2
through 7 and Appendixes C through EÑcontains the fac-
tual findings, and Chapter 8 contains the committeeÕs con-
clusions and recommendations. Box ES-1 provides a sum-
mary of how the various report chapters respond to the
statement of task.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2NETWORK SCIENCEOVERARCHING CONCLUSIONSThe committee reached three overarching conclusions
about the significance of networks and the state of knowl-
edge about them. First, it documented the pervasive influ-
ence of networks in all aspects of lifeÑbiological, physical,
and socialÑand concluded that they are indispensable to theworkings of the global economy and to the defense of theUnited States against both conventional military threats and
the threat of terrorism.Second, the fundamental knowledge needed to predict theproperties of large infrastructure networks (such as the
Internet and power grid) and vital social networks (the glo-
bal economic system and military command and control) isBOX ES-1Summary of Responses to the Statement of TaskThe Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology) has requested the National Research Council (NRC) Board on ArmyScience and Technology (BAST) conduct a study to define the field of Network Science. The NRC will:1.Determine whether initiation of a new field of investigation called Network Science would be appropriate to advance knowledge
 of complexsystems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. If yes, how should it be defined?A working definition of network science is the study of network representations of physical, biological, and social phenomenaleading to predictive models of these phenomena. Initiation of a field of network science would be appropriate to provide a bodyof rigorous results that would improve the predictability of the engineering design of complex networks and also speed up basic
research in a variety of applications areas (Chapter 4).2.Identify the fields that should comprise Network Science. What are the key research challenges necessary to enable progress i
n Network Science?General consensus exists among practitioners of network research in diverse application areas on topics that constitute net-work science (Chapter 5). There are seven major research challenges (Chapter 6).3.Identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experimental, and practical challenges to advance the field of Network
 Science. Consider suchthings as facilities and equipment that might be needed. Determine investment priority, time frame for realization, and degree of commercialinterest.Current military concepts of Ònet-centricityÓ are based on applications of computer and information technology that are farremoved from likely results of basic research in network science. Table ES-1 lists current areas of network research of interest tothe Army, including priority, time frames, and commercial interest (Chapter 3).Current funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge about large complex networksthat will advance network-centric operations. Besides the information domain, there are social, cognitive, and physical technol-ogy domains in the current conceptual framework for network-centric operations; there is no ÒbiologicalÓ domain (Chapters 2Ð4).A basis for network science is perceived in different ways by the communities concerned with engineered, biological, andsocial networks at all levels of complexity. Basic research efforts are incoherent (Chapters 5 and 6).Options for obtaining value from investments in network science include scenarios ranging from building a base of basicresearch, to leveraging business practices for market-driven R&D in specific areas of network applications, to creating a robustcapability for network-centric operations (Chapter 7).4.Given limited resources (and likely investments of others), recommend those relevant research areas that the Army should inve
st in to enableprogress toward achieving Network-Centric Warfare capabilities.Recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2, and 3 provide the Army with an actionable menu of alternatives that span the opportu-nities accessible to it. By selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the Army can develop a robust network
science to enable the desired progress (Chapter 8).NOTE: The statement of task is in lightface; the summary of responses is in boldface.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3primitive. Not even physical communications networks canbe designed so that their resistance to failure and scaling up
from small to large can be predicted a priori with confidence.Networks are built on top of one another. Social networks,for example, are built on information networks, which in
turn are built on communications networks that operate us-
ing physical networks for connectivity. The networks re-
quired to make NCO for the military a reality span the physi-
cal, information, cognitive, and social domains. They are
interactive and mutually interdependent.There is no science today that offers the fundamentalknowledge necessary to design large, complex networks in
such a way that their behaviors can be predicted prior to
building them. Given this shortfall, trying to implement net-
work-centric operations capabilities as envisioned by the
Department of Defense (DOD) is like trying to design and
build a modern combat jet aircraft without resorting to the
science of fluid dynamics.Third, in spite of the need for a science of networks andthe high level of interest in the scientific community, current
funding policies and practices of federal agencies are focused
on specific network applications and are not focused on ac-
cumulating fundamental knowledge about networks.Research on networks is fragmented. It is supported indisciplinary stovepipes that encourage jargon, parochial
terms, and local values. Fundamentals of network structure,
dynamics, and simulation are being rediscovered by differ-
ent groups that emphasize uniqueness rather than a common
intellectual heritage and methodologies. The fragmentation
is aggravated by funding-agency policies and procedures that
reward narrow disciplinary interests rather than results that
are demonstrably usable for addressing national problems.Nor is funding focused in areas with widespread applica-tion, such as the development of predictive models of social
networks, which could directly impact vital national prob-
lems, from secondary education in urban slums to military
command and control.Although researchers, especially the best researchers, arereacting rationally to the incentives placed before them, these

incentives reflect poorly the national interests of the United
States in a globally connected world.SPECIFIC CONCLUSIONSOn the basis of its data collection and analysis, the com-mittee offers the following conclusions containing answers
to the specific questions posed in the statement of task.Different research communities give different answers tothe question, What is network science? Nevertheless, the
committee discerned some basic features. First, network sci-
ence is distinct from both network technology and network
research: It is characterized by the discovery mode of sci-
ence rather than the invention mode of technology and engi-
neering. Network research encompasses both.Network science is broad in scope, encompassing physi-cal, biological, and social networks. Synergies between net-work representations and models in these domains give it
power. It creates fundamental knowledge that enables the a
priori prediction of the behaviors of diverse networks in con-
trast to their a posteriori characterization. In short, network
science consists of the study of network representations of
physical, biological, and social phenomena, leading to pre-
dictive models of these phenomena.The remarkable diversity and pervasiveness of networkrepresentations and models render network science a topic
that can be leveraged by both civil society and the military.
A provisional consensus exists around its core contents,
making network science an identifiable area of investiga-
tion. Excellent research problems on a variety of topics ex-
ist. By making an investment in network science, the Army
could forge a single approach to a diverse collection of ap-
plications. The committee therefore concludes that network
science is an emerging field of investigation whose support
would address important societal problems, including the
ArmyÕs pursuit of NCO capabilities.Although the boundaries of network science are fuzzy,the committee found broad consensus among practitioners
in network applicationsÑincluding physical, biological, so-
cial, and information networksÑon the key topics, the types
of tools that must be developed, and the research challenges
that should be investigated. Based on the responses to its
questionnaire and its own knowledge, the committee con-
cluded that there are seven major research challenges, the
surmounting of which will enable progress in network science:¥Dynamics, spatial location, and information propaga-tion in networks. Better understanding of the relation-ship between the architecture of a network and its func-
tion is needed.¥Modeling and analysis of very large networks. Tools,abstractions, and approximations are needed that al-
low reasoning about large-scale networks, as well as
techniques for modeling networks characterized by
noisy and incomplete data.¥Design and synthesis of networks. Techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtain de-
sired properties.¥Increasing the level of rigor and mathematical struc-ture. Many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the current state of the art in network science did
not have an appropriately rigorous mathematical basis.¥Abstracting common concepts across fields. The dis-parate disciplines need common concepts defined
across network science.¥Better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. Current data sets on large-scale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their struc-

ture and function are limited.¥Robustness and security of networks. Finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networkedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4NETWORK SCIENCEsystems that are both robust to variations in the com-ponents (including localized failures) and secure
against hostile intent.Finally, although all the military services have a vision ofthe future in which engineered communications networks
play a fundamental role, there is no methodology for ensur-
ing that these networks are scalable, reliable, robust, and se-
cure. Of particular importance is the ability to design net-
works whose behaviors are predictable in their intended
domains of applications. This also is true in the commercial
sphere. The committee therefore concluded that the high
value attached to the efficient and failure-free operation of
global engineered networks makes their design, scaling, and
operation a national priority.The ultimate value derived from these engineered net-works depends on the effectiveness with which humans use
them. These uses can be beneficial (e.g., better combat ef-
fectiveness) or detrimental (e.g., their exploitation by crimi-
nal and terrorist groups). Therefore research into the interac-
tion of social and engineered networks is also a national
priority.RECOMMENDATIONSThe statement of task asks the committee to recommendinvestments the Army should make in network science. The
impact of networks on society transcends their impact on
military applications, although both are vital aspects of the
total picture. The current state of knowledge about networks
is insufficient to support the design and operation of com-
plex global networks for military, political, and economic
applications. Advances in network science are therefore es-
sential for developing adequate knowledge for these appli-
cations.Recommendation 1.The federal government should
initiate a focused program of research and development
to close the gap between currently available knowledge
about networks and the knowledge required to charac-
terize and sustain the complex global networks on which
the well-being of the United States has come to depend.This recommendation is buttressed by increasing evi-dence that disruptive social networks (e.g., terrorists, crimi-
nals) learn to exploit evolving infrastructure networks (e.g.,
communications or transportation) in ways that the creators
of these networks did not anticipate. The global war on
terrorism, which is a main driver of military transformation,
is only one recent manifestation of this general pattern.
Addressing problems resulting from the interaction of social
and engineered networks is an example of a compelling
national issue that transcends the transformation of the mili-
tary and that is largely untouched by current research on
networks.Within this broad context, recommendations 1a, 1b, and1c provide the Army with three options:Recommendation 1a. The Army, in coordination withother federal agencies, should underwrite a broad net-
work research initiative that includes substantial re-

sources for both military and nonmilitary applications
that would address military, economic, criminal, and
terrorist threats.The Army can lead the country in creating a base of net-work science knowledge that can support applications for
both the Army and the country at large. Maximum impact
could be obtained by a coordinated effort across a variety of
federal agencies, including DOD and the Department of
Homeland Security, to create a national program of R&D
focused on network science to develop applications that sup-
port not only network-centric operations but also counter-
measures against international terrorist and criminal threats.Alternatively, if the Army is restricted to working justwith the DOD, it should initiate a focused program to create
NCO capabilities across all the services.Recommendation 1b.If the Army wants to exploit fully
applications in the information domain for military
operations in a reasonable time frame and at an afford-
able cost, it should champion the initiation of a high-
priority, focused DOD effort to create a realizable vision
of the associated capabilities and to lay out a trajectory
for its realization.Finally, if the Army elects to apply the insight from thecommittee primarily to its own operations, then it can still
provide leadership in network science research.Recommendation 1c.The Army should support an
aggressive program of both basic and applied research
to improve its NCO capabilities.Specific areas of research of interest to the Army areshown in Table ES-1. This table expresses the committeeÕs
assessment of the relative priorities for these areas, the time
frames in which one might reasonably expect them to be
consummated as actionable technology investment options,
and the degree of commercial interest in exploiting promis-
ing options. The committee notes that both trained personnel
and promising research problems exist in many of these ar-
eas, so that the Army should be able to create productive
programs readily.Regardless of which options are adopted, however, Armyinitiatives in network science should be grounded in basic
research as follows:Recommendation 1d.The initiatives recommended in 1,
1a, 1b, and 1c should include not only theoretical studiesNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5TABLE ES-1Network Research Areas
PriorityTimeCommercialfor Army
Research AreaKey ObjectiveFrameInterestInvestment
Modeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping veryPractical deployment tool setsMid termHighHigh
large networksCommand and control of joint/combined networkedNetworked properties of connected heterogeneousMid termMediumHigh
forcessystems
Impact of network structure on organizationalDynamics of networked organizational behaviorMid termMediumHigh
behaviorSecurity and information assurance of networksProperties of networks that enhance survivalNear termHighHigh

Relationship of network structure to scalability andCharacteristics of robust or dominant networksMid termMediumMedium
reliabilityManaging network complexityProperties of networks that promote simplicity andNear termHighHigh
connectivityImproving shared situational awareness ofSelf-synchronization of networksMid termMediumHigh
networked elementsEnhanced network-centric mission effectivenessIndividual and organizational training designsFar termMediumMedium

Advanced network-based sensor fusionImpact of control systems theoryMid termHighMedium

Hunter-prey relationshipsAlgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsMid termLowHigh

Swarming behaviorSelf-organizing UAV/UGV; self-healingMid termLowMedium

Metabolic and gene expression networksSoldier performance enhancementNear termMediumMedium
but also the experimental testing of new ideas in settingssufficiently realistic to verify or disprove their use for
intended applications.By selecting from Recommendations 1a through 1c anoption that is ambitious yet achievable, the Army can lead
the country in creating a base of knowledge about network
science that is adequate to support applications on which
both the Army and the country at large depend.The Army has another investment scenario that it couldpursue: Òbuilding the baseÓ for network science by funding a
small program of basic research in network science. This
investment of small amounts of Army risk capital funds
would create a base of knowledge and personnel from which
the Army could launch an attack on practical problems that
arise as it tries to provide NCO capabilities.If the Army is limited to modest changes in the funding ofits R&D portfolio and incremental changes to the way that it
manages these investments, funding only a small program of
basic research in network science could still have a signifi-
cant effect. But the committee wants to be crystal clear that
investments in basic (6.1) research in network science have
no immediate prospects of impacting the design, test, evalu-
ation, and sourcing of NCO capabilities.The main values created by a basic research investmentwould include access to thought leaders (principal investiga-tors) in the university community, the training of studentsthrough their work on university projects, the development
of a community that the Army can access to address its prac-
tical problems, and the efficient use of research dollars to
impact multiple areas of application. To exploit these oppor-
tunities, the committee offers the following two recommen-
dations:Recommendation 2.The Army should make a modest
investment of at least $10 million per year to support a
diverse portfolio of basic (6.1) network research that
promises high leverage for the dollars invested and is
clearly different from existing investments by other

federal agencies like the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH).This modest level of investment is compatible with theArmyÕs current R&D portfolio. There is an adequate supply
of promising research topics and talented researchers to make
this investment productive. Additionally, it can be imple-
mented within the ArmyÕs current R&D management work
processes.To identify the topics in basic network science researchthat would bring the most value to NCO, the committee re-
calls that the open system architectures for computer net-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6NETWORK SCIENCEworks consist of layers, each of which performs a specialfunction regarded as a ÒserviceÓ by the layers above. It is
useful to distinguish among the lower (physical and trans-
port) layers of this architecture, the higher (applications) lay-
ers that are built on top of them to offer services to people,
and the cognitive and social networks that are built higher
still, on top of the services-to-humans layers.Research on the lower layers of the network architectureis relatively mature. Improving these levels is more of an
engineering problem than one requiring basic research. The
most immediate payoffs from network science are likely to
result from research associated with the upper levels of the
network architecture and the social networks that are built at
an even higher level. This is where the committee thinks that
Army investments are most likely to create the greatest value.An area of particular promise that has little or no currentinvestment is the social implications of NCO for the organi-
zational structure and command and control. Basic research
could provide valuable insight into how military personnel
use advanced information exchange capabilities to improve
combat effectiveness. For example, one might study how
troops in combat could use these capabilities to make betterdecisions. Additional basic research in the core content ofnetwork science might help to determine how the Army can
most productively utilize the capabilities of its advanced in-
formation infrastructure.Recommendation 3.The Army should fund a basic
research program to explore the interaction between
information networks and the social networks that uti-
lize them.The Army can implement Recommendations 2 and 3within the confines of its present policies and procedures.
They require neither substantial replanning nor the orches-
tration of joint Army/university/industry research projects.
They create significant value and are actionable immediately.The committeeÕs Recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2,and 3 give the Army an actionable menu of options that span
the opportunity space available. By selecting and implement-
ing appropriate items from this menu, the Army can develop
a robust network science to Òenable progress toward achiev-
ing Network Centric Warfare capabilities,Ó as requested in
the statement of task.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71Introductiondemonstrate its soundness as a science on which to base use-ful applications. The purposes of this report are to assess the
scope and content of network science and to envision how
its pursuit can create value for the United States in general
and for the U.S. Army in particular. Semantics aside, the
opportunity is historic. The unrelenting drop in the costs of
computing, symbolized by MooreÕs law, has made massive
computation a commodity, cheap and available to industry
and individuals alike (Rheingold, 2002).The benefits of connectivityÑas quantified, for instance,by MetcalfeÕs law and first recognized in the rail and tele-
phone networksÑmake it irresistibly attractive (Rheingold,
2002). The value of communityÑasserted, for example, in
ReedÕs lawÑelevates connectivity to an economic impera-
tive (Rheingold, 2002). The linkage of information networks
has led to a global information grid, to which the majority of
the worldÕs population is likely to be connected within the
next decade. This situation is unparalleled in human history.
It will lead to social institutions and human behaviors never
before seen or anticipated (Ronfeldt, 2005). Its initial conse-
quences already are being reported in the popular press
(Business Week, 2005). It renders the study of networks and
their effectsÑthe pursuit of network scienceÑa social, sci-
entific, and technological imperative for the 21st century.Why should the military in general and the Army in par-ticular care? Aside from the fact that the U.S. military is
embedded in this wave of technological and social change,
the exploration of network science promises insights and
tools that are indispensable to improving its combat effec-
tiveness in the new world of likely conflicts.The development of the ArmyÕs Future Combat Systems(FCS) is experiencing cost and schedule overruns because of
the immense complexity of the effort (Weiner, 2005). Given
the committeeÕs findings about the immaturity of network
science, this is hardly surprising. Designing and testing the
FCS communications network alone is like trying to design
and test a modern jet aircraft without the benefit of the sci-
ence of aerodynamics or like designing and testing a radio orNetwork effects are found in biologically diverse worlds,at many layers of abstraction from micro to macro. These
include molecular biochemical reactions, cellular neural net-
works, insect swarms, and entire ecologies. They also are
found in such diverse engineered systems as power grids,
communications networks, like the Internet, and the trans-
portation infrastructure. Network effects are, however, most
commonly associated with human social structuresÑwe
speak about networking as an essential skill for both doing
our jobs and getting new ones. This dimension of networks
has taken on special significance in the past few years as we
recognize the powerful influence on society of criminal and
terrorist social networks that exploit modern communication
and transportation networks (Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001).In the military, network effects occur in the communica-tion systems that link platforms and Soldiers. The concept of
network-centric warfare (NCW) takes the importance of net-
works for the military even further. In this concept dynamic
battlefield command and control networks are built in real
time, relying on more static networks such as physical com-
munications, weapons systems platforms, and military orga-
nizational structure. The differences between static and dy-
namic networks are, however, not clearly understood, and
our understanding of dynamic network effects is primitive.Networks also build upon each other in layersÑfor ex-ample, a network of business process applications is built on
a communications network that is, in turn, built on a physi-
cal network.Despite the tremendous variety of complex networks inthe natural, physical, and social worlds, little is known sci-
entifically about the common rules that underlie all networks.
This is even truer for interacting networks. Ideas put forth by
scientists, technologists, and researchers in a wide variety of
fields have been coalescing over the past decade, creat-
ing a new field of thinkingÑthe science of networks (see
Box 1-1).Does a science of networks exist? Opinions differ. But ifit does, network science is in its infancy and still needs toNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8NETWORK SCIENCETV without the benefit of the fundamental knowledge ofelectromagnetic waves.The engineering of complex physical networks, like thatof the FCS, is not predictable because the scientific basis for
constructing and evaluating such designs is immature. This
is even more the case for characterizing, modeling, and
evaluating modern criminal and terrorist networks that are
built on a physical communications network infrastructure
(Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001). The Office of Force Trans-
formation (OFT) has advanced the concepts of network-cen-
tric warfare (Cebrowski and Garstka, 1998) and network-
centric operations (Garstka and Alberts, 2004) to define
warfare in the 21st century. Both concepts involve multiple
interacting networks built one on top of the other. Neither
has a firm empirical and analytical base. Thus, getting a gripon the fundamental science of networksÑtheir structure anddynamicsÑis a topic of pressing concern for military as well
as political and economic interests.SCOPE OF THE STUDYRecognizing the urgency of this situation, the NationalResearch Council (NRC) Board on Army Science and Tech-
nology (BAST) formed the Committee on Network Science
for Future Army Applications. The statement of task for the
committee consists of four charges (Box 1-2). This docu-
ment is the report of that committee.STUDY APPROACH AND CONSTRAINTSSpecial care was devoted to the composition of the com-mittee. Biographies are given in Appendix A. Three repre-
sentative groups of members were selected. The first group
included individuals from the physical sciences, engineer-
ing, biological sciences, and social sciences research com-
munities. In order to sample the breadth of intellectual effort
on network science, committee members were selected who
have recent first-hand experience in the subject matter as
reflected in their recent books or research and teaching as-
signments. Thus, committee membership includes the au-
thors of Six Degrees: The Science of the Connected AgeBOX 1-1Network Science: Foundation of OurConnected AgeThe first thing you see in the room on your right as you enterBostonÕs Museum of Science is a vertical peg board about 8 feet
square. Sticking out of a checkerboard square pattern are pegs at the
corner of every square. Ping-pong-size balls drop from the center
top of the board and carom crazily off various pegs on the way down
to the bottom. There is no way to predict which way a ball will zig or
zag at each row or where any one ball will land in the bottom row.
The pathway of each drop is completely random. Yet, despite the
chaos at the beginning, the balls collect at the bottom in a perfect
normal curve distribution. Within moments, the system changes
from totally random individual actions to a completely symmetrical
and predictable aggregateÑorder emerges out of chaos. Similar
phenomena are exhibited by human social networks, like the com-
plex web of traders and investors on the New York Stock Exchange
(Bernstein, 1992) or the operation of any large city (Johnson, 2001;
Watts, 2003). Why? Such is the mystery of self-organization in large,
complex networks.Similarly, what accounts for how birds flock and fish school?Why do accumulated grains of sand build to a mound or dune until
finally one grain proves to be a grain too many and an avalanche
occurs? And why do electrical systems crash when they reach com-
parable tipping points? Why are we all connected by the famous six
degrees of separation? What do epidemics, earthquakes, computer
viruses, religious fundamentalism, and the ÒFriends of Kevin BaconÓ
game all have in common?The common element in the answers to these questions is thatthings are connected. Connections create networks, networks oper-
ate by rules and probably laws, and a new science of networks is
emerging to determine and explain what these are. Nations, species,
corporations, and armies will all be affected by this new science.BOX 1-2Statement of TaskThe Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, andTechnology) has requested the National Research Council (NRC)
Board on Army Science and Technology (BAST) conduct a study to
define the field of Network Science. The NRC will:¥Determine whether initiation of a new field of investigationcalled Network Science would be appropriate to advance knowledge
of complex systems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. If
yes, how should it be defined?¥Identify the fields that should comprise Network Science. Whatare the key research challenges necessary to enable progress in
Network Science?¥Identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experi-mental, and practical challenges to advance the field of Network
Science. Consider such things as facilities and equipment that might

be needed. Determine investment priority, time frame for realization,
and degree of commercial interest.¥Given limited resources (and likely investments of others), rec-ommend those relevant research areas that the Army should invest
in to enable progress toward achieving Network-Centric Warfare
capabilities.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9(Duncan Watts); Linked: The New Science of Networks(Albert-Laszlo Barab⁄si); The Future of Work (ThomasMalone); and ItÕs Alive: The Coming Convergence of Infor-mation, Biology and Business (Stan Davis); and the editor ofControl in an Information Rich World: Report of the Panel
on Future Directions in Control, Dynamics and Systems (Ri-chard M. Murray), a report of the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (SIAM). The committee also includes
the organizer of the new systems biology curriculum at
Harvard University (Pamela A. Silver) and a contributor to
the World Technology Evaluation CenterÕs assessment of
systems biology (Adam Arkin). Thus, active players in the
diverse communities engaged in creating the science of mod-
ern networks are represented on the committee.The second representative group comprises both the com-mand and the research and development (R&D) communi-
ties of the military, including retired flag officers and ex-
perts with experience at the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) (Ronald J. Brachman), the
National Defense University (Robert E. Armstrong), and
MITRE (Norval L. Broome). Paul Van Riper, who first
applied the concepts of network science to the articulation of
the command-and-control doctrine in the U.S. Marine Corps,
is among the flag officers, as are William Hilsman, former
chief information officer of the Army and Jack Pellicci, a
retired Army brigadier general who is now an executive for
the Oracle Corporation.The third group includes representatives from the aca-demic and industrial management worlds. Two deans (Rich-
ard DeMillo, Georgia Institute of Technology, and John E.
Hopcroft, Cornell) played a major role in defining the scope
of the study. Dr. DeMillo also has served as chief technol-
ogy officer of Hewlett-Packard. The committeeÕs outreach
efforts were led by Richard Murray (California Institute of
Technology) and by Will E. Leland, chief scientist, Telcordia
Technologies. The committee chair Charles Duke, has been
an R&D manager for 22 years at Xerox and was chief scien-
tist and deputy director of the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory.Clearly, the committee membership spans the diverseconstituencies of network science: military commanders,
business managers, program managers, research managers,
and active researchers. Together, the members had the skills
and experience needed to assess the content of network sci-
ence; its prospects for advancing engineering, social, and
biological technologies; and the potential for selected re-
search efforts to impact the U.S. military in general and the
U.S. Army in particular over different timescales.Initially the committee was divided into three workingteams. Team I devoted its attention to assessing the impacts
of past network science and technology and to extrapolating
this record to project future impacts. Team II focused on
defining the scope of network science. Its members identi-
fied the core elements of network science underpinning the
diverse array of applications and technologies in the social,economic, engineering, and biological arenas. Team III con-centrated on outreach to communities that currently practice
network science and technology. It identified community
members via literature studies, interviews, and e-mail inquir-
ies. It constructed and circulated a Web-based questionnaire.
From the responses, it extracted the recognized core content
of network science, research activities in which community
members are engaged, and their perception of the major re-
search challenges.The three streams of activity carried out by the teams werebrought together midway though the committeeÕs delibera-
tions with the writing of a full-message draft. Consensus was
reached on the findings pertinent to charges (1) and (2) in the
statement of task. Then, in response to charges (3) and (4)
the committee was reconstituted into three new teams, which
developed scenarios of how network science could add value
for the Army. The committeeÕs findings, conclusions, and
recommendations were then refined and ratified at the final
meeting.REPORT ORGANIZATIONThis report documents the study approach, findings, con-clusions, and recommendations. It is organized in accord
with the statement of task in Box 1-2 and the study approach
described above. Where the committee conducted research
and discovered factual information, the information is re-
ported as a finding. Multiple findings combine as the basis
for conclusions, some ÒoverarchingÓ and the rest ÒspecificÓ
conclusions pertinent to specific requests in the statement of
task. The conclusions are contained in Chapter 8 along with
the committeeÕs recommendations.The bulk of the committeeÕs results are reported as find-ings in Chapters 2 through 7. Some of the details that sup-
port these findings are presented in the appendixes; others
may be found in the references cited in the text.Chapter 2 characterizes the pervasive impact of networksand network research in the 21st century. Chapter 3 describes
their significance for the military in general and the Army in
particular. Chapter 4 offers a provisional definition of Ònet-
work scienceÓ and notes the promise afforded by developing
a science of networks. Chapter 5 describes the potential
scope and content of network science, as determined from
an analysis of courses at academic institutions worldwide.
The contents of these courses are indicated in Appendix C.
Chapter 6 discusses the current status of network science
and identifies associated research challenges. This material
is based on an analysis, presented in Appendix D, of the
results of a questionnaire sent to over 1,000 researchers
working on various topics pertaining to networks. Chapter 7
presents findings concerning how the Army can create value
from investments in network science. It is based on the in-
vestment scenarios presented in Appendix E. Finally, as
noted above, Chapter 8 contains the committeeÕs conclusions
and recommendations.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10NETWORK SCIENCEREFERENCESArquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The Future ofTerror, Crime and Militancy. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.Bernstein, P.J. 1992. Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern WallStreet. New York, N.Y.: Free Press.Business Week. 2005. The power of us. Pp. 74Ð82.Cebrowski, A., and J. Garstka. 1998. Network centric warfare. Proceedingsof the United States Naval Institute 24: 28Ð35.Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2004. Network Centric Operations ConceptualFramework Version 2.0. Vienna, Va.: Evidence Based Research, Inc.Johnson, S. 2001. Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Citiesand Software. New York, N.Y.: Scribner Associates, Inc.Rheingold, H. 2002. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge,Mass.: MA Basic Books.Ronfeldt, D. 2005. A long look ahead: NGOs, networks, and future socialevolution. In Environmentalism and the Technologies of Tomorrow, R.
Olson and D. Rejeski, eds. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.Watts, D.J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Weiner, T. 2005. Drive to build high-tech army hits cost snags. New YorkTimes, March 28, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112Networks and Network Research in the 21st CenturyIf there is one word to describe society in the early 21stcentury, it surely must be Òconnected.Ó We have grown up
taking for granted the vast interlinked networks that bring
electricity, water, gas, and cable TV to our homes and that
allow us to be in personal contact with others almost any-
where in the world by telephone, e-mail, and other commu-
nications means. The Internet, especially the World Wide
Web (www), is thoroughly ingrained in our everyday lives.
The defense of our nation is heavily dependent on electronic
networks for communication, command and control, col-
laborative decision making, intelligence gathering, and other
critical functions.While less obviously Ònetworks,Ó many other richly con-nected systems play crucial roles in our lives. When diseases
are transmitted by person-to-person contact, their spread pat-
terns and ultimate effect are highly dependent on connec-
tions that can be described as a network. When cells divide
and transform under the influence of minute amounts of bio-
chemical elements in the body, they trigger a network of
influences and dependent reactions. Human organizations
are networks, often captured graphically with organization
charts. In our daily lives we encounter health-care provider
networks, purchase goods from companies that acquired
them from supply networks, and pay for them using net-
works of banks and credit card companies. Our brains are
immense networks of highly interconnected nerve cells, re-
sponsible for our ability to see and hear, make decisions,
remember and learn, and act.In order to get a sense of the scope and character of thesenetworks, the committee classified them into biological (e.g.,
metabolic pathways), physical (e.g., the power grid and tele-
phone system), and social (e.g., governments and churches).
This taxonomy is developed in Table 2-1, which identifies
some important physical, social, and biological networks and
gives an indication of their global impact. This table illus-
trates clearly the utter pervasiveness of networks in every
aspect not only of human existence but also of the existence
of all living entities on planet Earth. Connectivity is an es-
sential ingredient of life as we know it.Not only are networks pervasive, they are astonishinglydiverse. Moreover, they can be characterized by figures of
merit that indicate how large, how complicated, how robust,
and how important they are. This aspect of networks is illus-
trated in Table 2-2, which shows the characteristics of a di-
verse sampling of networks. The figures of merit for the col-
umns are defined in the footnotes. This table is worthy of
close examination because it reveals the wide diversity of
the scales, structures, states of maturity, technological inten-
sity, benefits, and consequences of failure of some of the
networks that we encounter daily. It also illustrates how com-

plex some of the networks are, leading one to wonder if their
designers and operators can control their behaviors.Inspection of Tables 2-1 and 2-2 leads to the committeeÕsfirst finding:Finding 2-1.Networks enable the necessities and conve-
niences of modern life.The tables illustrate how vital networks are to modernlife. We see from them that networks underlie nearly every
aspect of the infrastructure that supports daily life. Electric-
ity, water, transportation, telephone service, Internet connec-
tion, health care, banking, shopping, education, and govern-
ment all are brought to us by physical or social networks.Our bodies and minds are also manifestations of net-
works. The natural world in which we live is a vast array of
ecological networks. Networks are ubiquitous in daily life.
They also are central to the global economic infrastructure.
The failure of any of these networks impacts society.Finding 2-2.Engineered networks are a major driver of
the increasingly global economy and can be of benefit to
both the United States and its competitors.It can be seen from these tables that modern communica-tions and transportation networks are the drivers of the glo-
bal economy. They provide the fundamental connectivity on
which global banking, product design, tourism, supply chainNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12NETWORK SCIENCEmanagement, and customer relationship management de-pend. From overseas manufacturer to Wal-Mart, products
are ordered electronically, produced on demand, shipped
around the globe by shipping networks, and delivered to lo-
cal stores by rail and truck networks. Heralded by some pun-
dits as the century of biology and nanotechnology, the 21st
century is in fact an era of networks and is called by others
ÒThe Age of Information and TelecommunicationsÓ (Perez,
2002).Finding 2-3.Social and biological networks bear impor-
tant similarities to engineered networks.One might infer from Table 2-1 that biological and socialnetworks are similar to engineered networks. Indeed, much
recent literature has been devoted to documenting just how
this is the case (Barab⁄si, 2002; Bower and Bolouri, 2001;Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2003; Newman, 2003; Watts,2003). The important point for this study is that many meth-
ods and models are applicable to networks of all kinds: bio-
logical, physical, and social. (These commonalities are ex-
plored in Chapter 5 and Appendix C.)Finding 2-4.Advances in computer-based technologies
and telecommunications are enabling social networks
that facilitate group affiliations, including terrorist
networks.An important property of networks is that they may bebuilt on top of each other. For example, a social network
may be formed based on an information network built on a
communications network that utilizes a physical network of
transmission equipment. This property enables experimen-
tation in the social network realm using commercial com-TABLE 2-1Representative Networks
Biological NetworksaPhysical NetworksSocial Networks
Type of NetworkGlobal ImpactType of NetworkGlobal ImpactType of NetworkGlobal Impact
Disease transmittingSpread of disease,Distribution gridsEfficient distributionAffiliation/Efficient collaboration
networks (HIV,epidemics(electric power, waterof goods oracquaintance networksand activity
influenza, TB, malaria,supply, businesscommodities(terrorist, community,coordination
cholera)supply chains)business, religious,
clubs)Ecological networksSurvival of selectedTelecommunicationsInstantaneousBroadcast networksDissemination of
(food webs, riverspecies; globalinfrastructure (cellular,worldwide information(radio, TV networksidentical information
basins, rain forest)weather andPSTN, cable TV,distributionlike NBC, CBS, CNN)to large groups
topographyInternet)
Metabolic networksSustenance of life forDOD globalNetwork-centricInformation exchangeCheap, convenient
a given generation ofinformation gridwarfare and network-networks (U.S. mail,long distance pair-
living entities(sensors,enabled operationslocal and long-distancewise communications
communications, andtelephone service)
weapons)Community networksSurvival of selectedTransportationRapid movement ofGroup formingEasy, convenient
(insect societies,speciesnetworks (airports,goods from supplier tonetworks (eBay,formation of groups of

animal herds, birdhighways, railways,market; modern travelcorporate intranets)like-minded people
flocks, schools of fish)shipping)who have never met
Gene expressionTransmission andElectronic financialElectronic cashlessSupply chains andCoordination of
networksevolution of lifetransaction networkstransactionsbusiness networksmultiple players to
between generations(banking, credit cards,achieve common
ATMs)goals, global cost
reductionSocial servicesEfficient delivery of
networks (Socialgovernment services

Security, familyto large, distributed
services, Medicare,constituencies
Medicaid)NOTE: PSTN, public switched telephone network; DOD, Department of Defense.aIncludes biochemical and other networks that are natural rather than manmade.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND NETWORK RESEARCH IN THE 21ST CENTURY13TABLE 2-2Maturity, Structure, Characteristics, and Impacts of Some Networks
RelativeTechnologySocietal
MaturityaNetwork StructurebIntensitycImpact of(High,(High,RepresentativeCatastrophicCatastrophic
Medium,NumberTopologyMedium,NetworkSocietalFailure
eFailureSample NetworkLow)of NodesComplexityScalingLow)Scope
dImpacts/Benefits(High, Low)Description
U.S. electricHighHighLow
NMediumNationalElectric lighting,HighContinent-
powerappliances,spanning
distribution gridand electronicsblackout
Air transportationHighMediumMedium
N**2HighRegional/Rapid globalLowMajor
networknational/transport ofweather-
globalpeople andrelated
cargodelays
Integrated circuitsMediumMediumMedium
N**2HighLocalUbiquitousLowDevice
(chip level)computing andfailure or
otherrecall

electronicdevicesCellular networkHighHighLow
NHighNational/InstantaneousHighSurge-
and publicglobalmobilecaused

switchedworldwideoutage
telephonecommunicationsduring a
networkcrisisSexual networksN/ALowLow
NN/AMostly local,Large segmentsHighOnset of
(e.g., thosebut withof populationglobal
leading to ormodernafflicted withpandemic
spreading HIV ortransportationAIDS in

sexual diseases)can beunderdeveloped
regional,world
national, or
globalInternet data-linkHighMediumHigh
N**2HighGlobalEnabler of WebLowMajor
layer (router)and electronicdenial-of-
topologycommerceservice
attacksApplications layerMediumMediumMedium2**
NHighGlobalSupport forLowComputer
Internet topologygroup-formingviruses,
networksspyware,
andidentificationtheftBank of AmericaMediumMediumLow
N**2HighNational/CashlessHighGlobal
financial andglobalretailing anddisruption of
banking networkelectronicelectronic
currencyfinancial

exchangestransactions
Wal-Mart-likeLowLowMedium2**
NMediumNational/Just-in-timeLowStock items
business supplyglobalsupply andnot in stores
chaininventory controlSmall (50,000 orHighLowMedium2**
NMediumLocalRoads, water,Low (asLoss of local
less) townsewage, zoning,individualorder, e.g.,
governmentspolicegovernments)looting
aThe networkÕs position on a scale starting from first generation (at emergence, a low state) and ending with a high state of maturity, by which time thenetwork has gone through multiple subsequent iterations.bNetwork structure is characterized by number of nodes, topology complexity, and scaling. The number of nodes ranges between low (<1,000), medium(1,000 to 10,000,000), and high (>10,000,000). Topology complexity describes the diversity of interconnections from varied and complex to simple andcontinuesNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14NETWORK SCIENCEmunications and information networks. The implications ofthis fact for criminal, terror, protest, and insurgency networks
have been explored by Arquilla and Ronfeldt (2001) and are
a common topic of discussion by groups like the Highlands
Forum, which perceive that the United States is highly vul-
nerable to the interruption of critical networks.Finding 2-5.The high value attached to common engi-
neered networks makes their design, scaling, and opera-
tion a topic of national priority.It seems self-evident from the ubiquity of networks in ourdaily lives, as well as from the potential for massive civil
disruption if they fail, that the design, scaling, and operation
of networks is a national priority. Failures and threats of fail-
ure caused by terrorist action add urgency to the strategic
imperative to design, deploy, and operate robust networks
whose behaviors are predictable. Yet as we shall see later in
this report, fundamental (as opposed to empirical) knowl-
edge about how to do this is primitive. The current state of
knowledge about network design and characterization is
roughly analogous to the state of knowledge about metal-
lurgy in Europe in the 16th century. The empirical steel-
forming technology of the day was sufficiently advanced to
enable Europe to conquer most of the world but provided
only a pale indication of the materials designs that would
become possible in the 20th century based on the science of
metallurgy (Diamond, 1999). As the committee looked at
the current state of network technology and research in rela-
tion to our near total dependence on networks, it was amazed
at the abundance of interest in network applications and the
lack of fundamental scientific research that might advance
the development of an underlying network science to sup-
port the study of networks in general.Finding 2-6.Interest in network research has exploded
during the past 5 years.Research on networks has become highly visible duringthe past 5 years. A number of the measures that normally
accompany the emergence of a new field document this

heightened interest. For example, the number of publications
focusing on complex networks increased significantly dur-uniform. Scaling means economic or social value of that network as a function of N (the number of nodes). A linear value of N means that service is aimed atindividual users. N**2 is the value that results from person-to-person transactions, and 2**N, the value that results from the establishment of group affiliations(Rheingold, 2002, p. 58).cNetwork topology that is enabled by or highly dependent on modern computer-to-computer communications technologies. The high, medium, and lowranges are determined by the approximate number of computers in the networkÑfor example, high range indicates >106 computers in the network, mediumis 106 to 103, and low is <103.dGeographical scope of the network: global, national, regional, or local.ePotential consequences for society at large of a failure that is extremely destructive yet highly improbable. High range means >$100 million and low means<$100 million.TABLE 2-2Continued
ing that time. A Òcomplex networkÓ is one that exhibits emer-gent behaviors that cannot be predicted a priori from known
properties of the networkÕs constituents (Boccara, 2004).
This is not limited to a single discipline, but it is stimulated
by simultaneous interest in communication systems (like the
Internet or the Web), biological systems (like metabolic or
protein interaction networks), and social systems (like col-
laboration or e-mail networks). As shown in Figure 2-1, the
number of publications with Òcomplex networksÓ in their
title has increased fourfold over the past 5 years without signs
of saturation. The two most cited papers on complex net-
works have been cited more than 1,500 times, according to
Google Scholar (Watts and Strogatz, 1998; Barab⁄si and
Albert, 1999). Fueled by this increasing interest, major sci-
entific journals have devoted special issues, reviews, or edi-
torials to the promise of networks. For example, Nature haspublished several reviews on the subject (Strogatz, 2001;
Ottino, 2004; Koonin et al., 2002). Science and the Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences devoted specialissues to it (Jasny and Ray, 2003; PNAS, 2004). Two major
physics review journals, Reviews of Modern Physics andAdvances in Physics, have each published highly cited re-views on networks (Albert and Barab⁄si, 2002; Dorogovtsev
and Mendes, 2002). So have major engineering, applied
mathematics, and sociology journals, like IEEE Control Sys-tems Magazine, SIAM Review, and Annual Review of Sociol-ogy (Amin, 2002; Watts, 2004; Newman, 2003). Further-more, several of the most prominent biology journals, like
Nature Reviews Genetics, Nature Immunology, NatureStructural Biology, and Nature Reviews Systems Biology,have published high-profile reviews and editorials, often
highlighting them on the cover of the journal, as shown in
Figure 2-2.Another sign of the emergence of a network science com-munity is the organization of meetings devoted to network
research. Indeed, during the past 5 years more than 20 inter-
national conferences and workshops and summer schools
have focused exclusively on network research, some draw-
ing close to 400 participants. Electrical engineering and com-
puter science conferences have for many years devoted en-
tire sessions to networks. In addition, major physics and
biology meetings devote many focus sessions to networks.
For example, the March 2004 and March 2005 meetings ofNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND NETWORK RESEARCH IN THE 21ST CENTURY15the American Physical Society (APS), the largest annualphysics meeting in the world, had more than 10 network-
related sessions. Similarly, the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) regularly features sympo-
sia devoted to network science and its applications.The number of books on network science has exploded.Four general-audience books, translated into over 10 lan-
guages and making the bestseller list in several countries,
introduced the promise of network science to the general
public (Barab⁄si, 2002; Buchanan, 2002; Watts, 2003;
Huberman, 2001). Box 2-1 also lists over 15 monographs
focusing either on network science in general or on its appli-
cations to specific fields.In 2004, responding to the publicÕs fascination with net-works, the New York Hall of Science opened a major exhibit
entitled ÒConnections: Seeing the World in a Different
Way.Ó The exhibit focused on the impact of networks on
science, technology, and the arts.Finally, as is discussed in Chapter 5 and Appendix C,most major U.S. universities have developed courses on vari-
ous aspects of network science. These are offered in a vari-
ety of departments, including electrical engineering, phys-
ics, computer science, biology, economics, and sociology.The European Union recognized the potential of research innetworks early on under its Sixth Framework Program1 byinvesting several million euros per year in flagship programs,
such as COSIN, EVERGROW, DELIS, and EXYSTENCE,
which focus on complex networks and their applications
(Amaral et al., 2004).In addition to providing the knowledge underlying thedesign and operation of many of the global communications,
transportation, and power infrastructures noted in Tables 2-1
and 2-2, network research is leading to the creation of new
businesses. The poster child of the benefits of network think-
ing is Google and all the second-generation search engines
built after Google. Indeed, GoogleÕs phenomenal success and
what sets it apart from its early competitors is its revolution-
ary algorithm, which used the topology of the Web to rank
the obtained search results. Google is a wonderful example
of how a piece of published research by two graduate stu-
dents on random walks on networks, an academic exercise,1For further information, see http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fet/co.htm. Ac-cessed August 19, 2005.FIGURE 2-1Number of papers with the term Òcomplex networkÓ in the title. SOURCE: Introduction to Complex Networks: Modeling,
Control and Synchronization. Briefing by Guanrong Chen, director, Centre for Chaos Control and Synchronization, City University of HongKong, to the First Chinese Conference on Complex Networks, Wuhan, China, April 2005.Year2,3102,4082,6032,7853,0873,7014,8201998199920002001200220032004
5,2004,800
4,4004,0003,6003,2002,800
2,400
2,000Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16NETWORK SCIENCEled in less than a decade to a multibillion-dollar company(Brinn and Page, 1998).Search engines are not the only new business spawned bynetwork research. A rapidly evolving industry has developed
around social networks. Products are developed based on
information gleaned from mapping out peopleÕs social links.
The businesses range from facilitating business contacts to
providing dating services. Some of the companies aim to
revolutionize the sales process by identifying the shortest
acquaintance path from a salesperson to a target person. In
the past 3 years more than 20 companies have emerged that
use some aspects of social networks to provide benefits to
consumers.Small companies are springing up to apply an understand-ing of network structure to practical concerns. One example
is the work by Internet Perils, Inc., to improve the robustness
of a companyÕs Internet connectivity by identifying bottle-
neck hubs that lie on seemingly diverse paths. The interest in
network research has resulted in a number of network analy-FIGURE 2-2Magazines and journals with articles on networks.
sis tools. The majority of these tools focus on network visu-
alization; some are free, others can be purchased.In an intermediate time frame, biology is likely to benefitfrom advances in network research (Barab⁄si and Oltvai,
2004), and a rush is on to capitalize on applications of the
genomics revolution. It is increasingly apparent that the de-
sign of successful drugs for complex diseases like cancer or
depression depends on mapping out the interactions between
cell components. Several companies are involved in com-
mercializing this mapping process, and developing tools that
take advantage of network representations of a cell. For ex-
ample, Genomatica, a San-Diego-based company, has de-
veloped a series of tools: Starting with knowledge of the
structure of a metabolic network, Genomatica generates pre-
dictions useful in a range of ways, from developing drugs to
developing strains of bacteria with special metabolic charac-
teristics.All in all, the committee finds that research on networksnot only underlies the affordability and reliability of the glo-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND NETWORK RESEARCH IN THE 21ST CENTURY17BOX 2-1Books Relevant to Network ScienceGeneral AudienceAlbert-L⁄szlŠ Barab⁄si, Linked: The New Science of Networks.Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus Publishing, 2002.Mark Buchanan, Nexus: Small Worlds and the GroundbreakingScience of Networks. New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2002.Bernardo A. Huberman, The Laws of the Web: Patterns in the Ecologyof Information. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.Duncan J. Watts, Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. NewYork, N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2003.Monograph and ProceedingsEli-Ben Naim, Hans Frauenfelder, and Zoltan Toroczkai, ComplexNetworks (Lecture Notes in Physics). Springer-Verlag, October 16,2004.S.N. Dorogovtsev and J.F.F. Mendes, Evolution of Networks: FromBiological Nets to the Internet and WWW. Oxford, England: OxfordUniversity Press, 2003.S. Bornholdt and H.G. Schuster, eds., Handbook of Graphs andNetworks: From the Genome to the Internet. Weinheim, Berlin:Wiley-VCH, 2003.Pedro L. Garrido and Joaqu™n Marro, eds., Modeling ComplexSystems, Seventh Granada Lectures, Spain 2002. AmericanInstitute of Physics Conference Proceedings, Vol. 661. Melville,
N.Y.: AIP, 2003.Duncan J. Watts, Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks BetweenOrder and Randomness. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton UniversityPress, 1991.Graph Theory/AlgorithmsB”la Bollobas, Random Graphs, 2nd Ed. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.Clifford W. Marshall, Applied Graph Theory. New York, N.Y.: Wiley-Interscience, 1971.Joel Spencer, The Strange Logic of Random Graphs: Algorithms andCombinatorics. New York, N.Y.: Springer-Verlag, 2001.Internet/wwwRomualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani, Evolution andStructure of the Internet: A Statistical Physics Approach. Cam-bridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2004.Pierre Baldi, Paolo Frasconi, and Padhraic Smyth, Modeling theInternet and the Web: Probabilistic Methods and Algorithms.England: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin, Mapping Cyberspace. New York, N.Y.:Routledge, 2001.Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin, Atlas of Cyberspace. England:Addison-Wesley, 2001.Social NetworksStanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust, Social Network Analysis:Methods and Applications. Cambridge, England: CambridgeUniversity Press, 1994, reprint 1999.Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make aBig Difference. Boston, Mass.: Little, Brown and Company, 2000.Per Hage and Frank Harary, Island Networks: Communication, Kinshipand Classification Structures in Oceania. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, 1996.Manfred Kochen, The Small World. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex PublishingCorporation, 1989.R.R. McNeill and William H. McNeill, The Human Web: A BirdÕs-EyeView of World History. New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 2003.Peter R. Monge and Noshir S. Contractor, Theories of CommunicationNetworks. New York, N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2003.Wayne E. Baker, Networking Smart: How to Build Relationships forPersonal and Organizational Success. Available online at http://Backinprint.com.Wayne E. Baker, Achieving Success Through Social Capital: Tapping
Hidden Resources in Your Personal and Business Networks.Jossey-Bass, 2000.Economic Systems/Political NetworksManuel Castells, The Internet Galaxy. New York, N.Y.: Oxford UniversityPress, 2001.Ross Dawson, Living Networks: Leasing your Company, Customers,
and Partners in the Hyper-Connected Economy. Upper Saddle River,N.J.: Prentice Hall, 2003.Dirk Messner, The Network Society: Economic Development andInternational Competitiveness as Problems of Social Governance
.Frank Cass Publishers, 1997.Chris Westland, Financial Dynamics: A System for Valuing Technology
Companies. New York, N.Y.: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.Networks in the Arts and CultureAlistair Reynolds, ÒGlacierÓ in The YearÕs Best Science Fiction 2001,Gardner Dozois, ed. New York, N.Y.: St. MartinÕs Griffin, 2002.Mark Lombardi, Robert Hobbs, and Judith Richards, Mark Lombardi:Global Networks. Independent Curators, August 2003.Mark C. Taylor. The Moment of Complexity: Emerging Network Culture.Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2002.Other Books Discussing Various Aspects of NetworksFritjof Capra, The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of LivingSystems. New York, N.Y.: Anchor Books/Randomhouse, 1996.Geoff Mulgan, Connexity: How to Live in a Connected World. Cam-bridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 1998.Steven Strogatz, Sync: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order.New York, N.Y.: Hyperion, 2003.Judy Breck, Connectivity: The Answer to Ending Ignorance andSeparation. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18NETWORK SCIENCEbal communications, transportation, and power infrastruc-tures but also is an important source of economic growth via
the creation of new commercial endeavors.Finding 2-7. Recent network research is leading to newand growing businesses.In summary, human understanding of networks has thepotential to play a vital role in the 21st century, which is
witnessing the rise of the Connected Age. There is an enor-
mous demand for information on how to design and operate
large global networks in a robust, stable, and secure fashion.
In subsequent chapters, the committee discusses the dearth
of fundamental scientific knowledge that would ensure that
outcome. In Chapter 3, the committee looks at the use of
networks in the military, and the special attention given in
the statement of task to their role in network-centric warfare.REFERENCESAlbert, R., and A.L. Barab⁄si. 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex net-works. Reviews of Modern Physics 74(1): 47Ð97.Amaral, L.A.N., A. Barrat, A.L. Barab⁄si, G. Caldarelli, P. De Los Rios, A.Erzan, B. Kahng, R. Mantegna, J.F.F. Mendes, R. Pastor-Satorras, andA. Vespignani. 2004. Virtual round table on ten leading questions fornetwork research. The European Physical Journal B 38(2): 143Ð145.Amin, M. 2002. Modeling and control of complex interactive networks.IEEE Control Systems Magazine 22(1): 22Ð27.Arquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars. Santa Monica,Calif.: RAND.Barab⁄si, A.L. 2002. Linked: The New Science of Networks: The Future ofTerror, Crime, and Militancy. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus.Barab⁄si, A.L., and R. Albert. 1999. Emergence of scaling in random net-works. Science 286(5439): 509Ð512.Barab⁄si, A.L., and Z.N. Oltvai. 2004. Network biology: Understanding thecellÕs functional organization. Nature Reviews: Genetics 5(2): 101Ð114.Boccara, N. 2004. Modeling Complex Systems. New York, N.Y.: Springer.Bower, J.M., and H. Bolouri. 2001. Computational Modeling of Geneticand Biochemical Networks. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Brinn, S., and L. Page. 1998. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextualWeb search engine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30(1Ð7):107Ð117.Buchanan, M. 2002. Nexus: Small Worlds and the Groundbreaking Scienceof Networks. New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Diamond, J. 1999. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Dorogovtsev, S.N., and J.F.F. Mendes. 2002. Evolution of networks. Ad-vances in Physics 51(4): 1079Ð1187.Dorogovtsev, S.N., and J.F.F. Mendes. 2003. Evolution of Networks: FromBiological Nets to the Internet and WWW. Oxford, England: OxfordUniversity Press.Huberman, B.A. 2001. The Laws of the Web: Patterns in the Ecology ofInformation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Jasny, B.R., and L.B. Ray. 2003. Life and the art of networks. Science301(5641): 1863.Koonin, E.V., Y.I. Wolf, and G.P. Karev. 2002. The structure of the proteinuniverse and genome evolution. Nature 420(6912): 218Ð223.Newman, M.E.J. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks.SIAM Review 45(2): 167Ð256.Ottino, J.M. 2004. Engineering complex systems. Nature 427(6973): 399.
Perez, C. 2002. Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dy-namics of Bubbles and Golden Ages. Cheltenham, England: EdwardElgar Publishers.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States(PNAS). 2004. Mapping Knowledge Domains. 101(Suppl.1).Rheingold, H. 2002. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge,Mass.: MA Basic Books.Strogatz, S. 2001. Exploring complex networks. Nature 410(6825): 268Ð276.Watts, D.J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Watts, D.J. 2004. The ÒnewÓ science of networks. Annual Review of Soci-ology 30(1): 243Ð270.Watts, D.J., and S. Strogatz. 1998. Collective dynamics of Òsmall-worldÓnetworks. Nature 393(6684): 440Ð442.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.193Networks and the MilitaryAs the Army, in fact all of the services, the Joint Staff,and the Department of Defense (DOD) look to the future, a
new vocabulary dominates the planning as well as the strate-
gic and tactical direction of the entire military process: Doc-
trine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership/Educa-
tion, Personnel, and Facilities. ÒInformation dominance and
superiority,Ó Ònet-centricity,Ó Ònetwork-centric warfare,Ó
and Ònetwork-centric operationsÓ are frequently used terms
that have become part of the lexicon associated with trans-
formation to a future military force.NETWORKS AND THE ARMYFrom its earliest days, the Army has moved through doc-trine, training, and equipping the forces relying on some form
of networked communications. For the most part this was an
Army Signal Corps function satisfied by switches, radios,
satellites, and cable. Army leadership wanted to be sure it
could talk to whomever it needed and left decisions about
the network to technically competent Òcommunicators.ÓThis paradigm has shifted dramatically. Leaders of allmilitary services and DOD have become aware that a suc-
cessful doctrine for warfare in the Information Age demands
that they engage network issues at many different levels.
Force transformation is seen to depend on the development
of a coherent system of interacting networks using rapidly
evolving enabling technologies.The ability of joint and coalition units to integrate andmaintain ÒconnectionÓ has been essential to operations in
Iraq and Afghanistan. Joint Network Nodes (JNN) allow for
direct connectivity between warfighters of different services
and the Global Information Grid (GIG), thus enabling Army
brigade and battalion units to stay connected to the Joint
Task Force (JTF) in support of their mission. Blue Force
Tracker (BFT), which allows warfighters on the ground to
answer the questions Where am I? Where are my buddies?
was a great success in Iraq. JNN and BFT were rapidly fol-
lowed to the Afghanistan and Iraq battlefields by Joint Com-bat Identification (JCI) systems, improvised explosive de-vice (IED) countermeasure systems, artillery locating sys-
tems, persistent surveillance and dissemination systems,
mine detection systems, and long-range scout surveillance
capabilities (day/night and all-weather), all coming together
to provide what the Army calls Òbattle command on the

move.ÓOne only has to examine the key suite of technologies forcommand, control, communications, computers, intelli-
gence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systemsÑC4ISR
systemsÑto realize that none of the systems can be effective
standing alone. To win the battles of the future, the integra-
tion and networking of C4ISR systems is essential, from con-
cept development to combat in the field.At the same time as these C4ISR technologies and sys-tems provide a manifold improvement in combat capabili-
ties they provide a manifold problem of complexity. None of
the systems stands alone on the battlefield. Most C4ISR sys-
tems were developed in separate ÒstovepipeÓ programs by
hard-working, imaginative, and productive engineering

teams; yet all must interoperate to varying degrees. Further
complicating the issue will be adapting the highly central-
ized and hierarchical command structures of the Army (and
other service forces) and accommodating both old and new
generations of technology. Particularly vexing, for example,
will be requirements to network unmanned vehicles, includ-
ing remote sensors and weaponry, while keeping responsible
and accountable human beings in the loop.NETWORK-CENTRIC WARFARE AND NETWORK-CENTRIC OPERATIONSThe leadership of DOD has believed for some time thatglobal communications technology, epitomized by the
Internet and the World Wide Web, will fundamentally trans-
form the conduct of war in the 21st century just as airpower
transformed it between World Wars I and II. This belief is
embedded in two strategic assumptions of profound signifi-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20NETWORK SCIENCEcance to the Army. First, that better situational awarenessand communication in combat situations will result in higher
combat effectiveness. This implies facile and high-band-
width communications between elements of all the services
in combat operations as well as shared information in a com-
mon format. Second, it is assumed that better situational
awareness will make forces more mobile by virtue of allow-
ing heavy armor to be replaced by agility. These assump-
tions underlie the notion of a transformation of U.S. military
forces by bringing them from the Industrial Age into the
Information Age. They are captured in the strategic concept
of network-centric warfare (NCW), which has four main te-
nets (Garstka and Alberts, 2004):¥A robustly networked force improves informationsharing and collaboration.¥Such sharing and collaboration enhance the quality ofinformation and shared situational awareness.¥This enhancement, in turn, enables further self-
synchronization and improves the sustainability and
speed of command.¥The combination dramatically increases missioneffectiveness.In DOD today, the network is seen as perhaps the mostpotent aspect of this change. It captures the essence of the
ongoing transformation and is a central element in improv-
ing combat effectiveness. According to LTG Steve Boutelle,
U.S. Army Chief Information Officer, the Secretary of De-
fense has said that the single most transforming thing in our
force will not be a weapons system, but a set of interconnec-
tions (Military Information Technology, 2003). Thus, early
in its deliberations the committee developedFinding 3-1.DOD and all the military services have a vision
of the future in which networks play a fundamental role.Definition and implementation of the concept of NCW isthe goal of the DOD Office of Force Transformation (OFT).
Information about the initiative may be found on the OFT
Web site,1 where the concept is described as Òan emergingtheory of war in the Information AgeÓ that Òbroadly de-
scribes the combination of strategies, emerging tactics, tech-
niques, and procedures, and organizations that a networked
force can employ to create a decisive war fighting advan-
tage.Ó It is said to have Òapplicability for the three levels of
warfareÑstrategic, operational, and tacticalÑand across the
full range of military operations from major combat opera-
tions to stability and peacekeeping operations.Ó But the devil
is in the details. Defining and implementing the concept has
proven to be a huge challenge.As DOD has worked to come to grips with the definitionof NCW, the concept has evolved into a more encompassingnotion, Ònetwork-centric operationsÓ (NCO). The latter is
also described on the OFT Web site.2 NCO is based on re-vised tenets that are designed so that the hypotheses underly-
ing them can be tested experimentally based on field data
acquired in case studies. Relative to the tenets of NCW, the
tenets of NCO emphasize the use of shared information by
social networks. This evolution is documented in NetworkCentric Operations Conceptual Framework Version 2.0
(Garstka and Alberts, 2004) posted on the Web site, which
contains the most current definitions of both NCW and NCO.NCW encompasses three domains of activity: physical,information, and cognitive. NCO adds a fourth, the social
domain, and in addition emphasizes policies and procedures
in the cognitive and social domains that lead to effective use
of the information provided by the physical and information
domains (Garstka and Alberts, 2004).Finding 3-2.DOD has recognized the value of cognitive
and social domains in NCO.ÒThe physical domain is where strike, protect and maneu-ver take place across the environments of sea, air and space.
It is where the physical infrastructure that supports force el-
ements exists. The key elements of the physical domain are
(1) the network and (2) net-ready nodesÓ (Garstka and
Alberts, 2004, p. 49). ÒThe information domain is where in-
formation is created, manipulated, value-added and shared.
It can be considered the ÔcyberspaceÕ of military operations.
The key elements of the information domain are (1) data and
(2) informationÓ (Garstka and Alberts, 2004, p. 49).ÒThe cognitive domain is where the perceptions, aware-ness, understanding, decisions, beliefs, and values of the
participants are locatedÓ (Garstka and Alberts, 2004, p. 23).
A key process in this domain is Òsensemaking,Ó which re-
quires the participants to construct effective mental models
of a situation in which they find themselves. The military
has formulated a model of how sensemaking occurs and how
it can be influenced by information technology (Gartska and
Alberts, 2004, pp. 29Ð37).Finally, Òthe social domain is where people, organiza-tions, practices and cultures intersectÓ (Garstka and Alberts,
2004, p. 26). Conceptual Framework Version 2.0 identifiesthe attributes of networked structures and cultures, of net-
work-centric people, and of how they collaborate, heavily
emphasizing the dependence of combat effectiveness on per-
formance in the cognitive and social domains.Finding 3-3.Current DOD investments in network
research include no activity in the cognitive and social
dimensions of NCO, specifically in the vital area of deci-
sion making in an information-rich environment.1At http://www.oft.osd.mil. Accessed September 1, 2005.2At http://www.oft.osd.mil/initiatives/ncw/ncw.cfm. Accessed Septem-ber 1, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND THE MILITARY21BOX 3-1Case Studies in Net-centric OperationsThe Office of Force Transformation commissioned a series of case studies to evaluate the value of network-centric operations. In one studyÑU.S./U.K. Coalition Combat Operations during Operation Iraqi FreedomÑan attempt was made to judge the value-added for the Force XXI Battle CommandBrigade and Below (FCBC2)/Blue Force Tracker (BFT) system used in conjunction with existing C4 capabilities.The final analysis of the case study noted the following four points:¥FBCB2/BFT improved coalition operations, although in a somewhat limited way, by giving coalition units situational awareness of one another.¥The limited deployment, training, usage, and operation of FBCB2/BFT with the U.K. units constrained its contribution to overall situationalawareness.¥The perception that U.S. forces did not use FBCB2/BFT in interfacing with U.K. forces discouraged subsequent use of the system betweencoalition forces.¥Anecdotally, the greater benefits appeared to be at the operational and strategic levels of command, where blue force feeds from multiple sourceswere aggregated to provide a coalition common operational picture (COP).Specific combat actions extracted from the case study provide a clear view of the conclusions of the analysis:1At one objective when the U.S. forces were attempting to secure a bridge on the River Euphrates, 1 Brigade Combat Team (BCT) wasto secure the bridgehead to allow 2 BCT to be the breakout force. When forward elements of 1 BCT were reaching the objective the plan wasthat lead elements of 2 BCT should be four hours behind them. It should be noted that the formations were out of radio contact. In fact,elements of 2 BCT were up to eighteen hours behind according to the time and space calculations made by units of 1 BCT based on thesituational awareness afforded by FBCB2/BFT. Hence, the assault on the objective became a hasty defense until such time as the operationcould be conducted. This demonstrates the utility of FBCB2/BFT to allow a unit to synchronize its actions with the operational context andconform to the collective scheme of maneuver. Furthermore it demonstrates how the 1 BCT commander was provided time to consider newcourses of action.Interviews with personnel from 1 (UK) Armored Division highlighted that planning that had been undertaken prior to crossing the lineof departure regarding the use of FBCB2/BFT had not resulted in the system being used as agreed between unit commanders
....Apparently,when the U.S. forces were engaged by Iraqi forces south-west of Baghdad, the system was disregarded and the relief in place conductedthrough the more familiar use of liaison officers on the ground.In both of these extracted vignettes we see that the focus is solely on the relay of information. Thus, the network is nothing more than a network oflinked communications devices. Granted that provides a commander with increased situational awareness; but, despite that increased situational aware-ness, the commander does not derive a new approach to warfare. For example, the 1 BCT commander conducted a hasty defense, which is exactly whathe would have done when faced with the delay of 2 BCT. While it could be argued that increased use and familiarity with the FBCB2/BFT system wouldhave resulted in greater reliance on the system, it is noteworthy that the forces portrayed in the second vignette resort to direct human contact with liaisonofficers.The fourth point of the analysisÑthat the systemÕs greatest benefit may be at operational and strategic levelsÑis particularly revealing. It suggestsa return to a more traditional perspective, when an overall commander could assume an overview of the battlefield from a nearby hillside. (This impliesthat the scope of the battle may be more geographically distributed in modern warfare, but there are no new elements to the mission of defeating theopposing force.)A similar case study was conducted in which U.S. Air Force war games were evaluated to examine the difference in the kill ratios of fighter planesequipped with voice-only communications and those with link-16 data communication capabilities. The study demonstrated that aircraft sharing thegreater amount of informationÑlink 16Ñhad kill ratios more than twice those of aircraft that were equipped voice only. The significance of this findingis that the metric used is not something derived from a new theory of warfare; kill ratios are as old as warfare itself.SOURCE: Adapted from Garstka and Alberts (2004).1Garstka and Alberts, 2004, p. 5-5.The value of NCW is said to be greatest at the intersec-tion of the four domains. Analysis of recent military opera-
tions in Iraq and Afghanistan suggests, however, that only
the information domain is represented (OFT, 2005). Box 3-1
contains observations from an analysis of two of a numberof case studies commissioned by OFT to evaluate the valueof NCO. What seems clear from battlefield reports and analy-
ses is that the present systems used by the Army and other
services need to be improved and integrated into a solution
encompassing the physical, cognitive, and social domains,Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22NETWORK SCIENCEas well as the information domain. This is an elusive objec-tive that involves both near- and far-term efforts in network
research, and includes efforts that go beyond research per se.Finding 3-4.Current DOD investments in network
science and technology are almost exclusively in the
information domain of NCO.CHALLENGESUpon assuming his post, the Secretary of the Army fo-cused on issues of immediate concern to the Army: ÒA net-
work-centric capable force is one that is robustly networked
[and] fully interoperable and shares information and collabo-

rates by means of a communications and information infra-
structure that is global, secure, real time, reliable, Internet-
based, and user-driven.Ó3 This vision of NCO cannot bedelivered with the knowledge or technology available today.Challenges associated with present-day military informa-tion networks can be found at the tactical, operational, and
strategic levels (Garstka and Alberts, 2004). They include
the following:¥Lack of overall integrating architectures and systemsengineering for enterprise networks;¥Inadequately trained, educated, and certified person-nel and network users;¥Network management and lack of joint network con-figuration management;¥Network security and information assurance;¥Requirements to model, simulate, and test large net-works before deployment;¥Fusion of multiple sensors and sensor types across thenetwork for real-time decision making;¥Design of individual service networks and synthesiswith the DOD GIG;¥Understanding the relationship between network struc-ture and complexity and its impact on organizational
design and individual and unit behaviors; and¥Energy-efficient electronics to reduce soldier loads and
simplify logistics support.These challenges cannot be met with current technologyalone. While significant resources have been expended to
develop network-centric capabilities, most of the improve-
ments are based on existing technology rather than on new
results from network research. Even today, given all the re-
sources that have been devoted to creating a networked force,
there are no scientifically based guidelines for either the
specification of the infrastructure needed or its design.Bandwidth availability is often cited as the central issue.During Operation Iraqi Freedom, only the strategic level was
truly bandwidth-enabled. It is possible that network research
would lead not merely to advances in bandwidth utilization
but also to efficient applications that would better support
the networked force at the operational and tactical (war-
fighter) levels of combat. DOD is projected to spend $30
billion to $50 billion over a relatively short time frame to
transform and develop a network-centric force. It is possible
that benefits could be realized faster and at lower cost with
appropriate research in key areas.Planning and experimentation for NCO focuses on rela-tively narrow scenarios taken from past war experience and
fails to reflect the reality of determined 21st century adver-
saries. Present-day information technologies on which mili-
tary networks depend are extremely vulnerable to attack and
manipulation. More importantly, by limiting the focus of
NCO to the physical, information, cognitive, and social do-
mains, technologies based on networks in non-C4ISR do-
mains likely to be of importance in the future are being over-
looked.Finding 3-5.Although no specific biological domain is
identified for emphasis in NCO, the Army is responsible
for critical defense operations in this domain that involve
multiple interacting networks.A military operation consists of a myriad of activitiesoccurring in sequence and parallel, with each activity associ-
ated with one or more networks that bear on the outcome. A
biological attack on the United States, perhaps the Òmother
of all nightmares,Ó is an extreme but excellent example. The
multiplicity of networks involved in such a real-world con-
tingency illustrates the ArmyÕs central role, as well as the
wide applicability of benefits likely to ensue from invest-
ments in network research. Box 3-2 describes how Army
units, not necessarily girded for combat, would be required
to lead the nation in reacting to a biological attack. Such an
attack would provide a true test of the effectiveness of net-
centric operational principles.OPTIMIZING WARFIGHTING ORGANIZATIONSA number of times in history, the deployment of newweapons (from cannons to armored tanks to nuclear bombs)
has conferred a decisive military advantage. But at other
times, the most important military advantages have come
not from new weapons but from new ways of organizing
fighting forces. The Greek phalanx, the armored cavalry
squadron, and a unit of action such as the modular brigade
are all examples of military organizations that, when they
were first used, conferred decisive military advantages. To-
day, the dramatically reduced costs of communication al-
lowed by new information technologies are making it pos-
sible to organize military forces in very different ways. This3S.W. Boutelle, chief information officer, Department of the Army, ÒRe-marks by the Honorable Francis J. Harvey, Secretary of the Army, Decem-ber, 2004, as quoted in Slide 5: The Way Ahead,Ó briefing to the committeeFebruary 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND THE MILITARY23BOX 3-2Dependence of Army Operations on Networks: An ExampleWhereas the Future Combat System emphasizes physical networks, future Army operations will actually depend on many other types of networks.Figure 3-2-1 shows a highly simplified version of specific networks that might be involved in the response to a biological attack against the United States.The national response quickly diverges into civilian and military chains. On the civilian side, the first task is to identify the causative agentÑa procedureinvolving biological networks. The public health response then relies on various types of social networks to track the disease and control its spread, aswell as prepare for a potential follow-on attack.On the military side, the response is shown across the staff areas used by the military. (The ÒJÓÑfor JointÑnumbers are standard military designa-tors for the respective staff areas of responsibility shown.) The schematic illustrates how in future Army operations all the network types described in Table2-1Ñphysical, social, and biologicalÑwould be involved. For this simplified schematic, only two network types per staff area are shown. Clearly, as withthe civilian response discussed above, each task would be supported by many subtasks, most relying on various additional network types.To illustrate the potential power of networks in combat operations, Figure 3-2-1 draws on some futuristic concepts. For example, under J-3 Opera-tions, note the use of Òcommunity networks,Ó derived from biology. This example is drawn from theoretical work currently being pursued by numerousresearchers on the adaptation of animal behavior algorithms to support autonomous swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Using algorithms fromflocking/swarming behavior and ant path determination, a flock of UAVs could be launched on a mission. If some of them were destroyed en route, theflock could self-organize and re-form to continue the mission.In the case of J-5 Strategic Plans and Policy, there is the suggested use of Òecological networks,Ó also derived from biology. In this instance, onecould envision the use of information taken from our understanding of ecology to develop plans and policy for warfighting in areas where we have littlespecific knowledge of the terrain or environment. Knowledge about how networks influence the terrain or environment could improve war planning.Similarly, knowledge about group-forming networks could speed the establishment of coalitions needed for coalition campaigns. It is evident that whilenot necessarily even realizing it, the military draws on networks and network theories that have been developed in various fields. A fuller understandingof these underlying fields thus holds considerable potential.Telecommun-icationsInfrastructureBiological Attack Against the United StatesTreatmentContactTracingCivilian ResponseMilitary ResponseIdentification ofAgentGeneExpressionNetworksPersonnel(J-1)SocialServicesNetworksAffiliation/AcquaintanceNetworksPublicEducationInformationExchangeNetworksBroadcast NetworksBiologicalNetworksSocial NetworksPhysical NetworksIntelligence(J-2)Operations(J-3)Logistics(J-4)Strategic Plans and Policy(J-5)Communications(J-6)Social Services NetworksInformation ExchangeNetworksAffiliation/ Acquaintance NetworksDisease Transmitting NetworksBroadcast NetworksCommunity NetworksSupply Chains and Business NetworksTransportationNetworksEcological NetworksGroup- Forming NetworksDODGlobal Information GridKey:FIGURE 3-2-1Representative activities and networks involved in responses to a bioterrorist attack.
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24NETWORK SCIENCETABLE 3-1Network Research Areas
PriorityTimeCommercialfor Army
Research AreaKey ObjectiveFrameInterestInvestment
Modeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping veryPractical deployment tool setsMid termHighHigh
large networksCommand and control of joint/combined networkedNetworked properties of connected heterogeneousMid termMediumHigh
forcessystems
Impact of network structure on organizationalDynamics of networked organizational behaviorMid termMediumHigh
behaviorSecurity and information assurance of networksProperties of networks that enhance survivalNear termHighHigh

Relationship of network structure to scalability andCharacteristics of robust or dominant networksMid termMediumMedium
reliabilityManaging network complexityProperties of networks that promote simplicity andNear termHighHigh
connectivityImproving shared situational awareness ofSelf-synchronization of networksMid termMediumHigh
networked elementsEnhanced network-centric mission effectivenessIndividual and organizational training designsFar termMediumMedium

Advanced network-based sensor fusionImpact of control systems theoryMid termHighMedium

Hunter-prey relationshipsAlgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsMid termLowHigh

Swarming behaviorSelf-organizing UAV/UGV; self-healingMid termLowMedium

Metabolic and gene expression networksSoldier performance enhancementNear termMediumMedium
possibility already has been realized in the concept ofÒnetwarÓ (Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001).Twenty-first century communications technology makesit possible for every battlefield element to be connected with
every other battlefield element, including individual war-
fighters, sensors and weapons, and vehicles and aircraft,
manned and unmanned. Such connectivity has been shown
to enable real-time situational awareness and a common op-
erational picture of the battlefield. These and other connec-
tions to such things as remote artillery or an aerial weapons
platform, greatly extend the capabilities of the individual
warfighter.But increased situational awareness alone is likely to beof limited value if nothing else changes in the military com-
mand and control structure. For instance, soldiers who are
aware of their situation but unable to make decisions using
that information are unlikely to be much more effective than
soldiers without such situational awareness. On the other
hand, the vastly increased amount of battlefield information
that is now potentially shareable makes possible radically
new forms of organization such as loose networks of highly
autonomous soldiers who swarm over promising targets
without any centralized authority telling them to do so
(Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001).Finding 3-6.With the increasing importance of terrorist
networks, information warfare, and other unconven-
tional means of combat, the decisive advantages in 21st
century wars may arise not from superior weapons but
from superior ways of organizing warfighters.Developing such new organizational concepts, however,requires more than incremental improvements to existing
military doctrine. It demands substantial creativity and in-
vention, applied in this case not to creating new physical
devices but rather to new organizational forms. And this in-
vention is greatly helped by a rigorous understanding of or-
ganizational possibilities in other kinds of systemsÑfor ex-
ample, businesses, social networks, and biological systems
(Malone et al., 2003; Malone, 2004; Olson et al., 2001).NETWORK RESEARCH OF SPECIAL INTERESTTO THE MILITARYTable 3-1 summarizes major challenges identified by boththe Army and the committee during the course of its study. It
lists research areas and objectives in all categories of mili-
tary operations and highlights the broad potential of network
research to support C4ISR and other advances and develop-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORKS AND THE MILITARY25ments of interest to the Army and DOD. The time frame forrealization, the likely degree of commercial interest, and the
value to the Army (priority) of the challenges reflect the
knowledge and estimates of the committee at the time of the
study. The time frames are for the basic research activities in
network science necessary to produce actionable technology
investment options and are not for completion of technologi-
cal implementations.Finding 3-7.There are many challenges associated with
implementing NCO in the Army that can be identified,
classified, and prioritized to create an investment strat-
egy for network science.The transformation of the Army and other services intoan effective network-centric force requires disciplined study
and research in practically all areas involving networks. To-
day, there is no coherent discipline for the study of networks.
A well-defined science of networks would provide a much
more efficient path to a fully capable network-centric force.Finding 3-8.To exploit the full potential of networks, a
viable science of networks is required.REFERENCESArquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The Future ofTerror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2004. Network Centric Operations ConceptualFramework Version 2.0. Vienna, Va.: Evidence Based Research, Inc..Malone, T.W. 2004. Network the Future of Work: How the New Order ofBusiness Will Shape Your Organization, Your Management Style and
Your Life. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.Malone, T.W., R.J. Laubacher, and M.S. Morton, eds. 2003. Inventing theOrganizations of the 21st Century. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Military Information Technology Online Edition. 2003. Interview withMajor General Steven W. Boutelle. Available at http://www.military-information-technology.com/article.cfm?DocID=33. Accessed June 21,
2005.Office of Force Transformation (OFT). 2005. The Implementation of Net-work Centric Warfare. Document 387. Available at http://www.oft.
osd.mil/initiatives/ncw/ncw.cfm. Accessed June 21, 2005.Olson, G.M., T.W. Malone, and J.B. Smith, eds. 2001. Coordination Theoryand Collaboration Technology. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264The Definition and Promise of Network ScienceIn preceding chapters the committee demonstrated the im-portance of networks to society in general and the Army in
particular. It documented that there is interest in research on
the properties of networks in any number of civilian and
military applications. The committee also established that a
pressing national demand exists for Òthe creation of a new
field of investigation called network science to advance
knowledge of complex systems and processes that exhibit
network behavior,Ó as expressed in the statement of task. In
this chapter it addresses the question of how network science
should be defined and positioned.WHAT IS NETWORK SCIENCE?The first item in the statement of task (Box 1-2) asks howthe new field of investigation called network science envi-
sioned by the committee should be defined. The committeeÕs
research into this seemingly simple question created a sur-
prisingly complex response.Logically, the notion of network science is straightfor-ward. It is the organized knowledge of networks based on
their study using the scientific method. This notion is imme-
diately valuable in that it distinguishes science from technol-
ogy. Throughout human history technology often evolved
far earlier than the scientific knowledge on which it is based.
A classic example is the creation of advanced technologies
for the production of metal tools and weapons far in advance
of the science of metallurgy.This is the case today for networks. Although the tech-nologies underlying the design, construction, and operation
of the global physical communications, information, and dis-
tribution networks described earlier are quite advanced, the
underlying scientific knowledge has remained rather rudi-
mentary, according to the experts and literature surveyed by
the committee. Developing the metallurgy analogy further,
the current state of knowledge about physical communica-
tion and information networks is similar to the knowledge of
metallurgy for weapons and tools in 16th century Europe(Diamond, 1999). Quite sophisticated steel swords and, ulti-mately, guns were made by entirely empirical processes for
creating and forming the steel, without knowing anything
about atomic structure, grain boundaries, or the influence of
processing on grain boundaries and dislocations. The devel-
opment of atomic-level metallurgy in the 20th century en-
abled a quantum leap in the engineering of lightweight, high-
strength materials (e.g., for turbine blades and aircraft).
However, the weapons created using the empirical technol-
ogy of the 16th through 19th centuries enabled Europeans to
conquer the world during that period, just as modern com-
munications and information technology can and will trans-
form the battlefields of the 21st century. The components of
modern communication and information networks are the
result of technologies based on fundamental knowledge ema-
nating from physics, chemistry, and materials science. Their
assembly into networks, however, is based largely on em-
pirical knowledge rather than on a deep understanding of the
principles of network behaviors gained from an underlying
science of networks.In this report the committee examines the state of funda-mental knowledge emanating from research on the science
of networks rather than the state of empirical knowledge
emanating from research on the technologies that go into the
construction of physical networks. This is a profound and
fundamental distinction that must be appreciated to under-
stand the report. Its flavor may be illustrated by contrasting
the concepts of discovery and invention. In a scientific study
pursuing new fundamental knowledge, discoveries are made
about how the objects of study behave. For example, in the
study of the complex three-dimensional network formed by
magnetic atoms in solid atomic lattices, the emergent behav-
ior of phase transitions to various ordered states was discov-
ered experimentally and predicted by sophisticated analyses
of network models that describe the interactions between the
spins on nearby lattice sites (Binney et al., 1992). This is a
discovery in the science of networks that illustrates what
sorts of network structures and dynamics are required to pre-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DEFINITION AND PROMISE OF NETWORK SCIENCE27dict such behaviors. Contrast this to the invention of the pro-tocol stacks used in the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)
and Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/
IP) reference models for the Internet (Tanenbaum, 2003).
These models were invented to produce reliable connections
between computers under some assumed conditions. They
work when these conditions are satisfied but are not neces-
sarily suitable for substantially different network structures
like those needed for interplanetary communications (Jack-
son, 2005). They do not address such issues as whether there
exist conditions under which the networks on which they run
might exhibit emergent behaviors, i.e., behaviors not pre-
dictable from the known behaviors of their components. This
report is devoted to an assessment of the current state and
future prospects of scientific discoveries about networks
rather than of the improvement of the technologies of the
components of physical networks or the invention of meth-
odologies for integrating these components into networks to
solve specific problems.The fact that network science is logically conceivabledoes not imply, however, that the concept has been realized
in practice. The term Ònetwork scienceÓ evokes dramatically
different images in the minds of workers in different appli-
cations domains. The communications engineer envisages
the knowledge needed to design a complex communications
network like the Internet or the telephone system. The soci-
ologist thinks of networks of influence, like boards of direc-
tors or certain social organizations. The business person vi-
sualizes the study of informal human networks that enable
firms to function, like supply networks and influence net-
works within large organizations. The physicist thinks of the
theory of complex systems, focusing on how order emerges
from the apparently random interactions between the nodes
through phase transitions or self-organization. The power
engineer envisages the knowledge underlying the design and
control of the electric power grid. The cell biologist contem-
plates models of genetic and metabolic networks that enable
cell function. And so it goes.The committee addressed this situation by conducting twoinquiries. First, it inquired whether there was a body of
knowledge widely thought of as being the content of net-
work science that was taught in universities. The results of
this inquiry are reported in Chapter 5 and Appendix C. Sec-
ond, it asked the practitioners of various applications of net-
works about their notions of network science. The results of
this second inquiry are reported in Chapter 6 and Appendix
D. What the committee discovered was that practitioners in
each major applications area had their own local nomencla-
tures to describe network models of the phenomena in which
they were interested and their own notions of the content of
network science. These notions overlap, but are not identical.Finding 4-1.Today there is no encompassing science of
networks reflected in the practices and perceptions
ofpractitioners of network research and development.
That is, the committeeÕs research validated the implica-tion in the statement of task that such a Ònew field of inves-
tigationÓ has yet to be codified. The committeeÕs point of
view is that the operational definition of network science is
what the community of researchers who view themselves as
working in this field of investigation actually do. Because a
coherent community does not exist across the various appli-
cations areas, an opportunity exists for the Army to nucleate
such a field by its leadership and funding policies. This op-
portunity is real rather than virtual because a modest consen-
sus exists among network researchers as to what a core Ònet-
work scienceÓ might encompass. The committee developed
the substance of this consensus in Chapters 5 and 6. Network
science will evolve into whatever its practitioners create.
Those two chapters therefore describe the current state of
this rapidly evolving area of investigation.Finding 4-2.The notion of a science of networks is evolv-
ing, and there is limited understanding of its ultimate
scope and content.The communities from which network science is expectedto emerge encompass many disciplines and applications ar-
eas. Today these communities are characterized by a diver-
sity of nomenclature, models, and opinions about which as-
pects of the topic are most important. New terms and
concepts proliferate. Some are common across many fields
Ñfor example, across statistics, economics, sociology, and
biology. Others are found in only one or a few subfieldsÑ
for example, molecular biology, neurology, epidemiology,
and ecology, all within biology. Some are given different
labels in different fields while meaning essentially the same
thing. As documented in Chapter 5, there seems to be a wide-
spread realization that codifying a common nomenclature
and body of core knowledge would be useful, but this has
not yet occurred. This is why the task statementÕs concept of
a Ònew field of investigation called network scienceÓ is both
sensible and timely.Describing the communities of practice from which thescience might emerge does not suffice to provide an opera-
tional definition of network science. In addition we must
describe its scope and content. Given the rapid evolution of
research in this area, this must be done at a high level of
abstraction. The details will change significantly over time.The notion of a network is abstracted from the physical,biological, or social realities that are experimentally ob-
served. As discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, a network is de-
scribed by its structure (e.g., nodes and links), its dynamics
(the temporal attributes of nodes and links), and its behav-
iors (what the network ÒdoesÓ as a result of the interactions
among the nodes and links). Thus, a network is always a
representation or model of observable reality, not that reality
itself. This creates interesting questions about the unique-
ness of a specific network representation of a particular phe-
nomenonÑfor example, the network model of a metabolicNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28NETWORK SCIENCEprocess. It is difficult to establish that a successful networkmodel of a social or biological process is unique in the sense
that MaxwellÕs equations uniquely describe the propagation
of electromagnetic waves independent of the details of the
associated physical environment.The statement of task asks how a new field of investiga-tion called network science should be defined. Given the
evolving notion of a science of networks, any answer to this
question will be ephemeral, and the scope and content of
network science will evolve as its practitioners develop it.
Proposing a formal definition entails two additional risks.
First, since the various network application communities
perceive this topic in different ways, some of them are likely
to criticize, even reject, any definition offered. Second, in
light of this possibility, differences of opinion over the defi-
nition may become a rationale for discounting the contents
of this report. Nevertheless, in the spirit of providing the
Army with a framework for thinking about what network
science might become, the committee offers the following
tentative definition:Finding 4-3.Network science consists of the study of
network representations of physical, biological, and
social phenomena leading to predictive models of these
phenomena.By focusing on the development of models and propertiesof the underlying representations, this new area of scientific
investigation offers the promise of developing tools, tech-
niques, and models that apply to multiple applications areas.
It also offers the happy prospect of simplifying and codify-
ing a variety of nomenclatures and lexicons. Thus, one may
reasonably expect that creation of a field called network sci-
ence will not only provide a body of rigorous results that
improve the predictability of the engineering design of com-
plex networks, but also speed up basic research in a variety
of applications areas. (The defining characteristics of a net-
work and its behaviors are explored further in Chapter 6.)POSITIONING OF NETWORK SCIENCEScience tells us how the world operates, and technologygives us practical applications of the resulting insights. These
make their way into various sectors of society: into the medi-
cal tools, procedures, and remedies of our health-care sector,
into the products and services of our economy at large, into
the texts and classrooms of our educational centers, into the
laws and administration of our government, and into the
weapons and communications systems of our military. Paths
leading to military strength, health-care excellence, a trained
labor force and economic vibrancy all follow the flow from
science to technology to institutional forms and applications
in their plentiful variety.These paths all have beginnings and endings, with spe-cific tasks and characteristics at different points along theway. They begin in gestation, reach an inflection point andgrow rapidly, mature when their application is readily un-
derstood and widespread, then ultimately age and decline.
The quarters of a life cycle are gestation, growth, maturity,
and decline. They control not only biological life, but the
lives of nations and economies as well (Perez, 2002).We see this in a seed that sprouts, flowers, and dies; in aproduct that passes through research and development
(R&D) into the marketplace and then into every home; and
in an Army that pioneers systems that spread throughout the
military, then on into society at large, passing from the arcane
to ubiquity and, ultimately, to obsolescence. Ultimately, all
cycles are surpassed by another cycleÑbe it of organism,
product, or weapons systemÑthat is better adapted to the
extant surroundings. In this life cycle context, network

science is somewhere near the end of its gestation, poised for
takeoff and growth in the decade ahead.When new paradigms first appear, the scientific commu-nities that pertain have little or no social organization. In the
growth phase of their cycle, groups of collaborators and Òin-
visible collegesÓ characteristic of a more mature science de-
velop around their bodies of knowledge. Network science is
ready to complete this first phase but is not yet ready to enter
its growth stage. The Army can play a crucial role in facili-
tating the transition now.Indeed, truly surprising results might arise from a sys-tematic study of network science. For example, it is widely
held that a revised military paradigm is needed to address
evolving threats and opportunities associated with terrorism
at home and abroad. These threats arise from network be-
haviors, specifically the adaptation of social networks to the
increasing capabilities of communication and information
networks (Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001; Berkowitz, 2003).
This adaptive phenomenon has been observed over the cen-
turies. Typically, engineered networks designed with one set
of social behaviors in mind are, over time, exploited by dis-
ruptive elements (e.g., criminals and terrorists) for their own
purposes. This is a general historical pattern, examples of
which include disruption of commercial naval shipping by
pirates in the 18th century, train robberies in the 19th cen-
tury, airplane hijackings in the 20th century, and terrorism
and cybercrime in the 21st century, including the destruction
of the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001. Large
infrastructure networks evolve over time; society becomes
more dependent on their proper functioning; disruptive ele-
ments learn to exploit them; and society is faced with chal-
lenges, never envisaged initially, to the control and robust-
ness of these networks. Society responds by adapting the
network to the disruptive elements, but the adaptations gen-
erally are not totally satisfactory. This produces a demand
for better knowledge of the design and operation of both the
infrastructure networks themselves and the social networks
that exploit them. This demand cannot be met by existing
knowledge, because the circumstances that create it were not
anticipated when the networks were designed and built.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE DEFINITION AND PROMISE OF NETWORK SCIENCE29Finding 4-4.A gap exists between currently available
knowledge about networks and the knowledge required
to characterize, design, and operate the complex global
physical, information, biological, and social networks on
which the well-being of our citizens has come to depend.Closing this gap is an urgent matter, because society hasbecome dependent on the reliable, robust operation of com-
plex global communication, information, transportation,
power, and business networks. The disruption or exploita-
tion of these networks by adversarial social networks of ter-
rorists or criminals is a demonstrated threat, making an in-
vestment in network science not only strategically sound but
also politically urgent.Finding 4-5.Advances in network science can address
the threats of greatest importance to the nation’s security.In summary, the committee finds that although there isnot universal agreement on what network science is today,
there is an emerging consensus on what it can become to-
morrow. Moreover, there is a pressing demand for the fun-
damental knowledge that can be expected to emanate from
such a science. Thus, network science is positioned as anemerging new field of investigation at the beginning of itsgrowth curve and of compelling national interest and one
that the Army has a unique opportunity to nucleate. In Chap-
ters 5 and 6, the committee turns to an exposition of the
results of its research on the content, status, and challenges
of this emerging field. Then, in Chapter 7, it articulates how
the Army can create value by nucleating the new field and
supporting its growth.REFERENCESArquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The Future ofTerror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.Berkowitz, B. 2003. The New Face of War: How War Will Be Fought in the21st Century. New York, N.Y.: Free Press.Binney, J.J., N.J. Dowrick, A.J. Fisher, and M.E.J. Newman. 1992. TheTheory of Critical Phenomena. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.Diamond, J. 1999. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.New York, N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Jackson, J. 2005. The Interplantery Internet. IEEE Spectrum Online. Avail-able at http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/WEBONLY/publicfeature/aug05/0805inte.html. Accessed August 22, 2005.Perez, C. 2002. Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dy-namics of Bubbles and Golden Ages. Cheltenham, England: EdwardElgar Publishers.Tanenbaum, A.S. 2003. Computer Networks, 4th edition. Upper SaddleRiver, N.J.: Prentice Hall PTR.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.305The Content of Network ScienceIn this chapter, the committee determines topics forinclusion within the boundaries of network science and net-
work science research as a Ònew field of investigation.Ó The
chapter describes the activities conducted to help define
thescope and content of network science and presents the

committeeÕs factual findings.HOW DO WE KNOW?To arrive at a definition of network science and identifythe topics that it might encompass, the committee undertook
two activities. First, a team of committee members expert in
the domains of engineered, physical, biological, and social
networks reviewed available academic courses to determine
their topical contents. The common elements of the courses
were extracted and taken to be a provisional de facto specifi-
cation of the topics contained in the core science spanning
these diverse applications areas. The teamÕs proposal was
then circulated to selected academicians for suggestions and
refinement, and the results of this effort are collected in Ap-
pendix C.Second, the questionnaire described in Appendix D wascirculated to over 1,000 experts in applications areas perti-
nent to network science asking them for their definitions of
the term and their notions of appropriate topical content. The
results from the questionnaire, described in Chapter 6 and
Appendix D, confirmed the results of the first effort and as-
sisted the committee to elaborate a working definition of
network science (Finding 4-3).The results from both efforts further revealed that the termÒnetwork scienceÓ evoked different mental models in differ-
ent individuals and communities. What follows is an articu-
lation of the common elements of these mental models.CONTENTAs discussed in Chapter 4, network science means differ-ent things to different people. It does not exist today as acoherent field of investigation. The committee was chargedwith assessing whether turning it into a new field with this
name would be feasible and useful. One test of the utility of
doing so would be to examine the extent to which current
research on networks exhibits a core content that cuts across
the diverse applications areas.The questionnaire results discussed in Chapter 6 revealthat there are common elements in these diverse applications
that can help to create an operational definition of the field
pertinent to the committeeÕs statement of task. Specifically,
there seems to be widespread agreement that the common
core of network science is the study of complex systems
whose behavior and responses are determined by exchanges
and interactions between subsystems across a well-defined
(possibly dynamic) set of pathways. The central point is that
the behavior of a network is determined both by the path-
ways (structure) and by the exchanges and interactions (dy-
namics). Moreover the structure itself may be (and usually
is) dynamic. This is a flexible definition that allows flexible
interpretation in the various applications domains. It is elabo-
rated upon and extended in Chapter 6.A central outcome of the committeeÕs work is the realiza-tion that network ideas span an enormous range of disci-
plines and applications domains. As might be expected, re-
searchers in each domain have their own terminologies and
lexicons, so communication among them is not always
straightforward. There is a growing notion that these dia-
lects mask an underlying commonality, but the nature of this
commonality remains fluid.Finding 5-1.Network science is an emerging discipline
whose boundaries are evolving.For network science to be regarded as a science, it mustencompass core principles that can be taught to students.
These core principles, generally embedded in quantitative
models, should enable predictions of network behaviors
given the structure and dynamics of the network as inputs.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CONTENT OF NETWORK SCIENCE31These predictions must be testable experimentally so theycan either be verified or proven false. Moreover, the core
principles and their associated models and tests will need to
be captured in a core curriculum that can be communicated
to students. The committee found broad agreement among
experts in diverse applications domains on a set of core top-
ics that would need to be mastered to pursue a discipline
labeled as Ònetwork science.ÓFinding 5-2.There is broad agreement among experts
on topics necessary for inclusion as the core content of
network science.The specific topics included in the core content are de-scribed in Appendix C. The central notion is that a network
is described by its structure and dynamics, which combine to
provide a complete specification of its properties (including
functions and behaviors).The structure of a network is specified by indicating
which nodes are linked to which other nodes and whether
the links are unidirectional or bidirectional. From this infor-
mation a number of figures of merit characterizing the struc-
ture of the network can be determined. Textbooks and major
review articles have been written on this topic (Albert and
Barab⁄si, 2002; Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2003; Newman,
2003; Watts, 2004). The calculation of these figures of merit
for various classes of structural models for networks is a
staple of courses on networks and an essential core ingredi-
ent of network science.The specification of the dynamics of a network is lessstraightforward because the dynamics tend to be rather dif-
ferent in the various applications areas. One example is the
analysis of phase transitions in physical systemsÑfor ex-
ample, magnetic atoms in solids. Here the dynamics are
specified by the interactions between the spins of the mag-
netic atoms, which typically vary as a function of the dis-
tance between them (Binney et al., 1992). In chemistry and
biology, network models are used to describe sequences of
chemical reactions. The nodes are typically the reactants and
products, with the links being their chemical reactions. The
dynamics can be specified by logical models, by rate equa-
tions, or by stochastic models of individual reactions (Bower
and Bolouri, 2001). In sociology, the nodes are typically
people and the links are their interactions. The dynamics are
often specified by state models in which the state of one
person depends on the states of the other persons with whom
she/he interacts as well as on some internal predisposition,
often specified statistically (Watts, 2004). Thus, the model
dynamics that are introduced in a core course typically de-
pend on the classes of applications that the instructor has in
mind.The essence of network science is making testable pre-dictions about the properties of a network once its structure
and dynamics have been specified. A body of knowledge
about the standard models and tools for analyzing networkshas accumulated over time, as indicated in Appendix C. Be-cause these models and tools constitute knowledge that is
often reused in multiple applications areas, they are the re-
maining elements in the core content of network science.The core content of network science is basic science, cur-rently consisting of simplified models and of techniques that
are appropriate for the analysis of small networks that ex-
hibit low topological complexity in the terminology of Table
2-2. The analysis of network structure is more advanced than
that of network dynamics. If adequate structural data are
available, structure analysis techniques can be applied to

larger and more complex networks using available computer
tools. The outputs of model analyses in the core content are
insight and qualitative understanding, not engineering de-
sign.The specification of architecture and the design of thephysical type networks described in Tables 2-1 and 2-2 are
the province of engineering applications domains. The struc-
ture, dynamics, and function of the biological and social type
networks mentioned in the tables are the subjects of basic
research. The application of electromagnetic theory to the
design of the power grid affords a useful analogy. Even a
graduate physics course in electromagnetism is of little di-
rect use in designing the power grids noted in Tables 2-1 and
2-2. The material in the core content of network science is
analogous to that taught in graduate and undergraduate
courses in electromagnetism.Finding 5-3.Research contributing to the core content
of network science is basic research (6.1) in the DOD
classification scheme.When the demands on network science imposed by itsdesired applications are compared with the current state of
the knowledge about the science described in Appendix C, a
yawning gap appears. The applications require validated
theories that allow predicting the properties of global-scale
networks under stress conditions. Current knowledge con-
sists of simplified models and tools for analyzing relatively
small and simple networks. It seems clear to the committee
that substantial development of the core content of network
science is required for it to become adequate for its intended
applications.Finding 5-4.Significant investment in the development
of the core content of network science is required in order
to create adequate knowledge to meet current demands
for the characterization, analysis, design, and operation
of complex networks.The networks described in Chapter 2 tend to be both largeand complex. They are large if they have many interacting
components, typically millions or more for physical net-
works like the Internet, regional power grids, or transistors
on a chip. They are complex if their components exhibitNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32NETWORK SCIENCEknown behaviors, but our knowledge of these behaviors doesnot suffice to predict the behaviors of the network as a whole
(Boccara, 2004). Such complex networks are said to exhibit
emergent behavior if the behaviors of their components lead
to unanticipatedÑthat is, ÒemergentÓÑbehavior of the net-
work as a whole in the absence of a centralized controller
that creates this behavior by design. As an example, the net-
work of transistors on a computer chip is not normally re-
garded as exhibiting emergent behavior, whereas an ant
colony or the World Wide Web is (Boccara, 2004).It seems to be widely accepted that investment in basicresearch will be required to describe the behaviors of social
and biological networks. A similar call for investment in
basic research might appear counterintuitive for technologi-
cally advanced physical networks like the Internet or regional
power grids. A few moments of reflection reveals, however,
that these physical networks, too, exhibit emergent behav-
iors. The Internet is robust against expected noises but frag-
ile against unexpected ones, like computer viruses (Doyle et
al., 2005). Regional power grids fail infrequently but inevi-
tably, under circumstances not anticipated by grid designers
and not adequately dealt with by grid power control systems
(IEEE Spectrum, 2004). Contrary to the efforts and hopes of
the implementers of advanced technologies, the behaviors of
complex physical networks are not yet completely predict-
able. Moreover, spending to improve the technologies in
their components will not remedy this situation. Just like the
development of radar awaited the basic science of electro-
magnetism and that of nuclear weapons awaited the discov-
ery of nuclear fission, the ability to control the complex net-works in our lives awaits as yet unforeseen discoveries in thescience of networks.Because committees are notoriously inept at developingcurricula or specifying the research content of a science dis-
cipline, this committee makes no attempt to do either. It of-
fers the analysis given in Appendix C and discussed above
as a test of the proposition that network science be regarded
as a coherent area of investigation worthy of investment by
the Army. The committee believes that network science fully
passes this test.REFERENCESAlbert, R., and A.L. Barab⁄si. 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex net-works. Reviews of Modern Physics 74(1): 47Ð97.Binney, J.J., N.J. Dowrick, A.J. Fisher, and M.E.J. Newman. 1992. TheTheory of Critical Phenomena. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.Boccara, N. 2004. Modeling Complex Systems. New York, N.Y.: Springer.Bower, J.M., and H. Bolouri. 2001. Computational Modeling of Geneticand Biochemical Networks. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Dorogovtsev, S.N., and J.F.F. Mendes. 2003. Evolution of Networks: FromBiological Nets to the Internet and WWW. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.Doyle, J.C., D. Alderson, L. Lun, S. Low, M. Roughan, S. Schalunov, R.Tanaka, and W. Willinger. 2005. The ÒRobust yet FragileÓ Nature of the
Internet. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS)102(41): 14497Ð14502.IEEE Spectrum. 2004. The Unruly Power Grid. IEEE Spectrum August2004: 22Ð27.Newman, M.E.J. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks.SIAM Review 45(2): 167Ð256.Watts, D. 2004. The ÒnewÓ science of networks. Annual Review of Sociol-ogy 30(1): 243Ð270.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336Status and Challenges of Network ScienceAlthough no universal consensus exists in the researchcommunity that a field of investigation called network sci-
ence exists today, many researchers describe their work as
potentially related to such a field. Many techniques for de-
signing and analyzing networks exist in a variety of applica-
tion domains, as explored in Chapter 5. In this chapter, the
committee draws upon responses to a questionnaire to iden-
tify a suite of common characteristics and concerns that span
these domains. The questionnaire was circulated to active
researchers, identified from literature studies, recursive trac-
ing of collaborative ventures, conference attendance, mail-
ing lists, and interviews with the authors of recent books and
reviews. First, the committee describes the questionnaire
process and the respondents. Then it summarizes the respon-
dentsÕ assessments of the existence, nature, and challenges
of a possible field of network science. Further analysis and
discussion are provided in Appendix D.KEY MESSAGESFrom an analysis of over a thousand questionnaire re-sponses, the committee extracted four messages:¥There is no universal consensus among researchersthat an identifiable field of network science now ex-
ists, in part because there is no accepted definition of
what the discipline of network science might be.¥Analysis of the definitions put forth and the researchinterests of the respondents reveals a suite of input at-
tributes and output properties that could constitute a
common core of topics underlying network science.¥Researchers across diverse domains share an implicitunderstanding that a network is more than topology
alone. It also entails connectivity, resource exchange,
and locality of action.¥Of seven major challenges identified, the most criticalinvolve characterization of the dynamics and informa-
tion flow in networked systems; modeling, analysis,and acquisition of experimental data for extremelylarge networks; and rigorous tools for the design and
synthesis of robust, large-scale networks.QUESTIONNAIRE PROCESSThe questionnaire was developed through an iterative pro-cess, starting with an analysis of the statement of task. After
a beta-test phase, the final version of the questionnaire was
posted on the Web from December 20, 2004, to May 31,
2005. The complete text of the questionnaire is contained in
Appendix D. It asked for information about the respondents,
their work, and their views on Ònetwork scienceÓ as a field.
It also gave respondents the opportunity to provide as much
further information as they wished.The goal of the ensuing questionnaire invitation processwas to reach as large, diverse, and representative a sample of
the many relevant research communities as feasible within
the studyÕs resources. Overall, the findings that surfaced
from the responses and that are presented here are consistent
with views held by the committee members. This helped to
overcome concerns about the depth and breadth of coverage
or other limitations in the questionnaire process. Issues such
as reaching beyond the basic snowballing effect, detecting
hoax responses, and determining the degree of coverage of
the researcher community are discussed further in Ap-
pendixD.
THE RESPONDENTSFinding 6-1.Responses to the questionnaire show a

diverse and worldwide network research community
with shared concepts and concerns.Finding 6-2.The results of analyzing the questionnaire
responses are consistent across diverse subgroups of
respondents.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34NETWORK SCIENCEThe responding community is diverse in terms of bothgeographic distribution and the breadth of interests repre-
sented. Responses were received from 29 countries and from
39 states in the United States. Fourteen fields were selected
by at least 10 percent of the respondents, and, on average,
each respondent selected 3.6 fields. The findings presented
in this report do not depend significantly on the field of study
or the locale of the respondents but could be limited by the
fact that most of them (72 percent) are in the academic com-
munity. Further details are given in Appendix D.DISSENTING VOICESFinding 6-3.Seventy percent of the responses to the

questionnaire accept the idea that network science is a
definable field of investigation.The questionnaire analysis reveals a widespread but notuniversal consensus among the respondents that a definable
field of network science exists. When the reasons for saying
there is no such field as Ònetwork scienceÓ are analyzed,
they break down into five kinds of concern: the phrase has
no coherent definition; it is broad to the point of vacuity; it is
too early to define such a field; it is merely a new name for
already existing fields; or, defining such a field is the wrong
approach. In addition, respondents also indicated that the
field suffered from excessive hype. The distribution of these
responses is shown in Figure 6-1.Of the responses, 70 percent were affirmative to questionQ3a: ÒIs there an identifiable field of network science?Ó
Twenty-three percent of respondents answered no, and
7percent did not answer. These percentages show littledependence on the backgrounds of the respondents.The pervasiveness of dissenter concerns across the re-sponding communities reinforces the need for a clear defini-
tion of the field of network science, anchored in the ex-

pressed approaches of the researchers involved. It also
reinforces the idea that care must be taken not to overstate
what is achievable in such a field. More positively, articulat-
ing an explicit definition of the term Ònetwork scienceÓ may
address some of these concerns.DEFINING THE FIELDThe first question in considering a possible field of net-work science is this: What are its contents and scope? Ques-
tions 3a and 3b directly address this issue and provide em-
pirical data on the nature of network science as practiced by
current researchers. The responses to four other questions
proved highly relevant. Further analysis is presented in Ap-
pendix D.The committee structured its analysis in terms of two ba-sic questions: What are the defining attributes of a network?
What are the derived properties of interest? If these ques-tions have answers that are common across many applica-tion domains, then network science might be identified as
the insights, lexicon, measurements, theories, tools, and tech-
niques that allow one to map between desired output proper-
ties of a given network and its input attributes. Mapping is
needed in both directions: (1) determining the output proper-
ties that arise from specific input attributes and (2) determin-
ing the input attributes that could be designed into a new
network or achieved by intervention in an existing network
in order to realize particular output properties.If network science is to exist in a meaningful way, theseapproaches also must be effective over many application
domains, with well-understood techniques to apply general
tools, methods, and models to specific domains. As a hypo-
thetical example, one might envision a simulation tool that
deals with network models across a wide range of size scales
and timescales, with a growing suite of model libraries cus-
tomized to specific application domainsÑfor example, eco-
logical networks, metabolic networks, transportation net-
works, and so on.Attributes of a NetworkFinding 6-4.Analysis of the responses reveals three com-
mon attributes of networks: (1) they consist of nodes
connected by links, (2) nodes exchange resources across
the links, and (3) nodes only interact through direct linkage.Few responses captured all three attributes, but all threeappear consistently, either explicitly or implicitly (in more
domain-specific entries), across a wide range of subject
domains. The percentage of responses in which an attribute
was mentioned explicitly is indicated in Figure 6-2. For
brevity, these attributes are designated Òconnectivity,Ó
Òexchange,Ó and ÒlocalityÓ:¥Connectivity. A network has a well-defined connec-tion topology in which each discrete entity (ÒnodeÓ in
graph-theoretic terminology) has a finite number of
defined connections (ÒlinksÓ) to other nodes. In gen-
eral, these links are dynamic.¥Exchange. The connection topology exists in order toexchange one or more classes of resource among
nodes. Indeed, a link between two nodes exists if and
only if resources of significance to the network do-
main can be directly exchanged between them.¥Locality. The exchanged resource is delivered, and itseffects take place, only in local interactions (node to
link, link to node). This locality of interaction entails
autonomous agents acting on a locally available state.These attributes are discussed in more detail in Ap-pendixD.
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STATUS AND CHALLENGES OF NETWORK SCIENCE3505101520253035Wrong approachToo broadOther  field(s)EmergingUnclear, no coreFraction of ÒWhy NotÓ Responses Citing a Reason (%)FIGURE 6-1Reasons for saying there is no field of network science.
0102030405060LocalityExchangeConnectivityFraction of Responses to Question 3b Citing an Attribute (%)FIGURE 6-2Share of responses that mention an attribute.
Derived Properties of NetworksFinding 6-5. Respondents expressed a need for networkscience to provide tools that answer a common set of
questions across a broad range of applications.Thirty-three percent of the responses provided definitionsrelating to the output properties of networks. Analysis of the
proposed definitions identified six output properties that
spanned a wide range of application domains: characteriza-
tion, cost, efficiency, evolution, resilience, and scalability.
However, only 7 percent of the responses explicitly men-
tioned classes of tools to address the derivation of these prop-
erties. The most frequently mentioned were modeling, simu-lation, and optimization. These themes also appear in therespondentsÕ research challenges, discussed below.The responses that proposed driving applications for net-work science pointed to a highly disparate set of applica-
tions, generally tightly bound to five major communities of
research: technological, biological, social sciences, interdis-
ciplinary, and physical sciences and mathematics. The dis-
tribution of these responses is indicated in Figure 6-3.The analysis of the questionnaire responses also identi-fied three significant problem dimensions that account for
the difficulty of many associated challenges and of the
research effort required to address them: complexity, the
wide range of interacting scales, and network-to-network
interactions.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36NETWORK SCIENCEFuture Evolution of the Definition of Network ScienceNetworks and their associated research programs couldbe classified and analyzed based on any one of three descrip-
tive categories: input, output, or problem dimension. It is
also possible that the categories could become the basis for
more precise formal definitions of network science. The
questionnaire responses provide evidence that there is a rec-
ognizable, coherent common core to the research already
being done on network science, and that the scope of the
nascent field is both narrow enough to study and deep enough
010203040506070Physical sciences and mathInterdisciplinarySocialBiologicalTechnologicalFraction of Responses to Question 3c Citing an Application (%)FIGURE 6-3Responses identifying driving applications.
to capture concerns that recur across a diverse range of ap-plication domains.RESEARCH CHALLENGESFinding 6-6. Respondents identified seven major chal-

lenges requiring substantial future work (Figure 6-4).¥Dynamics, spatial location, and information propaga-tion in networks. Better understanding of the relation-DynamicsModelingDesignRigorCommonconceptsExperimentsRobustnessFIGURE 6-4Major research challenges.
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STATUS AND CHALLENGES OF NETWORK SCIENCE37ship between the architecture of a network and its func-tion is needed.¥Modeling and analysis of very large networks. Tools,abstractions, and approximations are needed that al-
low reasoning about large-scale networks, as well as
techniques for modeling networks characterized by
noisy and incomplete data.¥Design and synthesis of networks. Techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtain de-sired properties (such as the output properties dis-
cussed in the section ÒDerived Properties of Net-
worksÓ).¥Increasing the level of rigor and mathematical struc-ture. Many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the current state of the art in network science did
not have an appropriately rigorous mathematical basis.¥Abstracting common concepts across fields. The dis-parate disciplines need common concepts defined
across network science.¥Better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. Current data sets on large-scale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their struc-

ture and function are limited.¥Robustness and security of networks. Finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networked
systems that are both robust to variations in the com-
ponents (including localized failures) and secure
against hostile intent.THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE OF NETWORK SCIENCEThe questionnaire data were provided to Katy Bırner,associate professor of information science at Indiana Uni-
versity, for analysis of the visible social structure of research49966340InvitedCompleted QuestionsCollaborated784147188110FIGURE 6-5Relationships among invitees, respondents, and col-
laborators. SOURCE: Visualization prepared at the committeeÕsrequest by K. Bırner and W. Ke, InfoVisLab at Indiana University.FIGURE 6-6Network science researchers network. SOURCE: Visualization prepared at the committeeÕs request by K. Bırner and W. Ke
,InfoVisLab at Indiana University.Node colorOrange = not submittedBrown = submittedNode size (area)No. of times mentionedNode labelScholar IDLink colorOrange = collaborators
Green = invitedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38NETWORK SCIENCE1Katy Bırner, associate professor, Indiana University, ÒMapping theexpertise and social network of network science researchers,Ó briefing tothe committee on April 13, 2005.in network science. Her analysis considered the 1,241 uniquenames of network science researchers identified during the
course of the questionnaire and citation studies.1 Names werereplaced by unique identification numbers to preserve the
anonymity of the respondents. Relationships among the ini-
tial invitees, respondents, and identified collaborants are de-
picted in Figure 6-5.Figure 6-6 shows the major components (connectedgraphs of size greater than or equal to 10 nodes) of the re-
sulting network science researcher network (NSRN). The
Pajek shows exactly 630 of the 1,241 unique researchers and
their association with collaborations and invitations to com-
plete the questionnaire plot (Batagelj and Mrvar, 1997). Each
researcher is represented by a node. The nodes are color
coded to identify researchers who submitted (brown) or did
not submit (orange) questionnaires. The size of the circle
(node) reflects the number of times the researcher is men-
tioned by other researchers.The details of the visualization analysis are provided inBox D-1 of Appendix D. Upon reviewing the results of the
analysis, the committee agreed to include the following two
findings on the empirical state of the proposed field of net-
work science:Finding 6-7. Analysis of the social and collaborationnetworks of the respondents provides additional evidence
that network science is an emerging area of investigation.Finding 6-8. Analysis of the social and collaboration net-works of the respondents provides additional evidence of
the multidisciplinary nature of network science.REFERENCEBatagelj, V., and A. Mrvar. 1997. Pajek: Program Package for Large Net-work Analysis. University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. Available at http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/. Accessed August 18, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.397Creating Value from Network Science:Scope of the OpportunityIn earlier chapters the committee discussed the defini-tion, content, and research challenges of network science. In
this chapter it focuses on how investments in network sci-
ence can create value for the nation in general and for the
Army in particular.CREATING ECONOMIC VALUE FROM RESEARCHKNOWLEDGEInvestments in basic and applied researchÑthat is, inÒscienceÓÑcreate new knowledge. They also produce
trained research personnel, and they may generate intellec-
tual property (e.g., patents). They do not generate economic
value delivered directly to an end customer or user. Rather, a
long value chain of activities separates the creation of new
knowledge at the beginning of the chain from useful com-
mercial or military applications at the end of the chain (Duke,
2004). Therefore, knowing how the results of research might
be used is central to assessing the ultimate value the Army
can derive from supporting research in network science.The concept of real options analysis is helpful here(Amram and Kulatilaka, 1999; Boer, 2002; Mun, 2002).
Applying options analysis to research activities allows for
research to be viewed as creating the opportunity but not the
obligation (here is where the term ÒoptionÓ comes in) to use
the knowledge generated to create a final capability that a
customer, in this case the Army, is willing to pay a supplier
to create and deliver. These options can be valued using stan-
dard techniques of real options analysis (Mun, 2002).Many commercial firms plan their R&D investments us-ing this methodology (Boer, 1999). While the committee
does not pursue the full financial analysis discipline in this
report, the underlying concepts allow it to assess the scope
of opportunity available to the Army as it evaluates its in-
vestment alternatives for creating a new science of networks.
This assessment is presented below.SCENARIOS FOR VALUE CREATIONTo explore the opportunity for different kinds of optionsthat the Army might decide to create, the committee assumed
that the Army will make finite investments in research to
advance network-centric warfare (NCW) capabilities and
constructed three scenarios that represent fundamentally dif-
ferent levels of investment. After briefly describing these
three distinctly different scenarios, the committee presents
its findings about how the Army can create value by sup-
porting the development of network science. Since network
science does not now exist, the committee had to make some
assumptions about its future evolution in order to assess its
potential value. All three scenarios involve moving targets,
but the nature of these targets differs from one scenario to
another. The descriptions that follow provide a sense of the
direction dictated by each scenario and the choices available
to the Army. Details of the scenarios are provided in Appen-
dix E.Scenario 1, Building the BaseScenario 1 involves a modest level of funding (~$10 mil-lion per year) that fits into the ArmyÕs current scheme for 6.1
basic research. Small amounts of Army risk capital funds are
invested to create a knowledge and personnel base from
which it can attack the practical problems that arise when
trying to provide NCW capabilities. It is for this reason the
scenario is called Òbuilding the base.ÓBecause the anticipated investment is too small to fundsignificant interdisciplinary efforts, it should be focused on
leveraging existing research in areas related to network sci-
ence. As discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, the core of network
science is rapidly evolving, and Scenario 1 would help it to
crystallize.The committee envisions that the research efforts wouldbe located at major research universities. An important as-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40NETWORK SCIENCEpect of the program might be a once-a-year conference at anArmy laboratory or facility, where the principal investiga-
tors (PIs) would report on accomplishments during the year.
The program needs enlightened management to support in-
terdisciplinary work accomplished through the interaction
of a diversity of PIs. The essence of the program would be
the achievement of fundamental advances in network re-
search based on, among other things, statistical physics, ap-
plied mathematics, and the development of mathematical
models of social phenomena by generously funding only
exceptionally talented individuals who are collectively orga-
nized into a national network.Such a program would be the first to address the needs ofnetwork science per se. It would be devoted to the study of
networks as coherent entities characterized by their architec-
ture, structure, and dynamics. By deliberately adopting a
broad theoretical and methodological focus, the program
would encourage the creation of fundamentally novel ideas.
A wide diversity of approaches can be a key feature of long-
term success. Keeping the goals broad and flexible would
allow the Army to cultivate such diversity, whereas narrowly
defining the program would eliminate much of the creative
potential for breakthroughs and new ideas.The ArmyÕs needs are broad and fundamental in nature:It must learn how to approach the creation of a predictive
description of large, interacting, layered networks. A basic
science program is the first step toward building the critical
mass of talent needed to address specific Army problems in
this area. This modest approach would allow the Army to
identify the relevant research community and organize it so
that, in time, it could be called upon to address more specific
needs.The proposed approach differs from existing programs inagencies such as the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in that it focuses on
network science per se. While a significant amount of re-
search is taking place in communities addressing the appli-
cations of networks, almost none of this research is funded
by dedicated network science programs.As a consequence of its discussions with Army and DODrepresentatives, the committee has come to realize that the
fundamental problems underlying effective network-centric
operations (NCO) lie in the social domain. Yet how people
interact and utilize technology or make decisions based on
shared knowledge are areas almost unexplored in the ArmyÕs
current basic research portfolio. Applications to biology,
engineering, and the physical sciences are also essential to
Army applications, but the Army is already funding research
in these areas. The committee suggests that, on the margin,
the most significant problem is not how to build better satel-
lites, tanks, or medicines, but rather how to organize millions
of individuals to collect intelligence, deliver supplies, and
prosecute wars over an increasingly global and constantly
shifting geographical and political playing field (Garstka and
Alberts, 2004). This is a monumental problem that has not,however, traditionally been the province of science. Ratherit has been managed through a mixture of intuition, experi-
ence, and tradition. A significant fraction of the proposed
program should address this organizational problem the way
scientific problems are addressed: through a combination of
theoretical modeling, data analysis, and controlled experi-
mentation.In Scenario 1 (Appendix E) the committee indicatespromising research topics in four broad areas: network struc-
ture, network dynamics, network robustness and vulner-
ability, and network services. Each area has theoretical, em-
pirical, and experimental components. A basic research
investment in each of these areas of network science would
provide value for the Army. The committee also offers sug-
gestions for improving the return on investment by modest
changes in the way that basic research in network science is
managed.Scenario 2, Next-Generation R&DScenario 2 envisages applying best practices in industrialR&D management to the ArmyÕs investments in projects that
combine basic and applied network science. Specifically, the
committee expects the objective of these projects to be the
articulation of technology investment options that could be
exercised by the Army and its vendors to provide a desired
capability. The amount of this investment is envisaged to be
between $25 million and $100 million annually, roughly
$25million per project. There are expected to be investments

in the university community for the basic research and in
both Army in-house activities and commercial firms for the
applied research. The committee envisages, however, that
the R&D projects would be managed in a way profoundly
different from the way in which current Army in-house and
external centers are managed.The selection of projects to be funded would be marketdriven and controlled by a top-level Army team. It is ex-
pected that connections between the basic and applied por-
tions of the research will be much more intimate. Modern
Internet collaborative tools would be used to manage the day-
to-day work in rough analogy to the global design of indus-
trial products. The activities are managed in small, intimate
groups devoted to specific subprojects that are integrated into
the overall project in a looser networked fashion. People flow
from one small group to another over time. The entire team
makes up a social network consisting of smaller, more tightly
coupled social networks. In short, this scenario envisages
the application of modern communications networks and
tools and the insights of modern social network theory to
transform the management of Army R&D projects.In Appendix E the committee provides details for market-driven management of such projects. The next-generation
R&D model is a new and different approach similar to that
of networked organizations like eBay, Intel, and GE. It is
based on principles that have worked for many successfulNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATING VALUE FROM NETWORK SCIENCE: SCOPE OF THE OPPORTUNITY41companies that needed to get quality products and capabili-ties to market quickly: Think Big, Start Small, Scale Fast,
and Deliver Value. It is this type of next-generation model
that can deliver the knowledge, research, and technology that
will enable our warfighters to win the nationÕs wars.The market-driven approach requires strong commitmentfrom the Army and DOD senior leadership, and from their
partners in industry and academia, to make it work. It will be
led by a small team of the best and brightest Army
Òwarfighting R&D specialistsÓ committed for a period of 3
or 4 years, highly motivated, and working closely with
industry and academia.The Army has an opportunity for leadership in develop-ing and implementing this new model. At DOD, NCO must
be a joint effort, and so should be the new R&D modelÑ
after it has been proved in the Army. By moving ahead ag-
gressively to implement this model, the Army can establish
itself as the lead for DOD and seize the opportunity to con-
tribute significantly to the improvement of joint network-
centric warfighting capability.The statement of task requests the committee to Òidentifyspecific research issues and theoretical, experimental, and
practical challenges to advance the field of network science.Ó
Briefly stated, three such issues were discussed in Chap-
ters3Ð6:
¥Current military concepts of Ònet-centricityÓ are basedon applications of computer and information technol-
ogy that are far removed from likely results of basic
research in network science.¥Current funding policies and priorities are unlikely toprovide adequate fundamental knowledge about large
complex networks that will advance network-centric
operations.¥A basis for a network science is perceived in differentways by the communities concerned with engineered,
biological, and social networks at all levels of com-
plexity.A fourth issue, and major challenge as well, will be toobtain value from the investments that the Army does make
to advance network science. In the case of basic research
(6.1) alone, the relevant challenges are identified in Scenario
1. In the case of the combined basic and applied research
(6.1Ð6.3) projects envisaged in Scenario 2, the challenges
depend sensitively on the topics of the research.To illustrate the scope and scale of next-generation R&Dprojects with market-driven management, three projects in-
volving the sociological, engineering, and biological areas
of network applications were developed by members of the
committee as sample projects for Scenario 2 and are con-
tained in Appendix E. These projects were selected in di-
verse areas to underline the committeeÕs belief that research
will be equally necessary in all areas to advance network
science.The sample project in the social sciences domain outlinesa study of local decision making in combat environments. It
uses advanced information technology of the sort envisaged
for NCO, with the goal of improving the quality of local
decisions.The second project in the engineering domain proposesthe design, construction, and testing of a large-area (roughly
the size and complexity of a small city) monitoring network
for both people and vehicles.The third describes the construction and testing of a pro-totype biological surveillance system to detect emerging bio-
logical threats. Such a system could also analyze the results
of the surveillance and direct appropriate responses.While all of the sample projects have the potential to ad-vance network science, they should not be construed as a
Òshopping list,Ó and the committee does not recommend their
implementation without careful comparison of their costs
and benefits with those of other research projects.Scenario 3, Creating a Robust Network-centric Warfare/Operations CapabilityThe statement of task instructs the committee to Òrecom-mend those relevant research areas that the Army should in-
vest in to enable progress toward achieving Network-Cen-
tric Warfare capabilities.Ó When the committee examined
the literature on this topic, it discovered that the concept of
NCW has been superseded in the literature from the DOD
Office of Force Transformation (OFT) by an expanded con-
cept, NCO, as described in a conceptual framework docu-
ment published on the OFT Web site1 (Cebrowski andGarstka, 1998; Garstka and Alberts, 2004). When members
interviewed representatives from the Army and DOD, they
found that opinions on NCW and NCO varied widely with
regard to both nomenclature and substance. Moreover, the
literature on the topic is dynamic, with many new reports
and publications. Since this report is intended as an archival
document, the committee elected to utilize the published
conceptual framework description version 2.0 (Garstka and
Alberts, 2004) as point of reference.Scenario 3 adopts a national point of view. Its purpose isto ask what the nation must do if the strategic vision of NCO
is to be implemented. The committee was not tasked to re-
solve the issues raised in this scenario, but considers their
resolution of paramount national urgency.The committee has stressed that the knowledge of net-works that we possess today is not adequate to allow the
design of predictable, secure, robust global networks. Mem-
bers heard presentations and read reports of how the Òtrans-
formationÓ to a future force capable of NCO is not likely to
be achieved by traditional approaches to creating technol-
ogy. The committee came to recognize that the policies and1For further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil. Accessed onAugust 19, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42NETWORK SCIENCEpractices currently used to procure these capabilities do nottake into consideration the uncertainties inherent in the cur-
rent state of understanding the design and implementation of
complex networks. The purpose of this brief scenario, then,
is to emphasize that the task of designing, testing and oper-
ating the envisaged NCO capabilities is of an exceedingly
high order of complexity and should be approached as seri-
ously as the Manhattan Project or NASAÕs race to the moon.The committee would be remiss in its responsibilities if itfailed to note the essential urgency and profound difficulty
of this task. The chances of delivering NCO capabilities in a
timely and affordable way would be greatly increased by a
focused national initiative, combining the initiatives of all
services under central leadership, to respond successfully to
the diverse challenges of future warfare. Transforming the
U.S. military from its current state to that envisaged for NCO
as described in the published conceptual framework version
2.0 is the probably the most complex undertaking in the his-
tory of the U.S. government (Garstka and Alberts, 2004). It
is comparable to the successful pursuit of World War II and
the Cold War with the Soviet Union. It is a long-term, diffi-
cult, costly, and risky undertaking.Start by thinking about the task of designing the mostcomplex weapons system built to dateÑsay, a large aircraft
carrier. Add to this the complications in the physical domain
associated with, for example, secure, reliable wireless com-
munications via satellite to soldiers on a mobile battlefield.
In the information domain, add the hardware and software
challenges associated with storage, search, and retrieval of
orders of magnitude more data in real time, as well as the
challenges associated with ensuring the security and reliabil-
ity of these data. In the cognitive domain, add the issues
associated with a junior officer at a local (mobile) worksta-
tion processing information from sources at multiple levels
in all military services. In the social domain, add the compli-
cations of orchestrating the decision-making process in this
information-rich, real-time environment and the issues asso-
ciated with tactics and training to use all this information-
processing capability. The committee regards it as highly
unlikely that existing methods of designing and procuring
weapons systems will be adequate to accomplish this monu-
mental task. Current experience in the services themselves
supports this point of view (Brewin, 2005). Further, the com-
mittee regards the task of converting the current state of the
U.S. military to the vision articulated for NCO as vastly more

challenging than seems to be appreciated.Not only is the task dauntingly complex, the knowledgenecessary to accomplish it does not even exist. In similar
casesÑthe Manhattan Project and the initial days of NASA
come to mindÑa focused, long-term national initiative was
required, and it seems likely that something similar will be
required in this case also. Thus, Scenario 3 is one in which
the United States undertakes a focused national initiative,
comparable in scope to the Manhattan Project, to design and
deploy NCO capabilities as described in the conceptualframework document 2.0 in all the military services duringthe coming decade.Implication of the ScenariosThe main implication of the three scenarios is that thereare multiple ways in which the Army can create value by
supporting the creation of a science of networks. Which way
it selects will depend on circumstances that the committee
cannot know.Finding 7-1.The Army can create value in many differ-
ent ways from a significant investment in the emerging
field of network science.FINDINGS FROM SCENARIO 1In Chapter 5 the committee discussed the rudimentarycontents of network science. As is often the case, the empiri-
cal technology and engineering of large physical networks
precede the scientific underpinnings of the technology. This
is common throughout history. Humans were making tools
and weapons from metals thousands of years before the sci-
ence of metallurgy was developed. The situation is subtly
different for biological and social networks, where the sci-
ence is devoted to comprehending how these networks func-
tion. Tinkering with their natural engineering lies mostly in
the future. The ÒtechnologyÓ is well developed, but by na-
ture rather than man. In all three casesÑphysical, biological,
and social networksÑthe technology far outpaces the scien-
tific understanding of what the technology hath wrought.Finding 7-2.Because network science is at an early stage
of its development, a broad portfolio of basic and applied
research is expected to create greater value than a more
focused portfolio.Finding 7-3.If there is only a limited amount of funding
(e.g., $10 million per year or less), a broad portfolio of
basic research is the most promising approach to creat-
ing value for the Army.The main values created by a basic research investmentinclude access to thought leaders (PIs) in the university com-
munity, training students through their work on university
projects, the development of a community that the Army can
access to address its practical problems, and efficient use of
research dollars to impact multiple areas of application.Pursuing research in new ways also can generate value.In order to tackle complex problems, coordination is re-
quired. Yet individual insights gained by creative people are
usually at the root of the solution of such problems. How
does the Army get both at the same time? Network research
suggests that small coherent groups associated with excep-
tional talents can be collected into loosely coupled networksNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATING VALUE FROM NETWORK SCIENCE: SCOPE OF THE OPPORTUNITY43that interact productively without sacrificing the creativepotential of individual contributors (Malone, 2004; Watts,
2003). Creating, testing, and refining such an approach to
network science by the Army would have far-reaching con-
sequences in other domains.The ArmyÕs network research portfolio must differ fromthe portfolios of NSF, NIH, and DOE (Department of En-
ergy). This can be done if the Army focuses on the network
per se, rather than on specific applications. Perhaps more
important, the Army can explore new network approaches to
complex problems along the lines indicated above. This no-
tion is distinctly different from that of the centers of research
currently pursued by the Army and NSF, among others. An
essential element of the network approach, not normally
present in centers, is the coherent, coordinated actions of a
diverse group of different domain experts to address a pre-
cisely formulated, complex problem. This is not just the sup-
port of interdisciplinary and collaborative research. It fur-
ther requires intensely focused attention on a pre-specified
problem by diverse groups of domain experts working in
concert. Suitable reference models include product develop-
ment in large firms or the Manhattan Project rather than the
efforts that take place at a typical Army lab, NSF center, or
DOE user facility.The conceptual framework for NCO consists of interact-ing networks in four distinct technology domains: physical,
information, cognitive, and social (Garstka and Alberts,
2004). The Army is currently investing primarily, if not ex-
clusively, in R&D associated with a network communica-
tions infrastructure and a limited portfolio of applications
built upon a network communications infrastructure.2,3,4 Inother words, the current army R&D portfolio spans only two
(the physical and the information domains) of the four
domains essential to the implementation of NCO.Whether investments in physical and information infra-structure improve fighting effectiveness, however, depends
on what warfighters do with the information available from
the infrastructure. Their decisions and actions lie in the cog-
nitive and social domains, which remain unexplored in the
current DOD R&D portfolio. The good news is that existing
knowledge in these domains could benefit applications in
their respective domains of NCO. The bad news is that
knowledge in these areas is rudimentary and generic. The
insights are qualitative in nature and often not useful formaking precise predictions (Malone, 2004; Watts, 2004).5Serious investment in both basic and applied research is re-quired before the associated models and concepts can be
applied in a predictive way for the development of NCO
capabilities for the Army.Finding 7-4.Since the shift to network-centric opera-
tions raises many social and behavioral issues, the
ArmyÕs network science portfolio should stress develop-
ing basic knowledge that could enable applications of
network thinking to address the social and cognitive
domains.Because the state of network science is so primitive, thecentral problems of the field are neither well recognized nor
precisely posed. At this stage of its evolution, network sci-
ence is basic research in the most profound sense: The fun-
damental questions are still being framed (Watts, 2003). Pre-
vious experience in other disciplines (e.g., EinsteinÕs
contributions to relativity and quantum theory) suggests that
this is a playing field best suited for talent of the highest
order, not individuals doing next-step research. For the Army
to create value from investments in this area, it must recruit
and retain exceptional talent, a difficult task.Finding 7-5.The Army must find a way to attract the
best researchers in network science. This will require
stability of funding, the opportunity to interact with a
diversity of interesting colleagues, and flexibility to follow
the funded research wherever it leads.Finding 7-6.To attract the best researchers in network
science, the Army should fund them to do work that also
has applications in nonmilitary areas.Finding 7-7.To attract the best researchers in network
science, the Army must avoid putting restrictions on pub-
lications and on foreign nationals.The committee is well aware that these three findings mayappear to be as uncontentious as Òmotherhood and apple pie.Ó
Sadly, this is not the case. In todayÕs global economy, out-
standing technical talent has extensive international oppor-
tunities. Many of the worldÕs most talented people no longer
wish to come to the United States. Many talented people
here do not wish to work for the U.S. military. Plentiful op-
portunities exist for both elsewhere. To create value from
basic network research, the Army must attract top talent. The
committee believes that for the Army to have a good chance
of success in this endeavor, it must heed the three findings.2S.W. Boutelle, chief information officer, Department of the Army, ÒTheway ahead,Ó briefing to the committee on February 1, 2005.3J. Garstka, assistant director, concepts and operations, OSD Office ofForce Transformation, ÒFighting in the networked force: Insights from net-work centric operations case studies,Ó briefing to the committee on April
14, 2005.4J. Gowens and A. Swami, Army Research Lab, ÒArmy research in net-work science,Ó briefing to the committee on February 1, 2005.5C.F. Sabel, professor of law and social science, Columbia Law School,ÒTheory of a real-time revolution,Ó briefing to the 19th EGOS Colloquium,Copenhagen, July 2003.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44NETWORK SCIENCEFINDINGS FROM SCENARIOS 2 AND 3Valuing technology and managing risks to extract eco-nomic value became hot topics in the business literature dur-
ing the past decade (Boer, 1999; Branscomb and Auerswald,
2001; Chesbrough, 2003; Cooper et al., 2001). It is widely
recognized in industry that product development is an inher-
ently non-linear process, full of feedback loops and surprises
(Branscomb and Auerswald, 2001; Reinertsen, 1997). In-
deed, these same notions apply to DOD basic research (NRC,
2005). Thus, it is plausible to apply the notions developed in
the business context to the management of research in net-
work science by the Army.Finding 7-8.The Army can learn about R&D best
management practices from the business sector.R&D managers in commercial organizations couple theirbasic research activities with known or anticipated applica-
tions. This provides focus and enables a much more rapid
time to market (Branscomb and Auerswald, 2001; Ches-
brough, 2003; Cooper et al., 2001). The committee believes
that the Army could benefit from studying such practices
and adapting analogous ones.Finding 7-9.Additional value can be extracted from the
ArmyÕs 6.1 basic research investments in network science

by coupling them to downstream applied research and to
technology development efforts.Finding 7-10.The results of basic research in network
science are more likely to be rapidly put to use to meet
Army challenges if the Army also devotes significant
resources to related applied research.These findings are the basis for Scenario 2 in AppendixE, where the committee describes a management process and
three sample research projects in the social, engineering, and
biological spheres. All are based on and illustrative of cur-
rent models and tools used for R&D management in the busi-
ness sector, including software projects (Poppendieck and
Poppendieck, 2003). The material presented in Scenario 2 in
Appendix E describes how the Army might usefully experi-
ment with new R&D management practices and new ways
of integrating its 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 R&D programs. The three
sample projects developed in the scenario also serve to illus-
trate the truths of Findings 7-9 and 7-10.Although they can improve the performance of the frontend R&D of the ArmyÕs network design processes, commer-
cial R&D best management practices must be supplemented
by more fundamental change if DOD is to acquire NCO ca-
pabilities. R&D is only one step in a complete value chain.The military procurement value chain is more complexthan the chains in commercial firms. Cases in which large
commercial firmsÕ best practices for R&D management areknown to work well are those in which (1) the science ismature and (2) the market requirements can be determined
with fair accuracy. Neither is true in the case of applying the
outputs of network science to the procurement of an NCO
capability for the Army. Commercial best practices are most
likely to succeed when they are applied to the sourcing of
information infrastructure. Even here, however, prospects for
success are not certain.There is no ÒscienceÓ at this time that can predict the per-formance of wireless and wireline communications infra-
structures integrated into the architecture for the Global In-
formation Grid (GIG). Science can predict the performance
of individual components (e.g., of radios or computers) but
not that of the overall system of networks. At best, the appli-
cations that warfighters are likely to develop for such a sys-
tem are almost certain to be surprises conceived and tested
in the field before they are embedded into tactics and
doctrine.The current state of sociological models is too rudimen-tary for them to be applied reliably to simulate uses of such
a network a priori. Even the use of simulation to determine
the ÒmarketÓ requirements for the physical network is risky,
because it lies beyond the scope of current knowledge.DOD faces a major challenge as it tries to determine howto design a set of interlocking networks of the complexity
and scope envisaged for NCO. The committee captured its
concerns about the total end-to-end sourcing process in the
following finding:Finding 7-11.The design, testing, and deployment of the
overlapping and interacting physical, information, cog-
nitive, and social networks envisioned for network-
centric operations concepts are currently beyond the
ArmyÕs capability. They require a concerted national
effort to be achieved in a timely and affordable fashion.This finding motivated a third scenario, for creating a Òro-bust network-centric warfare/operations capability.Ó It is a
response to the committeeÕs hypothesis that the design and
procurement of large, complex networks, such as those en-
visaged for implementing NCO, cannot be done in an af-
fordable fashion using the current practices.The United States has faced similar challenges in thepastÑfor example, the design of nuclear weapons in the
1940s (LANL, 1986). Responding effectively to such chal-
lenges required a focused, coherent, and sustained national
effort involving government, industry, and academic part-
ners and the investment of hundreds of millions of dollars
annually over a decade or more.Moreover, recent insights on network organizations sug-gest that such a national effort must be organized and man-
aged rather differently than a large engineering project
(Malone, 2004). Scenario 3 is explored in Appendix E, but
only in broad outline, because the committee was not consti-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREATING VALUE FROM NETWORK SCIENCE: SCOPE OF THE OPPORTUNITY45tuted to provide expert advice on this topic. Current knowl-edge on the organizational implications of network research
leads the committee to suggest that the scenario illustrates
the direction in which the military should head to obtain the
biggest and most certain payoff from investments in network
science (Malone, 2004).6REFERENCESAmram, M., and N. Kulatilaka. 1999. Real Options: Managing StrategicInvestment in an Uncertain World. Boston, Mass.: Harvard BusinessSchool Press.Boer, F.P. 1999. The Valuation of Technology: Business and Financial Is-sues in R&D. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley.Boer, F.P. 2002. The Real Options Solution: Finding Total Value in a High-Risk World. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley.Branscomb, L.M., and P.E. Auerswald. 2001. Taking Technical Risks: HowInnovators, Managers, and Investors Manage Risk in High-Tech Inno-
vations. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Brewin, R. 2005. DoD Mulls Network Coordination. Available at http://www.fcw.com/article88939-05-23-05-Print/. Accessed May 31, 2005.Cebrowski, A., and J. Garstka. 1998. Network centric warfare. Proceedingsof the United States Naval Institute 24: 28Ð35.Chesbrough, H. 2003. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating6C.F. Sabel, professor of law and social science, Columbia Law School,ÒTheory of a real-time revolution,Ó briefing to the 19th EGOS Colloquium,Copenhagen, July 2003.and Profiting from Technology. Boston, Mass.: Harvard BusinessSchool Press.Cooper, R.G., S.J. Edgett, and E.J. Kleinschmidt. 2001. Portfolio Manage-ment for New Products, 2nd edition. Reading, Mass.: Perseus Books.Duke, C.B. 2004. Creating economic value from research knowledge. In-dustrial Physicist 10(4): 29Ð31.Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2004. Network Centric Operations: ConceptualFramework Version 2.0. Vienna, Va.: Evidence-Based Research, Inc.Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL). 1986. Los Alamos 1943Ð1945:The Beginning of an Era. LASL-79-78 Reprint.Malone, T.W. 2004. Network the Future of Work: How the New Order ofBusiness Will Shape Your Organization, Your Management Style and
Your Life. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.Mun, J. 2002. Real Options Analysis: Tools and Techniques for ValuingStrategic Investments and Decisions. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley.National Research Council (NRC). 2005. Assessment of Department ofDefense Basic Research. Washington, D.C.: The National AcademiesPress.Poppendieck, M., and T. Poppendieck. 2003. Lean Software Development:An Agile Toolkit. Boston, Mass.: Addison Wesley.Reinertsen, D.G. 1997. Managing the Design Factory: A Product De-veloperÕs Toolkit. New York, N.Y.: Free Press.Watts, D.J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Watts, D.J. 2004. The ÒnewÓ science of networks. Annual Review of Soci-ology 30(1): 243Ð270.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.468Conclusions and RecommendationsIn this chapter the committee combines its findings intoconclusions and offers recommendations. First, it collects
the factual findings presented in Chapters 2-7 into three
overarching conclusions concerning the importance of net-
works and the current state of knowledge about them. Next,
it articulates specific conclusions that are directly respon-
sive to Items 1 through 3 of the statement of task. Finally, in
response to Item 4, the committee provides its recommenda-
tions, including for research initiatives. Box 8-1 summarizes
how the report responds to the statement of task.OVERARCHING CONCLUSIONSConclusion 1.Networks are pervasive in all aspects of

life: biological, physical, and social. They are indispens-
able to the workings of a global economy and to the
defense of the United States against both conventional
military threats and the threat of terrorism.Conclusion 1 was developed in Chapters 2 and 3 and sum-marized in Tables 2-1, 2-2, and 3-1 and the discussions sur-
rounding them. It sets the stage for the committeeÕs inquiry
into the state of knowledge about these networks.Conclusion 2.Fundamental knowledge about the predic-
tion of the properties of complex networks is primitive.Given the pervasiveness and vital importance of net-works, one might assume that a lot is known about them. As
documented in Chapters 5 and 6, however, this is not the
case. Although the technology for constructing and operat-
ing engineered physical networks is sophisticated, critical
questions about their robustness, stability, scaling, and per-
formance cannot be answered with confidence without ex-
tensive simulation and testing. For large global networks,
even simulations are often inadequate. The design and op-
eration of network components (such things as computers,
routers, or radios) are based on fundamental knowledgegleaned from physics, chemistry, and materials science.However, there is no comparable fundamental knowledge
that allows the a priori prediction of the properties of com-
plex assemblies of these components into networks. Indeed,
such networks are expected to exhibit emergent behaviorsÑ
that is, behaviors that cannot be predicted or anticipated from
the known behaviors of their components. In the case of so-
cial and biological networks, even the properties of the com-
ponents are poorly known. A huge gap exists between the
demand for knowledge about the networks on which our
lives depend and the availability of that knowledge.The committee learned that developing predictive mod-els of the behavior of large, complex networks is difficult.
There are relatively few rigorous results to describe the scal-
ing of their behaviors with increasing size. Surprisingly, this
is true for common engineered networks like the Internet as
well as for social and biological networks.Simulation rather than analysis is the research tool ofchoice. In the case of social networks, even simulation is
vastly complicated by the diversity and complexity of the
agents that are the nodes of the networksÑhumans or groups
of humans Òin the wild.Ó Which of their many properties are
relevant for developing mathematical models of a particular
phenomenon? Existing models of social networks, moreover,
represent highly simplified situations and not necessarily
ones that are relevant to the Army or network-centric
warfare.Finally, the notion of using network models in biology isrelatively new. Controversy swirls around their utility, in-
deed around that of systems biology itself. In spite of a bur-
geoning literature on the structure of simple networks, the
advancement of the field to allow relating basic scientific
results to applications of societal and military interest still
lies mostly in the future.Conclusion 3.Current funding policies and priorities are
unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge
about large complex networks.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS47Fundamental knowledge is created and stockpiled in dis-ciplinary environments, mostly at universities, and then used
as required by (vertically integrated) industries to provide
the products and services required by customers, including
the military. This fundamental knowledge is different in kind
from empirical knowledge gleaned during the developmentof technology and products. You get what you measure. Sup-
pliers of fundamental knowledge measure publications, pre-
sentations, students supervised, awards received, and other
metrics associated with individual investigators. The knowl-
edge accumulates along traditional disciplinary lines because
this is where the rewards are found. Large team activities areBOX 8-1Summary of Responses to the Statement of TaskThe Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology) has requested the National Research Council (NRC) Board on ArmyScience and Technology (BAST) conduct a study to define the field of Network Science. The NRC will:1.Determine whether initiation of a new field of investigation called Network Science would be appropriate to advance knowledge
 of complexsystems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. If yes, how should it be defined?A working definition of network science is the study of network representations of physical, biological, and social phenomenaleading to predictive models of these phenomena. Initiation of a field of network science would be appropriate to provide a bodyof rigorous results that would improve the predictability of the engineering design of complex networks and also speed up basic
research in a variety of applications areas (Chapter 4).2.Identify the fields that should comprise Network Science. What are the key research challenges necessary to enable progress i
n Network Science?General consensus exists among practitioners of network research in diverse application areas on topics that constitute net-work science (Chapter 5). There are seven major research challenges (Chapter 6).3.Identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experimental, and practical challenges to advance the field of Network
 Science. Consider suchthings as facilities and equipment that might be needed. Determine investment priority, time frame for realization, and degree of commercialinterest.Current military concepts of Ònet-centricityÓ are based on applications of computer and information technology that are farremoved from likely results of basic research in network science. Table 8-1 lists current areas of network research of interest to theArmy, including priority, time frames, and commercial interest (Chapter 3).Current funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge about large complex networksthat will advance network-centric operations. Besides the information domain, there are social, cognitive, and physical technol-ogy domains in the current conceptual framework for network-centric operations; there is no ÒbiologicalÓ domain (Chapters 2Ð4).A basis for network science is perceived in different ways by the communities concerned with engineered, biological, andsocial networks at all levels of complexity. Basic research efforts are totally incoherent (Chapters 5 and 6).Options for obtaining value from investments in network science include scenarios ranging from building a base of basicresearch, to leveraging business practices for market-driven R&D in specific areas of network applications, to creating a robustcapability for network-centric operations (Chapter 7).4.Given limited resources (and likely investments of others), recommend those relevant research areas that the Army should inve
st in to enableprogress toward achieving Network-Centric Warfare capabilities.Recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2, and 3 provide the Army with an actionable menu of alternatives that span the opportu-nities accessible to it. By selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the Army can develop a robust network
science to enable the desired progress (Chapter 8).NOTE: The statement of task is in lightface; the summary of responses is in boldface.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48NETWORK SCIENCErelatively rare (except in medicine and large-scale physicsexperiments) and are mostly left to the consumers of the
fundamental knowledge, who must supplement the funda-
mental knowledge generously with empirical knowledge to
convert it into the goods and services desired by the paying
customer.This scheme worked marvelously for more than a half acentury, when the United States dominated the world and
industries were vertically integrated. With the onset of the
global economy in the 1990s, however, the situation began
to change dramatically, for a number of reasons. First,
knowledge, investment capital, technology, and technical
labor are becoming globally available commodities. Second,
economic activity, including R&D, is becoming global in
scale. Third, these two trends are making the networks on
which we depend ever larger and more complex and their
susceptibility to disruption ever greater.This traditional scheme does not work well for generatingknowledge about global networks, because focused, coordi-
nated efforts are needed. Thus, there is a huge difference
between the social and financial arrangements needed to gain
fundamental knowledge about large, complex networks in a
global environment and the arrangements that worked so
well to provide such knowledge for the design and produc-
tion of smaller, less complex entities in a national environ-
ment. Any successful effort to create the knowledge neces-
sary to secure robust, reliable scalable global networks must
come to grips with this reality.Overall, the committee is led to a view of networks aspervasive in and vital to modern society, yet understood only
as well as the solar system was understood in PtolemyÕs time.
The military has made networks the centerpiece of its trans-
formation effort without a methodology to design networks
in the physical and information domains in a predictive way
for network-centric operations (NCO). Further, according to
the DOD Office of Force Transformation, research in the
cognitive and social domains has yet to yield advances com-
parable to the technological developments in the informa-
tion domain. At the same time, current efforts by academia
to describe networks are fragmented and disjointed. Rela-
tively little of the current research on networks promises to
create a science of networks that will generate knowledge
adequate to meet the demand.In short, there is a massive disconnect between the impor-tance of networks in modern society and military affairs on
the one hand and, on the other, the support of coherent R&D
activities that would raise current network technologies and
capabilities to the next level. The Army alone cannot trans-
form this situation, but it can make a beginning.SPECIFIC CONCLUSIONSItems 1 and 2 in the statement of task inquire into theappropriateness of a field of investigation called network
science and its definition, content, and the research chal-lenges that would characterize it. Elements of a field of net-work science have begun to emerge in different disciplines
spanning engineering, biological, and social networks. The
emerging field is concerned with the development and analy-
sis of network representations to create predictive models of
observed physical, biological, and social phenomena.The remarkable diversity and pervasiveness of networkideas renders the study of network science a highly lever-
aged topic for both civilian and military investment. The pro-

visional consensus around its core content clearly defines
the notion of network science. By making an investment in
network science, the Army could forge a single approach to
a diverse collection of applications.Conclusion 4.Network science is an emerging field of
investigation whose support will address important
societal problems, including the ArmyÕs pursuit of
network-centric operations capabilities.Although the boundaries of network science are fuzzy,there is broad agreement on key topics that should be in-
cluded within the field, the types of tools that must be devel-
oped, and the research challenges that should be investigated.

These were documented in Chapters 3 and 4.Conclusion 5.There is a consensus among the practitio-
ners of research on networks for physical, biological,
social, and information applications on the topics that
make up network science.Responses to its questionnaire greatly assisted the com-mittee in determining Òthe key research challenges to enable
progress in network science.Ó These responses establish that
there is a fair degree of consensus on these challenges across
practitioners in diverse applications areas.Conclusion 6.There are seven major research challenges
the surmounting of which will enable progress in net-
work science:¥Dynamics, spatial location, and information propa-
gation in networks. Better understanding of the
relationship between the architecture of a network
and its function is needed.¥Modeling and analysis of very large networks.Tools, abstractions, and approximations are needed
that allow reasoning about large-scale networks, as
well as techniques for modeling networks charac-
terized by noisy and incomplete data.¥Design and synthesis of networks. Techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtain
desired properties.¥Increasing the level of rigor and mathematicalstructure. Many of the respondents to the question-
naire felt that the current state of the art in networkNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS49science did not have an appropriately rigorousmathematical basis.¥Abstracting common concepts across fields. Thedisparate disciplines need common concepts
defined across network science.¥Better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. Current data sets on large-scale net-
works tend to be sparse, and tools for investigating
their structure and function are limited.¥Robustness and security of networks. Finally, thereis a clear need to better understand and design net-
worked systems that are both robust to variations
in the components (including localized failures) and
secure against hostile intent.These challenges are elaborated in terms of specific re-search issues and their theoretical, experimental, and practi-
cal difficulties in Chapter 7 and Appendix E within the
framework of exploring various investment scenarios. The
scenarios respond to Item 3 in the statement of task.Although all the military services have a vision of thefuture in which engineered communications networks play a
fundamental role, there is no methodology for ensuring that
these networks are scalable, reliable, robust, and secure. Of
particular importance is the ability to design networks whose
behaviors are predictable in their intended domains of appli-
cations. This also is true in the commercial sphere. Creation
of such a methodology is an especially pressing task because
global commercial networks can also be exploited by crimi-
nal and terrorist social networks.Conclusion 7.The high value attached to the efficient
and failure-free operation of global engineered networks
makes their design, scaling, and operation a national
priority.RECOMMENDATIONSThe statement of task requests investment recommenda-tions from the committee. Options for these recommenda-
tions are explored in Chapter 7 and Appendix E. The com-
mittee documents in Chapters 2 and 3 that the impact of
networks on society transcends their impact on military ap-
plications, although both are vital aspects of the total pic-
ture. Chapters 3 and 4 explain that the current state of knowl-
edge about networks does not support the design and
operation of complex global networks for current military,
political, and economic applications. Advances in network
science are essential to developing adequate knowledge for
these applications.Recommendation 1.The federal government should ini-
tiate a focused program of research and development toclose the gap between currently available knowledgeabout networks and the knowledge required to charac-
terize and sustain the complex global networks on which
the well-being of the United States has come to depend.This recommendation is buttressed by centuries of evi-dence that disruptive social networks (e.g., terrorists, crimi-
nals) learn to exploit evolving infrastructure networks (e.g.,
communications or transportation) in ways that the creators
of these networks did not anticipate. The global war on ter-
rorism, which is a main driver of military transformation, is
only one recent manifestation of this general pattern. Soci-
ety has the same need in other areas, such as control of crimi-
nal activities perpetrated using the global airline and infor-
mation infrastructures. Addressing problems resulting from
the interaction of social and engineered networks is an ex-
ample of a compelling national issue that transcends the
transformation of the military and that is largely untouched
by current research on networks.Within this broad context, Recommendations 1a, 1b, and1c provide the Army with three options:Recommendation 1a.The Army, in coordination with
other federal agencies, should underwrite a broad
network research initiative that includes substantial
resources for both military and nonmilitary applications
that would address military, economic, criminal, and
terrorist threats.The Army can lead the country in creating a base of net-work knowledge that can support applications for both the
Army and the country at large. Maximum impact could be
obtained by a coordinated effort across a variety of federal
agencies, including the DOD and the Department of Home-
land Security, to create a focused national program of net-
work research that would develop applications to support
not only NCO but also countermeasures against international
terrorist and criminal threats.Alternatively, if the Army is restricted to working justwith the DOD, it should initiate a focused program to create
an achievable vision of NCO capabilities across all the

services.Recommendation 1b.If the Army wants to exploit fully
applications in the information domain for military
operations in a reasonable time frame and at an afford-
able cost, it should champion the initiation of a high-
priority, focused DOD effort to create a realizable vision
of the associated capabilities and to lay out a trajectory
for its realization.Finally, if the Army elects to apply the insight from thecommittee primarily to its own operations, it can still pro-
vide leadership in network science research.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50NETWORK SCIENCERecommendation 1c.The Army should support an
aggressive program of both basic and applied research
to improve its NCO capabilities.Specific areas of research of interest to the Army areshown in Table 8-1. This table expresses the committeeÕs
assessment of the relative priorities for these areas, the time
frames in which one might reasonably expect them to be
consummated as actionable technology investment options,
and the degree of commercial interest in exploiting promis-
ing options. Specific research problems and sample projects
are given in Appendix E. The committee notes that both
trained personnel and promising research problems exist in
many of these areas, so the Army should be able to create a
productive program readily.By selecting from among Recommendations 1a through1c an option that is ambitious yet achievable, the Army can
lead the country in creating a base of knowledge emanating
from network science that is adequate to support applica-
tions on which both the Army and the country at large de-
pend. Regardless of which option (or options) are adopted,
Army initiatives in network science should be grounded in
basic research.Recommendation 1d.The initiatives recommended in 1,
1a, 1b, and 1c should include not only theoretical studiesTABLE 8-1Network Research Areas
PriorityTimeCommercialfor Army
Research AreaKey ObjectiveFrameInterestInvestment
Modeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping veryPractical deployment tool setsMid termHighHigh
large networksCommand and control of joint/combined networkedNetworked properties of connected heterogeneousMid termMediumHigh
forcessystems
Impact of network structure on organizationalDynamics of networked organizational behaviorMid termMediumHigh
behaviorSecurity and information assurance of networksProperties of networks that enhance survivalNear termHighHigh

Relationship of network structure to scalability andCharacteristics of robust or dominant networksMid termMediumMedium
reliabilityManaging network complexityProperties of networks that promote simplicity andNear termHighHigh
connectivityImproving shared situational awareness ofSelf-synchronization of networksMid termMediumHigh
networked elementsEnhanced network-centric mission effectivenessIndividual and organizational training designsFar termMediumMedium

Advanced network-based sensor fusionImpact of control systems theoryMid termHighMedium

Hunter-prey relationshipsAlgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsMid termLowHigh

Swarming behaviorSelf-organizing UAV/UGV; self-healingMid termLowMedium

Metabolic and gene expression networksSoldier performance enhancementNear termMediumMedium
but also the experimental testing of new ideas in settingssufficiently realistic to verify or disprove their use for
intended applications.Recommendations 1, 1a, 1b, and 1c span only part of theinvestment opportunity spaceÑnamely, those segments of
the space described in Scenarios 2 and 3 in Chapter 7 and
Appendix E. They will involve substantial changes in how
the Army invests its R&D dollars and in how it plans and
manages these investments.The Army also has the opportunity associated with Sce-nario 1 in Chapter 7, which involves funding a small pro-
gram of basic research in network science. This investment
of relatively small amounts of Army risk capital funds would
create a base of knowledge and personnel from which the
Army could launch an attack on practical problems that arise
as it tries to provide NCO capabilities.Investments in basic (6.1) research in network sciencecan generate significant value; however, the committee
wants to be crystal clear that such investments have no im-
mediate prospects of impacting the design, testing, evalua-
tion, or sourcing of NCO capabilities. They would create
additional knowledge that builds the core content of network
science, and they would train researchers who could also be
recruited by the Army for later efforts. While the knowledge
generated would probably be less valuable than in the caseNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS51of Scenarios 2 and 3, the cost is less and implementation canbe immediate.If the Army elects to exploit Scenario 1, the committeeoffers the following two further recommendations:Recommendation 2.The Army should make a modest
investment of at least $10 million per year to support a
diverse portfolio of basic (6.1) network research that
promises high leverage for the dollars invested and is
clearly different from existing investments by other

federal agencies like the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Department of Energy (DOE), and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH).This modest level of investment is compatible with theArmyÕs current R&D portfolio. There is an adequate supply
of promising research topics and talented researchers to make
this investment productive. Additionally, it can be imple-
mented within the ArmyÕs current R&D management work
processes, although some enhancements along the lines
noted in Chapter 7 and Appendix E would improve the re-
turn on this investment.To identify the topics in basic network science researchthat would bring the most value to NCO, the committee re-
calls that the open system architectures for computer net-
works consist of layers, each of which performs a special
function regarded as a ÒserviceÓ by the layers above. It is
useful to distinguish among the lower (physical and trans-
port) layers of this architecture, the higher (applications) lay-
ers that are built on top of them to offer services to the people,
and the cognitive and social networks that are built higher
still, on top of the services-to-humans layers.Research on the lower layers of the network architectureis relatively mature. Improving the services offered at these
levels is more of an engineering problem than one requiring
basic research. The most immediate payoffs from networkscience are likely to result from research associated with theupper levels of the network architecture and the social net-
works that are built at an even higher level upon their out-
puts. This is where the committee thinks that Army invest-
ments are most likely to create the greatest value.An area of particular promise that has little or no currentinvestment is the social implications of NCO for the organi-
zational structure and command and control. Basic research
could provide valuable insight into how military personnel
use advanced information exchange capabilities to improve
combat effectiveness. For example, one might study how
troops in combat could use these capabilities to make better
decisions. Additional basic research in the core content of
network science might help to determine how the Army can
most productively utilize the capabilities of its advanced in-
formation infrastructure.Recommendation 3.The Army should fund a basic
research program to explore the interaction between
information networks and the social networks that uti-
lize them.The Army can implement Recommendations 2 and 3within the confines of its present policies and procedures.
They require neither substantial replanning nor the orches-
tration of joint Army/university/industry research projects.
They create significant value and are actionable immedi-
ately.The committeeÕs Recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2,and 3 give the Army an actionable menu of options that span
the opportunity space available. By selecting and implement-
ing appropriate items from this menu, the Army can develop
a robust network science to Òenable progress toward achiev-
ing Network-Centric Warfare capabilities,Ó as requested in
the statement of task.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ABiographical Sketches of Committee Members55Charles B. Duke (NAS/NAE), Chair, is vice president andsenior research fellow in the Innovation Group of Xerox Cor-
poration. He was formerly deputy director and chief scientist
at the Pacific Northwest National laboratory. He was found-
ing editor in chief of the Journal of Materials Research, theofficial journal of the Materials Research Society. For a de-
cade he served as editor in chief of Surface Science and Sur-face Science Letters. He has served on the governing boardsof the American Institute of Physics, the American Physical
Society, the Materials Research Society, and the American
Vacuum Society. He has written a monograph and over 350
papers on surface science, materials research, semiconduc-
tor physics, the electronic structure of molecular solids, and
research management. He has edited three volumes on sur-
face science and digital systems integration. He received his
Ph.D. in physics from Princeton University following a B.S.
summa cum laude with distinction in mathematics from
Duke University. He is chair based on demonstrated leader-
ship of research in electronic structures of physical and bio-
logical systems and for his expertise in the network design
of distributed systems and in real-world applications of con-
trol and communication theory.John E. Hopcroft (NAE), Vice Chair, is IBM Professor ofEngineering and Applied Mathematics at Cornell Univer-
sity. He received his B.S. from Seattle University and his
M.S. and Ph.D. from Stanford University, all in electrical
engineering. Dr. Hopcroft is a recipient of the A.M. Turing
Award of the Association of Computing Machinery and
serves on the National Research CouncilÕs Board on Math-
ematical Sciences and their Applications. His research cen-
ters on the theoretical aspects of computing, especially the
analysis of algorithms, automata theory, and graph al-
gorithms. He has expertise in computer science and
engineering.Adam P. Arkin is assistant professor of bioengineering andchemistry at the University of California at Berkeley andfaculty scientist in physical biosciences at the E.O. LawrenceBerkeley National Laboratory. He is also an assistant inves-
tigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. His labora-
tory develops and applies mathematical theory and compu-
tational and experimental approaches to the analysis of
cellular function. He was recognized as one of the most in-
novative young scientists by the MIT Technology Reviewand is a member of the National AcademiesÕ Committee on
the Frontiers at the Interface Between Computing and Biol-
ogy. Dr. Arkin received his B.A. from Carleton College and
his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He has expertise in quantitative biology and the modeling of
cellular networks.Robert E. Armstrong is a senior research professor in theCenter for Technology and National Security Policy at the
National Defense University. Dr. Armstrong also serves as a
member of the advisory council for the Agronomy Depart-
ment at Purdue University. He is a colonel in the U.S. Army
Reserve. He received his B.A. from Wabash College, his
M.A. in experimental psychology from Oxford University,
and an M.S. (biology) and a Ph.D. (plant breeding and ge-
netics) from Purdue University. He has expertise in bio-
defense applications for networks.Albert L. Barab⁄si is director of the Center for ComplexNetworks Research at the University of Notre Dame. He is
also Emil T. Hofman Professor of Physics at Notre Dame
and has previous research experience at the IBM T.J. Watson
Research Center. Dr. Barab⁄si has published extensively on
complex systems and networks in books, magazines, and
journals. He is a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sci-
ences. Dr. Barab⁄si received his M.S. from Eotvos Lorand
University in Budapest and his Ph.D. in physics from Boston
University. He is author of the book Linked: The New Sci-ence of Networks and has published the article ÒNetworkbiology: Understanding the cellÕs functional organization.Ó
His expertise is in biological and physical networks.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56APPENDIX ARonald J. Brachman is the director of the InformationProcessing Technology Office at the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA). He has previous experi-
ence at AT&T Labs, where he served as the vice president of
Communication Service Research as well as director of the
Software and Systems Research Center. Dr. Brachman cur-
rently serves as the president of the American Association
for Artificial Intelligence and is a fellow of the Association
for Computing Machinery. He received his B.S.E. in electri-
cal engineering from Princeton University and his S.M. and
Ph.D. in applied mathematics from Harvard University. He
has expertise in network applications research.Norval L. Broome is a consultant for the MITRE Corpora-tion. He was director of San Diego Operations and depart-
ment head of Naval Communications Systems for MITRE
and is a retired engineering duty officer in the U.S. Navy.
Dr. BroomeÕs research interests include software-derived
multimode, multifunction radios for high-data-rate tactical
communications. He received his B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E.
from Purdue University and the Ph.D.E.E. from the Califor-
nia Institute of Technology. He has published in journals of
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
including those of the Antennas and Propagation Society and
the Communications Society. His expertise lies in command,
control, communications, computers, and intelligence (C4I)
systems and network applications.Stan Davis is writer and consultant on business strategy,organization, and management. He spent 20 years on univer-
sity faculties, mainly at the Harvard Business School, and
was a senior research fellow at the Cap Gemini Ernst &
Young Center for Business Innovation. Dr. Davis is author
of 13 books, including Future Perfect, Blur, and ItÕs Alive!The Convergence of Biology, Information and Business. Hehas a Ph.D. in social science from Washington University in
St. Louis and has expertise in and knowledge of social and
business network applications.Richard A. De Millo is the John P. Imlay, Jr., Dean of Com-puting in the College of Computing at the Georgia Institute
of Technology. Before accepting his position at Georgia
Tech he was the chief technology officer for Hewlett-Packard.
Dr. DeMilloÕs distinguished technology career spans busi-
ness, government, and academia, including important posi-
tions at the National Science Foundation (NSF), Telcordia
Technologies, and Purdue University. He received a Ph.D.
in information and computer science from Georgia Tech and
a B.S. in mathematics from the College of St. Thomas. His
expertise is in computer science and engineering.William J. Hilsman is a retired Army lieutenant generaland a consultant to the Institute for Defense Analyses. He is
the chief executive officer of DTI International. Before that,
he was the CEO and chairman of the board of InterDigitalCommunications Corporation, which pioneered the devel-opment of digital wireless networks. As director of the De-
fense Communications Agency, General Hilsman managed
the National Communications System for the DOD world-
wide C3 system. He also was commanding general of the
Army CommunicationsÐElectronics Research and Develop-
ment Command. He is a graduate of the U.S. Military Acad-
emy and received his M.S. in electrical engineering from
Northeastern University. He has expertise in military appli-
cations and communications.Will E. Leland is chief scientist in the Network SystemsResearch Laboratory of the Telcordia Corporation. As re-
search scientist for Bellcore, Dr. Leland uncovered funda-
mental characteristics of network analysis and design based
on the mathematical concept of self-similarity. He has pub-
lished extensively on distributed network performance and
is the recipient of the Baker and Bennett prizes from the
IEEE. He has served as manager of and technical adviser for
the Telcordia Network Management System program for the
ArmyÕs Future Combat Systems and is currently involved
with TelcordiaÕs planning and research for the Air ForceÕs
Transformational Communications System. Dr. Leland re-
ceived a B.S. in both mathematics and physics from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer sciences from the University of
Wisconsin. He has expertise in communications networks
and knowledge of research in commercial telecommunica-
tions networking and military ad hoc wireless networking.Thomas W. Malone is the Patrick J. McGovern Professorof Management at the MIT Sloan School of Management.
He is also the founder and director of the MIT Center for
Coordination Science. Dr. Malone has published four books,
most recently Network the Future of Work, and over 75 re-search papers; he also holds 11 patents. Prior to his work at
MIT, he was a research scientist at the Palo Alto Research
Center of Xerox. He received a B.A. in mathematical
sciences from Rice University, an M.S. in engineering-
economic systems from Stanford University, and an M.A.
and Ph.D. in psychology from Stanford University. His
expertise is in human networks, coordination theory, and the
use of information technology in organizations.Richard M. Murray is the chair of the Engineering andApplied Science Division at the California Institute of Tech-
nology. His current research is in the area of dynamics and
control of mechanical, fluid, materials, and information sys-
tems, with applications in aerospace vehicles, robotics,
turbomachinery, and thin-film processing. He received a B.S.
in electrical engineering from the California Institute of
Technology and an M.S. and a Ph.D. in electrical engineer-
ing and computer science, both from the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley. He is an IEEE fellow and a member of
the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board. He has publishedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A57work in several journals, including the paper ÒControl in aninformation rich world: Report of the Panel on Future Direc-
tions in Control, Dynamics, and Systems.Ó He has expertise
in engineering and network controls.Jack Pellicci is the group vice president of business devel-opment for Oracle CorporationÕs Public Sector Group. He
retired from the U.S. Army as a brigadier general with 30
years of experience as an infantry officer, including service
as the commanding general of the Personnel Information

Systems Command, deputy director of training for the U.S.
Army, and brigade commander in the 7th Infantry Division.
He is a graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General
Staff College, the Army War College, and the Senior Execu-
tive Seminar in National and International Affairs. General
Pellicci received a B.S. degree in engineering from the U.S.
Military Academy at West Point and an M.S.M.E. from the
Georgia Institute of Technology. His expertise is in military
operations and information system development.Pamela A. Silver is professor of systems biology at HarvardMedical School and a member of the Department of Cancer
Biology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. She has devel-
oped novel genetic and cell biological approaches to study
the movement of macromolecules in eukaryotic cells, first as
a faculty member at Princeton University and now at
Harvard. Dr. Silver received a Ph.D. in molecular biology
from the University of California and was a postdoctoral fel-
low at Harvard University. She is an expert in the emerging
field of synthetic biology, with a published paper, ÒThe po-
tential for synthetic biology.ÓPaul K. Van Riper is a retired lieutenant general in the U.S.Marine Corps. He continues to participate in defense and
security-related seminars and lectures frequently at the Na-
tional Defense University and military educational institu-
tions. General Van Riper consults part-time for DARPA and
has participated in numerous war games and experiments
related to network-centric warfare. He has also served on the
Army Science Board and the National Research CouncilÕs
Naval Studies Board. He received a B.A. from California
State College, in Pennsylvania, and is a graduate of the Ma-
rine Corps Amphibious Warfare School, the U.S. Army Air-
borne and Ranger Schools, the U.S. Navy College of Com-
mand and Staff, and the U.S. Army War College. He has
expertise in military applications for networks.Duncan J. Watts is an associate professor in the Depart-ment of Sociology at Columbia University and was post-
doctoral fellow at the Santa Fe Institute and the Sloan School
of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy. His research and teaching focus on mathematical and
computational modeling of complex networks as applied to
problems in social network theory, contagion, computation,
and the theory of the organization. Dr. Watts is the author of
Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks Between Order
and Randomness; Six Degrees: The Science of a ConnectedAge; and more than 20 peer-reviewed articles, includingÒThe ÔnewÕ science of networks.Ó He received a B.S. in
physics from the University of New South Wales, Australia,
and a Ph.D. in theoretical and applied mechanics from
Cornell University. Dr. Watts has expertise in sociological
networks.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BCommittee Meetings and Other ActivitiesMEETINGSFirst Committee Meeting, November 15Ð16, 2004,Washington, D.C.BAST Network Science OverviewJohn Parmentola, director, Research and LaboratoryManagement, Office of the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of the Army (Research and Technology)Scope and Dimensions of Network ScienceCharles Duke, vice president, Xerox Innovation Group,Wilson Center for Research and TechnologyDimensions of Network ScienceRonald Brachman, director, Information ProcessingTechnology Office, Defense Advanced Research
Projects AgencyJoshua Epstein, senior fellow, The Brookings InstitutionCoordination Science as Part of Network ScienceThomas Malone, director and professor, Center forCoordination Science, Massachusetts Institute of
TechnologyNetwork Science and Network-centric Operations: AnIndustry PerspectiveJack Pellicci, group vice president, Oracle Public SectorNetworks Are UbiquitousJohn Hopcroft, Jett IBM professor, Cornell UniversityNetwork Science First ThoughtsRichard DeMillo, John P. Imlay, Jr., dean of computing,Georgia Institute of TechnologyCollective Dynamics of Small World NetworksSteven Strogatz, professor, Cornell UniversityDimensions of Net Science: What Makes a Net?Will Leland, chief scientist, Telcordia TechnologiesSecond Committee Meeting, February 1Ð2, 2005,Washington, D.C.Army Networks for Net-Centric OperationsLTG Steve Boutelle, chief information officer, Departmentof the ArmyNational and International Views on Systems BiologyAdam Arkin, assistant professor, Lawrence BerkeleyNational LaboratoryNetwork Science in the New Program in Systems Biologyat Harvard UniversityPamela Silver, professor, Harvard UniversityArmy Research in Network ScienceAnathram Swami, ARL fellow, Army Research LaboratoryApplications of Network Science in Business and MilitaryOrganizationsThomas Malone, director, Center for CoordinationSciences, Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyThe ÒNewÓ Science of NetworksDuncan Watts, assistant professor, Columbia UniversityThird Committee Meeting, April 13Ð15, 2005,Washington, D.C.Mapping the Expertise and Social Network of NetworkScience ResearchersKaty Bırner, associate professor, Indiana UniversityNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B59Fighting the Networked Force: Insights from Network-centric Operations Case StudiesJohn Garstka, assistant director, Office of the Secretary ofDefense, Office of Force TransformationHigh-Performance Computing for Army R&D in the BioSciences and Synergies with C2 NetworksAmado Cordova, RAND Arroyo CenterNetwork Science and Net-centric WarfareLtGen Paul van Riper, U.S. Marine Corps (retired)Fourth Meeting, May 12Ð13, 2005, Woods Hole,MassachusettsWriting meetingTELECONFERENCESFirst Full-Message Draft Teleconference, March 31, 2005Research Initiatives in Network Science, April 13, 2005ParticipantsJohn Doyle, California Institute of Technology
Stuart Milner, University of MarylandResearch Initiatives in Network Science, April 28, 2005ParticipantP.R. Kumar, University of IllinoisNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60CContent of Network Science CoursesAppendix C offers a detailed account of the results of thesurvey the committee conducted on the core materials taught
in network science courses. To achieve its goal, the commit-
tee followed a two-step procedure. First, it searched for cur-
rently taught courses on networks, looking in all possible
departments, from computer science and physics to the so-
cial and biological sciences. A representative list of such
courses is provided in Table C-1. The committeeÕs work was
facilitated by the fact that many courses post a detailed sylla-
bus on the Web, as well as links to other courses on the same
topic. If a syllabus was not available on the Web site, a copy
was requested from the instructor. After inspecting the col-
lected syllabi, it was possible to discern a set of core con-
cepts that are shared by a wide range of courses and applica-
tion areas that are often common only within a specific field.
The set of concepts was then shared with a number of re-
searchers and educators who are involved in research related
to network science or who teach related courses. Based on
the input provided by these individuals, the committee cre-
ated the survey of core material in this appendix.The committee faced a significant challenge as it soughtto synthesize the diverse body of material taught in a wide
range of disciplines. Indeed, as discussed in Chapter 2, net-
work science is called on to address problems that not only
cut across disciplines but also represent a vast body of knowl-
edge, from infrastructure networks, such as the power grid
and the Internet, to pervasive applications running over these
infrastructure networks, such as the World Wide Web
(www); from networks of gene and protein interactions to
social and economic networks. The board range of these net-
works is illustrated in Table C-2.In what sense can the study of such diverse subjects ex-amples fall under a single unifying domain? The realization
that despite their diversity, most real networks are character-
ized by a small set of organizing principles helped answer
this question. For example, the widespread emergence of
scale-free networks is rooted in the role of growth and pref-
erential attachment, mechanisms present in many real sys-tems, from cell biology to computer science. This impliesthat a unified set of tools can be applied to characterize the
properties and behavior of a wide range of real networks.
For example, tools developed by mathematicians to under-
stand random networks or measures introduced by sociolo-
gists to explore social networks can be applied by biologists
to design new drugs for disrupting the metabolic network or
by computer scientists to explore the properties of the World
Wide Web or the Internet. These generic or universal fea-
tures of real networks and tools are reflected in the courses
that are currently taught. Despite their diversity, most courses
cover basic concepts that appear to be common across disci-
plines. The role of this appendix is to survey these common
concepts, tools, and methods, identifying the material at the
core of network science.OVERALL ORGANIZATIONEven in established fields of science there is significantroom for diversity of focus and interpretation. For example,
a survey of basic courses on, say, quantum mechanics or
economics would show that while there is broad agreement
across instructors, textbooks, and universities on a small set
of topics that must be covered, there are significant varia-
tions in the examples used, the application areas covered,
and special topics. The committee shows that this is emi-
nently the case for network-science-related courses as well.
Broadly speaking, one can identify a set of core concepts
that emerges in a wide range of courses in network science,
largely independent of their discipline. These core concepts
are typically embedded into applications with different fo-
cus. Applications can be grouped into three main areas. The
first and the most dynamically evolving area, biological net-
works, applies network theory to subcellular (metabolic,
regulatory, genetic) networks, neural networks, and ecologi-
cal networks like food webs and species interactions. The
second area, social and economic networks, encompasses a
wide range of topics such as social interactions, collabora-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C61TABLE C-1Representative Courses on Computer Science
CoursesInstitutionName of CourseWeb Address
CorePennsylvania State UniversityGraphs and Networks inhttp://www.phys.psu.edu/~ralbert/phys597/
coursesSystems Biology
University of Michigan,Network Theoryhttp://www-personal.umich.edu/~mejn/courses/2004/cscs535/index.html
Ann ArborColumbia UniversityNetworks and Complexityhttp://www.columbia.edu/itc/sociology/watts/w3233/
in Social SystemsColumbia UniversityScaling in Networkshttp://comet.columbia.edu/courses/elen_e9701/2001/outline.html

University of CaliforniaNetworks and Complexityhttp://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/Anthro179a/SocialDynamics02.html
at IrvineUniversity of PennsylvaniaNetworked Lifehttp://www.cis.upenn.edu/~mkearns/teaching/NetworkedLife/

University of Indiana atStructural Data Mininghttp://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~katy/L597/
BloomingtonUniversity of Patras (Greece)Networkshttp://nicomedia.math.upatras.gr/courses/mnets/index_en.html
ApplicationsUniversity of Michigan,Information Retrievalhttp://tangra.si.umich.edu/~radev/650/
and relatedAnn Arbor
coursesCornell UniversityStructure of Informationhttp://www.cs.cornell.edu/Courses/cs685/2002fa/
NetworksMassachusetts Institute ofComplex Human Networkshttp://web.media.mit.edu/~tanzeem/cohn/CoHN.htm
TechnologyReading Group
Virginia TechRecommender Systemshttp://people.cs.vt.edu/~ramakris/Courses/CS6604-RS/outline.html

Boston CollegeSocial Network Analysishttp://www.analytictech.com/essex/schedule.htm

University of TorontoSocial Network Analysishttp://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/courses/gradnet01.htm
tions, social filtering, and economic alliances. The third ap-plication area, infrastructure and communication networks,
ranges from the Internet and the World Wide Web to power
grids, phone networks, and sensor networks.In the following sections the committee describes in somedetail the core concepts, followed by a short discussion of
the three application areas. Table C-3 lists some core mate-
rial that could be expected in network science courses.NETWORK STRUCTUREThe elementary attributes of all networks are the nodes,which are the basic units of a system, and the links, which
are the connections between the nodes. Both the nodes and
the links can widely differ in different fields. For example,
the nodes might be humans or scientists in social networks;
molecules, genes, or neurons in biology; routers or trans-
formers in infrastructural networks; and Web pages or re-
search publications in information networks. Similarly, the
links might be friendships, alliances, reactions, synapses,
optical and copper cables, URLs, or citations. The totality of
the nodes and the links defines a network, often representedin graphic form as a connectivity matrix, telling us whichnodes are directly connected to each other. Given that the
study of networks was traditionally part of graph theory, a
branch of mathematics with long and distinguished history,
most of the language that network theory uses today has its
roots in graph theory. A network map (or connectivity ma-
trix) is typically the starting point for characterizing the
structure or topology of any network.Once a network has been mapped, the first priority is tocharacterize its topological and structural features. Degree
of connectivity represents the most elementary measure of a
node, specifying the number of links a node has to other
nodes. Much can be learned about a network by inspecting
the degree distribution, which in its simplest manifestation
is a histogram of the number of nodes with a given degree.
Other important measures include the shortest path between
two nodes, which plays a key role in identifying small-world
effects; the diameter, which is the distance between the two
most distant nodes; the subgraphs and communities that
characterize the relationship between small subsets of nodes
within a network; the spectral properties, which help us cap-
ture a series of local and global network characteristics; and,Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62APPENDIX CTABLE C-3Content of a Typical Network Science
CourseSubjectContent
Core conceptsReal-world networks
Characterization and classifying networksand their componentsNetwork modelingNetwork interpretationFlow and routing
and processesAggregation and growth
Communication and coordinationBehavior: networks asPerformance and scaling
dynamic entitiesRobustness
Routing and congestionDisruptabilityEngineering methods inNetwork design
network scienceNetwork analysis
Applications of networkInformation and communication network
scienceBiological networks
Social networksControl and mechanical systems
Industrial applicationsMilitary applicationsTABLE C-2Real-World Networks Appearing in Courses
Discipline/CourseType of Network
Infrastructure andPower grid
communications networksInternet
Public switched telephone networkInformation and contentWorld Wide Web
distribution networksBroadcast
SensorsSearchSocial networksCollaboration
CommunitiesSocial filtering and recommendationsEconomic
LinguisticComputing networksNeural nets
Petri netsCellular automata
Interacting intelligent agentsEngineering systemsControl networks
Integrated circuitsQueuing networks
Process networksTransportation networksSupply chains and manufacturingResearch networksScientific grid
CollaborationsBlogs and online journalsMilitary networksTerrorist networks
Intelligence networks
Logistics networksBiological networksMetabolism
Gene and protein interactionsBiomanufacturing
Regulatory and control networksEcological networks and food websViruses and epidemicsfinally, the link strength or weight, which characterizes thenature of the interactions between different nodes.Based on these measures, real networks may be classifiedin perhaps two or three major classes. First, there is a class
known as regular networks, or graphs, in which the degree
of all the nodes assumes the same value or only a few dis-
crete values and the underlying network has a regular, re-
petitive structure. Such regular graphs approximate the struc-
ture of most crystals, as well as a number of other objects,
engineered and natural, from the retina of the eye to the roads
of some large cities (like New York). Much attention, how-
ever, has focused on random networks, systems in which the
nodes are randomly connected to each other. In such net-
works the degrees follows a Poisson distribution. Despitetheir important role in network theory, we do not know ofmajor real networks that would be fully random. Finally, the
availability of large-scale network maps has led to the dis-
covery that many real networks are neither regular nor fully
random but, rather, scale-free. They have a heavily tailed
degree distributionÑthat is, there are significant (order of
magnitude) differences in the degree of different nodes.
Scale-free networks describe the cell, the Web, the Internet,
and many collaboration and social and economic networks.
While many real networks are intermediate between these
three classes, this classification captures some of the basic
primitives used in many courses on networks and most net-
works are characterized in terms of the three classes.An important question surfacing in many network-sci-
ence-related courses is the following: What processes and
mechanisms give rise to the network characteristics dis-
cussed in the preceding section? A closely related question
is this: How do we generate networks with structural charac-
teristics that mimic the properties of selected real networks?
Network models, introduced to answer these two questions,
are an important part of most network science courses (see
Table C-4). These models have two main functions. First,
some models aim to mimic, in a simplified form, the emer-
gence and evolution of real networks, helping us to under-
stand the mechanism responsible for the formation of real
networks. Second, to test the impact of selected network
characteristics on the networkÕs behavior, we need to gener-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C63ate synthetic networks with preset properties. Given theseneeds, network modeling is one of the most highly studied
components of network science.Historically the most studied model is the random net-work model explored by Erdos and Renyi, which generates
networks by placing the links randomly between the nodes.
Random networks represent an important reference frame in
network modeling. Despite the fact that we do not know of
real networks that are captured by this model, given that most
of its characteristics can be calculated exactly, it represents
an important theoretical tool against which various real net-
works and hypotheses can be tested. While scale-free net-
work models represent a recent addition to the network lit-
erature, given that many real networks of interest, from
biology to computer science, have scale-free characteristics,
in the past few years they have become the most investigated
class of model. Several models are available to generate
scale-free networks. The most studied one was introduced
by Barab⁄si and Albert (1999) to capture the formation of a
real network. It involves two main ingredients, growth and
preferential attachment. Given the diversity of networks, a
whole class of models has been introduced that incorporate
other mechanisms affecting a networkÕs evolution, from fit-
ness to node and link removal and aging. In addition, a num-
ber of models do not capture the network formation process
but result in scale-free topologies through either a fitness-
driven or optimization procedure. Despite the important
theoretical role these models play, there is no clear evidence
that real networks would be shaped by these processes. The
small world model, introduced by Watts and Strogatz (1998),
interpolates between regular and random networks and has
also generated significant theoretical interest.TABLE C-4Network Models Commonly Used to
Generate Network Topologies and Analytical Tools Used
to Characterize and Study the Properties of ModelsNetwork ModelsAnalytical Tools
Random networksExact methods
Erdos-Renyi modelDiscrete math
Percolation basedCombinatorics
Scale-free modelsGraph theory
Growth and preferential attachmentDynamical systems
Static modelsMaster and rate equations

OptimizationMean field theory
Static modelsGenerating functions
Small-world modelStochastic networks

Optimized topologiesStatistical mechanics
Agent-based modelsClustering toolsUnderstanding the properties of these networks requires anumber of analytical tools that have been developed by a
number of fields, from discrete mathematics to statistical
mechanics. The study of random networks has a long his-
tory, using exact methods developed in graph theory, combi-
natorics, probability theory, and stochastic processes. Scale-
free network models, which represent graphs that change in
time, are typically studied using methods based on rate and
master equations capable of precisely predicting the degree
distribution and other characteristics of scale-free networks.
In some cases mathematicians have employed exact meth-
ods and the tools of dynamical systems and percolation
theory to obtain exact results for these networks. Optimiza-
tion and genetic algorithms have been used to generate opti-
mized networks. Finally, in order to identify communities
and groups in networks there has been a cross-disciplinary
interest in developing network clustering methods.NETWORK DYNAMICSThe specification of the dynamics that characterize a net-work is less straightforward because these dynamics tend to
be rather different in the various applications areas. As men-
tioned in Chapter 3, the examples range from phase transi-
tions in physical systems, to chemical reactions governed by
rate equations, to sociological interactions between people.
Here we develop just one example from the computer sci-
ence discipline.Computers in a network must often be able to broadcastmessages to all other computers in the network. The simplis-
tic protocol would require that each computer maintain a
view of the addresses of all computers in the entire network.
If computers are constantly leaving or entering the network,
the significant problem arises of updating and maintaining a
consistent view of the network at each computer. This up-
dating of the views prevented early systems from scaling in
size. The solution was for each computer to maintain only a
small partial view of the network. The broadcast protocol is
for a computer to broadcast to each computer in its view and
have computers receiving a broadcast retransmit the mes-
sage to computers in their views. These more sophisticated
protocols that are necessary to overcome scaling problems
have lead to sophisticated mathematical techniques and al-
gorithms (Demers et al., 1987). This is just one example of
many directions in which basic theory in network science is
emerging in the computer science area and appearing in ad-
vanced courses.NETWORK FUNCTIONThe purpose of most networks is to transport information,people, or material. These functions often determine both
the structure and the dynamics of real networks. Therefore,
the understanding of network function has been a very active
area in a number of research fields, and it is reflected in mostNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64APPENDIX Cnetwork courses. The high degree of universality and com-monality that is present in network structure largely disap-
pears when it comes to network function, thanks to the di-
versity of the functions that networks assume in different
domains. For example, the purpose of the Internet is to trans-
fer information in an efficient manner, in contrast to the pur-
pose of the metabolic network, which is to process the chemi-
cals consumed by the cell and to turn them into the cellÕs
building blocks. Therefore, on the top of similar topologies
one can define a wide range of dynamical rules, from flow to
diffusion and contagion, that lead to different functions and
network behavior. Despite this diversity, a number of com-
mon and highly studied themes have emerged in the past few
years.One of the most studied themes focuses on diffusion onnetworks. Indeed, networks support a wide range of diffu-
sive processes that can cause serious problems in a number
of application areas. Social and informational networks are
responsible for the diffusion of ideas. Sexual and contact
networks are responsible for the spread of infectious dis-
eases and viruses, ranging from acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) to influenza to severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS). Computer and e-mail networks are re-
sponsible for the spread of electronic viruses and worms,
generating billions of dollars in damages. Finally, social and
professional networks are responsible for the spread of inno-
vations, ideas, and rumors, playing a key economic and so-
cial role. It turns out that the numerical and analytical tools
used by different fields to approach these problems are
highly similar. Yet, in the past few years, with the increasing
understanding of the topology of sexual contact networks
and computer networks, we have witnessed significant para-
digm shifts. For example, the discovery that in scale-free
networks diseases do not experience an epidemic threshold
has had a significant impact on the strategies used for epi-
demic modeling and on the design of efficient interventions.
While these processes are discussed from the perspective of
different fields, they are widely covered in a wide range of
courses, from biology to business to computer science.Network flows, describing mostly the situation whensomething tangible flows from source to destination, are an-
other class of widely studied multidisciplinary problems.
They emerge in the Internet as the flow of bits along the
physical infrastructure, in the study of metabolic networksas the flux of matter across reactions, or in transportationnetworks as, for example, the flow of cars on the highway.
In general, the network structure canalizes these flow pro-
cesses and to a high degree determines the flow rates and the
necessary capacities on each link and node.Another much-studied interdisciplinary problem is anetworkÕs ability to carry on its functions in the face of er-
rors and failures. Centered on the question of robustness and
resilience, many of these studies explore the networkÕs dy-
namical and topological integrity under node and link loss
(Dodds et al., 2003). A number of studies have shown that
there is a strong interplay between a networkÕs robustness
and its structure. For example, scale-free networks are very
robust under random node removal but highly vulnerable to
the systematic removal of their hubs. The situation becomes
even more complex if network flows are considered, which
could lead to cascading failures, such as the 2003 Northeast
electricity blackout, affecting millions of consumers (Watts,
2002). But robustness studies play a key role in designing
new drugs or in developing systems and network topologies
that are highly error resistant.Another class of much-studied problems focuses onsearch in networks, leading to algorithms and methods to
efficiently locate information in complex networked struc-
tures. These studies play a key role in a wide range of prob-
lems, from Web search algorithms to the identification of
information and expertise in an organization.REFERENCESBarab⁄si, A.L., and R. Albert. 1999. Emergence of scaling in random net-works. Science 286(5439): 509Ð512.Demers, A., D. Greene, C. Hauser, W. Irish, J. Larson, S. Shenker, H.Sturgis, D. Swinehart, and D. Terry. 1987. Epidemic algorithms forreplicated database maintenance. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Sym-posium on Principles of Distributed Computing. Vancouver, B.C.,
Canada.Dodds, P.S., D.J. Watts, and C.F. Sabel. 2003. Information exchange andthe robustness of organizational networks. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100(21): 12516Ð12521.Watts, D.J. 2002. A simple model of global cascades on random networks.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United Statesof America 99: 12516Ð12521.Watts, D.J., and S. Strogatz. 1998. Collective dynamics of Òsmall-worldÓnetworks. Nature 393(6684): 440Ð442.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65DQuestionnaire DataIn this appendix, the committee provides more detail onits analysis of responses to the questionnaire that underlies
the results presented in Chapter 6, following the same order
of presentation. After describing the questionnaire process
and further characterizing the respondents, the committee
draws on the responses to more fully characterize the re-
search communityÕs approaches to the possible field of net-
work science: both doubts about the existence of such a field
and shared notions of what it would encompass. Although
the full context from the corresponding sections of Chapter 6
is not repeated, brief summaries introduce specific details.
The appendix also contains the analysis by Katy Bırner, of
Indiana University, of the social structure of network sci-
ence revealed by the questionnaire responses.1Network science has reached its present level of visibilityfrom the convergence of two phenomena: the ever-rising im-
portance of networks for the national well-being and secu-
rity and the achievement of promising formal results (prima-
rily from graph theory) relating aspects of network topology
to network properties such as resilience. But long before this
convergence, many disciplines studied phenomena arising
from recognizable networks in their subject domains. While
some of the studies inspired increased multidisciplinary re-
search, their sheer diversity also raised significant doubts
about the coherence and usefulness of an underlying Ònet-
work scienceÓ that might investigate further substantive
commonalities across the many specific uses of networks as
we know them. If there are such commonalities, then there is
great potential benefit in pursuing better theories, tools, and
insights that address the network science core shared across
so many critical domains, and such a pursuit becomes of
pressing importance.The committee adopted an empirical approach to deter-mining the status of this emerging field, if there is one, toassessing a common core for the disparate fields of applica-tion, and to identifying the key challenges the science might
address. The committeeÕs approach was to solicit the insights
of researchers from the communities doing work in the re-
lated domains.THE QUESTIONNAIRE PROCESSAs noted in Chapter 6, the questionnaire text was devel-oped by the committee through an iterative process, starting
with the statement of task and continuing through committee
discussion and beta-testing. The focus of the committee dis-
cussion is clarity and brevity in the questionnaire and con-
sideration of the kinds of information that might reasonably
be elicited from the research community. The beta-testing
allowed committee members to assess the ease of under-
standing and responding to the questionnaire text. In its final
form, the questionnaire addressed four broad areas: the re-
spondent, the respondentÕs work, the respondentÕs view of
the potential for network science to exist as a discipline, and
an open-ended opportunity to provide further information.To avoid as far as possible prejudging the question ofwhether there exists a field of network scienceÑand, if there
is such a field, its natureÑthe questionnaire and the various
solicitations of respondents intentionally did not define the
term Ònetwork science.Ó The committee initially expected
that this lack of definition might bring many requests for
clarification from the research community; in practice, fewer

than 1 percent of those solicited explicitly made such a
request. Of those who responded to the questionnaire, 9 per-
cent indicated that the term was unclear or had no well-

defined core (see ÒDissenting Voices,Ó below). The committee
did not determine how many of those solicited decided not
to respond because the term was not defined in advance.Content of the QuestionnaireBox D-1 contains the complete online text of the result-ing questionnaire, which was posted as a National Acad-
emies of Science (NAS) Web link on December 20, 2004.1Katy Bırner, associate professor, Indiana University, ÒMapping theexpertise and social network of network science researchers,Ó briefing tothe committee on April 13, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66APPENDIX DBOX D-1 NRC Network Science SurveyThe National Research Council has commissioned a study of the possibility of identifying 
“Network Science” as a cross-disciplinary area of research worthy of enhanced attention 
and funding. The purpose of this communication is to invite you to contribute to this 

study. You have been contacted because you have been identified as a leader in an area of 

research that is pertinent to Network Science, and hence as an individual who can 

contribute significantly to the study as well as benefit from its results and consequences. 
The resulting NRC report will be published by the National Academies Press and is 
expected to influence governmental programs and funding to accelerate and to enlarge 

the benefits that a focus on Network Science can provide.We ask you to devote 15 minutes to complete the survey’s first two sections. If you have 
time and interest, please also contribute your insights to the more open-ended questions 

in sections 3 and 4.
The NRC Network Science Study Committee is grateful for your contribution, and 
encourages you to invite other researchers to contribute at this study site: 

http://www8.nationalacademies.org/survey/deps/networksci2.htm.
For further information, please click here, or contact
Dr. Charles Duke, Committee Chair, cduke@crt.xerox.com
Dr. John Hopcroft, Committee Vice-Chair, jeh17@cornell.edu
Bob Love, NRC Study Director, rlove@nas.edu
(1) Your Characteristics1a.Name:First:Middle:Last:Suffix: 1b.Contact information:
E-Mail:Phone:Website: 1c.Principal Fields of Interest 
(please mark all that apply)
Biochemistry 
Organizations theory BiologyPhysicsChemistry (other 
Political science Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D67than biochemistry) 
Computer sciences 
Public health, epidemiology 
EcologyPublic policy Economics 
PsychologyInformation 
technologySociologyInternet 
Telecommunications (other than 
Internet) 
Management 
TransportationMathematics 
Utilities MedicineOthers (please specify): 
Operations research 1d.Your position or role:(mark most appropriate one)
(Click here to choose)
If other, please describe:
1e.Your organization:
Name of organization: 
Department: 
Type of organization: (mark one)
(Click here to choose)
If other, please describe:
(2) Your Work2a.Do you consider some or all of your work potentially part of an emerging 
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68APPENDIX Dfield of network science?
YesNoIf yes,2b.Please briefly describe your particular interests in this area.
2c.Please indicate your principal collaborators, using the structure entries 
below and/or the unstructured text field labeled “Other collaborators”.
 Name: Contact information 
(website or email): 
Collaborator 1
Collaborator 2
Collaborator 3
Other collaborators:
2d.Please briefly describe specific projects under which you are pursuing 
these interests. Use either the structured entries below and/or the 
unstructured text field labeled “Other projects”.ProjectName:ProjectWebsite:PrincipalInvestigator(s):Funding Organization: 
Project 1Project 2Project 3Other projects:Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D692e.If you have other relevant websites, please list:
(3) The Field of Network Science
We would appreciate any insight you might give us on the broad questions of 
defining the proposed field: 3a.Is there an identifiable field of network science?
YesNoIf yes,3b.How would you define it? For example, what are the core topics?
3c.What are the driving applications?
3d.What are the key research challenges? If no,3e.What are the principal reasons for your answer?
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70APPENDIX D3f.Should there be such a field of study?
(4) Additional information 
We welcome any further information sources you wish to bring to our attention 
and any material you wish to provide for the Committee’s understanding of the 

field of study. No material will be used in the Report without written permission 

of the copyright holders.4a.Other people to whom you suggest we send the survey invitation. Please 
indicate using the structured entries below and/or the unstructured text field 
labeled “Other people to invite”. Name: Contact information 
(website or email): 
Invitee 1Invitee 2Invitee 3Other people to invite:
4b.Pointers to information on network science: books, key papers, websites, 
conferences, mailing lists, etc.4c.Pointers to other programs funding network science, both US and 
international:Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D71Soliciting Responses to the QuestionnaireThe goal of the ensuing solicitation was to reach as large,diverse, and representative a sample of the many relevant
research communities as feasible within the studyÕs re-
sources. Because both the full range of relevant communi-
ties and the populations of researchers within those commu-
nities could not be readily defined in advance, the primary
process of choice was a snowballing outreach. To begin the
process, 113 recognized researchers working on topics in
candidate areas clearly relevant to the possible science of
networks were sent e-mails asking them to complete the
questionnaire. These solicitations briefly described the na-
ture and purpose of the study, provided the URL (Uniform
Resource Locator) of the on-line questionnaire, and invited
the recipient to forward the announcement to other research-
ers who might be interested. The solicitation process was
then continuously iterated, drawing on the responses to iden-

tify more peopleÑcollaborators, project principal investiga-
tors, and so onÑto receive a solicitation. The snowballing
process was stopped whenever it stepped outside the field of
network science as indicated by the respondentsÑthat is, if
a respondent explicitly indicated that he or she was not work-
ing in Ònetwork science,Ó the respondentÕs list of collabora-
tors and principal investigators was not added to the pool of
names. As of April 29, 2005, a total of 2,040 people had
been directly contacted through the solicitation process.Some heuristic sanity checks were performed to catchhoax entries; only three of the responses appeared suspect,
and their content did not affect the conclusions of this study.
A variety of spot checks were performed. For example, Is
the response internally consistent? Does it appear to name
nonexistent or wildly irrelevant people, programs, or organi-
zations? Does a respondent appear as an author in the techni-
cal literature (as indexed by Google Scholar Beta). How-ever, such checks were limited and are indicative at best; athorough screening analysis was not attempted.There are many inherent limitations to a snowballing pro-cess. For instance, poorly connected members of the under-
lying communities might be left out, or there could be under-
or overrepresentation of communities or specific programs
owing to differences in willingness to respond to such a ques-

tionnaire or to provide information that would allow further
snowballing. In addition, the committee observed that a few
highly connected people provided no information on col-
laborators or projects: Instead of listing names and projects,
they sent replies such as Òtoo many to list.Ó The committee
was especially concerned about these outreach limitations,
as the on-going questionnaire analysis quickly demonstrated
that many target communities were weakly interacting.The committee followed several ancillary processes tooffset the limitations of snowball instituted coverage by
bringing in additional sources of names throughout the so-
licitation process: literature citation studies, sequential trac-
ing of collaborative ventures, conference attendance, mail-
ing lists, and personal interviews with the authors of recent
books and reviews.The citation study and analysis looked at some selectedresearchersÕ work and collected the names of coauthors, cited
authors, and authors who cited those researchersÕ work. A
key goal of this analysis was to improve the coverage of
subject fields that had not yet seen many questionnaire re-
sponses. Although resource limitations constrained the
amount of citation analysis that could be performed, the
amount that was done succeeded in introducing several hun-
dred names that had not been uncovered by the snowballing
process to that point. Spot checks suggest that at least sev-
eral thousand additional names might have been produced
by more intensive citation tracking.4d.Additional material the NRC NetSci Committee should consider (for example: course syllabi, reading lists):
Submit
The National Academies 
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72APPENDIX DIn view of the methodological concern over potentiallyuneven community representation due to systematically
varying response rates, it might be worth noting that (1) the
number of new names provided by each respondent was not
strongly dependent on his or her self-identified field of study
and (2) the overall rates of response to the committeeÕs so-
licitations were not strongly dependent on the fields of study
of the respondents who provided the names to solicit. Simi-
larly, the number of new names provided by respondents
was independent of whether the respondents were from the
United States or not. Regardless of field or location, each
respondent provided a mean of 2.8 names that had not been
previously identified in the study.The committee recognizes that it cannot quantify the com-pleteness of the resulting coverage nor the degree to which
the responses are statistically representative of the underly-
ing communities of researchers (see also the discussion of
coverage saturation below). For this reason, some classes of
analysis could not be reliably performed and are not ad-
dressed in this report: For example, the committee explicitly
chose not to attempt to identify a top-100 list of researchers,
programs, or institutions. Nonetheless, its analysis of the key

responses relating to the existence and nature of a possible
field of network science appears solid: The responses are
stable across all responses obtained when they are partitioned
by such factors as when in the solicitation process the re-
sponse was received, whether the response was directly so-
licited or not, whether a solicitation was generated by snow-
balling or from the ancillary sources, which research

communities the respondents self-identified as their own,
and what country the respondents worked in. Some distinct
differences appear between respondents who believe there is
a field of network science and those who do not; these differ-
ences are described below.The committee is confident that the solicitation process,despite the multiple approaches and continued effort, did not
saturate the population of researchers whose work toucheson the potential field of network science. A variety of heuris-tic measures contribute to this confidence. The results from
the limited citation analysis have been mentioned above.
Another reason for the committeeÕs confidence is that new
names (that is, names not previously encountered in ques-
tionnaire responses or ancillary sources) continued to be pro-
vided by successive increments of responses without letup
until the end of the study (see Figure D-1). The latest re-
sponses provided essentially as many new names as the
earliest ones; in other words, the empirical probability of a
response-provided name falling outside the set of already-
known names did not decrease as the number of responses
grew from 50 to over 600.A similar conclusion is suggested by the fact that once aname is cited by a respondent, it is unlikely to be cited by
any other respondent: 71 percent of cited names are never
cited again. In short, there is no indication of saturation in
the coverage, so one may conclude that the questionnaire
solicitation process does not approximate complete cover-
age of those who would be interested.THE RESPONDENTSOver half of the responses (57 percent) came from peoplewho had been directly invited during the snowballing pro-
cess; the remaining spontaneous responses are believed to
have largely been induced by individuals forwarding the so-
licitation note and by its dissemination in online mailing lists
(see Figure D-1). The questionnaire did not ask how the re-
spondent learned of the study, but this substantial proportion
of spontaneous responses sheds light on both the limitations
of the committeeÕs explicit snowballing and the effective-
ness of using additional solicitation mechanisms. In aggre-
gate, names of 2,374 distinct people were provided by these
responses and the ancillary sources, although valid e-mail
addresses were identified for only 2,123 of them.FIGURE D-1New names by response ID.
150139143137162159103134133123143129050100150200Number of New Names1-51-101-150151-200201-250251-300301-350351-400401-450451-500501-550551-60010050Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D73Geographic LocalesQuestionnaire responses were received from 29 countries;the two most recurrent were the United States (497 responses
representing 39 states) and Canada (23 responses represent-
ing 6 provinces) (see Figure D-2).In analyzing each question, the results for individualcountries were compared against the aggregate results (see
Tables D-1 and D-2). Because most countries had few en-
tries, U.S. responses were compared with the aggregate fig-
ures for all non-U.S. responses. No significant differences
appeared. For example, the percentages of those self-identi-
fying their work as being in network science, of those stating
there is an identifiable field of network science, and of those
providing definitions, interests, application, and challenges
were closely comparable. Similarly, there were no signifi-
cant differences in the mean number per response of fields
selected; collaborators; projects; or new names (or of new
names that later responded). This was also true when U.S.
responses were analyzed by state (see Figure D-3 and Table
D-3).Fields of StudyThe best-represented fields, as identified by the respon-dents, are computer science (and its closely related areas),
other (described in more detail below), math, biology, and
physics (see Figure D-4).FIGURE D-2Countries where respondents were located.
44445568101419231324970100200300400500600Number of ResponsesBelgiumBrazilKoreaUnknownAustraliaFranceIsraelSpainItalyGermanyGreat BritainCanadaAll known non-U.S.United StatesThe questionnaire was structured to allow each respon-dent to indicate more than one field of interest, and this
opportunity was heavily used: the mean number of fields
selected by a respondent was 3.6, and 80 percent of the
respondents selected more than one field. For this reason,
the response-per-field figures shown in Table D-4 are
3.6times the number of responses.
These data also demonstrate the success of the solicita-tion process in bringing in research communities that had
not been identified in advance as involved in network sci-
ence: Some 159 (28 percent) of the responses indicated a
field other than the fields initially provided by the online
questionnaire (see Figure D-5). Analysis of the free-form
text entries describing these other fields shows great diver-
sity, with the most numerous being engineering, geosciences,
and human communication. The category labeled ÒUnclassi-
fied otherÓ represents fields with single entries; examples
include botany and economic history.The respondents overwhelmingly came from academia;of the 619 respondents (98 percent of all responses) who
indicated the type of organization they worked in, the ques-
tionnaire received only 46 (7 percent) from industry and only

12 (2 percent) from the military (see Table D-5). One sig-
nificant contributor to the low representation from industry
and the military was the comparative difficulty of finding e-
mail addresses or other contact information for people out-
side academia. Compounding this problem, the effectivenessNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74APPENDIX DTABLE D-2Canadian Respondent Provinces
Percent ofNumber ofPercent of AllRespondents
RespondentsRespondentsin Canada
Who SelectedWho SelectedWho Selected
Provincethe Provincethe Provincethe Province
Alberta10.24.3
British Columbia71.130.4

Newfoundland30.513.0
Nova Scotia30.513.0
Ontario81.334.8

Quebec10.24.3
TABLE D-1RespondentÕs Country
Number ofPercent of

RespondentsRespondents
Who SelectedWho Selected
Countrythe Countrythe Country
Known non-U.S.13220.9
Argentina10.2
Australia50.8

Belgium40.6
Brazil40.6
Bulgaria10.2

Canada233.6
China20.3
Denmark30.5

France50.8
Germany142.2
Great Britain193.0

Greece10.2
Hungary10.2
India20.3

Israel60.9
Italy101.6
Japan30.5

Korea40.6
Mexico10.2
Netherlands20.3

New Zealand10.2
Poland10.2
Portugal20.3

Russia20.3
South Africa10.2
Spain81.3

Sweden30.5
Switzerland30.5
United States49778.5

Unknown40.6
of snowballing was significantly greater for academic re-spondents: On average, each response from academia pro-
vided 3.1 new names, while responses from outside aca-
demia provided only 2.1 new names. In turn, the people
identified by academic respondents were also 50 percent
more likely to respond. The committee speculates that re-
searchers in academia may perceive more incentive to re-
spond and may attach more importance to influencing the
study. Judging from personal experience and anecdotal evi-
dence, industrial researchers today are under intense pres-
sure to focus on near-term financial return.The respondents were nearly unanimous in describing
their own work as related to network science: Only 24 re-
spondents (4 percent) did not so describe it. An additional 1
percent of the solicitations elicited personal e-mails to the
committee indicating that the recipient declined to submit
the questionnaire, usually because he or she did not work in
the area (see Table D-6). The near unanimity on working innetwork science was independent of the specific fields thatresearchers worked in and of the country where they worked.
Ninety-seven percent of respondents from academia said
they worked in network science, as did 93 percent of the
other respondents. Overall, this result is a reminder that the
results of the questionnaire reflect self-selection on the part
of those who responded; it must also be considered in light
of the fact that only 70 percent of these respondents indi-
cated that there was an identifiable field of network science
(see ÒDissenting Voices,Ó below).DISSENTING VOICESThe questionnaire analysis demonstrates that there is awidespread but not universal belief among the respondents
that there is an identifiable field of network science. Al-
though 95 percent classify their own work as potentially be-
longing to an emerging field of network science, only 70
percent state that such a field is currently identifiable. The
main reasons for saying there is no such field are that the
term has no coherent definition, that it is broad to the point
of vacuity, that it is too soon to define the field, that the field
is merely a new name for an already existing field, or that it
represents the wrong approach.The lack of consensus is shown clearly in the question-naire responses: Of the responses that had been received as
of April 29, 2005, only 442 (70 percent) answered yes to
Q3a: Is there an identifiable field of network science? Of the
remaining responses, 146 (23 percent) answered no and 45
(7 percent) did not answer. These percentages proved stable
as the number of responses grew and were only mildly de-
pendent on the field of study of a respondent. Table D-7 lists
the fields in decreasing order of the proportion of positive
responses to the question. Only political science and public
policy are notably more skeptical. Many more fields have
yes percentages above the mean for the entire sample than
below it: This ÒLake WobegonÓ effect primarily arises from
a positive correlation between answering yes to this question
and marking oneself in more fields of study.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D75FIGURE D-3States where respondents were located.
911111212161818202324284566101020406080100120Number of ResponsesNorth CarolinaFloridaTexasMichiganWisconsinIndianaMarylandNew MexicoIllinoisNew JerseyVirginiaPennsylvaniaNew YorkMassachusettsCaliforniaAlthough 23 percent of the respondents explicitly statedthat there was no such identifiable field, there is some sign in
the results that more than 23 percent felt that the question
was debatable: 26 percent answered Q3e, ÒIf no, what are
the principal reasons for your answer?Ó and 33 percent an-
swered Q3f, ÒShould there be such a field of study?ÓQ3e allowed free-form descriptions of the principal rea-son for saying there was no identifiable field of network sci-
ence. The committee analysis of the 163 responses to this
question indicates five broad reasons; a given respondent
often would offer more than one reason (see Figure D-6). In
addition, respondents also said that the field suffered from
excessive hype.The five broad reasons there is no field of network sci-ence are these:¥The term is unclear or has no coherent core. For ex-ample, ÒNetwork science combines two words such
that the resulting pair specifies less information than
either individual word alone.Ó¥The term reflects a field that is still emerging, so it istoo early to tell if it will bear substantive results. Thisphrasing may occasionally be a more tactful variationon the preceding wording, but often specific emerging
application domains are mentioned.¥The work labeled network science is simply part ofsome specific existing fields under a new name. There
is disagreement on just what existing field it is; fre-
quent candidates include graph theory, complexity
theory, systems theory, computer science, and control
theory.¥The phrase is too broad, to the point of being vacuous:anything can be represented as a network, but doing so
does not provide meaningful insight. For example,
ÒNetwork theories turn out wrong when applied to
particular application areas.Ó¥The idea of developing network science as a separatefield is a wrong or barren approach. For example, ÒThe
interesting questions arise from function, rather than
topology.Ó These answers agree that there is work that
can be called network science but disagree that devel-
oping it as a discipline science will benefit the many
other application domains that refer to networks in
some form. When these comments indicate what theNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76APPENDIX DÒwrong approachÓ is, they often mention the use ofconnectivity or topology alone as defining the scope
of network science.The responses also indicate that skepticism about the ex-istence of network science is encouraged by a perception
that the term Ònetwork scienceÓ has become trendy, both
overstated in its claims and overused as a justification for
other work. One explicit aspect in the expressions of per-
ceived over claiming and overuse is that if network science
is defined solely in terms of Òanything described as con-nected,Ó there is little that can be excluded from the claimedrealm of application.DEFINING THE FIELDThe first question in proposing a possible discipline ofÒnetwork scienceÓ is this: What are we studying? As has
already been seen in this report, many domains use the word
Ònetwork,Ó but what are the defining characteristics that let
us recognize a network as a subject for study in Ònetwork
scienceÓ?Two questions on the questionnaire are directly designedto address this issue: question 3a, which asks whether there
is a defined field of network science, and question 3b, which
asks those who responded yes to 3a to define the field as
they see it. The 436 responses received through April 29,
2005, to these specific questions (out of 633 total responses)
give the committee empirical data on the nature of Ònetwork
scienceÓ as practiced by current researchers in the various
domains. In addition, the responses to four other questions
proved highly relevant to this subsection and were reviewed
for consistency with the conclusions presented here: ques-
tion 2b, which asks the respondent to describe his or her
current research interests (596 responses); question 2d,
which addresses specific current research projects (436 re-
sponses); question 3c, which asks about the driving applica-
tions of network science (427 responses); and question 3d,
which asks about research challenges in the area (424 re-
sponses). These results must also be viewed taking into ac-
count that 30 percent of respondents did not believe such a
field is currently identifiable; their concerns are discussed
above.The many definitions and research interests provided bythe research community did allow formulating a potential
core definition of network science. To organize its descrip-
tion of this core, the committee structured its analysis in
terms of two basic components that identify any field of
study; this initial organization was chosen to be high level,
to focus on the information that was needed without prejudg-
ing what might actually be found in the questionnaire data:¥The subject being studied. If a well-defined field ofÒnetwork scienceÓ is to exist, the defining attributes of
a ÒnetworkÓ must be determined. A given network or
class of networks can then be characterized by specific
input values of these attributes. An attribute may have
very complex or dynamic values, defined by state
structures, algorithms, models, or empirical data.¥The derived properties of interest. When one solves aproblem in Ònetwork science,Ó what does one want to
know? What derived properties or insights arise from
the input attributes of the networks being studied? Here
again, a proposed network science requires that these
kinds of output properties can be meaningfully identi-
fied across the range of application domains.TABLE D-3Respondent States
Percent ofNumber ofPercent of AllRespondents
RespondentsRespondentsin the U.S.
Who SelectedWho SelectedWho Selected
Statethe Statethe Statethe State
Alabama20.30.4
Arizona71.11.4

California10116.020.3
Colorado81.31.6
Connecticut20.30.4

Delaware10.20.2
District of Columbia30.50.6
Florida111.72.2

Georgia60.91.2
Hawaii60.91.2
Illinois203.24.0

Indiana162.53.2
Iowa20.30.4
Kentucky40.60.8

Louisiana10.20.2
Maryland182.83.6
Massachusetts6610.413.3

Michigan121.92.4
Minnesota71.11.4
Mississippi10.20.2

Missouri50.81.0
New Hampshire10.20.2
New Jersey233.64.6

New Mexico182.83.6
New York457.19.1
North Carolina91.41.8

North Dakota10.20.2
Ohio60.91.2
Oklahoma10.20.2

Oregon30.50.6
Pennsylvania284.45.6
Rhode Island20.30.4

South Carolina20.30.4
Tennessee50.81.0
Texas111.72.2

Vermont20.30.4
Virginia243.84.8
Washington50.81.0

Wisconsin121.92.4
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D77If these questions have common answers across manyapplication domains, then network science might then be
identified as the insights, lexicon, measurements, theories,
tools, techniques, and heuristics that allow one to map be-
tween the desired output properties of given networks and
their input attributes. Mapping is needed in both directions:
determining the output properties that arise from specific
input attributes, and determining the input attributes that
could be designed into a new network or achieved by inter-
vening in an existing network to realize particular output
properties. If network science is to meaningfully be said to
exist, these techniques must be effective throughout many
application domains, with well-understood means to apply
the general methods to specific domains. For a hypothetical
example, one might envision a simulation tool that efficiently
dealt with network models across a wide range of size and
timescales, with a growing suite of model libraries custom-
ized to specific application domains: ecological networks,
metabolic networks, transportation networks, and so on.Just as the fundamental concepts of structure and dynam-ics shape the committeeÕs overall discussion, they also pro-
vide the key to decomposing the inputs, problem dimensions,
and outputs of network science into specific roles within a
given research or engineering study. Structure and dynamics
are orthogonal abstractions applicable to each of these fac-
tors: Indeed, a given input attribute, problem dimension, or
output property may contribute to both the structural and
dynamic aspects of a given study, depending on the focus
and intent of the study.FIGURE D-4Fields selected by respondents.
TABLE D-4Responses per Field
Number ofPercent ofMean Number
RespondentsRespondentsof Fields
FieldWho SelectedWho SelectedSelected
Computer science23240.84.82
Information technology18632.75.28
Internet17831.35.32

Other15928.03.91
Math13724.15.51
Biology13623.94.51

Physics10318.14.88
Telecom9817.35.50
Operations research9015.85.90

Organization theory8615.16.21
Sociology8014.15.68
Ecology7513.25.53

Economics7413.06.92
Management6912.16.42
Public policy6110.76.79

Biochemistry5910.45.27
Political science478.36.15
Medicine447.75.75

Public health427.46.31
Psychology366.36.97
Transportation346.06.35

Chemistry223.96.73
Utilities183.26.44
Overall respondentsTotal2,066363.4
Mean89.8315.83.64
Median7513.23.00
050100150200250300FieldResponses25720519017915414211310810796ComputerscienceITInternetOtherMathBiologyPhysicsTelecomOperationsresearchOrganizationNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78APPENDIX DTABLE D-5Respondent Affiliations
Organization TypeResponses
University455
Other nonprofit38

Industry46
Private consultant18
Military12

Other governmental30
Other20
TOTAL619
TABLE D-6Is Your Work Potentially Part of an
Emerging Field of Network Science?YesNoDidnÕt Say
FieldNo.%No.%No.%
Biochemistry611000000
Biology141991100

Chemistry251000000
Computer science250976210
Ecology75954500

Economics83991100
Internet183967400
Information technology196969400

Management74945600
Math149974311
Medicine44981200

Operations research106991100
Organization theory94981111
Other169949511

Physics110973300
Political science51980012
Psychology38971300

Public health431000000
Public policy69991100
Sociology81962211

Telecommunications107991100
Transportation41981200
Utilities21912900
FIGURE D-5Most frequently mentioned fields.
05101520253035404550FieldNo. of Responses4431141099887766Unclassified otherEngineering GeosciencesHuman communications EnvironmentOceanographyControl theory InfrastructuresSystemsSystems biologyAnthropologyNeuroscienceThe reader may find it useful to supplement the some-what abstract definitions in the following subsection with
the hypothetical description of a highly simplified network-
ing problem given further on.Defining Attributes of a NetworkAs noted in Chapter 6, analysis of the responses revealsthree common attributes of networks: (1) they consist of
nodes connected by links; (2) nodes exchange resources

across the links; (3) nodes only interact through direct link-
age; for brevity, these attributes are designated Òconnectiv-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D79TABLE D-7Is There an Identifiable Field of Network
Science?YesNoDidnÕt Say
FieldNo.%No.%No.%
Utilities20872914
Physics9281181633
Public health347971625
Transportation337981912

Medicine357881824
Biology11077241786
Ecology6076151945

Biochemistry4675132123
Telecommunications8175201976
Math11575332164

Information technology152744120126
Economics6274182145
Internet138733820147

Chemistry187272800
Psychology287292325
Computer science184716124125

Sociology5970192367
Operations research7570272555
Other124694123148

Organization theory6669262744
Management5367202568
Political science3160173348

Public policy4057243469
FIGURE D-6Reasons for saying there is no field of network science.
05101520253035Wrong approachToo broadOther  field(s)EmergingUnclear, no coreFraction of ÒWhy NotÓ Responses Citing a Reason (%)ity,Ó Òexchange,Ó and Òlocality.Ó Table D-8 summarizes thestructural and dynamic composition of these attributes.Few responses simultaneously capture all three attributes,but across a wide range of subject domains, these three at-
tributes consistently appear explicitly or by implication in
more domain-specific entries. The proportion of responses
driving the committeeÕs identification of each input attribute
is shown in Figure D-7. Because all three attributes are in-
herent to defining and understanding a network, the discus-
sion of each attribute has frequent cross-references to the
other attributes.ConnectivityA network has a well-defined connection topology, inwhich each discrete entity (ÒnodeÓ in graph-theoretic termi-
nology) has a finite number of defined connections (ÒlinksÓ)
to other nodes. A given link is commonly, but not necessar-
ily, point to point: that is, it connects two nodes. Multipoint
links, where they exist, may often be adequately modeled as
collections of point-to-point links. A given link may or may
not have a defined direction (Òfrom node A to node BÓ);
undirected links may generally be modeled as pairs of di-
rected links. The set of links associated with a given node
may change over time, but at any given moment a node has
only a finite number of nodes to which it is linked (its Òneigh-
borsÓ). The nodes and links are defined by both structural
attributes and dynamic attributes. The structural attributes
include the current snapshot of the underlying graph: which
nodes are linked to which others. Structural attributes alsoNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80APPENDIX DTABLE D-8Summary Decomposition of the Input Attributes of Networks
AttributeStructureDynamics
ConnectivityÑnodes, links,The structural constraints and permissible states of nodesThe state transition models of the nodes an
d links thatand their specificationsand links. The snapshot at a given instant of the nodes,define their behavior. The mechanisms for the a
ddition,links, and their attributes (the values of their structural statemodification, and deletion of nodes, links, and their

variables). Note that locality implies that individual nodesspecifications.
cannot have a consistent view of the complete networkstructure unless the structure changes slowly relative to
exchange.ExchangeÑresources andResource classes, specification of the mechanisms andStorage and transport capacities. Interactions betwe
entheir transport, storage, andresources that realize resource transformation.resource exchanges. Latencies in transport and
transformationtransformation. Degradation of resources during transportor storage.LocalityÑnode behaviorThe required capabilities that must be installed in nodes andThe definition of the local behavioral rules
 that governand state; interactions aslinks to support their local behavior.interactions between agents.
exchanges over linksFIGURE D-7Responses identifying network attributes.
0102030405060LocalityExchangeConnectivityFraction of Responses to Question 3b Citing an Attribute (%)include exchange-related attributes, such as capacity. Thedynamic attributes include evolution of the underlying graph
(addition and deletion of nodes and links) and the resource
exchange attributes of these nodes such as transit time across
links and resource transformation mechanisms.ExchangeThe connection topology exists in order to transport oneor more classes of resource between nodes; indeed, a link is
represented as existing between two nodes if and only if re-
sources of significance to the network domain can be di-
rectly transported from one of the nodes to the other without
the intervention of other nodes along the transport path. An
instance of a network is then characterized by the classes of
resource that constitute its exchanged payload of interest. To
make this abstract characterization concrete, some examples
of resources exchanged in specific networks include bits incomputer nets; cargo for bulk transportation; people for pas-senger flights; energy for chemical reaction networks; and
influence for social relations.The same system can be viewed as a different networkdepending on which resource exchanges are of interest, so
that, for example, the same system might be analyzed as an
electrical power distribution network when the resource of
interest is electricity and as a telecommunications network
when the resource is information encoded as bits distributed
over the electric lines. A given network may carry multiple
classes of resource, whose differences are reflected in the
constraint models that characterize and interrelate the
networkÕs attributes (see below). In defining the exchanges
of a given network, one must define such characteristics,
whether a resource exchange is logically continuous (a
stream) or in discrete independent units, how the resources
are transported over the links and stored at the nodes, and
what resource transformations are performed at nodes orNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D81FIGURE D-8Derived properties of networks mentioned by respondents.
0102030405060Fraction of Definitions Mentioning the Derived Property (%)ScalabilityResilienceEfficiencyCostEvolutionCharacterizationduring transit over links. Technically, there is also short-term storage on the links, because transport speeds are finite.LocalityThe exchanged resources are delivered, and their effectstake place, only in local interactions (node to link, link to
node). There is no GodÕs-eye view of effects and resources,
and the effects take time to propagate. This locality of inter-
action implies autonomous agents acting on locally avail-
able state. (When focusing on locality issues, the term
ÒagentÓ may therefore be used instead of Ònode.Ó) Like the
other key attributes of a network, locality appears in both the
structural and behavioral components of a networkÕs defini-
tion. Each node and link includes in its structure its available
resources, its individual goals (which may be modeled as
local values for the cost models and benefit models discussed
below), and the mechanisms available to it for achieving
them. The dynamic components of a networkÕs locality defi-
nition can be expressed as algorithms for maintaining local
state and exchanging resources.In particular, all networks reflect the dynamic conse-quences of locality, yielding phenomena that appear across
the many application domains of network science, such as
wavefront effects in the spread of resources and feedback
and stability issues due to control delays. A fundamental
consequence of locality is that globally optimal structure and
behavior are hostage to the independent local optimizations
of the individual nodes and links. The aggregate network
may become trapped in an equilibrium in which the systemis maintained in a nonoptimal state by the independent opti-mization behaviors of its individual components. Locality
often entails an analysis approach that is essentially game-
theoretic.Derived Properties of NetworksAnalysis of the proposed definitions in the questionnaireresponses also identified six derived properties that spanned
a wide range of application domains: characterization, cost,
efficiency, evolution, resilience, and scalability (see Figure
D-8). The responses driving the committeeÕs identification
of the common derived properties of interest in network sci-
ence are tabulated in Table D-9.Shared Aspects of the Network Science Problem SpaceBeyond these shared input attributes and derived proper-ties of interest to problems in network science, several ancil-
lary concerns were shared across many application domains;
these may be broadly classified as constraint models and
problem dimensions.Constraint ModelsThe network attributes are tied together by cost and ben-efit models that define the mapping from a networkÕs links,
nodes, exchange model, and local agents to derived penalty
and merit figures. The networkÕs creation, operation, and
behavior, as well as its growth, repair, and evolution, areNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82APPENDIX Ddriven by these defining constraint models through feedbackor signaling mechanisms.The cost models and benefit models may have both struc-tural components (determined by static attributes of the net-
work) and dynamic components. ÒCostÓ is an abstract term
measuring consumption of resources or decrease in value;
while engineered networks may have cost models that out-
put actual dollar costs (among other penalty factors), many
networks measure costs in other units. The dynamic compo-
nents of a cost model reflect aspects of the temporal behav-
ior of the network connectivity and exchange, including the
degradation of an exchanged resourceÕs value and the con-
sumption of resources on the nodes and links. As mentioned
above, both nodes and links have dynamic components to
their definition in that they transform resources passing
through them. The transformation is reflected in both cost
models and benefit models defining the network. Depending
on a given networkÕs definition, a transformation may con-
tribute to either cost or benefit or both. For a concrete ex-
ample, the transformation of electrical energy into heat may
appear in the constraint models defining a power distribu-
tion grid not as a contribution to the penalty figures but as a
contribution to the benefit model of a heating system.The output penalty and merit figures generated by anetworkÕs constraint models are where the end-to-end andsystemwide attributes of a network first emerge into view asa network is defined. The concomitant feedback or signaling
mechanisms may be implicit or explicit and may be any mix-
ture of in-band and out-of-band. In-band feedback mecha-
nisms are those exploiting signaling explicitly carried or
implied by components of the resources exchanged.Note that the existence of constraint models is an inherentfactor in network science research and one of the dominant
reasons for interdisciplinary approaches. All networks im-
plicitly or explicitly have one critical set of dynamic cost
models: The links have finite speeds for exchanging re-
sources and nodes have finite throughput. In particular, the
costs derived from these models ensure that the processing
of exchanges and the actions of the feedback mechanisms
occur locally (see Table D-10).Driving DimensionsThe analysis of the questionnaire responses also identi-fied three additional significant and common dimensions that
are drivers of the difficulty of many associated challenges
and of the research effort to address them: complexity, scale
range, and network context.Note that these three dimensions, although widely men-tioned in the responses and critical to the challenges andTABLE D-9Summary Decomposition of the Derived Properties of Networks
PropertyStructureDynamics
CharacterizationWhich nodes and links are ÒimportantÓ? What roles do theyWhat is the performance of the network, typically in t
ermsplay in the network? How would one modify a network toof qualities of the resource exchange? What network
change the role of a node in a specified way?attributes are required to achieve specified behavior? How
do we measure performance and maintain it?CostWhat is the cost of the aggregate suite of nodes and links ofWhat is the cost of the latency and degradation of the
a network, given their defined attributes?resource exchange realized by this network? What is the
least cost network, given input constraints, to achieve a
specified performance?EfficiencyWhat is the expected utilization of the network nodes, links,What is the trade-off between cost and performance for t
heand their limiting resources?available design space? How could the behavioral attributes
of the network components be modified to improve the
efficiency of the network realization?EvolutionWhich structural attributes are preserved as the networkWhat evolutionary path will emerge under specific rules
evolves? What structure should be created to assure itsand constraint models for the addition, modification, and
stable evolution?deletion of nodes, links, and their attributes? How can one
design or promote local behaviors that will result in adesired evolutionary path? How do failure modes andattacks evolve in response to the network evolution?ResilienceWhat are the structural attributes that resist accidental orHow does the behavior of a network change under damage
intelligently planned damage and overload?and overload? What input behavioral rules induce better
behavior under these scenarios?ScalabilityWhich structures scale in terms of the measures ofHow does network behavior change as network scale
complexity?changes? What rules and constraint models assure desired
behavior across changes in scale?Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D83potential value of a possible discipline of network science,are not required for a system to be studied as a network. The
greatest benefit from a rigorous network science, however,
would lie in understanding the laws that drive the structure
and dynamics of networks across the extremes of these three
critical dimensions:¥Complexity. This dimension includes issues such aslarge scale (a large number of nodes, links, classes of
exchanged resources, or constraints), as well as how
the nodes and links behave.¥Scale range. This dimension reflects the wide range ofinteracting critical temporal and spatial scales in the
structure and dynamics of a network.¥Network context. This dimension addresses the envi-ronment of a network as it relates to other networks:
Most networks exist in the context of a larger set of
other networks on which they depend and with which
they interact.These networks may be naturally captured as differentlevels of abstraction or as competing and cooperating net-
works at the same level of abstraction. A social network, forexample, may be strongly influenced by the characteristicsof the communications, economic, and transportation net-
works in which the social organisms are embedded (and they,
in turn, affect those networks), but each network is best dealt
with to a first approximation as its own form of abstraction,
using appropriate approximations to reflect how the other
networks affect the exchange, storage, and transformation of
its various classes of resource of interest (see Table D-11).Driving ApplicationsThe 427 responses through April 29, 2005, that proposeddriving applications for network science (68 percent of all
responses, including 92 percent of those who said an identi-
fiable field exists and 10 percent of those who said it does
not) described a highly disparate set of applications, gener-
ally tightly bound to specific other fields or problem areas
(see Figure D-9). Most of the responses were fairly terse and
high level and showed little consensus on specific applica-
tions. The committeeÕs analysis identified five major com-
munities of research players: technological, biological, so-
cial sciences, interdisciplinary, and physical sciences and
math. When viewed at a level high enough to allow identifi-TABLE D-10Summary Decomposition of Constraint Models
Constraint ModelsStructureDynamics
Cost models, benefitModels for determining the costs and benefits for a givenModels for determining the costs and benefits of a
dding,models, and the associatednode of the locally visible neighborhood.deleting, and modifying nodes and links.
models of feedback effects.Models for determining aggregate costs and benefits ofModels for costs and benefits for the exchange of classes
the network nodes, links, and their properties.of resource, with its associated transformation.
Models for how these costs and benefits affect networkModels for how these costs and benefits affect network
structure and its evolution.behavior and its evolution.
TABLE D-11Summary Decomposition of the Problem Dimensions of Networks
DimensionStructureDynamics
ComplexityA high number of nodes, links, resource classes, or rules inHigh numbers of internal states and transition rules for 
thethe cost models and benefit models.behavior of nodes and links.
Scale rangeDependencies across wide range of spatial dimensions.Dependencies across a wide range of timescales.
Highly disparate node and link attributes within oneHighly disparate rates of interaction and evolution in

network.different regions of the same network.
Network contextNumber and nature of peer networks and of networks atDefinition of behavioral rules governing resource exchange,
other levels of abstraction. Opacity: unavailability ofconstraints, and interactions between nodes.
information or resources across network boundaries.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84APPENDIX Dcation of shared concerns, the current driving applicationsproved to be closely related to the description of the major
research challenges (covered in the next section).There were also a few voices dissenting on the questionitself. For example, one response was that there are hundreds
of applications called network science; another was that ap-
plications are not the drivers for network science, as it is still
an emerging basic research field. In contrast to the view that
there were too many applications to consider, another
respondentÕs view was that more effort has been spent on the
search for universality principles in networks than on the
rigorous study of stand-alone application areas. These dis-
sents echoed the reasons given for saying there is no such
field as network science.Because so few responses were received from outsideacademia, no useful conclusions can be drawn about the in-
terests of specific nonacademic communities. Within the
academic world, the players are generally grouped into well-
defined communities focused on particular domains of study.
For this reason, the frequency with which particular classes
of applications are cited in the questionnaire response closely
tracks the response rate by field shown in Table D-4. Within
each community, the leading applications in terms of the
number of responses are shown in Figure D-10 and Table
D-12.The leading concerns of the technology and engineeringcommunities are closely related. Distributed computing fo-
cuses on the efficient realization of applications that are
FIGURE D-9Driving applications identified by respondents.
010203040506070Physical sciences and mathInterdisciplinarySocialBiologicalTechnologicalFraction of Responses to Question 3c Identifying a Driving Application (%)020406080100120140160180No. of Responses Identifying a Driving ApplicationTelecommunicationsPhysicsMathBiologyOtherInternetInformation technologyComputer scienceFIGURE D-10Number of responses to driving applications question.
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D85highly decentralized; many of these, in turn, are entwinedwith issues of networked information sharing, such as peer-
to-peer methods. The classic network problems of telecom-
munications engineering (network design, reliability and re-
silience, cost-performance trade-offs) appear frequently, but
generally with an emphasis on wireless infrastructures (in-
cluding self-organizing ad hoc and sensor networks). Net-
work collapse (meaning the collapse of the ability to trans-
port the communications payload) is also involved.The driving applications pursued in the biological sci-ences include models of disease transmission, ecological
modeling and biodiversity, and systems biology. The focus
of network understanding of disease transmission is both
predictiveÑHow will epidemics spread? What is the rela-
tion between the structure of the transmission network and
the evolution of the disease?Ñand interventionalÑWhat
changes to the underlying social and transportation networks
would prevent or reduce epidemics? Ecological applications
focus on understanding the flows of energy and nutrients in
ecological networks, the interdependence of organisms and
species, and qualitative changes in an ecosystem (such as
biodiversity stability and collapse). Systems biology refers
to the need to understand the system-level architecture of a
cell or an organism, as well as to design drugs and interven-
tions that can cause the desired effects and very few side
effects. However, a few responses expressed concern about
the time required to go from basic system biology to specific
medical applications.The applications in the social sciences are affected by thedeep history of the disciplineÕs analysis of social interaction
and influence networks. Other respondents were concerned
with understanding the well-known, heavy-tailed distribu-
tions in numerous social constructs in terms of the underly-TABLE D-12Major Players and Cited Applications
PlayersSummary of Most Cited Applications
TechnologicalDistributed computing
Information sharing and discoveryTelecommunicationsBiologicalPublic health and disease transmission
Ecosystem modelingSystems biologySocial sciencesSocial network analysis
Economic models and resource distributionInterdisciplinaryUnderstanding complex systems
Intersection of human interactions and networkingtechnologyPhysical sciencesHigh-energy physics
and mathMathematical models of networks
.ing social networks. Economic network issues such as theflow of capital also relate to the comparative impact of un-
derlying infrastructure networks for communications, appli-
cation information sharing, and transportation of people and
material. Network science is being applied to distribution
channel behavior, such as interpersonal ties within a market
or interorganizational ties in a value chain. Smaller but still
significant numbers of responses mentioned organization
models and political applications, ranging from disrupting
terrorist networks to supporting prodemocracy organizations

under authoritarian regimes.ÒInterdisciplinary communitiesÓ refers specifically to re-spondents who self-identified as being involved in several
disparate fields and/or who proposed application topics that
explicitly span or relate disparate fields. This distinction is
necessary because many responses gave lists of unrelated
applications drawn from different fields. In this category the
committee included Òcomplex systems,Ó which occurred
commonly but was generally not given further definition;
the term Òemergent phenomenaÓ is closely related and like-
wise undefined by the respondents. Descriptions of driving
application also commonly mentioned the need to understand
the relationship between disciplines such as biological and
computer networks.The use of telecommunications networks for data-inten-sive computing applications was cited as one driving appli-
cation on the physical sciences; other such applications in
that area spanned physics and chemistry, such as understand-

ing high-dimensional dynamical systems and the network
structures underlying the energy landscapes that drive pro-
tein folding and similar optimization behaviors. One driving
application in mathematics was theories for relating system-
wide behavior and network structures.RESEARCH CHALLENGESThe committee, aided by the questionnaire, identified anumber of important research challenges that should be ad-
dressed if the field of network science is to be moved for-
ward. The analysis of research challenges was based on the
responses to question 3d (What are the key research chal-
lenges?) and was performed by reading through all of the
responses to the questionnaire and binning the results to in-
fer broad topics that recurred frequently. To ensure that the
responses were not being biased by individual committee
members, the responses were compared with an earlier, in-
dependent analysis of the responses.The responses that fit within a broad category of chal-lenge were counted, and the seven most highly populated
categories were selected for inclusion in the report. Each
category had between 25 and 100 responses identifying it as
a research challenge; the proportion of responses garnered
by each challenge is shown in Figure D-11.The seven primary challenges that were identified werethese:Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86APPENDIX D¥Dynamics, spatial location, and information propaga-tion in networks. A major need in network science is abetter understanding of the relationship between the
architecture of the network and its function. This is
particularly important in networks where dynamics
plays a large role, either through the flow of informa-
tion around the network or through changes in the net-
work structure (by evolution or adaptation). How the
structure of a network relates to the behavior of the
system is still not well understood and will be a major
impediment to progress in many applications.¥Modeling and analysis of very large networks. Presenttools and approaches are designed to work with rela-
tively small networks, but many of the most important
problems involve much larger networks. Examples of
such networks include cell regulatory networks in
biology, social and economic networks, and computer
communication networks (including military com-
mand-and-control networks). Abstractions and ap-
proximations are needed that allow reasoning about
these large-scale networks, as well as techniques for
modeling networks with noisy and incomplete data.
Analysis techniques for such networks must have good
scaling properties so that they can be applied to the
very large networks that are key to network science.¥Design and synthesis of networks. While a lot of engi-neers, scientists, mathematicians, and sociologists are
simply trying to understand complex networks already
in existence, in many application areas the goal is to
design a network to obtain a desired behaviorÑfor
example, scalability, robustness, usability, resiliency,FIGURE D-11Major research challenges.
DynamicsModelingDesignRigorCommonconceptsExperimentsRobustnessefficiency, and resolvability (or adaptability). It maybe possible here to learn from biological systems how
to design engineered systems that exhibit equally com-
plex, adaptive, and robust behavior.¥Increasing the level of rigor and mathematical struc-ture. Many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the state of the art in network science did not have
an appropriate mathematical basis. This level of
mathematical rigor could be achieved by a combina-
tion of defining the appropriate levels of abstraction
for analysis, developing better tools in graph theory
and other relevant disciplines, and searching for fun-
damental limits of performance.¥Abstracting common concepts across fields. Manymembers of the committee and respondents to the
questionnaire cited the need to define common con-
cepts across the disparate disciplines and applications
that are part of network science. The multidisciplinary
nature of the work is a challenge, but results could be
transferable from one field to another if appropriate
unifying principles can be developed.¥Better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. Current data sets on large-scale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating the struc-
ture and function of these networks are limited in many
domains. There was a general feeling shared across
many fields that there needs to be more and better ac-
cess to data, which in some domains requires new mea-
surement techniques to be developedÑfor example,
to obtain a detailed spatiotemporal measurement of the
operation of a cell. One respondent suggested the de-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D87velopment of a so-called ÒmacroscopeÓ to detect, com-municate, and understand the structure and dynamics
of large-scale networks.¥Robustness and security of networks. Finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networked
systems that are both robust to variations in the com-
ponents (including localized failures) and secure
against malicious intent. This requires a much more
sophisticated understanding of the failure mechanisms
in networked systems as well as better tools for
predicting the impact of perturbations on networked
systems.The Social Structure of Network ScienceIn addition to the analysis performed by the committee,the data were also analyzed by Katy Bırner, who addressed
the visible social structure of research in network science as
indicated by the collaboration and invitation entries of each
respondent. Her analysis is provided in Box D-2. Upon re-
viewing her analysis, the committee consensus was ex-
panded to include the following two findings presented in
Chapter 6 on the empirical state of the proposed field of
network science:Finding 6-7.Analysis of the social and collaboration
networks of the respondents provides additionalevidence that network science is an emerging area ofinvestigation.While the clusters within the network are only weaklyconnected, a large connected core spans many of them.
Based on Dr. BırnerÕs extensive experience, and on the

judgement of the committee, this pattern is characteristic of
an emerging field and constitutes objective evidence that
network science is a field, but an immature one whose future
is still undecided.Finding 6-8.Analysis of the social and collaboration net-
works of the respondents provides additional evidence of
the multidisciplinary nature of network science.Dr. BırnerÕs analysis of the social and collaboration net-works provides additional evidence of the multidisciplinary
nature of network science. Researchers from any given dis-
cipline are distributed throughout the graph, and any given
subcommunity includes researchers from multiple disci-
plines. This pattern is unlike any field previously analyzed
by Dr. Bırner. In the committeeÕs judgment, therefore, the
pattern constitutes objective evidence that network science
is a field that is distinctly interdisciplinary, with research
concerns that support multiple application domains.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88APPENDIX DBOX D-2Mapping the Social Network and Expertise of ÒNetwork ScienceÓ ResearchersThis box presents the anonymized results of a bibliometric analysis1,2 of the social networks and expertise coverage of network science researchersprepared at the committeeÕs request by K. Bırner and W. Ke, of the InfoVis Laboratory at Indiana University. All results are based on the self-reported datain the file named Òcleaned_survey_as_of_050318_0910a_posted.xls.Ó Subsequently, the authors report the data¨ cleaning and analyses performed,major results, and their interpretation. They conclude with a set of recommended topics for further study.Data Set Used, Analysis Results, and InterpretationThe data file Òcleaned_survey_as_of_050318_0910a_posted.xlsÓ comprises 499 completed questionnaires that report 923 Òcollab_withÓ linksreported under Q2c and 376 ÒinviteÓ links reported under Q4a. To ensure a high quality of automatic data extraction and analysis, all names reported infree-form text as ÒOther collaboratorsÓ under Q2c and all ÒOther people to inviteÓ reported under Q4a were not considered. Figure D-2-1 illustratesrelationships among the initial invitees, respondents, and identified collaborants.In total, 1,241 unique names of network science researchers were identified. E-mail addresses were used to ensure that these names are truly uniqueand represent exactly one person. As requested by the National Research Council, author names were replaced by a unique identification number topreserve the anonymity of authors.In addition, the 22 (checkable) fields of interest as well as the free-form text of ÒotherÓ fields of interest reported in Q1c were analyzed. In total, 138unique fields of interest were identified. Fields that were mentioned most often were computer science (mentioned 201 times), information technology(166), and Internet (156).Data Quality IssuesThe Òcollab_withÓ links are mostly made to researchers in spatial or thematic proximity. Hence, these links help to grow the socialnetwork of network science researchers locally. Colleagues reported that they tried to ÒinviteÓ people who were not yet in the data set. There was noquestion that asked users to identify Òmajor playersÓ or Ògatekeepers.Ó There are many misspellings of names and disciplines in this data set. Informationprovided in the Òother collaboratorsÓ and Òother people to inviteÓ section could not be used in this automatic analysis.Data Analysis ResultsHere we report Òmajor researchersÓ who are frequently mentioned in the data set, who act as gatekeepers, and who interlink manyscientific fields. In addition, we extracted and will present existing social and collaboration networks. Researchers who are frequently mentioned in thecomplete data set and the number of times they are listed as a collaborator are given inTable D-2-1. Figure D-2-2 shows the major components (size10)network of the network science researcher network (NSRN). The Pajek3 plot shows exactly 630 of the 1,241 unique researchers, and their Òcollab_withÓlinks and ÒinviteÓ links are shown. Each researcher is represented by a node. Node color coding is used to identify researchers that submitted (brown) ordid not submit (orange) questionnaires. The node areasÕ size corresponds to the number of times a researcher is mentioned by other researchers. EachFIGURE D-2-1Relationships among invitees, respondents, and
collaborators.49966340InvitedCompleted QuestionsCollaborated784147188110TABLE D-2-1Researchers Who Are Frequently
Mentioned and Listed as CollaboratorsNo.No. Listed
IDListedas Collaborator
1005128
987
512126
100975

13975
102385
104754

78464
45564
81444

123874
92554
Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D89FIGURE D-2-2Network science researchers network.
Node colorOrange = not submittedBrown = submittedNode size (area)No. of times mentionedNode labelScholar IDLink colorOrange = collaborators
Green = invitednode with a betweenness centrality no less than 0.00001 or a size (number of appearances in the data set) 3 was labeled with the authorÕs name (ID).Links denote Òcollab_withÓ links (in orange) and ÒinviteÓ links (green).Subsequently, researchers who act as gatekeepers were identified based on an examination of the betweenness centrality (BC) values4,5 of nodes inthe NSRN. The top 10 researchers are given in Table D-2-2. Figure D-2-3 indicates nodes with a BC value 0.00001 by a black ring and shows them inthe context of the NSRN.To examine the community structure of network science researchers, we examined the different components in the NSRN. Table D-2-3 shows the sizeof existing components, the number of components that have this size, and the total number of nodes in these components. The largest component in theNSRN is shown in Figure D-2-4 using the color coding introduced in Figure D-2-2. It represents the current coherent core of the new field of networkscience.TABLE D-2-2Researchers Who Act as Gatekeepers
No.Betweeness
IDMentionedCentrality Value
106640.00020275
99720.00017878

98140.00015093
970.0001340834120.00012502

92540.00010882
84530.00010688
95910.00009716

122520.00007773
16230.00007060
box continuesBOX D-2 ContinuedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90APPENDIX DTABLE D-2-3Components in the NSRN
No. ofNo. of
SizeComponentsNodes
17777
23264

32575
445
18051050

61272
7749
818

9436
10440
11222

13113
14114
15115

17117
18118
30130

33133
73173
3551355
Total1,241
FIGURE D-2-3Researchers with high BC values (in black) and low BC values (in gray).
box continuesBOX D-2 ContinuedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D91FIGURE D-2-4Largest component of the NSRN.
InterpretationCompared with maps of other scientific disciplines, the NSRN clearly exhibits the characteristics of a new and emergent research area: Itconsists of many unconnected networks of collaborating network science researchers, and the existing networks show a rather heterogeneous coverageof research topics.Figure D-2-5 is a map of all network science researchers visualized in VxInsight.6 The map at the left-hand side shows the NSRN. On the right, the verysame graph is shown in ÒlandscapeÓ mode, with colored dots representing the self-reported interest profiles of researchers. A white dot denotes that theresearcher listed ÒbiologyÓ as a principal field of interest in Q1c. Yellow denotes Òcomputer sciences,Ó light blue ÒInternet,Ó blue Òphysics,Ó and greenÒsociology.Ó As can be seen, there are no groupings of researchers with similar fields of interest. Instead, very different research interests seem to bealmost equally distributed over the NSRN.As the field of network science matures, subareas devoted to the study of specific research fields are likely to emerge, and many of the separatecomponents will exhibit collaboration links, weak or strong and temporary or stable.box continuesBOX D-2 ContinuedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92APPENDIX DFIGURE D-2-5Disciplinary heterogeneity of the NSRN.
Social Network of Network Science Researchers: Topics for Further Study¥Increase our understanding of the interplay of affiliation, thematic, and social interrelations among todayÕs network science researchers. Invite keynetwork science researchers to identify and label the main research groups key shown in Figure D-2-2.¥Bibliometric analysis of networkscience publications, patents, and funding data. The InfoVis Laboratory at Indiana University is developing thesociotechnical infrastructure to analyze the structure and evolution of scientific disciplines and all of science on a large scale.7 Major publication, patent,and grant databases (covering mostly U.S. research) are available, as are scalable algorithms and compute power. A detailed, objective analysis ofscholarly data would complement the self-reported, subjective data and its analysis reported here.¥Development of an online portal that tracks and communicates the evolution of network science research and results. Geospatial and semantic mapsof network science researchers and publications presented here and proposed in Shiffrin and Bırner (2004) can be made available online as a uniqueinterface to data sets, publications, and expertise related to network science research. Researchers interested in being Òon the mapÓ should be given theoption to submit data about their publications, collaborators, etc. The incentives for researchers to contribute high-quality data can be further increasedby using this online map to make funding decisions much as PIÕs resumes are used today. Assuming that a comprehensive set of high-quality data canbe acquired on a continuous basis, an interactive, continuously evolving, weather-forecast-like map of network science research can be made availableto grant agencies, researchers, practitioners, and society at large.NOTE: The authors would like to thank Will E. Leland for compiling the data set used in this study and for insightful feedback on previous results. This work is supported bya National Science Foundation CAREER Grant under IIS-0238261.1Bırner, K., C. Chen, and K. Boyack. 2003. Visualizing knowledge domains. In Annual Review of Information Science & Technology, B. Cronin, ed. Medford, N.J.:Information Today, Inc./American Society for Information Science and Technology.2Shiffrin, R.M., and K. Bırner, eds. 2004. Mapping knowledge domains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 101 (Suppl. 1).3Batagelj, V., and A. Mrvar. 1997. Pajek: Program package for large network analysis. Available at http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/.4Freeman, L.C. 1997. A set of measuring centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry 40: 35Ð41.5Brandes, U. 2001. A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 25(1): 163Ð177.6Davidson, G.S., B. Hendrickson, D.K. Johnson, C.E. Meyers, and B.N. Wylie. 1998. Knowledge mining with VxInsight: Discovery through interaction. Journal of IntelligentInformation Systems 11(3): 259Ð285.7Available at http://iv.slis.indiana.edu.BOX D-2 ContinuedNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93EOpportunities for Creating Value from Network ScienceThis appendix supports the findings of Chapter 5 and pro-vides details of the scenarios developed in response to Items
3 and 4 in the statement of task. What are the viable invest-
ment options for the Army and nation in network science?
How does exploiting these opportunities create value? The
committee attempted to answer these questions by construct-
ing three scenarios that represent fundamentally different
levels of response by the Army.Scenario 1, Building the Base, examines the alternativesfor the Army if it wants to invest a modest amount (on the
order of $10 million annually) in 6.1 basic research within
the context of its present funding processes. While some
changes in the style and content of its present research ac-
tivities are envisaged, this scenario represents a minimal in-
vestment and a minimal change in posture relative to the
current Army R&D portfolio of investments and processes.
It creates value by increasing the knowledge of topics in the
core content of network science and by expanding the base
of trained practitioners.Scenario 2, Next-Generation R&D, examines alternativescreated by applying best practices in modern industrial R&D
to the ArmyÕs R&D investments in network science. In this
scenario, basic research (6.1) investments are coupled with
larger applied research (6.2) and, possibly, 6.3 investments,
to create technology investment options for the Army to ex-
ercise in concert with suppliers. The committee envisages,
however, that the management of this process would be sub-
stantially different from present Army practices. The com-
mittee gives an idea of how these changes could be effected
by creating a market-driven R&D environment. Projects that
might be funded in this environment are exemplified by three
kinds of projects: one in social networks, one in engineered
networks, and one in biological networks. Comparison of
these projects shows the sorts of issues and benefits that
could arise from Scenario 2 investments in the three differ-
ent areas of important network applications.Scenario 3 takes as its point of departure the phrase Òtoenable progress toward achieving Network Centric WarfarecapabilitiesÓ in Item 4 of the statement of task. In it, thecommittee asks what the Army (or, more appropriately, the
DOD Office of Force Transformation [OFT]1) should do ifits primary objective is to create these capabilities in a robust
and affordable way over the course of the next decade. A
significant investment in network science would be one ele-
ment in such an effort, but the emphasis would reside else-
where. Specifically, in this scenario the committee examines
past efforts of the federal government to develop major new
warfare capabilities all the way from basic research to de-
ployment in the field in order to estimate the magnitude of
the effort and investment required to source and deploy such
capabilities.SCENARIO 1, BUILDING THE BASEScenario 1 involves a modest level of funding (~$10 mil-lion per year) that fits into the ArmyÕs current scheme for 6.1
basic research. Small amounts of Army risk capital funds are
invested to create a knowledge and personnel base from
which it can attack the practical problems that arise when
trying to provide network-centric warfare (NCW) or network-
centric operations (NCO) capabilities. It is for this reason
the scenario is called Òbuilding the base.ÓBecause the anticipated investment is too small to fundsignificant interdisciplinary efforts, it should be focused on
leveraging existing research in areas related to network sci-
ence. It would support 20 to 30 single-investigator or small-
group grants of $300,000 to $500,000 per year. Such an in-
vestment would allow the Army to tap into top research
efforts in physical, social, and biological networks. The
Army should fund only the most outstanding researchers
because the very best are qualitatively different from even
the very good. The essential point is that to pay off big in1For further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil. Accessed August19, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94APPENDIX Eterms of breakthrough ideas and models, the very best re-searchers must be recruited to do the work. To attract an elite
group who will influence the future of network science, the
Army must adapt its funding and management policies, pos-
sibly offering larger and longer-duration grants with few or
no restrictions on citizenship, publication, and the like. The
selection criteria would be excellence of research as judged
by peer review and track records, relevance to Army objec-
tives, and opportunities for Army involvement through in-
clusion of suitable Army personnel in the effort.The committee envisions that the research efforts wouldbe located at major research universities. An important as-
pect of the program might be a once-a-year conference at an
Army laboratory or facility, where the principal investiga-
tors (PIs) would report on accomplishments during the year.
The program needs enlightened management to support in-
terdisciplinary work through the interaction of a diversity of
PIs. A major theme of the program would be the achieve-
ment of fundamental advances in network-research-based
statistical physics, applied mathematics, development of
mathematical models of social phenomena, and other areas
by generously funding only exceptionally talented individu-
als who are organized into a national social network.Such a program would be the first to address the needs ofnetwork science per se. The program would focus on net-
works as coherent entities characterized by their architec-
ture, structure, and dynamics. By deliberately adopting a
broad theoretical and methodological focus, the program
would encourage the creation of fundamentally novel ideas.
A wide diversity of approaches is a key feature of long-term
success. Keeping the goals broad and flexible would allow
the Army to cultivate such diversity; a narrowly defined pro-
gram would eliminate much of the creative potential that
could lead to breakthroughs and new ideas. One way to do
this would be for the Army to hold one or more workshops
with appropriate personnel to determine the topical content
for such a program.The ArmyÕs needs are broad and fundamental in nature:It must learn how to approach the creation of a predictive
description of large, interacting, layered networks. A basic
science program is the first step toward building up the criti-
cal mass of talent needed to address specific Army problems
in this area. This modest approach would allow the Army to
identify a relevant research community, and organize it so
that, with time, it could be called upon to address specific
needs.The proposed approach differs from existing programs inagencies such as the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in that it focuses on
network science per se. While a significant amount of re-
search is taking place in communities addressing the appli-
cations of networks, almost none of this research is funded
by dedicated network science programs. Instead, researchers
are funded by, for example, the NSF, to improve the Internet
or to understand the statistical mechanics of complex sys-tems, or the NIH, to uncover the features of specific organ-isms or biological processes. Because many of these research
programs cannot avoid dealing with the network aspects of
these problems, they divert some of their funding in that di-
rection. Nevertheless, most of their work is focused on ap-
plying network ideas to specific systems rather than on de-
veloping new tools and ideas. Currently, no agency the
committee knows of has a specific program devoted to net-
work science. A research program on network science per se
is a new concept, with unique and novel goals.As a consequence of its discussions with Army and DODrepresentatives, the committee has come to realize that the
fundamental problems underlying effective NCO lie in the
social domain. Yet how people interact and utilize technol-
ogy or make decisions based on shared knowledge are areas
almost unexplored in the ArmyÕs current basic research port-
folio. The committee urges the Army to focus additional
resources on the possible applications of network thinking to
social, especially organizational, issues (Helper et al.,

2000).2 Applications to biology, engineering, and the physi-cal sciences are also essential to Army applications, but the
Army is already funding research in these areas. The com-
mittee suggests that on the margin the most significant prob-
lem is not how to build better satellites, tanks, or medicines
but rather is how to organize millions of individuals to col-
lect intelligence, deliver supplies, and prosecute wars over
an increasingly global, constantly shifting geographical and
political playing field (Garstka and Alberts, 2004). This is a
monumental problem that has not, however, traditionally
been the province of science. Rather, it has been managed
through a mixture of intuition, experience, and tradition. A
significant fraction of the proposed program should address
this organizational problem the way scientific problems are
addressed: through a combination of theoretical modeling,
data analysis, and controlled experimentation.To illustrate the flavor of its thinking, the committeecloses this scenario by indicating some promising research
topics in four broad areas: network structure, network dy-
namics, network robustness and vulnerability, and network
services. Each area has theoretical, empirical, and experi-
mental components. Investments in basic research in each
can provide value for the Army.Network StructureAdvances in the applications of network research are lim-ited by a lack of fundamental understanding of the structure,
evolution, and topology of complex networks (Newman,
2003; Watts, 2004; Newman et al., 2005). Many network
models have been formulated and studied by numerical2C.F. Sabel, professor of law and social science, Columbia Law School,ÒTheory of a real-time revolution,Ó briefing to the 19th EGOS Colloquium,Copenhagen, July 2003.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E95simulations or approximate analytical methods (Albert andBarab⁄si, 2002; Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani, 2004;
Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2003; Ben-Naim et al., 2004;
Bornholdt and Schuster, 2003; Barab⁄si, 2003). While these
efforts constitute an advancement in the modeling and repre-
sentation of networks, the topology of these models is far
less rigorously understood. Questions concerning the uni-
versality of topological properties, correlations introduced
by dynamical processes, and the interplay between cluster-
ing, hierarchies, and centrality in networks remain only par-
tially answered (Amaral et al., 2004). A full understanding
requires the development of rigorous methods to uncover
the mathematical structure of growing networks. Advances
in this direction can be achieved only by the empirical study
of real networks and by developing the appropriate math-
ematical tools and metrics not only to characterize novel sys-
tems but also to classify networks based on their topology,
structure, function, and dynamics. In this respect we are lack-
ing in the fundamental characterization of network topol-
ogy, in our ability to characterize weighted networks and
communities in networks, and in our description of the time
evolution of the network topology. In parallel, we need to
develop discrete and continuum models that generate net-
works whose structure and evolution mimic those of real
networks.In spite of considerable effort in social network analysisover the past 50 years and great interest in the past decade,
surprisingly little is known about either the detailed struc-
ture or the time evolution of social networks. In part, the gap
in knowledge has come about because purely social interac-
tions, unlike interactions conducted on an engineered net-
work such as the Web, are much harder to track empirically.
It also derives from a tendency to view all networks as static
entities with structural features rather than as dynamic pro-
cesses with parameterized rules. Finally, it has resulted from
the tendency to ignore the role of social and organizational
contexts in network formation and to focus instead on the
role of exceptional individuals or small-group structures.
Without a better understanding of social networks, it is ex-
tremely difficult to advance our understanding of any social
processes, including implementation of the cognitive and
social domains of NCO to improve combat effectiveness.Network DynamicsNetworks are specified not only by their topology but alsoby the dynamics of information or traffic flow along their
links. The amount of traffic characterizes the connections in
a communication system or large transport infrastructure and

is fundamental for a complete description of these networks
(Barrat et al., 2004; Almaas et al., 2004). Heterogeneity in
the intensity of connections may also be important in under-
standing social systems. The ultimate objective is a math-
ematical characterization that might uncover general prin-
ciples describing the dynamics of networks. Furthermore,networks provide the substrate on top of which the dynami-cal behavior of the system must unfold. At the same time,
however, the various dynamical processes are expected to
affect the networkÕs evolution. Dynamics, traffic, and the
underlying topology are mutually correlated. It is vital to
define appropriate quantities and measures capable of cap-
turing how all these ingredients participate in the formation
of complex networks. To carry out this task, we need to de-
velop large empirical data sets that simultaneously capture
the topology of the network and the time-resolved dynamics
taking place on it.Understanding Òhow things spreadÓ through different
kinds of social, organizational, and technological structures,
and with what consequences, is of paramount concern in an
increasingly global economy and culture (Watts, 2003). Ex-
amples include electronic viruses spreading through com-
puter or phone networks, biological viruses (weaponized or
natural) spreading through the contact network in a society,
and ideas or strategic concepts spreading on a social network
(Arquilla and Ronfeldt, 2001; Pastor-Satorras and
Vespignani, 2004; Anderson and May, 1992). Uncovering
the similarities and the differences between electronic virus
spreading, biological and social contagion, and the interplay
between the network and spreading processes is crucial for
the research community. Such research has important poten-
tial Army applications, from defending the communication
infrastructure against viruses to developing scenarios for lim-
iting the impact of a biological contagion.Individuals making strategic decisions in uncertain orambiguous environments (which is to say, almost all envi-
ronments) are influenced either explicitly or implicitly by
the decisions of others (Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955; Watts,
2003). And when all individuals are paying attention to one
another and constantly making or updating various decisions
accordingly, Òsocial contagionÓÑthe spread of ideas, influ-
ence, norms, innovations, attitudes, rumors, unrest, violence,
extremism, etc.Ñbecomes not only possible, but pervasive
(Rogers, 1995; Gladwell, 2000; Huckfeldt et al., 2004). In
some ways, social contagion seems like biological conta-
gion, but in other ways it is fundamentally distinct (Dodds
and Watts, 2004, 2005). Sorting out these differences is a
key to understanding network contagion.In order to exploit the information infrastructure capabili-ties envisaged for NCO, the Army must comprehend how
large groups of individuals coordinate their efforts to solve
large-scale problems, where Òlarge-scaleÓ implies that the
scope of the problem is beyond the capacity of any particular
individual to solve or even fully comprehend (Dodds et al.,
2003; Watts, 2003).3 Examples of such problems include (1)collating large volumes of ambiguous information, collected
in widely dispersed environments, to assess the seriousness3C.F. Sabel, professor of law and social science, Columbia Law School,ÒTheory of a real-time revolution,Ó briefing to the 19th EGOS Colloquium,Copenhagen, July 2003.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96APPENDIX Eand immediacy of specific threats; (2) coordinating largenumbers of troops in novel and rapidly evolving combat en-
vironments; (3) coordinating geographically and industrially
diverse supply chains to deliver highly specific and time-
sensitive logistical support that varies rapidly and unpredict-
ably; (4) business firms attempting radical innovations or
recovering from catastrophic supply-chain breakdowns; and
(5) educational or community development organizations
attempting change to alleviate widespread and deeply rooted
social or economic disparities. Large-scale problem solving
is complicated because it involves the study of collective
behavior that is oriented toward particular (if imprecisely
specified) outcomes rather than just the study of processes in
action. It is also, and perhaps not surprisingly, the problem
area about which least is understood theoretically.Biology also deals with diverse large-scale networks. Themost prominent cellular networks are metabolic networks,
the regulatory network, and signaling and protein interaction
networks (Barab⁄si and Oltvai, 2004). The key question here
is, What do network science results tell you in terms of biol-
ogy? Are they falsifiable? Do they offer testable predica-
tions? In order to be of value, the predictions must ultimately
be testable in the laboratory. This kind of work is being par-
tially funded by the NIH roadmap initiatives. Results in this
domain might lead to new ways to analyze networks and to
make predictions relevant to rapid response to disease and
biological warfare.Another important structural and dynamical issue is thelocation of function within a biological networkÑthat is,
What is the architecture of the network? Networks typically
comprise different groups of interconnected elements, or
modules, each one being responsible for different functions.
In engineered networks, this architecture is designed in a
priori. In biological networks, it must be discovered by, for
example, identifying highly interlinked communities of ele-
ments. Modules can be repeated at different hierarchical lev-
els and interconnected via the hubs of the system. How
modularity emerges across many biological networks and
how it can be reconciled with the other properties of these
networks are basic questions. The constraint and facilitation
of biological phenomena by network structure is an issue
that is likely to be at the forefront of biology in the coming
years.Network Robustness and VulnerabilityNetworks need to be able to function in spite of errors,failures, and attacks. Such phenomena can affect a networkÕs
ability to function in several fashionsÑfor example, by in-
capacitating nodes and links or limiting traffic, leading to
local and potentially cascading failures (Watts, 2002; Dodds
et al., 2003; Albert et al., 2000; Cohen et al., 2000, 2001).
How do we understand the different modes of network fail-
ure? Can we design networks with maximum tolerance of
errors and a high survivability under attack? What is the re-lationship between a networkÕs robustness and its structure?How do the different dynamical processes taking place on
networks affect their survivability? These are questions that,
if answered, could fundamentally alter the ArmyÕs ability to
design and implement fault-tolerant communications and
organizational networks.Network ServicesThe operation of computer networks is governed by anarchitecture, known as a reference model, in which the func-
tioning of the network is divided into independent layers
built on top of each other (Tanenbaum, 2003). The lower
layers of this architecture deal with the physical connections
(including wireless) and electrical signals transmitted across
these connections that link the nodes of the network. The
important concept underlying this organizational construct
is that each layer of the architecture delivers ÒservicesÓ to
the layer above according to a standard interface convention.
This organization is important to hide the workings of one
layer of the architecture from those of all the others. Thus,
the technology used to implement one layer can be upgraded
without changing the operation of the layers above and be-
low. In the open system interconnection (OSI) reference

model describing the architecture of computer networks, the
lowest layer is referred to as the physical layer, and the next
two layers as the data link and network layers, respectively.
On top of these sits the transport layer, whose function is to
ensure that the messages from the layers above get transmit-
ted reliably from one computer to another even if the lower
three layers are unreliable. These four layers, in concert, es-
tablish a reliable communications link between two comput-
ers (nodes) on the network, over which messages associated
with services created in the upper layers are delivered
(Tanenbaum, 2003).The Internet is the most important and familiar computernetwork. As important as the Internet itself, however, are the
services that are created at the upper levels of the Internet
architecture. Among the most visible services that have
evolved on the Internet are e-mail, the World Wide Web
(www), search engines, and the targeting and formatting of
information to individuals. Other services, such as making
information available in digital format and positioning data
globally, have added value to the network.Search engines such as Google play a major role in find-ing Web sites for travel, medical information, research pa-
pers, indeed almost anything you can conceive. As commer-
cial activity on the Web increases, all kinds of services that
support it have developed. These include services that pro-
vide individualized news, weather, driving directions, and
maps. Such services allow one to track a storm as it travels
across a state in real time or to view the road surface of a
highway pass from a camera mounted at the summit. They
are changing the way citizens access and use information.
Underlying these activities is an evolving research base inNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E97filtering, clustering, ranking, and optimization. This is abroad area of study carried out largely in computer science,
electrical engineering, and computer engineering depart-
ments worldwide and in many firms. Some of the important
topics encompassed by this area are data mining, distributed
computing, network protocols, information capture and ac-
cess, and security, privacy and cryptography. Since these
services are vital to NCO, support of basic research in this
area should ultimately create value for the Army.SCENARIO 2, NEXT-GENERATION R&DScenario 2 envisages applying best practices in industrialR&D management to the ArmyÕs investments in projects that
combine basic and applied network science. Specifically, the
committee expects the objective of these projects to be the
articulation of technology investment options that could be
exercised by the Army and its vendors to provide a desired
capability. The amount of this investment is envisaged to be
between $25 million and $100 million annually, roughly
$25million per project. There are expected to be investments

in the university community for the basic research and in
both Army in-house activities and commercial firms for the
applied research. The committee envisages, however, that
the R&D projects would be managed in a way profoundly
different from the way in which current Army in-house and
external centers are managed.The selection of projects to be funded would be marketdriven and controlled by a top-level Army team. It is ex-
pected that connections between the basic and applied por-
tions of the research will be much more intimate. Modern
Internet collaborative tools would be used to manage the day-
to-day work in rough analogy to the global design of indus-
trial products. The activities are managed in small, intimate
groups devoted to specific subprojects that are integrated into
the overall project in a looser networked fashion. People flow
from one small group to another over time. The entire team
makes up a social network consisting of smaller, more tightly
coupled social networks. In short, this scenario envisages
the application of modern communications networks and
tools and the insights of modern social network theory to
transform the management of Army R&D projects.The committee proceeded by first agreeing on the mosteffective management approach for next-generation R&D
projects. It developed the concept of Òmarket-drivenÓ man-
agement to apply to all projects that characterize the entire
Scenario 2 segment of the opportunity space. While associ-
ated issues and benefits will vary depending on the network
application, the market-driven approach is the same. To il-
lustrate the scope and scale of next-generation R&D with
market-driven management, committee members developed
three sample projects in the sociological, engineering, and
biological areas of network applications.These projects were selected in diverse areas to underlinethe committeeÕs belief that research will be equally neces-sary in all areas to advance network science. While each ofthe sample projects has the potential to advance network sci-
ence, they should not be construed as a Òshopping list,Ó and
the committee does not recommend their implementation
without careful comparison of their costs and benefits with
those of other research projects.Market-Driven ManagementThe U.S. Army faces a significant challenge todayÑhowto create a more responsive R&D process that can leverage
the relevant network science initiatives of universities and
private companies and use them to design and deliver im-
proved network-centric warfighting capabilities to our
forces.As DOD prosecutes the global war on terrorism, it isterrorist (social) networks that are enabling insurgents to
innovate, react, and adapt very quicklyÑin many cases more
quickly than U.S. forces. Given the complexity of NCO, the
current R&D model is hard-pressed to react, and it is not
delivering new insights and capabilities in a sufficiently
timely manner to meet Army operational requirements. One
only needs to look at the current challenges facing major
programs like the Future Combat System (FCS) to under-
stand that the current R&D process needs drastic change
(Weiner, 2005).To field capabilities for NCO more effectively at the stra-tegic, operational, and tactical levels, the Army must develop
a model for next-generation R&D, and the evolution of net-
work science may provide a unique opportunity for the Army
to transform the R&D process. To make this new model a
reality, the Army must think outside the box, leverage exist-
ing technology, and attract outstanding researchers both
within the Army and in industry and academia.By combining new thinking, new incentives, and a closepartnership among the military, industry, and academia, the
new R&D model could leverage existing networks and col-
laboration technologies to accelerate the development of
network science and simultaneously to enhance the R&D
process. The new model must take advantage of the rapid
proliferation of technology coming from the commercial sec-
tor as well as the increasing amount of network science R&D
flowing from university research. At the core of the new
model will be the innovative use of robust networks and
proven, Internet-based business concepts that drive change
and increase the speed with which knowledge, research, and
technology are delivered.Companies like Intel, GE, and Oracle, among others, haveestablished network-centric business practices to deliver new
technology, products, and services at a rate that keeps them
in the forefront of innovation and competition. They do this
by keeping their feelers out in the academic, scientific, and
technology communities, monitoring evolving technologies,
and placing bets on which ones will mature soon and have
the most positive market effect. Simultaneously they developNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98APPENDIX Eand market products, build market infrastructure to supportthem, please shareholders, and provide new working capital
to continue the process. The Army must adapt and incorpo-
rate these industry best practices into its new model, perhaps
by creating a networked R&D framework that would engage
both industry and academic researchers and more closely
integrate them with the ArmyÕs in-house R&D resources and
stakeholders. The framework could be an eBay-like network
model that aggregates ideas and supports a community that
rigorously (but rapidly) evaluates them (Surowiecki, 2004).At the heart of this new model for advancing NCO is theestablishment of a national network of virtual centers of ex-
cellence at multiple universities, where small groups of re-
searchers act autonomously but are connected to the Army
through an R&D coordinating council that also facilitates
linkages with private companies. To establish the centers,
the Army could implement an initial application process that
provides core funding for the researchers. A portion of the
funding could be maintained in a focused project fund, which
could then be dispensed to research centers that collaborate
to address specific Army challenges.The challenges could be prioritized through an internalapplication process. Then the Army could post specific prob-
lems of interest to which the centers could respond with a
brief proposal, estimating time and additional resources
needed to address them. The Army would select the most
appropriate center to address the challenge and allocate ad-
ditional funding if necessary. The additional funds might also
cover such things as extended data collection, new apparatus
needed to perform the task, or programming to generate an
interface for a project or even to take an idea to a prototype.In most cases, members selected to participate in the com-munity would receive base funding to cover their core per-
sonnel and other fixed costs. The network of the community
would be used to assemble and fund a variety of flexible
project teams. In addition to an Army coordinating council,
other funding entities (such as other government agencies or
private companies) might be invited to participate in this
network as sponsors of projects. This mechanism could sig-
nificantly shorten the normal process between posing a prob-
lem or challenge and getting a solution.Projects could arise in two primary ways. First, the Armycoordinating council or another sponsor could post a Re-
quest for Proposal (RFP), and various participants from the
centers of excellence would submit research proposals.
These proposals would be graded by the community of cen-
ters, industry participants, and the Army. For large projects,
potential participants might also post their own smaller RFPs
to assemble teams for subprojects. In either case, project
teams could include participants from multiple institutions
in the network. When a sponsor wanted help evaluating pro-
posals, it could ask other participants in the network to grade
different proposals. Network participants, like those on

eBay, would all have a continually updated reputation rat-ing. This buyer-initiated process is similar to that used onsites like Elance, Inc.A second way for projects to form would be for research-ers to post proposals for projects they want to do (or project-
related services they are willing to do). In cases of highly
desirable projects or services, different sponsors (or sub-
project leaders) might compete for the services of a person
or team. This seller-initiated process is similar to the process
used on sites like eBay.In either case, the centers and researchers who bringworthwhile knowledge, research, and technology to market
are funded, and those who donÕt are not. And the lead time of
a year or more that is typical for a grant application process
could be reduced to weeks or days.An example that provides valuable insight is the Net-worked Centers of Excellence (NCE) program in Canada.4NCE mobilizes research talent across Canada and applies it
to critical challenges that benefit all Canadians. The pro-
gram fosters partnerships of business, education, and gov-
ernment to accelerate the exploitation of knowledge, re-
search, and technology and to speed their transfer to products
and services that succeed in the marketplace.One way the Army could organize and apply this newmodel would be to staff its coordinating council with quali-
fied R&D people (senior officers at the O-5 to O-7 level,
including some with warfighting experience) to operate and
manage Army and joint R&D projects, as described above.
A one-star general could be placed in charge and told that if
successful, he/she will be promoted in 3 years. The council
could be limited in number to 15-20, mainly to manage the
network community described above. It would consist of
experienced R&D officers to guide this process, including
some O-6 warfighters who would be able to orchestrate or
manage the input from the networked community.The council members would be like Linus TorvaldÕs smallgroup of Linux code approvers or eBayÕs inner circle of stra-
tegic community managers. The Army must give serious
thought to how to attract the best minds. Additionally, the
Army may want to consider adding to the council one person
from industry and one from academia, both of whom are
familiar with network research, with what the different
centers of excellence can do, and with the cultures of the
different communities of researchers.The council would be given priorities based on theArmyÕs R&D investment strategy, most likely developed by
the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research
and Technology. It would be given authority to cut through
red tape and manage both the process and the networked
community of contributors.4For further information, see NCEnet spring 2004 issue, available at http://www.nce.gc.ca/pubs/ncenet-telerce/spr2004/newsletterspr04_e.htm.Accessed August 19, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E99Furthermore, the Army should develop mechanisms forencouraging and recognizing the best and most relevant re-
search. This would involve attracting talented researchers
and providing for a constant stream of challenging projects.
For continuity, the military officers on the council would be
designated Òwarfighting R&D professionalsÓ and set on an
appropriate career path that allows them to develop the next-
generation concept of virtual centers of excellence that can
meet the ArmyÕs critical needs in network science in a short
but realistic time frame.The next-generation model for network science R&D isdepicted in Figure E-1. This figure shows the conceptual
relationships between the Army coordinating council, uni-
versity centers of excellence, and industry consortia as de-
scribed above.In summary, the next-generation R&D model outlined inthis scenario is a new and different approach based on the
proven experience of networked organizations like eBay,
Intel, and GE. It is based on principles that have worked for
many successful companies that needed to get quality prod-
ucts and capabilities to market quickly: Think Big, Start
Small, Scale Fast, and Deliver Value. It is this type of next-
generation model that can deliver the knowledge, research,
and technology that will enable the nationÕs warfighters to
win its wars.For this approach to work requires strong commitmentfrom the Army and DOD senior leadership and their partners
in industry and academia. A small team of the best and
brightest Army warfighting R&D specialists committed for3Ð4 years and working closely with industry and academiawould not only contribute to accelerating the development
of the field of network science but also contribute to the
prompt and cost-effective delivery of effective NCO capa-
bility (DOD, 1999). The Army has an opportunity to assume
leadership in developing and implementing this new model.
In DOD, NCO must be a joint effort, and so should the new
R&D modelÑafter it has been proved in the Army. By mov-
ing aggressively to implement this model, the Army can es-
tablish itself as the lead in DOD and seize the opportunity to
make a significant contribution toward improvement of joint
network-centric warfighting capabilities.The statement of task requests the committee to Òidentifyspecific research issues and theoretical, experimental, and
practical challenges to advance the field of network science.Ó
Briefly stated, one such issue (and major challenge as well)
will be to obtain value from the investments that the Army
does make to advance network science. In the case of basic
research (6.1) alone, relevant challenges are identified in

Scenario 1. In the case of the combined basic and applied
research (6.1Ð6.3) projects envisaged in Scenario 2, the chal-
lenges depend sensitively on the topics of the research.To illustrate the scope and scale of next-generation R&Dprojects with market-driven management, three projects in-
volving the sociological, engineering, and biological areas
of network applications were developed by members of the
committee as sample projects and are described in following
sections.FIGURE E-1Schematic depiction of next-generation model for Army R&D showing the relationship between the main entities in this
model.ArmyCoordinating
CouncilUniversityCenters of
ExcellenceIndustryConsortiaLeverage capabilities of Army, university, and 

industry networks to 
support market-driven 
collaborative environment 
for R&D.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100APPENDIX ESociological Research: Local Decision Making in aNetworked Combat EnvironmentWhen network-centric operations are conducted in thefield, it is envisioned that squads, platoons, and companies
will have access to communications capabilities that provide
them with common situational understanding, a common
operating picture, information necessary for rapid decision
making, and ready communications directly with their com-
manders and peers. Operations like ground targeting for pre-
cision aerial bombardment require that specific items of in-
formation be made accessible to specific elements on (or
above) the battle. Experiments have been conducted to de-
termine whether access to this information actually increases
combat effectiveness, and if it does, how. This proposal is
for an exploration of decision making in an information-rich
combat environment via the design and conduct of field tests
to assess how Army personnel might adapt their processes
for searching for information and for decision making to
make optimal use of newly acquired information resources.This problem is of profound interest to the Army becausean understanding of the impact of incremental increases in
information resources on the search and decision making
processes of field units is central to the utilization of these
resources to improve the combat effectiveness of these units.
This is especially true if the units are expected to fight under
nontraditional circumstances like urban guerilla combat.The proposed approach to this problem is to extend and toadapt current models of networked group decision making
to examine how the availability of NCO capabilities might
modify the decision-making processes used by combat units
in the field and hence the effectiveness of these units (Watts,
2003). The current models apply more to simpler, more ge-
neric situations than to the complex situation of decision
making in combat. Thus, three lines of investigation would
be initiated. First, extensions of the models would be exam-
ined to assess the extent to which they can be applied to
social situations characterized by information exchange be-
tween remotely located small groups collaborating to reach
a joint decision. Second, examples of specific unit decisions
in field situations would be reviewed to assess if a subset of
the decisions could be isolated and subjected to the disci-
pline of constructing validated models. Third, the availabil-
ity and accessibility of NCO information in field settings
would be explored to assess the types and amount of infor-
mation that realistically could be expected under combat situ-
ations. Following these initial lines of investigation, an as-
sessment would be made of the feasibility of combining the
results to design and field test a revised set of decisioning
processes that showed promise of using the available NCO
information assets to improve combat effectiveness. At this
stage a decision would be made on whether the prospect of
useful results was good enough that the project could use-
fully be scaled up to support an actionable technology in-
vestment option to develop elements of training modules orspecifications for the user interface to and functionality ofNCO capabilities.The committee envisages that the models would be con-structed and exercised by leading university groups. Their
test and validation by means of field experiments and simu-
lations would be performed at Army facilities using prima-
rily Army personnel. These two groups must work together
intimately, because the current state of the art in modeling
obviously does not extend to the complexities of realistic
combat decisioning. Therefore, success of this project de-
pends on an exceptional level of creativity both in the exten-
sion of current models and in the identification of specific
field-relevant situations in which they could reasonably be
tested.The responsibilities of the university personnel would beto explore the range of behaviors described by current mod-
els and their extensions and to work with Army personnel to
assess their applicability to unit decision making in an NCO
environment. The responsibilities of the Army personnel in-
clude management of the program, collaboration with their
university partners to assess the applicability of the models
to NCO, design and conduct of tests, participation in the
analysis and interpretation of test results, and preparation of
recommendations to the Army for changes in unit organiza-
tion and training processes based on the results.The Army could make this program attractive to research-ers at leading universities by making 5-year grants for the
work, facilitating the participation of non-U.S. citizens, al-
lowing for timely publication of the results of the 6.1 por-
tions of the program, providing access to state-of-the-art
computing and Web collaboration facilities, and making the
competition for the grants sufficiently rigorous that only top-
notch university personnel could participate.Special capabilities that would be required includeenough computer power to exercise the models adequately
and simulation and test facilities for testing models of NCO
information availability and usage.This proposal envisages an intimate collaboration be-tween Army and university personnel in all aspects of plan-
ning and executing the program. The project would start with
a workshop in which the goals and approach of the project
are defined and procedures for collaboration clarified. The
principal university personnel involved would be expected
to devote at least 3 months each year to the project, with up
to a full year temporary assignment possible during the con-
duct of the experiments. Army personnel would be made
available to give participating university groups extended
briefings on the realities of decision making under combat
conditions. Efforts would be made to keep the assignment of
the leaders (both Army and university) of the program stable
so that good personal and professional relationships would
be established.This project is expected to differ from traditional Army6.1 programs in focus, intensity, and style. It would con-
struct, validate, and refine models of combat decision mak-Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E101ing in an NCO environment that would be usable by theArmy in determining the kind of information that is needed
and in training Soldiers. The research is expected to be per-
formed in the manner of a team social network, and the
project would be intense enough to require full-time involve-
ment of participants for extended periods. The university and
Army partners will construct a validated model to assess if
specific items of information envisaged to be available in an
NCO environment can be used to create a decision-making
process that demonstrably improves combat effectiveness.The proposed project also differs from projects sponsored
by funding agencies like NSF or the Department of Energy
by virtue of being a basic research project in model building
and validation that is embedded in a design, test, and evalu-
ation environment that would be suitable for the observation
and description of human behavior in particular network-
centric operations performed by the Army.Engineering Research: Large-Area Agent MonitoringNetworkThe goal of this project would be to develop and demon-strate the ability to create algorithms for communications,
sensor fusion, and motion control that can maintain an accu-
rate representation of the location, role, and intent of a dis-
tributed set of 10,000+ agents in a distributed geographic
area. The sensors would range from high-resolution fixed
assets (e.g., satellites), to sensors on platforms whose mo-
tion can be dedicated to data collection (e.g., unmanned
aerial vehicles [UAVs]), to sensors whose motion is under
limited control (e.g., sensors attached to already moving ob-
jects or fixed in place). Connectivity between the sensors
varies based on local conditions: Some sensors are sporadi-
cally available, others are mostly available but moving and
changing the network topology, and still others are perma-
nently attached to the network.A civilian example of this capability would be to main-tain a dynamic population density estimate across a city the
size of Washington, D.C., that is accurate to within +/Ð 100
people per square kilometer and to use this information to
control the flow of individuals to safety shelters inside or
outside the city through a heterogeneous set of transporta-
tion systems (cars, trains, buses, walking, etc.). Sensors
would include fixed sensors deployed on buildings and in
public areas, mobile sensors deployed on vehicles (some of
which are dedicated to collecting information, others of
which have other primary tasks), and personal sensors car-
ried by emergency personnel.A military example of this capability would be to main-tain an accurate representation of an urban area that included
information on the location of (possibly moving) military
assets, on the likely location of specific individuals and
groups of military interest, on the status of civilian and mili-
tary infrastructure (roads, communications, power, etc.), and
other information relevant to a military operation. Informa-tion sources would include dedicated satellite and UAV data,sensors attached to military vehicles operating in the area,
and fixed and mobile sensors (including cameras, vibration
sensors, communications taps, and power monitoring equip-
ment) placed by military personnel.Current solutions to this problem involve either trying tocentralize all information (as, for example, in an air opera-
tions center) or maintaining sparsely interconnected infor-
mation sources (different military units maintain their own
operating pictures, and these are synchronized at a high level
and with limited fidelity). The main obstacle to better inte-
gration of information is not the communications bandwidth
available, but rather our ability to design, build, and operate
complex, networked systems at this scale. Traditional ap-
proaches to analyzing the dynamics and function of such
networks are not likely to provide the insights necessary to
design robust, scalable solutions to this problem.One approach to solving this problem while advancingthe field of network science would be to develop a sequence
of annual experiments in which new methods and approaches
could be tested in a highly instrumented environment,
roughly like the military exercises run at the National Train-
ing Center (NTC). The Army would define and pay for run-
ning the experiments and would provide access to the data
collected on various nodes. Universities and companies
would demonstrate technologies at the experiments, includ-
ing forming coalitions to integrate their technologies into a
complete solution. A resident military groupÑpatterned af-
ter, say, the opposing force (OPFOR) at the NTCÑwould
role play the opposition and try to exploit the technology so
that it provided incorrect information about what is going
on. All data from the experiments would be made available
to the research community at some point after completion of
the experiments.To implement this set of experiments, the Army wouldhave to first identify (or construct) a site and to install instru-
mentation to allow monitoring of the operation. The type of
facility envisaged by the committee would be similar to the
ArmyÕs NTC at Fort Irwin, which already has many of the
types of instrumentation that would be required to keep track
of the movement of and communications between a large
number of troops operating in a military exercise.Finally, the Army would have to develop (or contractsomeone to develop) a software and hardware framework
that defines the interfaces to the portions of the experiment
that are fixed (e.g., the vehicles, sensors, and human-inter-
face hardware). The interface specifications and a simula-
tion and/or test suite would be made available to all prospec-
tive participants in the exercise. These specifications should
be focused on exploring the role of network effects in opera-
tions and need to represent current military capabilities, sys-
tems, or platforms.A possible model for this framework is the Open ControlPlatform (OCP), developed by Boeing as part of the

Software-Enabled Control (SEC) program of the DefenseNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102APPENDIX EAdvanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The OCPallowed researchers from academia and industry to run a set
of experiments on a test bed consisting of an F-16 and a T-
33. Each research site developed its own code, then tested
and verified it in simulation. Then the code was run on the
experiment, with full data provided to the users at the end of
the runs. Operation of the entire SEC final experiment was
the responsibility of Boeing. Although this program was
much smaller in overall scope than what the committee is
proposing here, it provides one example of how to allow
many users to access a common test facility.The experiments must be sufficiently large and complexthat a systems-level approach is required to succeed. The
committee anticipates that an experiment would involve be-
tween 10 and 100 vehicles, hundreds of troops (each con-
nected to the network), and 10,000+ individual sensors and
information sources. The venue of the experiment would
have a like number of individual agents that needed to be
tracked and characterized, as described in the civilian and
military applications above.The participants would be teams of researchers, technolo-gists, and engineers from academia and industry. University
researchers would provide new ideas for methods to inte-
grate information, implemented as protocols, algorithms, and
theory. They would develop software for communication
protocols, sensor fusion, control, etc. Industry would be re-
sponsible for overall systems integration as well as imple-
mentation of advanced methods for information aggregation
in a networked environment. The Army would manage the
operation but also insert new technologies from Small Busi-
ness Innovation Research (SBIR) and other entities receiv-
ing 6.2 funding under their control. Several recent examples
of such programs, such as the DARPA SEC and Bio-Spice
programs, could be used as models for how the teams would
work together.The program would be structured to attract participants.The availability of large-scale experimental infrastructure
and data sets for further research would motivate participa-
tion by universities, since this capability would be well be-
yond what is typically available in an academic environment.
It would also be important to provide a mechanism for long-
term support of fundamental research in network science,
perhaps by engaging a dedicated set of researchers to study
the overall experiment and provide a running assessment of
the adequacy of the science to explain the results of the exer-
cise. In addition to allowing exploration of engineering as-
pects of network science, this type of environment could also
be used to explore the social aspects of networks in military
operationsÑfor example, the impact of changes in the net-
work on the tactics used by friendly and enemy units.Biological Research: Field Biological Threat AssessmentMilitary personnel are deployed widely in different areasof the globe, are exposed to the different environments anddiseases at these locations, and are then, often quickly, rede-ployed elsewhere in the world. In addition, there is a threat
of directed biological attack on the force during combat.
These intense conditions can lead to the rapid infection of
troops and the spread of agents across the world if not imme-
diately detected and neutralized. Such a threat is also en-
countered in civilian situations, where economic needs might
drive the invasion of remote locations, such as biologically
diverse rain forests to collect medicines or wilderness area to
drill for oil. Other such situations might entail the exchange
of bacterially and virally dense sea waters through ballast
uptake and dumping by commercial or tourist ships. Each of
these cases involves the introduction of infective biological
systems from once-isolated remote locations to places where
individuals have not built immunity to them.The mobility of the military, or even civilian, participantsmeans infections could be brought from the site of interac-
tion to the wider community. Avian influenza provides a
prime illustration of the danger posed (see Box E-1) and
underscores the importance of having in place a well-in-

formed surveillance and decision structure to detect and re-
spond to emerging biological threats.The goals of this project would be to develop a focusedcapability to monitor the biological load of troops prone to
rapid redeployment, to demonstrate a capability to detect and
identify the source of new biological threats to soldier health,
and to provide recommendations for the control of such
threats to individuals and populations. A longer term goal
would be to turn this information into sufficient knowledge
about the biological organism at the molecular level to allow
rapid development and deployment of pharmaceutical solu-
tions. For the purposes of this report the committee uses as
examples existing viral threats such as human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV-1), influenza, and West Nile virus and the
emerging threat of avian flu. Similar considerations apply,
however, to bacterial threats such as anthrax, tularensis, and
leishmania (a particular problem in the Middle Eastern
theater).This overall assessment effort would require a network ofmonitoring stations reporting on samples from the environ-
ment and patients, looking for prevalence of the threat agent
and patient response to the agent in terms of morbidity and
virulence indices. Agents would be rapidly sequenced and
typed. These sequences would be related to their virulences
and used to track the spread of a particular strain from loca-
tion to location. Models of the viral infection and transmis-
sion process based on the sequence and prior measurements
of similar strains would inform network models of the spread
and mutation of these viruses. These models, in turn, would
enable rapid risk assessments when an infection appears at a
given site.This biology project links with the social and engineeringnetwork sample projects presented above. Data from arrays
of sensors in the environment and on individual soldiers
would need to be fused into a database of biological andNetwork ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E103geographical information. This database would be providedwith analytical and decision management tools that assess
the risk associated with detection of a new strain of virus or
infection event. The information would need to be coordi-
nated from forward field laboratories to commanders respon-
sible for combat operations, especially troop deployment.A pilot study in this area would be designed to cooperatewith Marine and U.S. Navy SeaBee medical aid stations
(MASs) already engaged in disease and noncombat illness
surveillance, as well as with the global disease tracking ef-
forts of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the World
Health Organization (WHO). The MASs could be charged
with monitoring soldiers for a panel of viral species and
would be outfitted to rapidly sequence isolates. Perhaps a
field team would be dispensed to sequence similar viruses in
local fauna and environments. Sequences would be filed in
databases along with soldier data (health and some form of
identifier for tracking where individuals are stationed and
how they are moved from place to place). These databases
would be integrated with, for example, the influenza data-
base at Los Alamos National Laboratory.5 A university teamwould work on relating sequence, virulence, and geographicinformation into a model of the sequence determinants of
different virulence and epidemiological parameters, such as
transmissibility and the rate of mutation. Working with a
DOD team, the university team would develop structured
epidemiological models of the spread and of new viral infec-
tions in the troop population based on models of troop move-
ment and the viral dynamics. An Army team would then
focus on modeling decision processes under different sce-
narios in order to optimize containment of any viral threat.This project involves four major challenges: (1) choosingthe scale, breadth, and accuracy of the data needed for con-
struction and parameterization of the network models, (2)
developing a modeling framework relating data at the viral
sequence level to the level of whole populations of infected
individuals, (3) creating modeling tools that take into ac-
count the unique ability of live biological threat agents to
adapt to and mutate around human interventions, and (4)
developing a decision support model that prescribes an ef-
fective course of medical and social intervention to quell a
possible viral outbreak. This work faces the challenges gen-
erally faced by multimodal, multiscale network analysisÑ
how to place the sensors (in this case medical and environ-
mental surveillance); how to fuse their information into
network models at both the epidemiological and molecularBOX E-1Case Study from the World Health Organization: Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza is an infectious disease of birds caused by the Type A strain of influenza. Nearly all birds are susceptible to it, and different strains havewidely differing virulences, with some strains being highly contagious and able to cause severe symptoms, death, or dangerous epidemics. There are atleast 15 subtypes of avian influenza that provide an extensive pool of virus. Contact between domestic and migratory birds transmits and mixes thesepools, and research has shown that even viruses of low pathogenicity can, after circulating for only a short time, mutate into highly pathogenic viruses.Early detection of these virulent strains and strict quarantine are the most effective means of control. Good sanitation helps in prevention, but virus canexist in the environment for long periods, especially in cold regions. In the absence of prompt control measures backed by excellent surveillance,epidemics can last for years.One of the most worrisome aspects of these viruses is their ability to efficiently recombine their genetic material with that of other viruses to cause anantigenic shift, creating variants less likely to be halted by the immune systems of the birds. These viruses rarely hop species (except to pigs), but therehave been a number of recent cases of the avian flu hopping from birds to humans. These cases are so disturbing that a 1997 outbreak of one highlypathogenic strain (H5N1) in Hong Kong poultry that directly spread to 18 humans, 6 of whom died, caused the government to destroy within 3 days theentire poultry population of 1.5 million birds. This action likely averted a large-scale spread to humans and a pandemic. The infected persons were oftenotherwise healthy, and there seemed to be no age preference. Since then there have been a number of other outbreaks in southern China, Viet Nam, andKorea.The H5N1 strain is of particular concern because it has a propensity to acquire genes from viruses that infect other animal species, increasing theprobability that these new strains might become virulent to humans. Testing and diagnosis for the virus is rapid and reliable, and treatment is the sameas for human flu. Vaccines can be effective, although only temporarily. Antivirals often work, but they are expensive and in short supply. The upshot is thatrapid detection, estimation of the threat, and good command and control, such as was demonstrated in the Hong Kong poultry massacre, are importantmeans for containing this possible source of pandemic.SOURCE: Adapted from a document found at http://www.who.int/csr/don/2004_01_15/en/.5For further information, see http://www.flu.lanl.gov. Accessed August19, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104APPENDIX Elevels; and how to use these network models to direct distri-bution of resources and to design interventionsÑand re-
quires network science at all scales. Since coordination and
communication among the teams is paramount to the suc-
cess of a project at this scale, the online infrastructure and
computational resources would be an early focus.An initial coordination team would identify the key exist-ing infrastructure for achieving the project goals and would
establish contact with the requisite field sites and field mili-
tary personnel. The team would develop a knowledge of the
key data trackers in the WHO and CDC. It would identify
candidates to participate in the program. Key government
players and invited participants would attend a workshop to
discuss what technology, resources, and organization would
be necessary for success of the program. A subset of this
group would form a project team and create the final 5-year
project design. Dedicated team leaders would be chosen from
the Army, other government agencies, and nonmilitary re-
search groups.The scale of the work, the diversity of participating agen-cies, and the use of military field data make this a project
outside the scope of most funding agencies. The committee
expects that the basic science to be accomplished as well as
the important societal and military applications would make
this project attractive to the scientific community at large.SCENARIO 3, CREATING A ROBUST NCW/NCOCAPABILITYThe statement of task instructs the committee to Òrecom-mend those relevant research areas that the Army should in-
vest in to enable progress toward achieving network-centric
warfare capabilities.Ó When the committee examined the lit-
erature on this topic from the DOD OFT, it discovered that
the concept of Ònetwork-centric warfareÓ had been super-
seded by the concept of Ònetwork-centric operations,Ó as
described in a conceptual framework document published
on the OFT Web site6 (Cebrowski and Garstka, 1998;Garstka and Alberts, 2004). In interviews and discussions
with representatives of the Army and DOD, committee mem-
bers learned that opinions on NCW and NCO varied widely
and were substantial, not just a matter of nomenclature.
Moreover, the literature on the topic is dynamic, with new
reports and publications frequent. Since this report is in-
tended as an archival document, the committee elected to
use the published conceptual framework description version
2.0 (Garstka and Alberts, 2004) as its point of reference.In Scenario 3, the committee adopts a national point ofview. Its purpose is to ask what the nation must do if the
strategic vision of NCO is to become a reality. Investment inresearch by the Army is a part of Scenario 3, albeit a modestone.Transforming the U.S. military from its current state tothat envisaged for NCO, as described by Garstka and Alberts
(2004), is probably the most complex undertaking in the his-
tory of the U.S. government. Its achievement would argu-
ably be comparable to the successful pursuit of World War
II or the cold war with the Soviet Union. It is a long-term,
difficult, costly, and risky undertaking. It is not clear to the
committee that the difficulty, cost, and risk associated with
this notion have been communicated effectively to the se-
nior management of the Army and DOD. In Scenario 3, the
committee emphasizes the magnitude of the undertaking and
sets forth the view that significant new activities will be re-
quired to accomplish it.Think first of designing the most complex weapons sys-tem yet: say, a large aircraft carrier. Add to this the compli-
cations in the physical domain associated with, for example,
secure, reliable wireless communications via satellite to sol-
diers on a mobile battlefield. In the information domain, add
the hardware and software challenges associated with stor-
age, search, and retrieval of orders of magnitude more data
than have ever before been processed in real time, as well as
the challenges associated with ensuring the security and reli-
ability of these data. In the cognitive domain, add issues as-
sociated with processing information from all three services
by a junior officer at a local (mobile) workstation. In the
social domain, add the complications of orchestrating the
decision-making process in this information-rich, real-time
environment and the issues associated with tactics and train-
ing to use all this information-processing capability. In all
seriousness, the challenge seems more like science fiction
than like science and technology that can be delivered up by
the R&D operations of the military services as currently con-
stituted or even by commercial R&D.The committee regards it as highly unlikely that existingmethods of designing and procuring weapons systems will
be adequate to accomplish this monumental undertaking.
Current experience in the services themselves supports this
point of view (Brewin, 2005). The committee regards the
task of converting the current state of the U.S. military to the
vision articulated for NCO as vastly more challenging than
seems to be appreciated.Not only is the task dauntingly complex, the knowledgenecessary to accomplish it does not even exist. In similar
casesÑthe Manhattan Project and the initial days of NASA
come to mindÑa focused, long-term national initiative was
required, and it seems likely that something similar will be
required in this case also. Thus, in Scenario 3 the United
States undertakes a focused national initiative, comparable
in scope to the Manhattan Project, to design and deploy NCO
capabilities as described in the conceptual framework docu-
ment version 2.0 for all the military services during the
coming decade.6For further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil/. Accessed August19, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E105Insights from Network ThinkingWhat insight does network thinking offer on this subject?First, a network organization (as opposed to a hierarchical
one) is required because the organization must learn how to
do the job on the job.7 A critical function is specifying thearchitecture of the interacting networks in the various do-
mains, setting the interfaces between them, and monitoring
successive waves of implementation to ensure consistency
and learning. This could be accomplished by a senior execu-
tive office that also managed the program itself. Underneath
this top layer of the network is a project management layer
responsible for converting the architecture into a series of
projects that implement and test various elements of the ar-
chitecture. Think of this layer as the middleware of the orga-
nization. Beneath this is a network layer of vendors and mili-
tary logistic organizations that provide and source the
material for operational commands. A model for the vendor
organization might be Sematech. A model for the logistics
organization might be the nuclear Navy. The important
points are that a new network organizational structure and
work process is required to create a capability of this com-
plexity and that the scale of the activity is larger than the
Army alone; it must be national, or at least DOD-wide.Another insight is that the design and implementation ofNCO capabilities are on the same scale and of the same com-
plexity as their use. The same principles of better, faster de-
cisions by means of information sharing apply. Thus, the
environment in which the capabilities are designed can be
regarded as a test bed for many of the expected capabilities
themselves in the information, cognitive, and social domains.

Taking advantage of this insight could make the overall job
less onerous and should be an explicit consideration in ini-
tiatives to create NCO capabilities.SynopsisThe committee was not tasked to resolve the issues raisedin Scenario 3 but considers their resolution to be of para-
mount national urgency. The committee stresses that the
knowledge of networks that we possess today is not adequate
to design predictable, secure, robust global networks. Mem-
bers heard presentations and read reports on how the Òtrans-
formationÓ to a future force capable of NCO is not likely to
be achieved by traditional approaches to creating technol-
ogy. They came to recognize that the policies and practices
currently used to procure these capabilities do not take into
consideration the uncertainties inherent in the current state
of understanding the design and implementation of complex
networks. The purpose of Scenario 3, then, is to emphasizethat the task of designing, testing, and operating the envis-aged NCO capabilities is of an exceedingly high order of
complexity and should be approached as seriously as the
Manhattan Project or NASAÕs race to the moon.The committee would be remiss in its responsibilities if itfailed to note the essential urgency and profound difficulty
of this task. The chances of delivering NCO capabilities in a
timely and affordable way would be greatly increased by a
focused national initiative combining the initiatives of all
services under central leadership, to respond successfully to
the diverse challenges of future warfare.REFERENCESAlbert, R., and A.L. Barab⁄si. 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex net-works. Review of Modern Physics 74(1): 47Ð97.Albert, R., H. Jeong, and A.L. Barab⁄si. 2000. Error and attack tolerance ofcomplex networks. Nature 406(6794): 378Ð382.Almaas, E., B. Kovacs, T. Vicsek, Z.N. Oltvai, and A.L. Barab⁄si. 2004.Global organization of metabolic fluxes in the bacterium Escherichia
coli. Nature 427(6977): 839Ð843.Amaral, L.A.N., A. Barrat, A.L. Barab⁄si, G. Caldarelli, P. De Los Rios, A.Erzan, B. Kahng, R. Mantegna, J.F.F. Mendes, R. Pastor-Satorras, and
A. Vespignani. 2004. Virtual roundtable on ten leading questions fornetwork research. European Physical Journal B 38(2): 143Ð145.Anderson, R.M., and R.M. May. 1992. Infectious Disease of Humans: Dy-namics and Control. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press/OxfordScience Publications.Arquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The Future ofTerror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.Barab⁄si, A.L. 2003. Linked. New York, N.Y.: Plume, a member of thePenguin Group, Inc.Barab⁄si, A.L., and Z.N. Oltvai. 2004. Network biology: Understanding thecellÕs functional organization. Nature Reviews: Genetics 5(2): 101Ð114.Barrat, A., M. Barth”lemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. 2004.The architecture of complex weighted networks. Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101(11):3747Ð3752.Ben-Naim, E., H. Frauenfelder, and Z. Toroczkai. 2004. Complex Net-works. New York, N.Y.: Springer-Verlag.Bornholdt, S., and H.G. Schuster, eds. 2003. Handbook of Graphs and Net-works: From the Genome to the Internet. Weinheim, Berlin: Wiley-VCH.Brewin, R. 2005. DOD Mulls Network Coordination. Available at http://www.fcw.com/article88939-05-23-05-Print/. Accessed May 31, 2005.Cebrowski, A., and J. Garstka. 1998. Network centric warfare. Proceedingsof the United States Naval Institute 24: 28Ð35.Cohen, R., K. Reez, D. Ben-Avrahan, and S. Havlin. 2000. Resilience of theInternet to random breakdowns. Physical Review Letters 85(21): 4626Ð4628.Cohen, R., K. Reez, D. Ben-Avrahan, and S. Havlin. 2001. Breakdown ofthe Internet under intentional attack. Physical Review Letters 86(16):3682Ð3685.Department of Defense (DOD). 1999. DOD Financial Management Regu-lation Volume H.Dodds, P.S., and D.J. Watts. 2004. Universal behavior in a generalized
model of contagion. Physical Review Letters 92(21): 218701.Dodds, P.S., and D.J. Watts. 2005. A generalized model of social and bio-logical contagion. Journal of Theoretical Biology 232(4): 587Ð604.Dodds, P.S., D.J. Watts, and C.F. Sabel. 2003. Information exchange andthe robustness of organizational networks. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences of the United States of America 100(21): 12516Ð
12521.7C.F. Sabel, professor of law and social science, Columbia Law School,ÒTheory of a real-time revolution,Ó briefing to the 19th EGOS Colloquium,Copenhagen, July 2003.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106APPENDIX EDorogovtsev, S.N., and J.F.F. Mendes. 2003. Evolution of Networks: FromBiological Nets to the Internet and WWW. Oxford, England: OxfordUniversity Press.Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2004. Network Centric Operations ConceptualFramework Version 2.0. Vienna, Va.: Evidence Based Research, Inc.Gladwell, M. 2000. The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a BigDifference. New York, N.Y.: Little, Brown and Company.Helper, S., J.P. MacDuffie, and C. Sabel. 2000. Pragmatic collaborations:Advancing knowledge while controlling opportunism. Industrial and
Corporate Change 9(3): 443Ð483.Huckfeldt, R., P.E. Johnson, and A. Sprague. 2004. Political Disagreement:The Survival of Diverse Opinions within Communication Networks.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.Katz, E., and P.F. Lazarsfeld. 1955. Personal Influence: The Part Played byPeople in the Flow of Mass Communications. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.Newman, M.E.J. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks.SIAM Review 45(2): 167Ð256.Newman, M.E.J., A.L. Barab⁄si, and D. Watts, eds. 2005. The Structureand Dynamics of Networks. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Pastor-Satorras, R., and A. Vespignani. 2004. Evolution and Structure ofthe Internet: A Statistical Physics Approach. Cambridge, England: Cam-bridge University Press.Rogers, E.M. 1995. Diffusion of innovations. New York, N.Y.: Free Press.Surowiecki, J. 2004. The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are SmarterThan the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Econo-
mies, Societies and Nations. New York, N.Y.: Doubleday.Tanenbaum, A.S. 2003. Computer Networks, 4th edition. Upper SaddleRiver, N.J.: Prentice Hall PTR.Watts, D.J. 2002. A simple model of information cascades on random net-works. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the UnitedStates of America 99(9): 5766Ð5771.Watts, D.J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
N.Y.: Norton.Watts, D.J. 2004. The ÒnewÓ science of networks. Annual Review of Soci-ology 30(1): 243Ð270.Weiner, T. 2005. ÒDrive to build high-tech Army hits cost snags.Ó NewYork Times, March 28, 2005.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107FRecommended Reading ListAhmadjian, C.L., and J.R. Lincoln. 2001. Keiretsu, governance, and learn-ing: Case studies in change from the Japanese automotive industry. Or-ganization Science 12(6): 683Ð701.Alberts, D.S., and R.E. Hayes. 2003. Power to the Edge: Command andControl in the Information Age. Washington, D.C.: CCRP PublicationSeries.Alberts, D.S., and T.J. Czerwinski, eds. 1997. Complexity, Global Politicsand National Security. Washington, D.C.: National Defense UniversityPress.Amin, M. 2002. Modeling and control of complex interactive networks.IEEE Control Systems Magazine: 22Ð27.Arquilla, J., and D. Ronfeldt. 2000. Swarming and the Future of Combat.Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND National Defense Research Institute.Artzy-Randrup, Y., S.J. Fleishman, N. Ben-Tal, and L. Stone. 2004. Com-ment on ÒNetwork motifs: Simple building blocks of complex networksÓ
and ÒSuperfamilies of evolved and designed networks.Ó Science305(5687): 1107c.Barab⁄si, A.L. Linked. 2003. New York, N.Y.: Plume, a member of thePenguin Group, Inc.Barab⁄si, A.L., and Z.N. Oltvai. 2004. Network biology: Understanding thecellÕs functional organization. Nature Reviews: Genetics 5(2): 101Ð114.Berkowitz, B. 2003. The New Face of War: How War Will Be Fought in the21st Century. New York, N.Y.: Simon and Schuster.Bower, J.M., and H. Bolouri, eds. 2001. Computational Modeling of Ge-neric and Biochemical Networks. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.Buchanan, M. 2002. Nexus: Small Worlds and the Groundbreaking Scienceof Networks. New York, N.Y.: Norton.Bushnell, L.G. 2001. Networks and control. IEEE Control Systems Maga-zine (1): 22Ð23.Carley, K.M. 1995. Communication technologies and their effect on cul-tural homogeneity, consensus, and the diffusion of new ideas. Socio-logical Perspectives 38(4): 547Ð571.Carley, K.M. 2001. Smart Agents and Organizations of the Future. Thou-sand Oaks, Calif.: Sage Publications.Carley, K.M. 2003. Dynamic network analysis. Pp. 133Ð145 in DynamicSocial Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and Pa-
pers. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.Carley, K.M., J.S. Lee, and D. Krackhardt. 2001. Destabilizing networks.Connections 24(3): 31Ð34.Clippinger, J.H. Human Nature and Social Networks. Available at http://www.dodccrp.org. Forthcoming.Davis, S., and C. Meyer. 1998. Blur: The Speed of Change in the ConnectedEconomy. New York, N.Y.: Warner Books.Davis, S., and C. Meyer. 2003. ItÕs Alive: The Coming Convergence ofInformation, Biology, and Business. Chapter 3 and Chapter 7. NewYork, N.Y.: Crown Business.Epstein, J.M. 2002. Modeling civil violence: An agent-based computationalapproach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of theUnited States of America (PNAS) 99(Suppl. 3): 7243Ð7250.Ferber, D. 2004. Synthetic biology: Microbes made to order. Science303(5655): 158Ð161.Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosper-ity. New York, N.Y.: Free Press.Gaddis, J. 2004. The Landscape of History: How Historians Map the Past.Vienna, Va.: Evidence Based Research, Inc.Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2003. Network Centric Operations ConceptualFramework Version 2.0. Vienna, Va.: Evidence Based Research, Inc.Gerchman, Y., and R. Weiss. 2004. Teaching bacteria a new language. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 101(8): 2221Ð2222.Goldsmith, S., and W.D. Eggers. 2004. Governing by Network: CIOs andthe New Public Sector. Washington, D.C., and Cambridge, Mass.:
Brookings Institution Press and Innovations in American GovernmentProgram at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard
University.Hammes, T.X. 2004. The Sling and the Stone: On War in the 21st Century.Osceola, Wis.: Zenith Press.Hoffman, F.G., and G. Horne, eds. 1998. Maneuver Warfare Science.Quantico, Va.: U.S. Marine Corps Combat Development Command.Horn, P. 2005. The new discipline of services science. Business Week.Available at http://ww.businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2005/
tc20050121_8020.htm?campaign_id=nws_techn_jan25&link_position=link10.Last accessed on February 28, 2005.Ilachinksi, A. 2004. Artificial War: Multiagent-Based Simulation of Com-bat. Hackensack, N.J.: World Scientific Press.James, G.E. 1995. Chaos Theory: The Essentials for Military Application.Newport, R.I.: Naval War College Press.Jervis, R. 2001. System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.Keller, E.F. 2002. Making Sense of Life: Explaining Biological Develop-ment with Models, Metaphors and Machines. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.Keller, E.F. Revisiting Òscale-freeÓ networks. BioEssays. In press.
Kelly, K. 1999. New Rules for the New Economy. New York, N.Y.: Pen-guin Group.Kobayashi, H., M. K¾rn, M. Araki, K. Chung, T.S. Gardner, C.R. Cantor,and J.J. Collins. 2004. Programmable cells: Interfacing natural and en-gineered gene networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences of the United States of America 101(22): 8414Ð8419.Network ScienceCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108APPENDIX FLooger, L.L., M.A. Dwyer, J.J. Smith, and H.W. Hellinga. 2003. Computa-tional design of receptor and sensor proteins with novel functions. Na-ture 423(6936): 185Ð189.Lun, L., D. Alderson, W. Willinger, and J. Doyle. 2004. A first-principlesapproach to understanding the InternetÕs router-level topology. Proceed-ings of SIGCOMM 04.Malone, T.W. 2004. The Future of Work: How the New Order of BusinessWill Shape Your Organization, Your Management Style and Your Life.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.Murray, R.M., ed. 2003. Control in an Information Rich World, Report ofthe Panel on Future Directions in Control, Dynamics, and Systems.Philadelphia, Pa.: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.National Research Council (NRC). 2001. Opportunities in Biotechnologyfor Future Army Applications. Washington, D.C.: National AcademyPress.Newman, M.E.J. 2001. The structure of scientific collaboration networks.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United Statesof America 98(2): 404Ð409.Newman, M.E.J. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks.SIAM Review 45(2): 167Ð256.Parmentola, J.A. 2004. Army transformation: Paradigm-shifting capabili-ties through biotechnology. The Bridge: Linking Engineering and Soci-ety 34(3): 33Ð39.Perez, C. 2002. Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dy-namics of Bubbles and Golden Ages. Cheltenham, England: EdwardElgar Publishers.Reed, D.P. 1999. Weapon of Math Destruction. Available at http://www.contextmag.com/archives/199903/DigitalStrategy.asp/. Last ac-cessed on March 23, 2005.Rheingold, H. 2002. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge,Mass.: MA Basic Books.Sable, C.F. 2003. Theory of a real time revolution. Paper presented at the19th EGOS Colloquium. July 3Ð5. Forthcoming.Scott, J. 2000. Social Network Analysis: A handbook. Thousand Oaks,
Calif.: SAGE Publications.Silver, P., and J. Way. 2004. The potential for synthetic biology. The Scien-tist 18(18): 30Ð31.Smith, M.A. 1998. Communities in Cyberspace. Oxford, England:Routledge.Strogatz, S.H. 2001. Exploring complex networks. Nature 410(6825): 268Ð276.Strogatz, S.H. 2003. SYNC: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order.Pp.229Ð259. New York, N.Y.: Theia Books.
Tanenbaum, A.S. 2003. Computer Networks, 4th edition. Upper SaddleRiver, N.J.: Prentice Hall PTR.U.S. Marine Corps (USMC). 1996. Control and Command. DistributionNumber 142 000001 00. Washington, D.C.USMC. 1997. Warfighting. Distribution Number 142 000006 00. Washing-ton, D.C.Von Bertalanffy, L. 1976. General System Theory: Foundations, Develop-ment, Applications. New York, N.Y.: George Braziller, Inc.Waldrop, M.M. 1992. Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge ofOrder and Chaos. New York, N.Y.: Simon and Schuster.Watts, D.J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. New York,
N.Y.: W.W. Norton.Watts, D.J. 2004. The ÒnewÓ science of networks. Annual Review of Soci-ology 30(1): 243Ð270.Watts, D.J., and S.H. Strogatz. 1998. Collective dynamics of Òsmall-worldÓnetworks. Nature 393(6666): 440Ð442.Wellman, B. 1996. Computer networks as social networks: Collaborativework, telework, and virtual community. Annual Review of Sociology
22(1): 213Ð238.Wellman, B. 2001. Computer networks as social networks. Science293(5537): 2031Ð2034.Wellman, B. 2001. Physical place and cyberplace: The rise of personalizednetworks. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 25(2):227Ð252.West, G.B., and J.H. Brown. 2004. LifeÕs universal scaling laws. PhysicsToday 57(9): 36Ð43.Wilson, C. 2004. Network Centric Warfare: Background and Oversight Is-sues for Congress, Order Code RL32411. Washington, D.C.: Congres-sional Research Service, Library of Congress.Wolkenhauer, O., B.K. Ghosh, and K.H Cho. 2004. Control and coordinationin biochemical networks. IEEE Control Systems Magazine (4): 30Ð34.