DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11529Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for AirForce Needs116 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10031-1 | DOI 10.17226/11529Committee on Directions for the AFOSR Mathematics and Space Sciences DirectorateRelated to Information Science and Technology; Board on Mathematical Sciencesand Their Applications; National Research CouncilBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Directions for the AFOSR Mathematics and Space SciencesDirectorate Related to Information Science and TechnologyBoard on Mathematical Sciences and Their ApplicationsTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSWashington, D.C.www.nap.eduBASIC RESEARCH ININFORMATION SCIENC
EANDTECHNOLOGY
FORAIRFORCENEED
SBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS500 Fifth Street, N.W.Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by theGoverning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committeeresponsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and withregard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by Contract No. F1ATA04295M001 between the Na-tional Academy of Sciences and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publica-tion are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the orga-nizations or agencies that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-10031-3Copies of this report are available from The National Academies Press, 500 FifthStreet, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313(in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-ment on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the
National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engi-
neering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulfis president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.
Dr.Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy ofSciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal govern-ment. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy,the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providingservices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering commu-nities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON DIRECTIONS FOR THE AFOSR MATHEMATICSAND SPACE SCIENCES DIRECTORATE RELATED TOINFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYALAN J. McLAUGHLIN, MIT Lincoln Laboratory (retired), ChairRUZENA K. BAJCSY, University of California at Berkeley
ELWYN BERLEKAMP, University of California at Berkeley
PHILIP A. BERNSTEIN, Microsoft Corporation
ROGER W. BROCKETT, Harvard University
VINCENT CHAN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
STEPHEN CROSS, Georgia Institute of Technology
EDWARD FELTEN, Princeton University
OSCAR GARCIA, University of North Texas
W. DAVID KELTON, University of Cincinnati
KLARA NAHRSTEDT, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo, Inc.
RONALD W. SCHAFER, Hewlett-Packard LaboratoriesStaffSCOTT WEIDMAN, Director, Board on Mathematical Sciences andTheir ApplicationsBARBARA WRIGHT, Administrative AssistantvBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOARD ON MATHEMATICAL SCIENCESAND THEIR APPLICATIONSDAVID W. McLAUGHLIN, New York University, ChairTANYA STYBLO BEDER, Tribeca Investments, LLC
PATRICK L. BROCKETT, University of Texas at Austin
ARAVINDA CHAKRAVARTI, Johns Hopkins University School ofMedicinePHILLIP COLELLA, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
LAWRENCE CRAIG EVANS, University of California at Berkeley
JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University
ROBERT KASS, Carnegie Mellon University
KATHRYN B. LASKEY, George Mason University
C. DAVID LEVERMORE, University of Maryland
ROBERT LIPSHUTZ, Affymetrix, Inc.
CHARLES M. LUCAS, AIG
CHARLES MANSKI, Northwestern University
JOYCE McLAUGHLIN, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo, Inc.
STEPHEN M. ROBINSON, University of Wisconsin-Madison
EDWARD WEGMAN, George Mason University
DETLOF VON WINTERFELDT, University of Southern CaliforniaStaffSCOTT WEIDMAN, DirectorBARBARA WRIGHT, Administrative AssistantviFor more information on BMSA, see its Web site at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bms/, write to BMSA, National Research Coun-cil, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call at (202) 334-2421, or e-

mail at bmsa@nas.edu.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcknowledgmentsThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the NRC’s Report Review Committee. The purposeof this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments
that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as
possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review
comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity
of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals
for their review of this report:C. William Gear, Princeton University,Eric Horvitz, Microsoft Research,
John W. Lyons, U.S. Army Research Laboratory (retired),
Debasis Mitra, Bell Laboratories,
S. Shankara Sastry, University of California at Berkeley,
William Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon University, and
Sheila E. Widnall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the
conclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the
report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by William
H. Press, Los Alamos National Laboratory. Appointed by the National
Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an inde-viiBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiACKNOWLEDGMENTSpendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance withinstitutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully con-
sidered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely
with the authoring committee and the institution.The committee thanks members of the AFOSR staff of the Air ForceResearch Laboratory’s Information Directorate; staff of the Air CombatCommand; Thomas Cruse, Chief Technologist of the Air Force Research
Laboratory; and Shankara Sastry and Janos Sztipanovits of the Air Force
Scientific Advisory Board for their helpful discussions and inputs to this
study.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1INTRODUCTION17
2BACKGROUND22
Overview of Air Force Goals That Rely on IS&T Research, 27
The R&D Response: Current Directions, 293BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE NETWORK SYSTEMS35
AND COMMUNICATIONS
Types and Characteristics of Communication and NetworkServices Needed in the Future, 35Technical Challenges Posed by Future Air Force Networks andCommunications Systems, 37Challenges for Future Air Force Communications Systems, 37
Challenges for Future Air Force Networks, 41Recommended Basic Research Areas in Support of Air ForceNetworks and Communications, 48Satellite Communications and Data Networking, 49
Radio Communications and Networking, 50
Free-Space Optical Networks, 51ixBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xCONTENTS4BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE SOFTWARE53
Coevolution of Air Force Concepts of Operations and SystemArchitectures, 55Software Behavior Envelopes, 58
Evolvability Throughout the Life Cycle, 595BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE INFORMATION61
MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION
Background, 61
Major Information Management Challenges forAir Force IS&T, 63Recommended Basic Research in Information Management andIntegration, 676BASIC RESEARCH FOR HUMAN INTERACTIONS WITH71
AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMS
Challenges Posed by Human Interactions with Air ForceIS&T Systems, 72Scope of the Challenge, 72
Interfaces for Air Force Decision Makers, 74
Machine Learning to Support HSI, 76
Simulation as a Design and Training Tool for HSI, 77Basic Research Recommendations for HSI for Air ForceIS&T Systems, 777PRIORITIES IN BASIC IS&T RESEARCH FOR THE AIR FORCE80
A Model for Air Force IS&T Basic Research, 80
Recommended Basic Research Priorities in IS&T, 848FUNDING MECHANISMS87
9FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS91
Program Organization, 91
Recruitment of Program Managers, 92
A Mechanism for Fostering Experimental Research in IS&T, 93APPENDIXESAMeeting Agendas101
BAcronyms105
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryThe U.S. Air Force, like the other services, is transforming itself into anew type of force with capabilities appropriate for an emerging array of
new threats. The Air Force roadmap for transformation, part of the U.S.Air Force Transformation Flight Plan,1 describes the desired new capabili-ties, and it is readily seen that advances in information science and tech-
nology (IS&T) underpin most of them. For example, the three main new
capabilities are information superiority, precision targeting (or strike), and
improved battlespace awareness. The first requires secure and survivable
command and control systems; methods for sharing, tailoring, and dis-
tributing vast amounts of information; decision aids; and offensive and
defensive cyber warfare. Precision strike implies the ability to place muni-
tions with minimal error anyplace required to achieve a military objec-
tive, and also the ability to perform rapid damage assessment. And im-
proved battlespace awareness requires the ability to fuse and convey
information so that decision makers can fully understand the plan of ac-
tion and its execution in real time and be able to rapidly assess and antici-
pate necessary changes to the plan.In order to refocus its program of basic research in IS&T to bettersupport these Air Force goals, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR) 
asked the National Research Council to establish a committeecharged with the following task:1Available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/af_trans_flightplan.pdf.   Referred to in
this report as the Air Force Flight Plan.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThe study will create a vision and plan for the IS&T-related programswithin the AFOSRÕs Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate.  Based
on the spectrum of Air Force IS&T needs and the context in which the
Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate operates, the committee willdo the following:¥Identify which of the Air ForceÕs IS&T needs seem to call for AFOSR-sponsored R&D;¥Recommend a program of 6.1 research2 in IS&T that is not being doneelsewhere (or is not readily applicable to Air Force situations) andthat covers the most critical or broadly useful topics that fit within the
purview of the Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate;¥Develop rough estimates of the funding needed to make credibleprogress in this program of IS&T-related research, with a prioritizationthat defines what could be adequately covered with flat funding, a10percent decrease, a 10 percent increase, and a 25 percent increase.

Recommend how the directorate might transition from its current pro-
gram to the envisioned one under these various budget scenarios; and¥Recommend an appropriate balance of funding mechanisms for thedirectorateÕs IS&T-related research, choosing among the various mecha-nisms currently in use in the directorate.This report is the outcome of that committeeÕs study.The committee learned about Air Force goals from a variety of sources,including printed reports, briefings at the Air Force Research Laboratory
(AFRL) and the Air Combat Command, and discussions with senior Air
Force leaders in research and development (R&D). From these sources,
the committee concluded that most of the capabilities desired by the Air
Force cannot be attained without continued IS&T R&D. This is because IT
pervades most, if not all, envisioned Air Force systems and is often the
principal enabler of system capability, yet IT is still an immature engi-
neering discipline requiring much work to assure predictable results when
a system requires IT-related innovation. Furthermore, nearly all of thosecapabilities require some advances that are unlikely to be developed com-mercially or by the other services and therefore will require targeted R&D
by the Air Force itself. Moreover, nearly all of that Air Force-specific R&D
must include ambitious basic research, because significant gaps exist in
the knowledge base upon which the desired capabilities will be built.2In the Department of Defense (DOD), funding lines are assigned numbers, and 6.1 is theline for basic research. Within the Air Force, the AFOSR is in charge of all 6.1 funding, mostof which is used to support peer-reviewed academic research. Funds for applied researchand development (R&D) are designated 6.2 or 6.3.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3The committee, echoing what is already understood within the AFOSRR&D establishment, identified (1) access to disparate data and informa-
tion, (2) their fusion and appropriate distribution, and (3) conversion of
information into knowledge as the necessary building blocks for attaining
the desired capabilities. These building blocks, like most of the Air ForceÕs
desired capabilities, rely on team-focused, network-enabled systemsÑthat
is, interlocking systems made possible by networks that enable the teams
to work together. The committee concluded that research to develop those
building blocks is the most important Air Force need, one that will persist
as long as the Air Force relies on network-enabled systems, and from its
initial store of ideas about which kinds of research would be relevant to
Air Force IS&T, the committee identified four that underpin team-focused,
network-enabled systems of any kind:  research in networks and commu-

nications, software, information management, and human-system inter-
actions (HSI). The committeeÕs vision for AFOSRÕs IS&T program is
captured in Figure ES-1. Distributed research and experimentation envi-
ronments are discussed in Chapter 9 and some grand challenges are
proposed in Chapter 7. Then, the committee summarizes the research it
recommends in each of these areas.FIGURE ES-1A vision for Air Force IS&T research: Team-focused, network-
enabled systems are created by the four research areas shown. The concerted ef-forts in the four areas, which also affect one another, are to be focused by grandchallenges identified by the AFOSR and by experiments conducted in distributed
research and experimentation environments.Human-system interactions
Information management
Software
Networks and communications
Distributed research and experimentation environmentsGrand challenges
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSNETWORKS AND COMMUNICATIONSAir Force applications must contend with communication modalitiesthat are not encountered in commercial and civilian settings. For example,
satellite channels have unusually long-delay data rates and randomly
fading dispersive channel characteristics. Classical communication and
information theories do not incorporate an element of adversarial attacks.
Radio channels, especially those associated with mobile platforms, have
rapidly changing link capacities and connectivity, with disconnections
and dropouts that can last minutes or more. In contrast with this dynamism,
traditional layer 3 (Network Layer) and layer 4 (Transport Layer) proto-
cols assume fairly stable underlying substrates that change, if at all, over
the course of minutesÑthat is, much more slowly than most transmis-
sions. These traditional protocols often yield low throughputs and poor
quality service when applied to defense systems; in some cases, they do
not work at all despite valiant efforts to provide patches. Thus, the main
challenge of Air Force communications is to provide assured connectivity
between networks (albeit at varying rates) under difficult channel condi-
tions, including during adversarial attacks.Another Air Force communications challenge is how to recognizewhen multiple sensors have collected related observations so that redun-
dancy can be removed or complementary data fused. This is essential in
order to stay within network bandwidth capacities, especially in difficult
communication environments. More generally, the theory of networks has

not matured to a point where one can predict how well protocols devel-
oped heuristically in one application setting will perform on a communi-
cation network built on radically different communication modalities. To
deal with the new and complicated modalities of importance to the Air
Force, fundamental tools must be developed to help understand how net-
works might perform in new environments and to optimize architectures.
It is simply too costly to develop these architectures and protocols ad hoc
and then experiment with the communication links in the field.Bandwidth will always be in high demand in the battlespace, so thereis a need for a network management system that is able to translate high-
level guiding principles into network actions such as routing and media
access control priorities in a timely fashion without a human in the loop.
Currently, asset management is done manually, and it is far from respon-
sive or optimal. Because it will not always be possible to ensure that no
nodes are compromised, the network should be designed to sense dead or
malfunctioning network elements and route around them. In addition,
the network should have an architecture that confines such damage to a
local area and does not allow it to propagate across the network. When
the network senses outside attacks, it should be able to locate the real
entry points and then defend against and remove these attacks.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5In response to these challenges, the committee recommends thatAFOSR pursue basic research in the following topics of importance for
Air Force networks:¥Robust protocols, addressed with new mathematical tools for net-work dynamics analysis.¥Error-free, end-to-end delivery, requiring better methods for per-formance prediction.¥Throughput, delay deadlines, and congestion control, all based onnetwork coding.¥Network performance optimization, building on dynamic (convexand nonconvex) programming, game theory, and control theory.¥Policy-based network management, requiring means of monitor-ing, resource allocation, and making performance guarantees for
subsets of users.¥Robust architectures, perhaps based on Byzantine robust networking.¥Network architecture and protocols for unmanned air vehicles(UAVs) and other air vehicles.For sensor networks in particular, the committee recommends the
following basic research topics:¥Real-time embedded processing.¥Embedded control systems.¥Minimization of power consumption, addressed through energy-efficient routing, Transport Layer protocols, and energy-efficient
process management.¥Programming and support tools for large-scale networks.¥Energy-efficient coding schemes for information distribution.¥Techniques for real-time dynamic resource allocation.¥Energy-aware compilers and schedulers.¥Source compression and correlation methods for multiple sensors.The Air Force communication systems that operate on these networksrequire basic research in the following areas:¥Unifying methodologies for modulation, coding, beam-forming,and scheduling optimization.¥Information theory extensions for dynamic self-adaptive com-munications.¥Wireless architectures for exploiting node-to-node cooperation.¥Ultrawideband (UWB) communication: air-ground, air-air, air-space.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥Dynamic exploitation of channel characteristics for increasedcapacity, reliability, and spectrum efficiency.¥Design of systems with performance guarantees for difficultchannels, including channels under attack.¥Integrated design/optimization of networks plus communicationssystems, being conscious of the vulnerability to cross-layer
adversarial attacks.SOFTWARENetwork-enabled systems are by definition dependent on complexsoftware because of the great number of possible states of the networks.
The systems that require such software transcend a range of Air Force
applications, from intensive human-machine systems (e.g., command and
control, air operation centers) to embedded applications (e.g., avionics
systems). Increasingly these applications are connected by networks into
a system of systems and, in fact, the distinction between enterprise
and embedded systems blurs as the focus is increasingly on the inter-
connectedness of all such systems.Rather than focusing on large-scale code developmentÑa challengethat is being researched by othersÑthe committee recommends that
AFOSR focus on a set of important software engineering issues that are
key to successful Air Force network-enabled systems but that have
received limited attention. This recommended set of issues centers on how
to understand what to build and how to ensure that its behavior is rela-
tively predictable and acceptable, both during design and in operational
use. Three important questions emerge:¥How do we discover and understand what is needed?¥How can critical nonfunctional attributes (those that are desired ornecessary but ancillary to the softwareÕs primary functionality) be
implemented in a predictable fashion?¥Can the resulting software, once fielded, evolve to satisfy newneeds discovered as it is used?To address the first of these, the committee recommends a program ofresearch aimed at the coevolution of Air Force concepts of operations and
system architectures. This program extends the philosophy of software
development models such as iterative development that support rapid
prototyping of a software system so that end users can experiment with
the system to see if it satisfies their needs. The prototype then becomes an
explicit representation of the requirements. Current research in execut-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7able architectures and in engineering tools for the design and analysis offunctional and nonfunctional attributes provides a basis for this program.The committee recommends research into the following:¥Methods to support rapid composability.¥Semantic extensions of current modeling languages to enhancecomposability and representation and reasoning of behavior.¥Development of tools that enable the construction of executableversions of models in system modeling languages.¥Methods that support experimentation, operational assessment,and the use of initial architecture representations in exercises. An
example might be scripting languages that allow end users to

explore early versions of software and help encode their prefer-
ences into the final architecture.¥Approaches that allow user tailoring, definition, and explorationof new processes and automated learning based on past problem
solving.¥Experimentation and demonstration of these research approachesin domains of relevance to the Air Force.To address the second question, the committee recommends thatAFOSR support a new line of research, extending model-based softwareresearch funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) to build up an understanding of software behavior envelopes.

Dynamic analysis of the nonfunctional attributes (e.g., scalability, 
inter-operability, survivability, security, energy awareness) of software could
define the performance envelope of a network-enabled system. It would
be valuable to know the extent to which software could be modified, by
developers or end users, and stay within the desired envelope. This topic
would be a new area of research for the software community, but there is
related work on which to build, as explained in Chapter 4 of this report.Once a software architecture has been defined and the performanceenvelope explored, a logical third capability would be one that supports
the continued evolution of complex software within its fielded context.
While most other software engineering research focuses on developing
new software-intensive systems, in fact the larger challenge is to learn
how to maintain and upgrade the huge amount of Air Force software that
has already been fielded. Thus, important research areas include methods
to infer the architecture of legacy software systems, to identify software
components within that architecture, to parallelize legacy system software
and applications, and to migrate that architecture and components to new
and improved architectures, possibly within a new computing environ-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSment. Since network-enabled systems will involve many legacy systemsas well as new systems, it is imperative that software be designed so that
it can be evolved in an affordable manner throughout its life cycle. The
committee recommends that AFOSR support research to improve the
evolvability of software-intensive systems. The following specific lines of
research, which could build on readily available commercial frameworks,
are recommended:¥Our ability to conduct dynamic, model-based analyses to analyzenonfunctional attributes needs to be improved.¥In order to improve component integration, research is needed toaccelerate the development of abstract design-component systems
and code-component-based systems, addressing automated dis-
covery, composition, generation, interoperability, and reuse across
hundreds of systems.¥Research in security is needed in support of the goal of measurable,available, secure, trustworthy, and sustainable network-enabled
systems.¥To attain assured reliability with hard time-deadlines, methods areneeded for modeling and analyzing integrated reliability, availability,
and schedulability of components and systems in realistic condi-
tions derived from user-specified scenarios.¥All participating components of the overall system need to be energy-efficient: (1) network energy on network interface and communica-
tion protocols of ad hoc networks, (2) processor energy and process
management for scheduling various applications, (3) memory/
storage energy and memory/storage management, and (4) display
energy.¥Research is needed into novel integration of methods for verifica-tion and validation, such as integration of informal methods (e.g.,
software testing and monitoring) with formal verification (i.e.,
model checking and theorem proving) and abstract interpretation
and static program analysis techniques. The ability to validate
scalability, adoptability, usability, and measurement is also impor-
tant, and some fundamental breakthroughs have occurred in the
past 5 years that have led to a rapid rise in industry adoption and
interest.INFORMATION MANAGEMENTOne ramification of the ubiquitous deployment of IT in the Air Forceis that both human and automated decision makers are now often facedBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9with voluminous multimedia data from which they must create knowl-edge. Even the first step in knowledge creationÑthe integration of raw
data that are in different formats and managed by different data manage-
ment technologiesÑis challenging, but future Air Force capabilities will
require much more.The Air Force faces major open questions on how to manage and shareinformation in a distributed system. The Òpublish-subscribeÓ paradigm is
one that is being explored at the AFRL. That concept includes (1) a common
repository where information is ÒpublishedÓ and (2) ÒsubscriptionÓ infor-
mation for various users that defines which posted information their
systems will download from the common area. The publish-subscribe
concept has been shown to scale to hundreds of thousands of participants
within stable network environments. However, an Air Force publish-
subscribe system must work in an unstable wide-area network environ-
ment such as a battlespace network; it must in many cases weed out
information that is outdated or redundant; its subscription rules must be
more sophisticated than those available today, including having enough
ÒintelligenceÓ to take context into account; and the system must be trust-
worthy even if an adversary has gained access to publish or subscribe.
These challenges are examples and not comprehensive. Moreover, they
are not unique to publish-subscribe. Similar challenges accompany alter-
native infrastructures for information management. It is clear, therefore,
that much research in fields such as distributed computing, database sys-
tems, security, and data mining must be accomplished before the Air Force

can field a dependable information management system.More generally, the Air Force needs to understand information at amore abstract level. It needs a model and architecture for situation under-
standing and a means of incorporating situation modeling, model-based
processing, situation projection, and top-down management of situation
understanding in order to explore topics in information fusion. It also
needs a scientific basis and technologies for multisensor fusion for air and
ground targets. Some of these topics are extensions of ongoing work in
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) methods. An even
bolder question would be, How can a computer understand data and
information in context? In principle, background understanding of a
mission or related intelligence could help a computer interpret informa-
tion from the battlespaceÑfor example, to help identify objects in video
or image data. If such context-dependent processing were possible, perhaps
information-understanding algorithms could be embedded in sensors and
networks to enable rapid data assessment and rapid situation assessment.The committee recommends the following basic research in supportof Air Force information management:Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥Query-processing techniques for large-scale sensor networks.ÑWhere to place query functionality vs. limited power, band-width, etc.ÑCoping with mobile sensors, unreliable sensors, high data rates.¥Techniques for processing and managing semistructured content.ÑFor data modeling, for querying and routing, for execution.¥Fusion of uncertain, inconsistent data and querying of incompleteinformation.¥Mechanisms for determining the certainty of answers as a functionof the certainty of raw data.¥Multilevel representation of multimodal signals (video, images,hyperspectral, etc.).
ÑFor efficient transmission, storage, manipulation, multimodaldata mining, and machine learning.HUMAN-SYSTEM INTERACTIONSThe committee focuses on HSI to encompass not only human-com-puter interactions but also the coordinated and purposeful interactions of
several or many humans with complex systems and the interactions of
teams of humans mediated through systems. The committee recommends
an AFOSR focus on HSI because it is essential to the successful operation
of complex systems and to the accomplishment of network-enabled op-
erations. An ultimate goal of HSI research would be to enable machines
(or algorithms) to perform more of the complex data manipulation, corre-
lation, computation, and data reductionÑand even some decision-mak-
ingÑleaving humans to perform the most critical judgments that cannot
be accomplished by algorithms or that rely on extrinsic knowledge. Fur-
thermore, HSI should help humans to interact with one another in coop-
erative tasks where multiple humans are part of the system.In the Air Force, there are many situations where one or more humansinteract with one or more IS&T systems. This includes systems that are
distributed not only among different platforms but also, perhaps, across
geographical and organizational boundaries, most often with strict securityand service reliability constraints such as near-real-time or time-critical
services. Complexity increases if the humans and the systems interact with

one another in ways that are not connected with the task being analyzed.
What sorts of information, architecture, and format should be used to

achieve desired effects, and how can designers and users estimate the
uncertainties and internalize the context and caveats associated with each
option? Assuming the right information is available at the right time and in
the right form (e.g., text, images), what techniques will enable the user to
make the best use of it? How can what-if simulations be considered andBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11evaluated? Such complex capabilities might require integrated and synchro-nized multimodal interfaces (visual, aural, and/or haptic) to capture the
high dimensionality of a system of sensors and actuators in the battlefield.Research into HSI should shed light on the usability of the (same)information in a battlefield command-and-control situation relative to the
perspective (rank) of the user and the granularity (detail of the informa-
tion). In other words, one must understand and characterize the most
likely and useful level of complexity for each potential user, from the
warfighter to the commander, so that the complexity and amount of
information can be optimized for battlefield decision-makingÑnot a
paucity of data, but not data overload either.The importance of HSI research is also driven home by the Air Forceemphasis on influence operations, which are meant to alter adversariesÕ
attitudes and perspectives so as to achieve U.S. goals without resorting to
the tools of traditional warfare. Influence operations require fundamental
research into behaviors and how they can be affected. To this base of

knowledge must be added knowledge on interpretation and presentation,
personnel training, and modeling and simulation, building on what is
known about cultural and behavioral factors to carry out influence opera-
tions. As an example, characterization and recognition of normal and

abnormal behavior would, in general, help in surveillance at all levels.
Characterizing which actions, postures, and so on signify worrisome
behavior requires ongoing research in the social sciences, and the ability
to automatically recognize such behavior in sensed data is an ongoing
challenge for IS&T.The committee recommends that AFOSR pursue basic research in thefollowing areas of importance to HSI:¥Tools for improved human interactions with automated reasoningand inference systems under constraints.¥Automated diagnosis and decision support, automated learning.Enable user navigation of systems involving complex and noisy

data and decision systems.¥Learning-theory-based techniques for predictive modeling andanticipatory behavior involving cultural factors.¥Combination of heuristic and optimization techniques for complexsearches, with adaptability to different levels of detail to avoid
information overload of the warfighter.¥Trade-offs between power usage in sensors and displays andchoices regarding the range of visual items, human attention, and
control.¥Fundamental requirements and metrics in designing, implementing,and experimenting with complex, interactive, time-critical infor-
mation systems.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥Enhanced, interactive, mixed-modality models, experiments, andtestbeds for more integrated real-time human/system/sensor
synergy and database decision support relevant to Air Force goals.In particular, HSI research of importance to information usability andinfluence operations would include:¥Simulation of urban and human environments.¥Behavioral models of individuals, groups, and organizations.¥Fundamental attributes of information operations testbeds andexperimental metrics for evaluating effectiveness.¥Decision support techniques for addressing partial-solutionapproximations based on evolving, nonstatic information.Note that some of the HSI research falls squarely in the domain ofpsychology or sociology. AFOSR already has programs that are joint
between IS&T and psychology, and the committee recommends that this
interface continue to be strengthened and broadened.PRIORITIES FOR AFOSR IS&T RESEARCHThe committee recommends that AFOSR prioritize its IS&T researchin networks, communications, information management, software, and
HIS, as shown in Table ES-1. With the current funding available for IS&T
(the column headed ÒStableÓ) the committee recommends that networks,
communications, and HSI research merit the highest priority, while infor-
mation management and software research portfolios would be better able
to weather any forced reductions in the level of effort. The committee is
not saying that the latter two research areas are less important to the Air
Force. Rather, it is the committeeÕs judgment that if cutbacks are required,
reductions in those programs would do the least harm in limiting future
options. If the overall IS&T funding dropped by 10 percent, the committee
would give software the lowest priority only because other organizations,
and commercial enterprises, are doing some related research. If overall
funding increases by 10 percent, the priority for information management
research should be raised a notch. Finally, if overall IS&T funding were to
increase by 25 percent, the committee recommends a balanced portfolio
drawn from the particular research recommendations earlier in this sum-
mary. See also the footnotes to Table ES-1 for additional interpretative notes.Because all of the major research areas listed in Table ES-1 contributesynergistically to the future fielding of team-focused, network-enabled
systems, progress toward that vision is dependent on a balanced research
effort across all five areas. As implied by Table ES-1, the overall fundingBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13TABLE ES-1Relative Priorities Under Four Funding Scenarios
IS&T Topic10% ReductionStable10% Increase25% Increase
NetworksHHHH
CommunicationsHHHH
Information managementMMHH
SoftwareLMMH

Human-system interactionsHHHH
Note: ÒHÓ means the general topic is a high priority, and its funding should be protected or
increased. ÒMÓ means the general topic is of medium priority for AFOSR support, given thecontributions by other players, not that it is of medium importance to the AFOSR. ÒLÓ meansthat funding in that area should be sacrificed so that a critical level of effort can be supported
in other areas. ÒLÓ does not mean that the topic is not of importance to the Air Force, onlythat if resources are tight, it is a reasonable candidate for cuts because other organizationsare contributing to the topic and/or the challenge is so great that a small AFOSR effort is
unlikely to lead to significant progress. These priorities pertain to the five general researchareas listed in the left-hand column as weighed only against one another, not against otherprograms funded by AFOSRÕs Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate. The priorities
are meant to show the committeeÕs consensus on which of the areas to (de)emphasize ifthere are any changes in funding. The priorities take into account not only the importance ofthe research but also the relative need for Air Force-specific research. They reflect the
committeeÕs general sense of what can be meaningfully accomplished within the fundingscenarios posited, but the committee did not develop a detailed estimate of the resourcesrequired for each of the research topics in the left-hand column.level for basic research in IS&T will not support such a broad, balancedeffort unless there is a significant increase. Therefore, the committee
recommends a significant increase in IS&T funding within AFOSR centered
on research to support team-focused, network-enabled systems of Air
Force interest.The committee also recommends that AFOSR consider designatingsome topics as grand challenges as a means of focusing its IS&T research,
motivating the academic research community, and connecting that
research to Air Force goals. Topics designated as grand challenges would
be ones for which there is a recognizable gap in the knowledge base that
would be properly addressed by a cross-disciplinary community of basic
researchers; the grand challenge will help give that community an iden-
tity and thus strengthen its coherence. These grand challenges should be
defined in terms that are recognizable to the basic research community,
but AFOSR should also be able to map the grand challenges to future Air
Force technologies. The grand challenges are not part of, nor do they com-
pete with, the AFRLÕs focused long-term challenges (which are more ori-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSented toward technologies), but they should link to them. Building a pro-gram around grand challenges quite naturally facilitates new interdisci-
plinary research communities: Òinterdisciplinary,Ó because the breadth of
the challenges calls for varied expertise, and Ònaturally,Ó because the as-
sociated researchers are interested in the whole range of efforts address-
ing the grand challenge.The committee recommends that AFOSR consider the following aspossible grand challenges, but this list is by no means exhaustive:¥Control of multiple UAVs. Research to enable the control of multipleUAVs by one human in mixed manned-unmanned airspace, in
contrast to todayÕs requirement for many humans for a single UAV
in carefully deconflicted manned and unmanned airspace.¥Taskable airborne network. Research to enable cost-effective andrapidly deployable tactical intelligence networks in urban environ-
ments, where the nodes generally are sensors carried on UAVs or
lighter-than-air vehicles and the networks are taskable by ground-
and air-based commanders.¥Mixed-reality training environments. Research to enable training forair crews, command post staff, and commanders in an environ-
ment of such fidelity that it would be indistinguishable from the
real world (and in fact would sometimes involve the real worldÑ
hence ÒmixedÓ rather than ÒvirtualÓ or ÒaugmentedÓ).  The com-

puter tools used in such training environments should be the same
as those used in the real world.¥An automated Air Operation Center staff assistant. Research to enablesoftware that can learn from being told, much as human staff
members learn on the job.¥Rapid system integration. Research to enable the rapid integration ofIT-based systems, such as those belonging to different members of
ad hoc coalitions. This research would encompass HSI, networks and
communications, security, software, and information management.FUNDING MECHANISMSAFOSRÕs current IS&T research is supported through a range of fund-ing mechanisms, and the committee found that each of those mechanisms
provides value and that the AFOSR program managers are doing a good
job of making use of them. The committee does not recommend any hard-
and-fast rules for balancing the various funding mechanisms; rather, it
encourages continued flexibility and is comfortable with the current mix.
The committee did observe, though, that it would be beneficial for AFOSR
to increase the number of young investigators who are aware of Air ForceBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15challenges.  Therefore, it recommends that the Air Force consider estab-
lishing a mechanism for young investigator awards so as to raise its
visibility within that group of IS&T researchers.FUTURE CONSIDERATIONSThe committee observed that AFOSRÕs IS&T portfolio is difficult topin down because it is distributed among various programs in two AFOSR
directorates. The committee recommends that AFOSR identify IS&T as a
major topic within the Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate and,
as IS&T investment increases, establish a separate directorate with that
single focus. It also recommends that all human-system and human effects
research be consolidated within that IS&T directorate because of the criti-
cal importance of HSI to the effectiveness of complex Air Force systems.As the IS&T program grows, the committee sees an opportunity forAFOSR to try new mechanisms for recruiting program managers, espe-
cially by reaching out to the broader IS&T community. Mechanisms such
as the Intergovernmental Personnel Act and the Experimental Personnel
Hiring Authority can be very useful for bringing in both program managers
and higher-level staff.Finally, the committee urges AFOSR to work with other parts of theAir Force to establish testbeds that will allow researchers and Air Force
users to experiment with prototype IS&T concepts and systems. Besides
the inherent benefit of experimental science, such an approach would
provide an intellectual crossroads between the scientific and operational
community to support the scientific discovery process. The committee
uses the label Òdistributed research and experimentation environmentÓ
(DREE) to describe a shared computation infrastructure that supports
experimentation within a community of researchers.The committee believes that DREEs would be useful for each area ofresearch cited in this report. A DREE for information management, for
instance, would enable the associated communityÑincluding universi-
ties, AFRL laboratories, and perhaps federally funded R&D centersÑto
create sample data sets and develop associated queries that illustrate how
the data are to be integrated. A DREE related to network-centric systems
would allow exercises from which concrete performance requirements
could be generated; those requirements are difficult to identify otherwise.
While exercises are ongoing, operational Air Force participants can clarify
their real, not hypothetical, needs; IS&T applied researchers can investi-
gate engineering issues with the prototype network; basic researchers in
IS&T can experiment with fundamental changes (e.g., to communication
protocols); and HSI researchers can instrument the experiments and learn
from them.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThe DREE approach to promoting experimental science should not beprohibitively expensive, because the necessary network infrastructure is
rapidly falling into place and there is the possibility of leveraging
investment in testbeds made by other AFRL directorates. For example, a
research version of the Distributed Mission Training environment housed
in AFRLÕs Human Effectiveness Directorate might support experimental
science in areas ranging from control of UAVs to decision making in real-
time environments. The committeeÕs recommendation is that basic research
funds not be used to establish DREEs, only to support the involvement of
researchers.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.171Introduction
In October 2004, the National Research Council (NRC) was asked bythe Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) to recommend a basic
research program to support Air Force information science and technology
(IS&T) goals. The NRC established the Committee on Directions for the
AFOSR Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate Related to Informa-
tion Science and Technology and charged it to Òcreate a vision and plan
for the IS&T-related programs within the AFOSRÕs Mathematics and

Space Sciences Directorate.The committee was not charged with reviewing the current IS&T pro-gram, so nothing in this report should be construed as a criticism of
AFOSR or its current program. Rather, this report was designed to be a de
novo look at what should be included in the Air ForceÕs basic IS&T pro-
gram. Many of the recommended research topics are well known to
AFOSR staff, and they clearly overlap the current program. The identifi-
cation in this report of a basic research need does not imply that the need
has been overlooked, only that it should be one of AFOSRÕs top IS&T
priorities.To accomplish its charge, the committee held three meetings. Thefirst two were intended to inform the committee of the Air Force needs in
IS&T, from which the committee would deduce the required basic re-
search portfolio. (Complete agendas of the three meetings are included
in Appendix A.) The first meeting was held at the Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) Information Technology Directorate in Rome, New
York. This directorate is a counterpart to AFOSR charged with conduct-
ing 6.2 and 6.3 R&D in IS&T; as such, it is both a user of the results ofBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSAFOSR-sponsored IS&T and a conduit for transitioning results betweenthe research community and Air Force operating units. At that meeting,
the committee also interacted with two members of the Air Force Scien-
tific Advisory Board, who conveyed results from that boardÕs 2003 re-
view of Air Force IS&T R&D. The second meeting was held at Langley
Air Force Base in Hampton, Virginia, and was hosted by units of the Air
Combat Command (ACC). The ACCÕs Command, Control, Intelligence,
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance center and ACC activities in informa-
tion operations make it the primary customer among Air Force opera-
tional units for AFOSRÕs IS&T research. At that site visit, the committee
received additional perspectives on the Air ForceÕs IS&T needs. At its
third meeting, in Washington, D.C., the committee held a discussion with
Thomas Cruse, chief technologist for the AFRL, to explore AFRLÕs direc-
tions in IS&T. At all meetings, the committee had ample opportunity for
frank discussions with AFOSR personnel who manage IS&T-related re-
search portfolios, and on two occasions it had in-depth discussions with
Brendan Godfrey, the director of AFOSR.The committee also sent one member to attend a program review ofthe Partnership for Research Excellence and Transition (PRET) for
advanced concepts in space situational awareness, held in January 2005,
and another member for a site visit to the Mesa, Arizona, unit of AFRLÕs
Human Effectiveness Directorate. The first visit was helpful in bringing
out different perspectives about AFOSR funding mechanisms, and both
visits covered potential research.As part of its investigation, the committee examined a wide range ofpast reportsÑfrom the Air Force itself, the Defense Science Board, the Air
Force Scientific Advisory Board, and the National Research CouncilÑthat
bear on Air Force basic research into IS&T. For example, the committee
examined Air Force-specific planning documents such as the Air Force
Long-Term Challenges, the Air Force Mission and Vision Statement, and
the Air Force Flight Plan. From all of these investigations, readings, and
discussions, the committee first established a consensus on what IS&T
research is needed to support the Air ForceÕs goal and then filtered those
findings based on the committee membersÕ collective insight about what
research is being done, or is likely to be done, in industry, academia, and
elsewhere. The study focused on information available from AFOSR,

AFRL, and the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board. As such, this report
centers on IS&T research for Air Force operations and does not explore
possible IS&T research to improve Air Force processes. The committee
also filtered the research needs according to whether or not there were
Air Force-specific questions to be addressed:  If not, then there is no need

for AFOSR to carry out research in that particular area.Based on these inputs and its own expertise, the committee firstBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION19generated a list of more than a dozen IS&T research areas of importanceto the Air Force. Then, echoing what is already understood within the Air
Force R&D establishment, the committee identified three building blocks
for attaining the desired Air Force capabilities:  (1) access to disparate

data and information, (2) fusion and appropriate distribution of the data,
and (3) conversion of the information into knowledge. These building
blocks, like most of the Air ForceÕs desired capabilities, rely on team-
focused, network-enabled systemsÑthat is, interlocking systems made
possible by networks that allow teams to work together. The committee
concluded that research to develop those building blocks is the most
important for the Air Force, and from its initial list of Air Force-relevant
IS&T research areas, it identified four that underpin team-focused, network-
enabled systems of any kind:  research in networks and communications,

software, information management, and human-system interactions (HSI).
This committee vision for AFOSRÕs IS&T program is captured in Figure 1-1;
Òdistributed research and experimentation environmentsÓ and Ògrand
challengesÓ will be explained in Chapters 7 and 9. By building up the
knowledge base in these four fundamental areas, AFOSR can help the Air
Force move beyond more heuristic approaches for developing disruptive
technologies such as network-enabled systems.FIGURE 1-1A vision for Air Force IS&T research:  Team-focused, network-en-
abled systems are created by the four research areas shown. The concerted effortsin the four areas, which also affect one another, are to be focused by grand chal-lenges identified by the AFOSR and by experiments conducted in distributedresearch and experimentation environments (see Chapter 9).Human-system interactions
Information management
Software
Networks and communications
Distributed research and experimentation environmentsGrand challenges
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThe committee believes this structure for IS&T research is generic inthat it applies to a broad set of information-intensive challenges and
embraces all of the high-priority topics for the Air Force. In developing
this vision, the committee decided to recommend that AFOSR focus on
the IS&T needs of team-focused, network-enabled systems. This choice of
research areas is strongly suggested by the documents, briefings, and
plans reviewed by the committee. Such a focused research program prom-
ises to be much more effective in achieving the goals of a network-enabled
Air Force than would a piecemeal attack on disparate IS&T research
topics. The committee recognizes that the inputs to network-centric
operations and lower-level aspects of networksÑfor example, sensors,
processors, information/surveillance/reconnaissance (ISR), and informa-
tion assuranceÑalso require continued AFOSR-sponsored research, but it
believes the greatest research void when looking to the future lies with
the system-oriented topics in Figure 1-1. It is at the interface to these
systems that information and data emerge and must be dealt with in an
effective way to enhance the decision superiority of the Air Force.The basis for all network-enabled operations is a good understandingof networks and the communications that traverse them. As explained in
Chapter 3, there are many differences between Air Force networks and
commercial networks such as cell phone networks and the Internet. These
differences mean that a large number of basic research challenges are Air
Force-specific and are not being addressed outside the military. At
present, there is no solid foundation of understanding to guide the design
and management of these complex networks, and without that under-
standing building such a network would be akin to designing a new
generation of fighter planes by piecing together components from the last.On top of the networks and communications, the Air Force relies on awide range of complex software. The challenge is to develop a capability
to build complex software systems with predictable behavior. This is a
long-standing challenge, and Chapter 4 recommends specific aspects that
AFOSR should pursue.Information management and interactions between human beingsand systems are needed to create military value from the Air ForceÕs
emerging information dominance. For example, much basic research is
needed before the Air Force can effectively use and coordinate all of the
data currently available from both unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) and
satellites. There are many unmet challenges in these areas, which are ex-
plored in Chapters 5 and 6. Included in the HSI discussion is information
operations, which entails not only offensive and defensive cyberwarfare
but also the emerging area of influence operations, which aims to effect
military goals without necessarily damaging people or infrastructure.
There is a great deal of research to be done on that topic.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION21The committee did not conduct a detailed audit of the present AFOSRIS&T programs other than to review the brief summaries that were
provided. Such an audit was not within its mandate, and the committee
took a blank-slate approach to defining an IS&T vision and a basic re-
search program. By identifying the basic research challenges that under-
pin team-focused, network-enabled technologies rather than those sug-
gested by specific Air Force or DOD systems and programs, the committee
aimed to define an IS&T program that will remain relevant regardless of
how particular technology foci might vary over the coming years.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222Background
An NRC review of DODÕs IS&T for air and space asserts the following:1The pervasiveness of information systems in military systems and in visionsfor future warfighting and the accelerating threat information technology
poses require that [the Department of Defense] have a strong informa-tion systems S&T program.  The committee found the opposite to be thecase, however, in its review of the Air Force S&T investment.  Since at

least the mid-1990s, the Air Force S&T investment in information systemshas declined steadily, despite recurring annual plans to increase it.Later, on pages 29 and 30, that report notes as follows:Future Air Force concepts are driven by information and information
systems, which are becoming the Òforce multiplierÓ for the Air Force ofthe future. The increased emphasis on information and associated trends
are reflected in Air Force warfighting concepts. These concepts include:*¥Dynamic aerospace command¥Joint battlespace infosphere¥Information operations¥Integrated aerospace operations¥The Expeditionary Aerospace Force¥Effects-based operations*Defense Science and Technology Advisory Group, ÒAir Force strategy in infor-1National Research Council, Review of the U.S. Department of Defense Air, Space, andSupporting Information Systems Science and Technology Program, National Academy Press:Washington, D.C. (2001), p. 4.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND23mation,Ó briefing by John A. Graniero at the Information Systems Technology(IST) Technology Area Review and Assessment (TARA), Air Force Research Labo-
ratory, Rome, New York, March 13-17, 2000.On pages 31 and 32, the NRC report notes that commercial IS&T willnot, no matter the size and strength of the investment, address all of the
IS&T needs of DOD:Leveraging commercial information technologies is difficult, however,because industry rapidly changes direction to meet rapidly changing

customer demands and because the time to market must be as short aspossible.  Fierce competition dictates limited, short research and devel-
opment cycles and near-term investment strategies. Very little funding is
being invested in basic research, which is usually outsourced to academia.*IndustryÕs short-term needs cannot support the longer-range visions ofthe services. Although commercial technologies show promise in pro-
viding significant near-term capabilities, leveraging them could requiremuch effort (and significant resources) to adopt, adapt, or reengineerthem. . . . Another caveat about using commercial information systems is
that they are becoming available to all nations and interest groups. If theservices depend on commercial technologies for advancing the state ofthe art in their information systems, potential enemies may come close to
achieving parity (or even asymmetrical superiority) with U.S. forces . . . .DOD needs to expand its basic research to explore the frontiers of sciencein search of new technological approaches for maintaining military
superiority. . . . The committee believes that DOD should continue toexplore the frontiers of science and that basic research has never beenmore important to DOD.*National Research Council, Trust in Cyberspace, National Academy Press: Wash-ington, D.C. (1999).It is certainly desirable to use commercial technology wherever it ful-fills Air Force needs, meaning when the Air Force requirements are in
some sense close to those of the commercial sector. However, the Air
Force, like all the services, has requirements that are not significant drivers
in the commercial sectorÑrequirements in security (e.g., being multilevel
in many cases), in the complexity of its command and control systems, in
the real-time requirements of some systems, and in the need for robust-
ness and resilience in the face of broken network or communications links
or of captured nodes.That 2001 report ultimately reaches (p. 36) the following recommen-dation for Air Force IS&T research funding:The committee believes that the Air Force should increase its science andtechnology (S&T) budget for information systems technology (IST). Thebasic research (6.1) program should support long-term air and space ISTBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSneeds, surpass previous-year levels, support a strong in-house program(with appropriate researchers), and compensate for limited long-termcommercial investment.The DOD investment in basic research in IS&T has not improved inthe 4 years since that report was issued. While the committee did not
develop a detailed estimate of the level of effort required for Air Force
basic research in IS&T, its general sense is that it is small in relation to the
challenges identified in Chapters 3 through 6.The Air Force roadmap for transformation is described in the Air ForceFlight Plan.2 Though not intended as a primer on Air Force needs for IS&T,it describes deficiencies in current capabilities as well as desired new
capabilities that require new information technologies. The three main
new capabilities are information superiority, persistent precision strike,
and battlespace awareness.Assuring information superiority is a critical part of the Air Forcemission. Issues requiring advances in IS&T include secure and survivable
command and control systems, the rapid evolution and adaptation of
command and control systems, decision aids based on rapidly changing
operational needs, and increased capabilities in information operations.
Information operations3 include all offensive and defensive actionsnecessary to ensure full access to timely and accurate information and to
deny the same to adversaries.Precision strike refers to the ability to place munitions with minimalerror anyplace required to achieve a military objective. Persistence, a rela-
tively new desired capability, refers to the ability to maintain precision
targeting for long periods. Open goals for R&D revolve around decreas-
ing the time from sensing to shooting to less than 10 minutes, providing
actionable intelligence in a useful (i.e., decision-ready) form, and timely
and accurate damage assessment, which is particularly difficult when
nonkinetic weapons are used.  A report from the National Intelligence

Council4 notes as follows:The use of precision-guided munitions will increase. The accuracy ofthese systems will improve. Targeting will remain the critical factor in
determining success or failure of these missions. Having eyes on target . . .must be a core mission.2Available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/af_trans_flightplan.pdf.3Available at http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd2-5.pdf.4John B. Alexander, ÒThe evolution of conflict through 2020: Demands on personnel,machines, and missions,Ó CIA Conference on the Changing Nature of War (2004), pp. 9-12.Available at http://www.cia.gov/nic/NIC_2020_2004_05_25_intro.html.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND25Actionable intelligence is essential. In recent conflicts commanders at alllevels have lamented the shortfalls of actionable intelligence. OperationIraqi Freedom was initiated prematurely when it was reported that
Saddam Hussein would be located at Dora Farms in Baghdad. A phonecall from an agent in the area began the process. Because this was thebeginning of the conflict the decision rested with President Bush. The
reaction time was too long, and if Saddam ever was there, he left beforethe target could be hit.By 2020 we should be able reduce the time from which a target is detecteduntil it is hit to under ten minutes. Currently, for DOD elements, targetidentification and release must cycle back to the US for approval. This is
simply too slow.Battlespace awareness implies the ability of a commander and his orher staff to fully understand the plan of action and its execution in real
time and to rapidly assess and anticipate necessary changes to the plan.
The deficiencies that motivate current research are summarized from an
Air Force report on information operations:5Battlespace awareness information is often reactive in nature and rapidlyloses relevance. Targeting decisions often are made too far away fromthe warfighter to effectively engage mobile targets. . . . It is still verydifficult to integrate rapidly expanding data streams from multiple
sources in a timely manner. . . . Commanders often do not have a clear,accurate real-time picture of the battlespace. . . . The military still cannotassess, plan, and direct air and space operations from anywhere or from
multiple locations in near real-time, something the Air Force believeswill be necessary in the future to give the commander the greatest flex-ibility to meet national tasking.The Air Force needs take into account that our potential adversarieshave access to the same commercial IT as we do and that those adversaries
can field IT systems at commercial rates, typically much faster than
possible under current DOD acquisition practices. Hence, Air Force IS&T
research must be focused on capabilities that fill Air Force needs, will prob-ably not be provided by the commercial sector, and will give superiority
over the enemy.In the abstract, to fully address Air Force needs, IS&T research mustyield new capabilities that satisfy the four 
SÕsÑspeed, security, scalability,and smartness. ÒSpeedÓ means IT-based systems need not only to operate
in real-time environments but also to be built and delivered much faster
and to be extensible in the field by end users. Such systems must also be5Available at http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd2-5/afdd2-5.pdf.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSsecure and scalable. Lastly, they need to be smart. Getting there requires abetter approach for sponsoring and conducting IS&T research. The AFOSR,
which is the Air ForceÕs prime agent for the conduct of 6.1 research, is well
aware of these issues.As part of its investigation, the committee examined a 1996 NRCreview of AFOSR programs in mathematical and computer sciences and
found that some of the observations still pertain and are helpful for set-
ting the context of the current study.6 That study reviewed the size, scope,and quality of the erstwhile AFOSR mathematical and computer sciences
program. (Many of the elements of that program, and some of the program
managers, are now part of AFOSRÕs IS&T program. The IS&T program,
though, does not map directly onto any AFOSR unit. Most of the IS&T
research is managed today within the AFOSR Mathematics and Space
Sciences Directorate, but only about half of that unit deals with IS&T. In
addition, AFOSRÕs research in human-computer interfaces is managed
jointly with its Chemical and Life Sciences Directorate.) The following
observations, paraphrased from the 1996 report (pages 1-3), appear to

have withstood the test of time:¥AFOSR program managers in mathematical and computer sciences
have a great deal of autonomy and compete for funds among them-
selves in a relatively cooperative way. They are self-motivated to
promote their areas in order to gain an adequate share of the avail-
able funds.¥The majority of funds go to principal investigators (PIs) at univer-sities, but the Air Force is successful at teaming these PIs with
researchers at Air Force laboratories.¥Prior collaboration with Air Force laboratories is not essential forobtaining program support, but collaboration subsequent to an
award characterizes the best and longest-lived research projects.¥During the early 1990s, these program managers were underincreased pressure to fund projects with short- rather than long-
term payoffs, although there appears to have been adequate
flexibility to resist such pressure.¥In determining program priorities, emphasis should be given toresearch that clarifies Air Force problems, has an impact on opera-
tional procedures, and advances the state of the art in areas of
interest to the Air Force.6National Research Council, Review of AFOSR Programs in Mathematical and ComputerSciences, National Academy Press: Washington, D.C. (1996).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND27OVERVIEW OF AIR FORCE GOALSTHAT RELY ON IS&T RESEARCHThe Air Force is already heavily dependent on IS&T, and its ongoingtransformation is critically dependent on the successful fielding of new
IS&T products. Many of those new products will be specific to military
needs, and many require basic research. A good summary of Air Force
IS&T goals is contained in the pamphlet ÒS&T Planning Review.Ó7 Thispamphlet presents six long-term challenges identified in 2001 to provide
focus and motivation for Air Force science and technology over the next
20 to 50 years. The emphasis is on basic and applied research that will
enable critical future Air Force capabilities:¥Finding and tracking. Provide the decision maker with quality infor-mation from anywhere in near real time. The needed capabilities
include reliable assessment and monitoring, sensor placement and
sustainment, and information systems.¥Command and control. Monitor, assess, plan, and direct aerospaceoperations anywhere from multiple locations in near real time.
Capabilities to support this goal include monitoring and assessing
global conditions and events, planning and executing military
operations, and information assurance.¥Controlled effects. Rapidly create precise effects with the ability forquick retargeting. The needed capabilities include measured global
force projection and dominant remote control.¥Sanctuary. Protect the total force from natural and manmade hazardsand threats while permitting operation with lowest possible risks.¥Rapid aerospace response. Quickly respond to peacetime operationsor crises. Required capabilities include rapid global reach, on-
demand space surge, and aerospace power network.¥Effective aerospace persistence. Sustain the flow of equipment andsupplies as well as the application of force as required. Capabilities
include space awareness and control, space access, and operations.It is clear that information systems pervade all of these capabilitiesand that sustained basic research in IS&T will be required to meet these
challenges. It is also clear that there are Air Force-unique aspects to most,
if not all, of this basic research.More recently, the Air Force released the latest statement of its mission,which encompasses not only air and space operations but also informa-7Available from the AFOSR.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDStion operations.8 The latter includes the union of electronic warfare, bothdefensive and offensive; offensive and defensive cyber operations (that is,
disruption of, or tampering with, computing and communications or
defense against the same); and Òinfluence operations,Ó actions intended
to lessen an enemyÕs resolve to fight.9 Influence operations was givenspecial emphasis when the study committee met with the Air Combat
Command, which is exploring a range of means to lessen adversariesÕ will
to fight, their negative impressions of the United States or U.S. forces, or
otherwise reduce the need for traditional military action. The principal
goal of all information operations is to ensure decision dominance over
adversaries. Key challenges from an IS&T perspective include integration
of, access to, and fusion of disparate data and information sources;
conversion of information to actionable knowledge; basic modeling of
human behaviors; and so on.The ways the Air Force achieves its vision and accomplishes its mis-sion are changing. This change is the process DOD calls transformation,
and it relies in a central way on information superiority. The Air Force
roadmap for transformation is described in Air Force Flight Plan, 2003,which on pages 51-56 expands the notion of information operations
described in the vision statement to the notion of information superiority:10Information superiority is a key enabler of the type of revolutionarychange described by RMA [revolution in military affairs] advocates
including effects-based operations and parallel warfare. . . . There arestill many obstacles to achieving the full potential of informationsuperiority under many circumstances today:ÑThere is still significant progress to be made in rapidly gettingtimely, accurate, and relevant intelligence from sensors-to-shooters
(actionable intelligence in a usable format) in single-digit minutes.ÑBattlespace awareness information is often reactive in nature andrapidly loses relevance. Targeting decisions often are made too far
away from the warfighter to effectively engage mobile targets.ÑIt is still very difficult to integrate rapidly expanding data streamsfrom multiple sources in a timely manner.

ÑCommanders often do not have a clear, accurate, real-time pictureof the battlespace.ÑThe military still cannot assess, plan, and direct air and space
operations from anywhere or from multiple locations in near real-
time, something the Air Force believes will be necessary in the futureto give the commander the greatest flexibility to meet national tasking.8Available at http://www.af.mil/library/posture/vision/vision.pdf.9Available at http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd2-5/afdd2-5.pdf.10Available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/af_trans_flightplan.pdf.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND29ÑComputer network and information systems are often vulnerableto attack.ÑThere is limited ability to disrupt adversary C4ISR [command,
control, computing, communications, intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance] assets and information flow.ÑÒTribalÓ platforms and procedures within the Air Force still must
be integrated using information technology.
ÑNew and planned C4ISR systems require a lot of additionalbandwidth.
ÑLack of data standards inhibits use and exploitation of ArtificialIntelligence capabilities.ÑThe Air Force has not developed all necessary protocols for machine-to-machine interfaces.ÑThe Air Force lacks a scalable C4ISR system that can support opera-tions across the spectrum of conflict.

ÑThe Air Force still needs to evaluate its current systems and deter-mine what they can contribute to its capabilities 
and what tools arenecessary to transform those systems from a collection of platforms
into a networked system that is greater than the sum of its individualparts.THE R&D RESPONSE:  CURRENT DIRECTIONS
The AFRLÕs Information Directorate (AFRL/IF) is a major performerof applied research and development for Air Force IS&T, and the com-
mittee spent considerable time with researchers there to learn about their
programs and their strategy for addressing Air Force IS&T needs.
Northrup Fowler, chief scientist (at the time), told the committee on Feb-
ruary 24, 2005, that the directorateÕs main R&D thrusts were¥Global awareness.  Methods to acquire, exploit, fuse, and reason
about information.¥Dynamic planning and execution.  Methods for rapidly exploiting
knowledge of the battlespace and fostering better informed and
more accurate decisions.¥Global information enterprise.  Methods to move, process, manage,
and protect information throughout the Global Information Grid
(GIG) and provide assured information to decision makers.The underlying science and technology focus areas identified by
AFRL/IF are these:¥Information exploitation, which involves estimation and predictionof signals from electronic intelligence, imagery, audio, and speech
processing.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥Information fusion and understanding, the process of combininginformation to estimate and predict the state of the battlespace.¥Information management, the harnessing of information resourcesand capabilities of an organization to accomplish its objectives.¥A framework for developing and demonstrating informationmanagement technology solutions.¥Advanced computing architectures, R&D focused on fundamentalmodels of computation and on engineering techniques for the
design of computing systems.¥Cyber operations, encompassing technologies for informationassurance, computer network defense, and computer network
exploitation.¥Connectivity, addressing the need for high-capacity C4ISR net-working and enterprise management and control.¥Command and control, involving decision support, adversarial
modeling, and battlefield simulation.AFRL/IF and AFOSR have a joint strategic planning process to helpthem align 6.1 investments with AFRL/IF program needs. The process
involves AFOSR program managers in strategic deliberations with AFRL/
IF and input from AFRL/IF on AFOSRÕs 6.1 investments. The committee
concluded that the AFRL/IF program, though certainly not exhaustive, is
well matched to the long-term challenges outlined above, and it also con-
cluded that the success of the AFRL/IF program is critically dependent
on a number of basic research advances that are well within the purview
of AFOSR.Final background information was provided to the committee in abriefing by Shankara Sastry of the University of California at Berkeley,
who chaired an IS&T review panel for the Air Force Scientific Advisory
Board that issued a report on November 21, 2003.  That review identified
several key IS&T areas for investment: the scalability of the information
management systems under investigation, security and real-time capability,
mission management technologies for unmanned air vehicles in mixed
manned/unmanned environments, and embedded software and systems.
AFOSRÕs current response to these various challenges is suggested by
these excerpts from its ongoing Broad Agency Announcement 2005-1,11which invites IS&T proposals in the following areas:Dynamics and ControlThe . . . program is interested in . . . guidance, navigation, and control of
autonomous aerial vehicle systems and teams; image tracking and robustfeedback control in high scintillation environments; . . . and . . . hybridBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND31control systems that can intelligently manage actuator, sensor, andprocessor communications in complex, spatially distributed systems. . . .Interest in control of complex, multi-scale, highly uncertain nonlinear
systems is increasing. . . . Interest exists in the development of controlconcepts applicable to single and multiple unmanned aerial vehicles(UAVs) and micro air vehicles (MAVs). Areas of interest include
cooperative/collaborative control of a team of UAVs conducting opera-tions such as cooperative combat ISR, electronic attack, urban warfare,wide area search/attack, and persistent area denial. Real-time, adaptive
acquisition, classification, prosecution and assessment of geographicallydispersed targets is envisioned, requiring cooperation amongst UAVs. . . .A cooperative decision and control theoretic framework is of interest to
address robust dynamic control of distributed UAVs executing multiple,strongly coupled tasks with a high degree of decentralization. A long-term goal of the Dynamics and Control program is control for intelligent
autonomy, in order to achieve a higher level of autonomous control. . . .Providing UAVs and MAVs with faculties of wide field-of-regard per-ception will be a significant step toward the realization of autonomous
control, and in this area research in vision-based guidance, navigationand control is of interest.Optimization and Discrete MathematicsTarget tracking environments include multiple maneuvering targets in
clutter, targets with low [signal-to-noise ratios], and cooperative track-ing platforms. Computational complexity for real time applications is akey issue. . . . Research includes discrete event systems, especially as it
relates to Air Force transportation, target tracking, command and controlsystems, and battlefield management.Signals Communication and SurveillanceThis . . . activity is concerned with the systematic analysis and interpreta-
tion of variable quantities that represent information, or convey informa-tion physically through a channel. Communications signals, enablingcommand and control, and surveillance images are of special importance
. . . . An outstanding need in the treatment of signals is to develop resilientalgorithms for data representation in fewer bits (compression), image
reconstruction/enhancement, and spectral/frequency estimation in the
presence of external corrupting factors. . . . These . . . hold promise in thedetection and recognition of characteristic transient features, the synthe-sis of hard-to-intercept communications links, and the achievement of
faithful compression and fast reconstruction for audio, video, and multi-spectral data.11Available at http://www.afosr.af.mil/pdfs/BAA2005-1.pdf, dated October 2004.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSSoftware and SystemsThe goal is . . . basic research needed to enable development of advancedcomputing science methods to support future Air Force needs in world-
wide, 24-7 battlespace information management. . . . Research is . . . tomeet . . . challenges including collection, control, and integration of thevast amounts of information flowing through battlespace information
networks, protection of friendly information resources, and complexitiesin software and algorithm development in support of large informationsystems. Some specific areas of Infospheric Science research follow:¥Models of Information Flows¥Metrics for Information Flow¥Hierarchical Flow Models¥Information Dynamics¥Managing Massive Numbers of Triggers¥Information Pedigree/Certainty¥Stream Data Processing¥Automated Downgrading of Sensitive Information¥Preventing Self-Inflicted DoS Attacks¥Audit Data for Damage Assessment¥Steganography Detection¥Secure Code Composition¥Distributed, Assured Pipelines¥Application Layer Multicast Encryption¥Seamless Integration of Wireline-Wireless Networks¥Network Monitoring, Measurement, and Inferencing¥Ad Hoc Wireless Networking¥Middleware¥Joint Battlespace Infosphere (JBI) System Stability¥Dynamic System Management¥JBI Information Metadata and Structure¥Evolvable ComponentsThe need to collect, integrate, and disseminate information from widelydisparate sources will be crucial. . . . Information extraction from allsources of data is . . . of interest. . . . Network protection . . . detection of
intrusion, forensics, and an active response and recovery from an attackon information, are needed. Basic research that anticipates the nature offuture information system attacks is critical. . . . Research on effective
security policies across large, heterogeneous infospheres is of high interest.Techniques to automatically detect deceptive data or information are ofinterest . . . [as are] mathematical approaches for the specification, design,
and analysis of distributed software systems. Approaches for overcomingthe increasing computational complexity of these systems are essential.Artificial IntelligenceMathematical foundations of information fusion must be establishedÑ
robust, integrated fusion architectures for handling increasing diversityBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND33of input sources. . . . Research is sponsored into how to make the best use
of uncertain information; share and disseminate information; increasethe accuracy, speed, and economy of the recognition and identification
process; and aid the intelligence analyst. . . . Research is needed todevelop large-scale intelligent systems that can address practical AirForce needs. . . . Means are sought to scale up those methods that work
for small knowledge-based systems. . . . Formalisms need to be devel-oped for the representation of and reasoning with uncertainty, in handlingcorrupt information, identifying deceptive information, and effectively
using experiences. . . . We seek means to combine numeric and symbolicinference methods. . . . The program seeks to develop technology thatwill support decision-making. . . . Intelligent agents are needed [that are]
capable of gathering information, reducing data to a manageable amountof essential information, and cooperating with other agents to solveproblems. Research is also needed to combine artificial intelligence
methods with operations research tools to overcome inefficiencies insolving some mission-critical Air Force problems (e.g., scheduling in adistributed, dynamic environment).To cover this range of research, AFOSR has an annual budget of some$25 million for IS&T:  approximately $16 million for academic grants,

$7million for multidisciplinary university research initiatives (MURIs),

and $2 million for in-house research at AFRL/IF.12 Although it did notexamine the current IS&T portfolio in any depth, the committeeÕs sense is
that the resources are not adequate for the broad scope of the challenge
identified earlier. While many of these topics are clearly important, the
committee also found gaps and recommended changes of emphasis,
which are reflected in Chapters 3 through 7.In the next chapters, the committee offers recommendations for thetop-priority basic research in IS&T to help the Air Force meet its IS&T
goals.  The recommendations fall into four very general areas:  research to

enable network-centric warfare, including networking, communications,
security, real-time embedded systems, and other topics; research to
support improvements in software development, including the ideas
developed in Chapter 4; research in information management, including
integration of complex databases, publish-subscribe systems, signal pro-
cessing, and information fusion; and research into the interface between
humans and IS&T, including human-computer interfaces, human-system
integration, decision-support tools, and information fusion.12Figures supplied by Clifford Rhoades, head of the AFOSR Mathematics and SpaceSciences Directorate, in discussions with the committee on February 27, 2005, in Rome, N.Y.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.343Basic Research for Air Force Network
Systems and CommunicationsThe Air Force is becoming a network-enabled paradigm, whereinmany of its capabilities will be generated through, and dependent on, the
integrated efforts of multiple components. This approach to operations is
expected to result in greater agility and attendant tactical advantages.

However, as is the case with any untested concept, there is a need for
technology that enables the analysis and execution of the new paradigm.
In this case, the scope of change is extremely large, requiring reanalysis of
force structures, doctrine, acquisition options, command-and-control
systems, training, and long-range planning, not to mention the consider-
able challenges involved in engineering, constructing, and managing the
actual networks. Much of the planning and analysis will depend on the
research described in this chapter, which will provide the necessary
conceptual and technical foundation. Network-centric warfare also is criti-
cally dependent on software, the subject of Chapter 4, on the effective
distribution and management of information throughout the network,
which is the prime topic of Chapter 5, and on the effective employment of
that information, which is considered in Chapter 6.TYPES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMUNICATION ANDNETWORK SERVICES NEEDED IN THE FUTUREFigure 3-1 shows the range of components that will be networked inthe future Air Force. The following capabilities are key to achieving the
desired functionality, but off-the-shelf technologies are not yet adequate:Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35FIGURE 3-1Schematic showing the range of components that will be networked in the future Air Force. Robust dynamic tactical
networks support 10,000 to 500,000 communicating devices in theater. They go beyond traditional Òtactical,Ó which is oriented tothe voice and to human users, and beyond traditional ad hoc networks.TRANSOCEANIC LINKBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥The network must provide robust data and circuit services to tensor hundreds of thousands of fixed and mobile users with different
service levels. Some of the service challenges include guaranteed
rates, communication over difficult channels, hard time-deadlines,
reliable message delivery over unreliable networks, security, and
policy-driven resource allocation (explained below).¥Sensors in the networks must be able to relay data while maintain-ing coherency, and there must be high compression of correlated
sensors to reduce communication needs.¥Laser communication must be available between satellites and air-craft and to terrestrial sites.
¥Satellite services must be available to mobile and fixed users. Those
services must (1) maintain connectivity at all times and track impor-
tant users, (2) have low probability of detection (LPD), low prob-ability of intercept (LPI), and antijamming (AJ) capabilities, (3) be
secure, and (4) support very small as well as large terminals.¥Wireless radio services must be available in the field without pre-existing infrastructures, and they must be secure, power-efficient,
have LPD and LPI, have AJ capabilities, and be able to maintain
connectivity with important users.¥The satellite, radio, and wireless networks must be integrated witha high-bandwidth, affordable, and secure terrestrial fiber network
as one supernetwork.¥The network must be an integrated one with multilevel security,data delivery within deadlines, and the capability for rapid
reconfiguration and adaptation.With the possible exception of power efficiency and some aspects ofsecurity, all of these characteristics are primarily driven by defense needs,
and they will not be advanced by the commercial sector.The remainder of this chapter describes some of the technical chal-lenges of future communication modalities planned for the Air Force and
the performance of networks when they are connected together in military
settings. It concludes with recommendations of particularly important
basic research areas that typically cut across multiple challenges.TECHNICAL CHALLENGES POSED BY FUTURE AIR FORCENETWORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMSChallenges for Future Air Force Communications SystemsDefense applications have to contend with communication modalitiesthat are not encountered in commercial and civilian settings. SatelliteBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS37channels have unusually long-delay data rates (sometimes known asdelay-bandwidth products) and randomly fading dispersive channel
characteristics. Radio channels, especially those associated with mobile
platforms, have rapidly changing link capacities and connectivities, with
disconnections or dropouts that can be on the order of minutes or more.
In contrast to this dynamism, traditional layer 3 (Network Layer) and
layer 4 (Transport Layer) protocols assume fairly stable underlying sub-
strates that change, if at all, over the course of minutesÑthat is, much
more slowly than most transmissions. Recent applications have shown
these traditional protocols often yield low throughputs and poor quality
of service when applied to DOD systems. In some cases, these protocols
do not work at all despite valiant efforts to provide patches. Thus, the
main challenge of Air Force communications is to provide assured
connectivity between networks (albeit at varying rates) under difficult
channel conditions, including during adversarial attacks.A cost-effective investment strategy is to make maximum use of com-mercial technologies. However, not all the services listed above can be
supported by commercial technologies. In many cases, commercial archi-
tectures only need to be modified, but in some cases completely new
designs are needed.Source Compression for Correlated SensorsOne communications challenge is the need for source compressionmethods when multiple sensors collect correlated observations, whether
or not this was done in a coordinated manner. This is critical in order to fit
the large volumes of sensed data in modest network capacities, especially
in difficult communication environments. Particularly challenging is the
identification and compression of highly correlated data in the absence of
fine coordination among sensing platforms. This will require both lossless
and information-lossy compression and new approaches to measuring

signal fidelity tailored to battlefield signals. Another challenge lies in
creating joint source-network coding: The separation theorem, which for
point-to-point communication channels allows one to decouple source
and channel coding, does not apply to networks of Air Force interest,
where the data volume itself may cause packet loss due to congestion. It is
important to explore the joint consideration of coding for both source com-
pression and network transport (from layer 1 to layer 4).Design of Communications SystemsA better understanding of capacity limits is needed in order to designthe best architectures for Air Force communications systems, whichBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSshould perform at the theoretical limit for difficult channels and in thepresence of adversarial attacks. The open-air satellite, radio, and optical
channels planned for the Air Force exhibit fading, dispersion, and inter-
ference (benign and adversarial) not typically encountered in well-known
classical channels, especially when the channel is broadband. For these
channels, there are many different ways to design the communication sys-
tem, and good system design will depend on understanding the channel
effects and the fundamental limits of communication performance opti-
mized over the class of possible architectures. Our current understanding
of the fundamental limits of these channels is only rudimentary, and the
space of communication designs has yet to be fully characterized and
optimized. There are also open questions related to the capacity limits of
multiple-access channels with or without coordination. Multiple-access
techniques for open-air channels, such as satellite and battlefield radio
channels, are extremely important for good communication performance.
Classical techniques must be reconsidered in a context that includes
adversarial jamming, interference, coupling, and little or no coordination
with some key inputs such as the satellite channel. Classical information
theory articulates the limits of communication capacities with no specific
attention paid to the transaction delay of the session. In fact, most results
are asymptotic, taken as the delay becomes large. In contrast, some critical
Air Force applications are very delay sensitive, and a theory for the
fundamental capacity limits of a communication system with delay con-
straints needs to be developed. In some applications power efficiency is
also required.Classical communication and information theories do not incorporatean element of adversarial attacks, although some results related to LPD,
LPI, and AJ communications were developed 40 years ago. The tech-
nology assumptions underlying those results have changed, of course,
and none of the results were obtained with networking in mind. For
instance, networks using open-air interfaces present a new set of vulner-
abilities that can be easily exploited by adversaries. It is important to
understand the set of possible technologies and techniques available to
adversaries and to design the network with those in mind rather than
treating them as an afterthought. Game-theoretic and optimization tech-
niques will likely be relevant approaches, as will methods for authentica-
tion and cryptography.Reliable and Efficient Free-Space Optical CommunicationsFree-space optical communications in space is relatively well devel-oped, though its capabilities for terminal spatial tracking systems and the
weight and power demands of the systems can be improved using moreBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS39sensitive receivers. The current sensitivity of the best receivers (direct orheterodyne detection) available in prototype form requires 2-10 received

photons per bit. With the advent of solid-state, single-photon detectors, a
photon counting receiver can achieve 5-10 bits per received photon. A
fundamental investigation into the best combination of modulation and
coding under technology constraints could lead to large payoffs for Air
Force space and aircraft systems.More problematic is free-space optical communication over the tur-bulent atmospheric channel where fast fading (a few multiseconds) pre-
sents difficulties in the design of modulation/coding and receivers. These
systems are important for aircraft and ground applications. For super-
sonic platforms, the bow shock presents even bigger challenges than
atmospheric turbulence owing to its speed, which is three orders of
magnitude higher. The current mainstream receiver uses adaptive optics
to compensate for phase-front distortion, which gives rise to fading and
other undesirable channel effects. While its performance is adequate, the
solution is costly and heavy. The Air Force should pursue new system
techniques, such as spatial-, temporal-, and frequency-diversity receivers
in both coherent and incoherent forms, to mitigate the turbulence effect.Energy-Efficient CommunicationsThe Air Force needs more energy-efficient communications for tworeasons. The first is that for operations in a hostile environment, keeping
the transmitter power low is good for LPD and LPI. The second is that
some operations may be conducted with ground mobile radios, where
battery conservation is very important. The first problem can and should
be addressed as part of the research outlined above aimed at developing
capabilities for efficient communications for difficult channels and under
attack. The second includes efficient signal processing and higher-layer
network protocols, which will be addressed below in the discussion of
sensor networks.Dynamic Information Theory for Network ApplicationsRecent developments in the new applications of communication net-works often require that information be processed in a distributed fashion
in real time. For example, in a sensor network, a relay node often needs to
forward a received signal without being able to decode the embedded
message reliably; when controlling a dynamic system, decisions often
need to be made based on noisy observations. Conventional information
theory, which is based on the concept of reliable communications andBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSthus assumes large delays and extensive coordination, is often not appli-cable to these new problems. The theoretical understanding of how to
handle information without the error-free guarantees is therefore impor-
tant for future developments of highly dynamic and distributed network
applications. The study of communication systems with partial or list
decoding using a layered coding structure could be the first concrete step
in this direction.Challenges for Future Air Force NetworksThe theory of networks has not matured to a point where one canpredict how well the protocols developed heuristically in one application
setting will perform on a communication network built on radically
different communication modalities. To deal with the new and compli-
cated modalities of importance to the Air Force, fundamental tools must
be developed to help understand how networks may perform in new
environments and to optimize architectures. It is simply too costly to
develop these architectures and protocols ad hoc and then experiment
with the communication links in the field. In addition, there are many
possible ways to configure a communication system. If a communication
system is going to be used as part of a network, it should be designed
jointly with the network and not independently. For example, end-to-end
reliable data delivery can be a function of the communication system
(using diversity receivers and error-correcting codes), or it can be a func-
tion of the network (using diversity path routing and automatic repeat
requests at various layers such as the Data Link Control Layer and the
Transport Layer).High-Bandwidth, Affordable, and Secure Global Fiber NetworkThe Air Force needs a global broadband fiber network to interconnectits multiple modalities and act as the high-speed backbone. Current
networks, such as the Global Information Grid (GIG), use commercial

technologies with wavelength-division multiplexed optical transport and
electronic packet switching. This technology is both costly (it does not
scale well to very high data rates) and insecure. For terrestrial networks
there is a burning need to create economical new optical transport mecha-
nisms such as optical flow switching (dynamically set up with short-
duration connections on demand) with lightweight protocols and also a
security architecture for both the Physical Layer (the transport mecha-
nisms) and the higher layer protocols.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS41Network Layer (Routing) DesignRouting over the Internet today is purposely set to change ratherslowly to prevent oscillations and overreactions to sudden rate surges. In
contrast, most of the channels used by the Air Force can experience rapid
changes in connectivity and link capacities due to random channel effects,
mobility, and adversarial attacks. Thus, most routing protocols in use

today cannot keep up with such changes nor can they provide effective
congestion and flow control. To create better protocols it is important first
to understand the fundamental effects on the Network Layer of these fast
dynamics. For example, mobile networks (especially those that support
high data rates and time-deadline services) are not well served by con-
ventional commercial protocols, which are mostly designed for static or
quasi-static network topologies. Many of these dynamics appear first in
the Physical Layer and permeate up the protocol stack. The mobility
aspect calls for the joint design of the Physical Layer and the higher layers,
including routing and the Transport Layer. The development of funda-
mental mathematical tools is a prerequisite to the understanding and
solution of this very important problem.Transport Layer DesignThe task of providing error-free, end-to-end delivery of messages in anetwork is jointly shared by the Data Link Control Layer (layer 2) and the
Transport Layer (layer 4). For random channels (especially those in mobile
networks), these two layers interact in ways that are stochastic and not yet
well understood; the interactions often result in drastically reduced through-
put.  
Researchers have not yet succeeded in predicting the performance ofspecific implementations and determining the fundamental limits of these
protocols when coupled with random channels. The answer might come
from control theory and stochastic system analysis.Current Transport Layer protocols assume a stable Physical Layercommunication infrastructure, so packet losses are typically interpreted
as buffer overflow at routers due to congestion. In the random channels
with which the Air Force has to deal, packet losses can also be due to path
fades or intentional interference by an adversary. Some of these effects
can be very fast owing to the mobility and agility of electronic attacks. The

Transport Layer Protocol will react poorly to these effects, resulting in
very low network throughput. This is plaguing many current DOD pro-
grams. For the difficult channels DOD and the Air Force deal with, funda-
mental research is needed to address this large and critical performance
gap. Joint design of the Physical Layer and upper Network Layers must
be done in these cases.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSNetwork Coding and Diversity Routing for Difficult ChannelsFor networks using difficult channels, such as channels that changequickly compared with network coordination time, it may be impossible
to solve the network routing problem with traditional techniques. Net-
work coding is a new technique that uses almost no buffering, no route
computation, and no flow control. The simplicity of this technique could
be the answer to these problems (especially for mobile networks that have
no infrastructure and dynamic topologies that change too quickly). How-

ever, the area of network coding is just beginning to be defined, and there
are many theoretical problems in throughput, delays, and congestion con-
trol that need to be solved. This topic is explained further later in this
chapter.Because some packets on Air Force networks have hard time-deadlines,those networks must be designed with an understanding of the limits and
trade-offs of network throughput, delay, and available resources.  Diversity
routing, for instance, is one possible technique for increasing performance,

albeit at the expense of more network resources. Some network topolo-
gies are better for this purpose than others, so there is a need to optimize
network performance as a function of topologies and protocol design at
the higher layers.Policy-Driven Efficient Network Resource AllocationThere may be a misconception that with modern fiber and radiotechnologies, bandwidth is plentiful and should not be a bottleneck to
network performance. This is far from true in a tactical battlespace, where
there are several limitations to bandwidths and quality of service. First,
the amount of asset that can be deployed is limited. Second, difficult
channel conditions can drastically reduce rates; in some situations, expen-
sive relay assets must be put in place to provide minimal but critical
connectivity. Finally, in adversarial attacks, the number of surviving
routes may be few and signaling bandwidths may have to be used to
provide AJ via band spreading, reducing the actual data rates. These
factors all point to the reality that high-performance tactical network
assets will always be precious and in demand. To allocate these precious
resources fairly and provide the best operational support to our forces,
the network management system must be able to take into account exter-
nal policy on priorities, which would change from time to time depend-
ing on the important missions at the moment and requirements that arise
in the field. The network management system should be able to translate
these high-level guiding principles into network actions such as routing
and media access control priorities in a timely fashion without a human inBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS43the loop. Currently, assets are managed manually, and the process is farfrom responsive and optimal.There are risks associated with a network management system that isagile and responsive. To guard against the network going into undesir-
able states, it needs to be closely monitored for unusual behavior, and
fallback procedures and network states must be implemented to ensure
minimal critical network service performance. The fundamental research
that must be done to support such a vision includes multicommodity
resource allocation in a competitive environment, game-theoretic
approaches to deal with adversarial attacks, and inference techniques to
assess network states in the presence of noise and intentional masking.Networks Designed to Function Under Adversarial AttacksThere will be many nodes in a tactical network and the span can bewide, with connectivities back to the continental United States from any-
where on the globe. Since it will not always be possible to ensure that no
nodes are compromised, the network should be designed to sense dead or
malfunctioning network elements and route around them. In addition,
network failures often result from operator errors, so the network should
have an architecture that confines such damage to a local area and does
not allow it to propagate across the network. When the network senses
outside attacks, it should have the capability of first locating the real entry
points and defending and removing the attacks. Because sensing and other
protection techniques can fail, the network should be designed to recog-
nize such failures and be able to continue to function, probably at a lower
performance level. This feature is necessary because it may be impossible
to avoid rogue nodes or network operator errors. Techniques such as
Byzantine robust networking can provide sabotage-resistant routing and
defend against compromised trusted network elements. There is some
parallel here to fault-tolerant computing, except in this case the adversarial
factor must be included in the analysis. Of particular importance are the
techniques for refreshing and distributing cryptographic keys for dynamic
narrowcast groups. This is especially difficult when a central authority is
not readily connected to the population. A provably secure consensus
agreement and key exchange mechanism must be devised.In particular, jamming of open-air communication systems (e.g.,satellite links and wireless radios) is a standard military technique to bring
about denial of services. Only a few military radio communication sys-
tems today have been designed with any AJ capability.  Of these, only the

satellite system Milstar has adequate AJ capability to deal with jammers
that employ modern technologies. Milstar succeeds by deploying spread
spectrum and antenna nulling techniques. However, Milstar was designed
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSfor voice communications. When data networking protocols are put ontop on this physical layer medium to provide data services in new DOD
networks, such as those described by the Transformational Communica-
tion Architecture, new vulnerabilities have surfaced that significantly
weaken the systemÕs AJ capability. For example, the adversary need only
jam a few bits per Internet Protocol (IP) packet to fool the Transport Con-
trol Protocol (TCP) into believing that there is congestion at some routers
downstream. In response, TCP will begin closing its transmission win-
dow (reducing the number of packets released in flight), reducing the ef-
fective throughput of the system to less than 1 percent. Counteracting this
new attack requires a combination of techniques from the Physical Layer
to the Transport Layer: spread spectrum, nulling, rerouting and diversity
routing, and changes to TCP. There are several other known network
weaknesses, some of which would appear to be correctable, although his-
tory tells us that ad hoc changes to overcome vulnerabilities often open
(or overlook) other vulnerabilities. What is needed is a systematic funda-
mental look at networking, perhaps with a solid mathematical founda-
tion, to provide some assurance of protection. In particular, vulnerabili-
ties to cross-layer attacks (which might be more effective than traditional
within-layer attacks) should be examined and addressed.Cross-Layer Network Design and OptimizationMore generally, there would be value in rethinking the networkarchitecture across the layering boundary for military networks, because
the difficult channels encountered by DOD are a reality that cannot be
avoided. It is easy to state the obviousÑnamely, that when network
layering structures are broken and the architecture is optimized without
boundary constraints, the network will perform better. However, the
unstructured problem may become so unwieldy that any insight and hope
of arriving at a good architecture is lost. There should be a wholesale
reevaluation of the functions of each traditional layer to see if there is a
better way to group these functions in view of new communication
modalities. Even if it is highly unlikely that one could find a layering struc-
ture that totally decouples the network architecture, breaking down the
architecture problem into weaker interacting subsystems would be a great
advance over todayÕs architecture.Optimization is a fundamental discipline very important to networkdesign and multiagent control. It relies on tools such as mathematical
programming for optimization in static contexts, dynamic programming
for optimizing systems that evolve over time, and game theory for opti-
mizing in the presence of competing interests. A key characteristic of the
Air ForceÕs communication networks is their decentralized nature. TheyBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS45are being constructed from the interconnection of different systems andusers with different objectives and performance measures, and their
operation relies on varying degrees of collaboration and competition
among these entities. Thus, there is a need to understand the optimal allo-
cation of resources in the presence of users with heterogeneous service
requirements, which would seem to necessitate the use of game-theoretic
and economic market models for resource allocation and network control.Challenges in this area might include (1) developing game-theoreticand artificial intelligence models for resource allocation problems in
different types of networks, (2) studying the optimality/efficiency prop-
erties of such multiagent control schemes, (3) developing new theoretical
tools in optimization and game theory to analyze convex and nonconvex
optimization problems and games that arise in these settings, (4) devising
efficient computational methods with established convergence/rate of
convergence properties, and (5) developing tractable approximate dynamic
programming methods that generate suboptimal control strategies.Some of the difficult network design problems can benefit from newmathematical analysis tools. In the past few years, ideas developed in
statistical physics seem to have had a strong impact in many areas of
electrical engineering and computer science. In particular, ÒreplicaÓ and
ÒcavityÓ methods arising from physics have led to better (heuristic)
understanding as well as the development of novel algorithms for hard
questions arising in combinatorial optimization, error-correcting codes,
statistical inference, and the like. It would be profitable to study these
connections rigorously as well as to identify their strengths and weak-
nesses. This would also lead to a healthy shift in the engineering thinking
of large-scale systems such as a globally connected defense network.Network CodingTraditionally, network schemes have considered transmission ofinformation in networks in terms of flowsÑin essence, networks are used
in a manner akin to any transportation system. Recently, a radically dif-
ferent approach has been proposed. Rather than considering information
as a good to be distributed, one could actively make use of the fact that
information is composed of algebraic entities, such as bits, that can be
manipulated. One could then consider combining the information of
different packets in the interior of the network in order to increase
throughput, even in the case of a lossless network. This type of network
routing has significant potential application in military networks, where
links are unreliable to begin with and there are also adversarial attacks.
The main theoretical underpinnings of this area should be developed by
merging algebraic theory, networks, and stochastic algorithms to estab-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSlish the fundamental performance characteristics of network coding. Astrong focus should also be maintained on randomized distributed algo-
rithms for multicast network coding, which has shown promise for net-
work operation in preliminary industry demonstrations.Some specific basic research challenges in network coding wouldinclude the following:¥Concurrently explore the theoretical foundation of network codingand applications of that theory.¥Bring network coding to the area of network security by develop-ing the ability of network coding to perform algebraic manipula-
tions in the interior of the network.¥Consider the economic implications of network coding. In particular,the pricing of resources in network coding differs significantly from
traditional network and other pricing mechanisms based on addi-
tive resources. Network coding builds on the use of entropy rather
than volume as a pricing unit.¥Develop the theory and implementation of network coding in lossynetworks for data dissemination and for creating altogether new
means of performing distributed storage.¥Bring network coding to wireless applications. The dynamic andlossy nature of wireless networks renders the use of network
coding, particularly for robustness, very effective.Energy-Efficient Sensor NetworksThis is a topic of considerable interest in the private sector, so thereare opportunities for leveraging developments there. However, there
remain significant research challenges in the area of networked sensor-
based embedded systems (for instance, to control swarms of UAVs).
Within sensor networks of importance to the Air Force, the following
characteristics are common:  (1) sensors vary widely in size, computing

resources, and sensing information, ranging from very simple sensors like
temperature sensors to acoustic sensors and surveillance cameras captur-
ing and distributing video signals, (2) sensors are deployed in very large
numbers to ensure adequate coverage, (3) sensors generally perform only
a single task (such as sensing temperature or other environment charac-
teristics), but they operate at very high sensing rates to ensure accuracy in
environment monitoring, object identification, coordinate location, or
other tasks, (4) sensors are deployed in difficult environments where
energy sources are not easily accessible and where external forces can
damage them, and (5) sensors need to communicate with the environ-
ment (other sensors or other IT devices) to distribute information.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS47The embedded sensor area is relatively new, although some work hasbeen done in the development of operating systems for sensors and in
protocols for the Physical, Media Access Control (MAC), Network, and
Transport Layers. Related work exists in vehicular sensor networks,
applied to sensor information such as Global Positioning System (GPS)
positions, video, and others. Efforts are starting in programming and de-
bugging large-scale sensor networks. Many relevant results exist in the
use of sensors for location identification, but their integration with other
sensing platforms has still not happened. Energy is an issue, and exten-
sive work has been done on minimizing the consumption of ad hoc sensor
networks. However, significant research challenges specific to Air Force
applications remain in the area of sensor networks:¥Development of scalable large-scale sensor network topologies andenergy-efficient architectures, including algorithms, operating sys-
tems, protocols, and internetworking management for the collec-
tion of information, taking into account constrained resources such
as energy, communication bandwidth, and processing capacity.¥Design/development of efficient algorithms and protocols whensensors are part of a vehicular area network and need to communi-
cate with one another under high-mobility scenarios.¥Development of efficient programming support and tools forprogramming large-scale systemsÑthat is, developing efficient
languages, compilers, and debuggers for programming large-scale
networks of sensor nodes.¥Development of efficient memory systems and caches on sensornodes to capture the state of the environment.¥Development of energy-efficient encoding schemes to distributeinformation at low data rates.¥Development of location identification sensors (e.g., radio-frequency identification), their associated processing algorithms,
and their integration into the overall computing/communication
environment.¥Investigation of security and privacy to protect sensing information.¥Incorporation of fault tolerance to ensure reliability of processingat sensing nodes and during information dissemination.RECOMMENDED BASIC RESEARCH AREAS IN SUPPORT OFAIR FORCE NETWORKS AND COMMUNICATIONSSome of the challenges described above need more investment by theAir Force than others. In this section the committee recommends a few
particularly important basic research areas that typically cut across mul-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDStiple challenges. The committee believes that the most valuable resultswill be achieved when communications and network challenges are con-
sidered together, so it has formulated recommendations that target these
topics jointly. Because these recommendations are for basic research, the
research programs should be tailored to the abstractions that arise from
these applications rather than the specific applications themselves.Satellite Communications and Data NetworkingSatellite communications will be an important means of providinglinkages between disconnected pockets of radio clusters and theaters to
the outside world. Very high frequencies (>20 GHz) are necessary to sup-
port high data rates in benign situations and provide good AJ capability
with wide-bandwidth, spread-spectrum modulation. Thus far, all mili-
tary satellite systems have been designed for circuit operations having
relatively few users (~1,000s), and the systems are highly inefficient for
the transmission of bursty data traffic. These inefficiencies are exacerbated
by the unique characteristics of the satellite channels. For example, satel-
lite systems often have longer propagation delays and higher bit error
rates than their terrestrial wired counterparts, while the open-air interface
for satellite channels (and the high sunk cost of those channels) argues for
dynamic sharing of resources. To accommodate data communication for
many (~100,000) bursty computer users, the architectures of the Air
ForceÕs satellite communications systems will have to undergo a radical
change. At the Physical Layer, the communication system should adapt to
weather-induced impairments with power and variable rate control; over
10 dB of efficiency gain could be realized. To serve a large population of
bursty data communication users, an efficient and rapid-response MAC
Protocol needs to be adopted for the unique properties of the satellite
channel. Rapidly changing channel conditions, especially under open-air
attacks, will require a fresh look at the routing and flow/congestion
control algorithms at the Network and Transport Layers. Since this satel-
lite network will be interconnected to other networks, issues of routing at
the Network Layer, reliable packet delivery at the Transport Layer, and
network management and control will also need to be addressed. The
corresponding research efforts should center on communication theory,
experimentation, and practice, with emphasis on heterogeneous networks
involving satellites, aircraft, UAVs, and terrestrial wireless and optical
systems. Examples of some high-priority research topics include the
following:¥Design of architectures and protocols for satellite communicationssystems, including design of satellite constellations, efficientBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS49resource allocation algorithms, Link Layer Protocols for dealingwith special properties of space systems, and efficient channel-
sharing mechanisms (i.e., MAC Protocols).¥Development of hybrid space-terrestrial network architectures,including space-ground network architectures and interfaces, and
the design of protocols for internetworking over heterogeneous
networks that are efficient, reliable, and able to assure quality of
service.¥Network architectures and protocols for air vehicle systems, includ-ing architectures for reliable communications between autonomous
air vehicles (e.g., UAVs) for the purpose of delivering time-critical
control information.¥Development of analytically tractable models of wideband channelsand exploitation of channel characteristics to increase transmission
availability, reliability, and/or spectral efficiency.¥Development of new lossless and lossy techniques for joint com-pression and aggregation of correlated sensor signals.¥Efficient design and performance analysis of transmission systems,receiver algorithms, diversity methods, and impairment mitigation
techniques for air-ground, space, and inter- and intravehicle
communications.¥Reliable and robust ultrawideband communications for high-speed
wireless access, inter- and intra-airplane and -spacecraft com-
munications, UAV communications, and special operations in
harsh environments.Radio Communications and NetworkingThe development of wireless applications and wireless networks inrecent years has motivated some significant improvements in communi-
cation theory and information theory. However, maintaining good per-
formance at the Physical Layer for difficult radio channels in the battlefield
will be very challenging. Channel conditions and topologies can change
rapidly, and the network must efficiently manage its communications
over these shared, dynamic, unreliable resources. High-priority research
goals in this area include the following:¥Development of a methodology that unifies the rich collection ofnew results in the wireless field. While numerous new techniques
have been introduced in recent years to address different aspects
of wireless applications (e.g., multiple input, multiple output
(MIMO), beam-forming, energy-efficient ad hoc networks), trans-
lating these results into fundamental principles requires that weBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSfirst merge them into a unifying framework. Designs for modula-tion and coding, antenna shaping, and processing should be opti-
mized across multiple nodes and with resource scheduling and
routing and adversarial attacks all incorporated as key elements in
the problem.¥Extension of the basic setup of information theory to allow moreflexible communications. The primary goal of information theory
is to enable reliable communication over long blocks at a prescribed
rate. Wireless applications, however, call for breaking such opera-
tional scenarios. Many of these applications require communica-
tion over dynamic links, with varying qualities and performance
requirements. The goal is thus to extend information theory to ad-
dress the dynamics of information transmission and thereby de-
velop rateless, blockless, self-adaptive communication schemes
with delay as a prominent constraint.¥Development of cooperation in wireless environments and thearchitecture of wireless networks. While most of the current wire-
less networks adopt the cellular architecture, new self-organizing
networks promise much better flexibilities, making many more
applications possible. A basic research goal in this area would be to
study cooperation between wireless nodes with limited informa-
tion exchange between them and, further, to develop new wireless
network architecture that takes advantage of such local cooperation.¥The emergence of new applications with diverse requirements hasmade traditional wireless systems suboptimal, often leading to
inefficient use of spectrum, energy, and other resources. It is impor-
tant to 
understand how the communications paradigm is evolvingand to develop methodologies for the design of flexible, efficient
networks. Of particular interest is how decentralized systemsÑ
where decisions are made with local information onlyÑcan achieve
globally optimal use of resources. Also, the research efforts should
incorporate factors that are traditionally overlooked, such as the
competitive equilibrium and mechanism design for the resource
allocation problem, in order to allow the design of fundamentally
different systems based on the paradigms of cognitive/software-
defined radio and opportunistic communication.Free-Space Optical NetworksFree-space optical networks are important for Air Force applicationsconnecting satellites, aircraft, and ground terminals. The Physical Layer
properties of fading and phase distortion for optical links passing through
atmospheric and aircraft turbulence create serious problems for protocolsBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NETWORK SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATIONS51for higher network layers, often resulting in very low throughputs andlong delays for data delivery. It is important to consider optics as a net-
work system rather than an isolated communication link. As described in
the section above on Transport Layer Design, the Physical Layer and the
network architecture must be codesigned. High-priority areas of research
include the following:¥Understand the interaction of network protocols with the opticallink and quantify the performance shortcomings.¥Jointly design the Physical Layer and higher network layers, makingjudicious use of spatial, temporal, frequency, and route diversity.¥Internetworking with other modalities, including using them asbackup for guaranteed message delivery.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.524Basic Research for Air Force Software
Network-enabled systems are by definition dependent on complexsoftware because of the great number of possible states of the networks.
Building such software is very challenging. The systems that require such
software transcend a range of Air Force applications, from intensive
human-machine systems (e.g., command and control, air operation
centers) to embedded applications (e.g., avionics systems). Increasingly
these applications are connected by networks into a system of systems,
and, in fact, the distinction between enterprise and embedded systems
blurs as the focus is increasingly on the interconnectedness of all such
systems. This chapter develops recommendations for basic research to

enable more successful development of network-enabled systems, and
those recommendations therefore apply to enterprise systems as well as
to embedded systems.The Air ForceÕs experience with software over the past 30 years ormore has been one of grappling with more and more lines of code to
implement increasingly complex functionality in a software-intensive
system that itself may contain many interconnected subsystems (e.g., a
fire control system and a navigation system on a fighter aircraft). This
software complexity has contributed to the challenges encountered in
developing and fielding operational systems such as the F-22 aircraft and
space systems such as the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS).1 The1Department of Defense, Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Defense Soft-ware (2000). Available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/defensesoftware.pdf.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE53advent of network-enabled systems is in some sense an extrapolation ofthe old challenge:  the development, integration, and sustainment (main-

tenance) of many interconnected, large, software-intensive systems. And
the Air Force expects to continue to develop and sustain systems that are
unprecedented in terms of their size and complexity. Therefore, a basic
research program in software must address how to develop and sustain
such large families of software-intensive systems.Rather than focusing on large-scale code developmentÑa challengethat is being researched by othersÑthe committee recommends that
AFOSR focus on a set of important software engineering issues that are
key to successful Air Force network-enabled systems but that have
received limited attention. This recommended set of issues centers on how
to understand what to build and how to ensure that its behavior is rela-
tively predictable and acceptable, both during design and in operational
use. Little is predictable about an end productÕs behavior when and where
it is needed, and this knowledge is critical to understanding both how to
engineer a new system and how to sustain and upgrade an existing
system. In order to address this challenge, the committee recommends
revisiting a concept articulated in 1987 by the Air Force Scientific Advi-
sory Board:  Pursue research that helps imbue unprecedented software

development projects with some of the attributes that enable success when
there is a precedent.  Quoting from that report:
2The main philosophy behind risk reduction [for software] is to makeunprecedented systems as precedented as practical.Precedented systems are those for which (1) the requirements are consis-tent and well understood, (2) the system architecture (both hardware and
software) is known to be adequate for the requirements, and (3) the acqui-sition and development teams have worked together to develop a similarprevious system. Violation of one or more of these elements of definition
causes the system to be unprecedented. Consequently, certain risks arisethat require an acquisition-development strategy for their mitigation.A primary assertion . . . is that precedence is one of the most importantelements in the timely development of quality software. In many cases, itis more dominant than many of the more narrowly focused issues that
receive more attention, such as language, tools, hardware instruction set,architecture, etc. Simply stated, the concept of precedented systemsmeans that the learning curve applies to software development, as it does
in all other areas of human endeavor.2Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, Adapting Software Development Policies to ModernTechnology (1987). This report is summarized in R.J. Sylvester and M. Stewart, ÒUnprec-edented systems,Ó Encyclopedia of Software Engineering, J. Marciniak, ed., John Wiley (1994).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThat report went on to note that engineering and management tech-niques have been developed to address the predictability of software and
its behaviors, but only in domains that are fairly well understood and
where the team developing and acquiring the software-intensive system
has worked together on a similar system. With network-enabled Air Force
systems, such experience in software development and maintenance does
not yet exist, at least not with actual systems in operational settings (as
opposed to tightly controlled and scripted exercises). That gap can be
addressed by research into three major questions:¥How do we discover and understand what is needed?¥How can critical nonfunctional attributes (those that are desired ornecessary but ancillary to the softwareÕs primary functionality) be
implemented in a predictable fashion?¥Can the resulting software, once fielded, evolve to satisfy newneeds discovered as it is used?Figure 4-1 shows the logical flow from one question to the next andalso indicates an appropriate research theme for each question. These
themes, which leverage related research already under way at AFOSR
and other research funding organizations, are explored next, and specific
research topics are recommended.COEVOLUTION OF AIR FORCE CONCEPTS OFOPERATIONS AND SYSTEM ARCHITECTURESOne of the persistent problems in software development is requirementuncertainty. This is particularly problematic with the complex unprec-
edented systems envisioned by the Air Force. The software management
literature is replete with methods to instill disciplined approaches toFIGURE 4-1Logical flow of software development in support of Air Force
operations.rdneed
ed?
Howcan
crit
ical
nonfunctionalattributes
bepredictably
implemented?
Howcanit
evolveto
satisfywarfighter
ntwithitsuse?
Howcan
crit
ical
nonfunctionalattributes
bepredictably
implemented?
Canfie
lded
software
evolvetosatisfy
needsdis
covered
Co-evo
lution
ofAFconceptof
operationsandsystem
architectureSoftwareperformanceenvelopes
Evol
vabilitythroughout
the
lifecycle
rdneed
ed?
Howcan
crit
ical
nonfunctionalattributes
bepredictably
implemented?
Howcanit
evolveto
satisfywarfighter
ntwithitsuse?
Howcan
crit
ical
nonfunctionalattributes
bepredictably
implemented?
Canfie
lded
software
evolvetosatisfy
needsdis
covered
Co-evo
lution
ofAFconceptof
operationsandsystem
architectureSoftwareperformanceenvelopes
Evol
vabilitythroughout
the
lifecycle
Coevolution of Air Force 
concepts of operation and system architecture 
Software behavior
envelopes
Evolvability throughout
the life cycle
How can we discover and understand what is needed?as it is used?Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE55developing and managing (e.g., the Software Engineering InstituteÕsCapability Maturity Model Integration),3 but an even more powerfulmethodology is needed for the Air ForceÕs next-generation systems; it will
require far more than process discipline to avoid repeating recent prob-
lems encountered with Air Force software systems.The committee recommends that AFOSR sponsor research to extendthe philosophy of software development models, such as iterative devel-
opment, that support rapid prototyping of a software system so that end
users can work with the system to see if it satisfies their needs. Through
such interplay, the prototype then becomes an explicit representation of
the requirements. To extend this research for, say, a network-enabled
C4ISR system, a software model of the proposed system could be con-
structed and used in simulation-based exercises. The exercises would
serve the dual purpose of discovering and validating user requirements,
which help build Air Force concepts of operations (CONOPS) while sup-
porting the design and analysis of the architecture. This is consistent with
the architecture-first approaches advocated in best practices (e.g., using
the Unified Modeling Language (UML) to enable architecture design that
is motivated by cases supplied by end users) and the DOD standards for
operational, system, and technical views of systems. This model for
requirements definition has the additional benefits of building stronger
communication between researchers and the user communities and of
providing infrastructure to better support team-based problem solving
involving humans and automated decision aids, which is particularly
valuable for next-generation enterprise systems.Current research in executable architectures and in engineering toolsfor the design and analysis of functional and nonfunctional attributes pro-
vides a basis for enabling this coevolution. Architecture development
methods typically rely on standards-focused specifications and policy
documents (e.g., those for the GIG, JTA, DODAF, DII COE) and on envi-
ronments based on industry standards such as real-time CORBA. Those
methodologies bring together operational views, which describe how the
system will be used from the usersÕ perspective and which might be
expressed by the software or system engineer in a formal language such
as UML; technical views, which describe the building codes or standards
with which systems will be constructed; and the system view, the actual
architecture of the system to be fielded. The system view satisfies the

needs as defined in the operational architecture and adheres to the con-
straints imposed by the technical view.3Capability Maturity Model Integration is a service mark of Carnegie Mellon University.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSTechnologies now exist for modeling an architecture, the most popularbeing UML. Tools and methods exist for evaluating the architecture from
the perspective of scalability, real-time performance, survivability, and
other nonfunctional attributes; for example, the Architecture Tradeoff
Analysis Method (ATAM)4 is a commonly used analysis technique forarchitecture assessment. Some work has been done on executable and
model-based architectures, which enable early execution in a simulation
environment. These analysis methods typically work on static representa-
tions. A new approach in the software engineering community, the Model
Driven Architecture (MDA), is designed to document an organizationÕs
business and business rules and the structure of its information infra-
structure so as to create an expression of the business need for software
that can guide IT projects. The power of the MDA approach is that the
people who know the business will develop and maintain the business
model, while the software engineers will develop and maintain the design
and documentation of the software. These ideas are also being explored
by other communities. For example, the workflow management commu-
nity has developed an XML-compliant standard to support the explicit
definition of business processes and the separation of these processes from
underlying applications.5 In addition, the Object Management Group(OMG) recently released a draft version of a new language called the
System Modeling Language.6These recent advances would be extended through the recommendedresearch into methods to allow the coevolution of Air Force CONOPS and
system architecture. The committee recommends a general goal of pro-
viding executable versions of systems earlier in the development process
to ensure that the operational view (the CONOPS) is accurately, effec-
tively, and consistently represented by the system and technical views. To
achieve that goal, the committee recommends research into the following:¥Methods to support rapid composability.¥Semantic extensions of current modeling languages to enhancecomposability along with representation of and reasoning about
behavior.¥Development of tools that enable the construction of executableversions of models in system modeling languages.¥Methods that support experimentation, operational assessment,and the use of initial architecture representations in exercises. An4ATAM is described at http://www.sei.cmu.edu/ata/ata_init.html.5For example, see http://www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/tc003v11.pdf.6See http://www.sysml.org.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE57example might be scripting languages that allow end users to
explore early versions of software and help encode their prefer-
ences into the final architecture.¥Approaches that allow user tailoring, definition, and explorationof new processes and automated learning based on past problem
solving.¥Experimentation and demonstration of these research approachesin domains of revelance to the Air Force.SOFTWARE BEHAVIOR ENVELOPESAir Force systems need to be scalable, interoperable, survivable,secure, evolvable, and capable of predictable real-time performance and
energy awareness, among other things. These are ÒnonfunctionalÓ

attributes: characteristics of the software that, while necessary for the suc-
cess of the system, are ancillary to the softwareÕs ability to execute its
function(s). The degree to which such attributes can be achieved in a

system requires trade-off analysis during design and monitoring during
execution. To this end, the committee recommends that AFOSR support a
new line of research, extending DARPA-funded, model-based software
research to explore the concept of a software behavior envelope. Dynamicanalysis of nonfunctional attributes based on embedded models could be
viewed as the behavior envelope of a network-enabled system. The extent
to which the software could be modified within the envelope, by developers
or end users, provides a measure of system elasticity. The analogy is to
the flight envelope of an aircraft:  Stay within the envelope and perfor-

mance is safe and assured; wander outside the envelope, and tragedy
could follow.This topic would be a new area of research for the software commu-nity, but there is related work upon which to build. One related area is the
approach called rate monotonic analysis (RMA), which is commonly used
for real-time scheduling in operating systems. RMA was credited with
enabling the rapid debugging and repair of the Mars Rover during its
1997 mission.7 Another avenue of research is qualitative modeling.8 Thisis worth reexamination because of the huge increases in computing power
over the past 20 years, the lack of which was a limiting factor in those
earlier efforts. A third related area comes from a recently completed
DARPA program, the Model-Based Integration of Embedded Software7See http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/user/raj/www/mars.html.8For example, see D.S. Weld and J. de Kleer, eds., Readings in Qualitative Reasoning aboutPhysical Systems, Morgan Kaufmann: Los Altos, Calif. (1990).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS(MoBIES) program, which was largely executed by AFRLÕs InformationDirectorate.9 A fourth area of related research would build on refer-ence frameworks for composable systems (e.g., the work of David Garlanand colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University) and the work at the Soft-
ware Engineering Institute in predictable assembly from certifiable com-
ponents.10 Another relevant line of work is that by Janos Sztipanovits and
colleagues at Vanderbilt University.11 The union of these directions pro-vides a good starting point for research into how to include executable
versions of intended system behavior into actual systems, thus providing
a means to establish a software performance envelope.  This recom-

mended program of research would leverage and extend ongoing research
called out in AFOSRÕs BAA 2005-01 and research supported by other DOD
laboratories, the National Science Foundation,12 and other agencies.EVOLVABILITY THROUGHOUT THE LIFE CYCLEOnce a software architecture has been defined and the performanceenvelope explored, a logical third capability would be one that supports
continued evolution of complex software to continue to adapt it to its
fielded context. While most other software engineering research focuses
on developing new software-intensive systems, in fact the larger challenge
is to learn how to maintain and upgrade the huge amount of Air Force
software that is already fielded. Thus, important research areas include
methods to infer the architecture of legacy software systems, to identify
software components within that architecture, to parallelize legacy system
software and applications, and to migrate that architecture and compo-
nents to new and improved architectures, possibly within a new comput-
ing environment. The products of the research outlined in the previous
section, for predicting software performance envelopes, could also be
applied during such a migration to end users to tailor the software in a
new operational environment.9Mark Lewis, Air Force chief scientist, described the opportunities and benefits of AFOSRcontinuing, and thus completing, research projects initiated by DARPA in his October 2005address to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board.10See http://www.sei.cmu.edu/pacc.11K. Chen, J. Sztipanovits, A. Ledeczi, and S. Neema, ÒToward a semantic anchoring infra-structure for domain-specific modeling language,Ó Proceedings of EMSOFTÕ05, ACM SpecialInterest Group on Embedded Software, September 2005.12For example, see the NSF-sponsored study at http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~sullivan/sodsis.html or a related NSF program at http://www.cise.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_display.cfm?pub_id=13078.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE59Since network-enabled systems will involve many legacy systems aswell as new systems, it is imperative that software be designed in a way
that it can be evolved in an affordable manner throughout its life cycle.
The committee recommends that AFOSR support research to improve the
evolvability of software-intensive systems. The following specific lines of
research, which could build on readily available commercial frameworks,
are recommended:¥Improvements to our ability to conduct dynamic, model-basedanalyses to analyze nonfunctional attributes.¥In order to improve component integration, research to acceleratethe development of abstract design-component systems and code-
component-based systems, addressing automated discovery, com-
position, generation, interoperability, and reuse across hundreds
of systems.¥Research in security in support of the goal of measurable, avail-able, secure, trustworthy, and sustainable network-enabled sys-tems.¥To attain assured reliability with hard time-deadlines, methods for
modeling and analyzing integrated reliability, availability, and

schedulability of components and systems in realistic conditions
derived from user-specified scenarios.¥Energy-efficient components of the overall system: (1) networkenergy on network interface and communication protocols of ad
hoc networks, (2) processor energy and process management forscheduling various 
applications, (3) memory/storage energy andmemory/storage management, and (4) display energy.¥Research into novel integration of methods for verification and vali-dation, such as integration of informal methods (e.g., software test-
ing and monitoring) with formal verification (i.e., model checking
and theorem proving) and abstract interpretation and static pro-
gram analysis techniques. The ability to validate scalability, adopt-
ability, usability, and measurement is also important, and some
fundamental breakthroughs in the past 5 years have led to a rapid
rise in industry adoption and interest.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.605Basic Research for
Air Force Information
Management and IntegrationBACKGROUNDThe primary reason for developing a network-centric Air Force is togain the ability to rapidly collect and distribute information and thereby
create information superiority and, from it, military superiority. This is a
very challenging objective. While the Air Force has greatly increased its
ability to collect information, the capability does not yet exist for quickly
managing that information so as to create knowledge where it is needed
while avoiding information overload.Technology to manage and integrate information is critical to the AirForce for its current operations and its long-term challenges. The need for
this technology arises in finding and tracking, command and control,
decision support for situation assessment, counterintelligence, and public
affairs. For example, finding and tracking require integrating data from
large numbers of sensors and fusing them into actionable information.
Command and control and situation assessment have similar require-
mentsÑfor example, to tie together sensors and databases into a publish-
subscribe environment.More concretely, the Air Force will need an integrated battlespacemanagement system that combines all of these capabilities in order to
significantly improve its ability to conduct effective joint and coalition
warfare. Such a system is dependent on several key IS&T advances:
information exchange with complex event processing; transformationof multiple sources of information into a common representation and theninto knowledge; and distributed collaboration via shared knowledge.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION61Building such a system is made more difficult by many real-world factorsthat are well beyond the state of the art. For example, integration often
needs to be done quickly between systems that were not designed to
interoperate, such as those of partners in an ad hoc coalition. Efficient
techniques for evaluating complex subscriptions may enable warfighters
to identify targets more quickly, while they are still vulnerable to attack.
Sensors may be moving and unreliable, so that integration needs to be
more dynamic and flexible. As improvements are made in power sources
for sensors and networking technology and the cost and size of sensors
decrease, we can expect the number of sensors and the data rate per sensor
to increase. The combination of these effects will greatly increase the over-
all data rate from sensors, seriously taxing the scalability of current
stream-processing algorithms. And, inaccuracies in human sources of
information must be factored in.The Air Force also needs advanced data integration technology in sup-port of nonkinetic operationsÑthat is, those that do not rely on damage to
physical objects. For example, public relations challenges might require
quickly searching and correlating information across many data sources,
only some of which may be owned by the Air Force and many of which
have not been integrated at the time the search request is issued. Influence
operations might rely on very fast unearthing of information about par-
ticular individuals (e.g., a leader of a threatening group) or groups (e.g., a
tribe, clan, or religious community). Other nonkinetic operations might
depend on quick searches of blueprints, building permits, inventories,
cybercrime logs, and so on.Commercial database and distributed systems technology can be
expected to meet many Air Force needs. However, for many technical
areas, the Air Force places a higher value than the commercial sector on
obtaining highly innovative solutions or on obtaining them well before
their widespread commercial availability. Because the Air Force uses
many custom-developed application systems, off-the-shelf solutions are
often insufficient, particularly for aspects of databases and distributed
systems that enable interfacing with other systems: schema reconcilia-
tion, metadata, and so on. Rather, fundamental models of information
integration are needed, models that can be tailored to unique Air Force
requirements.What is the current state of the art? Robust database system productsexist to support the storage and management of structured information,
and recent research is leading to versions of these products that can man-
age XML documents. Extract, transform, and load (ETL) tools are avail-
able to help clean and integrate dataÑfor example, to store it in a data
warehouse. Enterprise information integration (EII) tools are becoming
available that enable querying heterogeneous databases, typically rela-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDStional or XML, although this approach is much less mature than datawarehousing.Data integration projects, particularly for data warehouses, are nowan important part of the IT work done in large enterprises. However, such
projects are usually quite expensive. Simple ones typically require a year
of elapsed time and several person-years of engineering effort, and com-
plex projects require much more effort.There is also a large market for application servers and related middle-ware products that support the integration of distributed applications.
Application servers enable the integration of applications through remote
procedure call (RPC). The newest incarnation of this technology is service-
oriented architecture (SOA), where the RPC is Internet-enabled using the
XML-based Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). Enterprise application
integration (EAI) tools have a similar goal, but they use asynchronous
message-passing and generally run behind the firewall. As in the data-
base area, the deployment of such products is usually an expensive

multiyear affair.There is some redundancy of application development tasks appro-priate to ETL, EII, EAI, and/or application servers. For example, data may
need to be cleaned and reshaped in the same way for each of them. This
redundancy increases the cost of integration and potential inconsistencies
between functionally related solutions. However, there are technical
impediments to eliminating this redundancy, such as incompatible execu-
tion models (e.g., streaming vs. RPC vs. batch processing). This area is
ripe for research.MAJOR INFORMATION MANAGEMENT CHALLENGESFOR AIR FORCE IS&TA central issue in the ubiquitous deployment of IT is the efficient andeffective use of the large variety and large quantities of data that can be
acquired, transmitted, and stored. In the specific area of national defense,
both human and automated decision makers must rapidly sort through
voluminous multimedia data and fuse disparate sources to create knowl-
edge. The first step is to integrate raw data that arrive in different formats
and are managed by different data management technologies so that they
can be correlated and searched using a common mechanism. There has
been much progress on integrating classical formatted files with semi-
structured data, such as XML, which is becoming a standard feature of
commercial database systems. The integration of other information man-
agement functions into a common database infrastructureÑsuch as infor-
mation retrieval, natural language processing, geographical information
systems, image and video stream processing, and data streamsÑis not asBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION63far along. It is an open question how best to integrate these functions intoa common database system architecture.Similarly, the Air Force faces major open questions on how to manageand share information in a distributed system. The Òpublish-subscribeÓ
paradigm is an increasingly popular one for enabling distributed
information-system integration and which is being explored by the Air
Force to work with DODÕs Global Information Grid. That concept includes
a common area where information is ÒpublishedÓ and ÒsubscriptionÓ in-
formation for various users that defines which posted information their
systems will download from the common area. While the publish-sub-
scribe concept has been shown to scale to thousands of participants within
stable local area network environments,1 there are many Air Force require-ments that will be met only with further research:¥An Air Force publish-subscribe system must work in an unstablewide-area network environment such as a battlespace network.¥An Air Force publish-subscribe system must scale to a very largenumber of users and data sources, while coping with a bursty load
that generates network and server contention.¥A publish-subscribe systemÕs scalability depends in part on theamount of state information it needs to maintain about old events.
Thus, in order to scale to the sizes contemplated by the Air Force,
systems based on this paradigm must weed out published infor-
mation that is outdated or redundant, even if it has not been
replaced by a clear duplicateÑexcept that in some cases, old infor-
mation is still useful for some subscribers.¥The system must distinguish between subscription rules that do notfire because the ruleÕs conditions do not hold and those that do not
fire because their data sources are unavailable. The former situa-
tion indicates that no action is required but the latter is ambiguous.¥A system that handles more expressive subscription rules can bemore selective in identifying events of interest to battlefield com-
manders and can reduce the cognitive load on commanders by

tracking the state of partially satisfied subscriptions. However, the
expressiveness of subscription rules is limited by the speed with
which they can be processed and the amount of memory needed to
maintain the state of partially satisfied subscriptionsÑremember-1A. Carzaniga, D.S. Rosenblum, and A.L. Wolf, ÒDesign and evaluation of a wide-areaevent notification service,Ó ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 19(3):332-383 (2001);
Yi-Min Wang, Lili Qiu, Chad Verbowski, Dimitris Achlioptas, Gautam Das, and Paul Larson,ÒSummary-based routing for content-based event distribution networks,Ó Computer Com-munication Review, October 2.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSing, for example, that two of the three requested events haveoccurred.¥In effect, rules are continuous queries being posed on streams ofdata arriving from sensors and other data sources. Database-style
query optimization will be needed to cope with high data rates and
the large number of rules that need to be concurrently checked. It
will also be needed to process queries over a combination of historical
data and newly arriving data.¥The system must have some ÒintelligenceÓ to take context intoaccount when interpreting subscription rules. For example, a userÕs
information needs can vary tremendously depending on external
conditionsÑfor example, whether a battle is ongoing, whether
other elements of the chain of command are online, and whether
other information sources are operational.¥The importance of timeliness can vary greatly according to theinformation posted or the external conditions. Rules must be
evaluated on input data streams at a rate that suits the timeliness
requirements.¥The relative importance of certain rules can vary according to externalconditions. When the system is overloaded due to a burst of activity
in one area of the battlespace, performance should degrade grace-fullyÑthat is, the system must not thrash. The most important rulesshould be prioritized to access the limited system resources.¥Security of the published information is critical, and the systemmust be trustworthy even if an adversary has gained access to pub-
lish or subscribe. In an Air Force setting, it must also offer multi-
level security.The above requirements are examples and not comprehensive. Evenso, it is a long list of challenges that spans many areas of computer science
in addition to publish-subscribe concepts, such as database systems, secu-
rity, and data mining. Moreover, in addition to publish-subscribe, other
distributed computing paradigms might be relevant, such as peer-to-peer
messaging, media delivery, grid services, distributed services for wireless
networks, and overlay networks. Different paradigms offer different
options for power management, net capacity, security, and other factors.Information needs to be understood at a more abstract level. The AirForce needs a model and architecture for situation understanding and a
means of incorporating situation modeling, model-based processing, situ-
ation projection, and top-down management of situation understanding
in order to explore topics in information fusion. It also needs a scientific
basis and technologies for multisensor fusion for air and ground targets.
Some of these topics are extensions of ongoing work in intelligence, sur-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION65veillance, and reconnaissance methods. These sorts of analyses need toaccount for the uncertainty of information sources, sometimes due to
known error characteristics of instrumentation but also due to hard-to-
quantify uncertainties such as those inherent to human-supplied intelligence.An even bolder question would be, How can a computer understanddata and information in context? In principle, background understanding
of a mission or related intelligence could help a computer interpret infor-
mation from the battlespace. For example, it might help identify objects in
video or image data. If such context-dependent processing were possible,
perhaps information-understanding algorithms could be embedded in
sensors and networks to enable rapid data assessment and hence rapid
situation assessment. Source compression methods might also be possible
when multiple sensors collect correlated observations, whether or not the
collection was done with coordination. If the correlation is known, as is
often the case (e.g., when data are bursty), redundancy can be compressed
out. This is critical in order to fit the large volumes of sensed data into
modest network capacities, especially in a difficult communication envi-
ronment. One challenge is the compression of highly correlated data with-
out fine coordination among sensing platforms.Defense applications today involve a wide variety of information-bearing signals.  Examples include audio and video communication

signals, video and still light imagery, hyperspectral imagery, and radar
imagery, to name but a few. Often, these different data acquisition modes
will be employed simultaneously in the same system. To use such signals
effectively, it is necessary to represent them in digital form in a hierarchy
ranging from the basic uncompressed analog-to-digital form to a com-
pressed digital form to a symbolic form. Continuing research will be
required to find multilevel representations of multimodal signal sets so
that they can be efficiently stored, transmitted, manipulated, and under-
stood by digital techniques. Although much progress has been made in
standardizing signal and data representations (e.g., MPEG7 and XML),
additional AFOSR-sponsored research is needed to focus on Air Force
signal representation problems. Given appropriate digital representations
of multimodal signal sets, it is also important to find new ways to search
for desired information and to aggregate that information into a conve-
nient form. This means that basic digital signal processing topics such as
signal enhancement, signal modeling, redundancy removal, and feature
extraction will continue to be important fundamental research topics. This
also requires advances in multimedia data mining and machine learning
in the defense context. Combining information across different signal
modes and fusing that information into robust multimedia ÒdocumentsÓ
with high semantic value is another topic of broad interest beyond just
the Air Force, but there are also Air Force-specific aspects to this challenge.
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThroughout information management and integration, there is acritical need for security, but many of the research challenges are military-
specific. A very difficult challenge is how to enable the multilevel security
needed in a fully functional publish-subscribe system. However, some of
the most important issues there are policy ones, not technical ones.There is a great need for research in defensive and offensive informa-tion operations, some of which has already begun at the AFRL. There is
also a great need for better understanding of how humans react to infor-
mation operationsÑthat is, what actions will create the desired effectsÑ
and ways to evaluate options for influence operations, trade-offs, and
courses of action. Damage assessment for influence operations is a special
challenge so far unexplored.RECOMMENDED BASIC RESEARCH ININFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATIONFollowing are areas of information management and integration func-tionality that are important for future Air Force systems and are either
beyond the state of the art and require basic research or are areas where
progress has been slow and could be sped up by additional research
initiatives:¥Large-scale sensor networks need to support queries, because it isoften infeasible to send all sensor data to a central location to
process queries. Research is needed to understand where to place
query-processing functionality when nodes have limited power,
limited computing capability, and limited network bandwidth and
connectivity. Conversely, as network and power limitations are
overcome, higher data rates can be expected, which will lead to
optimization trade-offs different from those being investigated
under todayÕs limitations.¥Applications needed in the field will demand coping with dynamic,late-binding, and unpredictable structure in the data, or even no
structure at all. Accordingly, dealing with semistructured content
with unpredictable structureÑfor the data model, for querying and
routing documents, and for efficient executionÑis critical.¥Data arriving from different sensors and other sources may be
inconsistent. Yet they need to be rolled up into a coherent view of
the environment, thereby being turned into knowledge. Tech-
nologies are needed for fusing uncertain or inconsistent data and
for querying databases containing incomplete or inconsistent infor-
mation. Some of these technologies may be generic across arbitrary
data types, while others may be specializedÑfor example, forBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION67merging location information from mobile sensors. It is also impor-tant to be 
able to mine inconsistent data for patterns, to obtain hintsabout a coherent view without necessarily being able to construct
such a view.  It may be helpful to create and maintain an ontology
of the information domain, to help direct the data mining or inter-
pret the results.¥Database mechanisms are needed to track the lineage of all storeddata, from its initial source through transformations and updates
that were applied to it. Solutions exist for tracing schema informa-
tion, for example, from the column of an output report to the input
data sources and transformations of those inputs that generate it.
However, much less is known about how to track lineage at the
level of data instances, especially when arbitrary transformations,
not just database queries, can be applied.¥Database system mechanisms are needed to deduce the degree ofcertainty of query results as a function of the uncertainty of the raw
data, under appropriate probabilistic models. Uncertainty may
arise, for example, from measurement errors, incomplete structure,
imprecise knowledge of the location where a measurement was
made, data cleaning of raw data, or conflicting data from different
sources. Some of the challenges are to identify mathematical models
of uncertainty that have general utility across a variety of applica-
tions, to develop efficient deduction algorithms for these models,
and to find optimal ways of making these algorithms effective in
the context of information management systems (e.g., in a database
system, in middleware, or in application programs).¥New approaches are needed to reduce elapsed time and level ofeffort to integrate independently designed databases, such as the
databases supporting each participant in a joint mission. Such
approaches must be embodied in tools that can help an engineer
design, develop, and test mappings between databases, find and
reuse existing mappings in the same domain as the mapping to be
generated, and evolve and customize mappings as data sources
change and new ones are added. Here, too, the creation and main-
tenance of an ontology may be useful to organize a repository of
schemas and mappings.¥The Air Force needs advanced distributed systems technology insupport of battlespace information management. As discussed
above, in the section on major information management challenges,
publish-subscribe is one important distributed systems infrastruc-
ture, though other distributed computing paradigms should also
be explored. Although there is much research on publish-subscribe
systems for centralized infrastructure, many improvements in theBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSfunctionality of publish-subscribe systems are needed, which requiresadditional research. These include scalability to wide-area, unstable
network environments; filtering outdated or redundant informa-
tion; coping with intermittent availability of event streams; sup-
porting more expressive subscription rules; improved optimization
of rule execution; processing strategies that account for context,
timeliness, and priority; and incorporating security guarantees.
Architectural principles that enable us to create secure, scalable,
reliable publish-subscribe platforms would also be valuable.¥Air Force distributed systems need to be interoperable, secure,massive in scale, highly available, dynamically reconfigurable, and
easily managed. These system-level characteristics are notoriously
more difficult to engineer than component-level capabilities. More-
over, some military requirements for these system-level character-
istics are beyond todayÕs state of the art.¥The data that flow through such distributed systems are subject tothe same integration problems described above for information

management. For example, identifying errors, cleaning the data,
fusing data from multiple sources into a coherent view, and track-
ing data lineage are all relevant to data flowing through a distrib-
uted system. Some data must be moved from a real-time publish-
subscribe system into a database to enable historical queries of

(possibly recent) publications, to obtain answers to point questions,
and to identify trends.¥System management is important, especially in an environmentwhere information publishers, subscribers, and even major servers
are unreliable. System managers must know who is connected,
must be notified when users and information sources connect and
disconnect, must be warned of impending performance and reli-
ability problems, must be helped in understanding the impact of
these problems on system behavior, and must be able to reconfigure
the system dynamically in response to these and other changes.
Again, techniques are needed to ensure these capabilities can be
made available despite incompatible network architectures and
security domains.¥Performance and scalability, which are always a major concern, areespecially hard to manage in heterogeneous distributed systems
that are frequently reconfigured as components and communica-
tions fail and recover. For example, quality of service for real-time
streaming of audio and visual information needs to be maintained,
while avoiding overload that interferes with concurrent high-
priority interactive workloads.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND INTEGRATION69¥Given the dynamic nature of battlespace systems, testing for abroad range of contingencies is extremely challenging. Better
models of large-scale systems are needed to allow virtual testing
and analysis.¥Continuing research will be required to find multilevel representa-tions of multimodal signal sets so that they can be efficiently stored,
transmitted, manipulated, and understood by digital techniques.
This means that basic digital signal processing topics such as signal
enhancement, signal modeling, redundancy removal, and feature
extraction will continue to be important fundamental research
topics. However, the special nature of defense applications argues
for continued support by AFOSR of work that leverages and extends
signal-processing R&D of a more general nature.¥There is also a need for research on multimedia data mining andmachine learning in the defense context. Research on basic signal
representation and research on signal analysis must be closely
intertwined. Combining information across different signal modes
and fusing that information into robust multimedia ÒdocumentsÓ
with high semantic value and focused on information sources of
interest in Air Force applications will allow AFOSR to leverage
non-defense-based research and foster the creation of new knowl-
edge with direct applicability to Air Force problems.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.706Basic Research for Human Interactions
with Air Force IS&T Systems
The concept of human-system interactions (HSI) includes the tradi-tional field of human-computer interactions (HCI) but also encompasses
the coordinated and purposeful interactions of several or many humans
with complex systems and the interactions of teams of humans mediated
through systems. The committee recommends that AFOSR focus on HSI
because it is essential to the successful operation of complex IT-based
systems and to the accomplishment of network-enabled operations. There
is strong historical precedence for this area of research. One example of
clear importance to the Air Force is the use of cockpit simulators for train-
ing and rehearsing. However, the increasing pervasiveness of interactive
complexity in IS&T systems argues for a broader interaction, much
beyond the computer interfaces and human-machine synergy. Examples
are interactions in real-time virtual and simulated environments and in
the collaborative control of UAVs. Clearly, such capabilities are both team-
focused and network-enabled. An ultimate goal of HSI research would be
to enable machines (or algorithms) to perform most if not all of the
complex data manipulation, correlation, computation, and automatic data

reductionÑand even some decision makingÑleaving humans to perform
the most critical judgments that cannot be accomplished by algorithms.
Furthermore, HSI should help humans to interact with one another in
cooperative tasks where multiple humans are part of the system.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN INTERACTIONS WITH AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMS71CHALLENGES POSED BY HUMAN INTERACTIONSWITH AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMSScope of the ChallengeIn the Air Force, there are many instances where one or more humansinteract with one or more IS&T systems. These include systems that are
distributed not only among different platforms but also perhaps across
geographical and organizational boundaries, most often with strict secu-
rity and service reliability constraints such as near-real-time or time-
critical services. Added complexity comes about because both the humans
and the systems might be interacting with one another in additional ways
that are disconnected from the task being analyzed. New paradigms such
as publish-subscribe architectures are being investigated to cope with
some of the challenges. What sorts of information, architecture, and format
should be used to achieve desired effects, and how can designers and
users estimate the uncertainties and internalize context and caveats asso-
ciated with each option? Assuming the right information is available at
the right time and in the right form (e.g., as text or images), what tech-
niques will enable the user to make the best use of it? How can what-if
simulations be considered and evaluated? Such complex capabilities
might require integrated and synchronized multimodal interfaces (visual,
aural, and/or haptic) to capture the high dimensionality of a system of
sensors and actuators in the battlefield.Research into HSI should shed light on the usability of the (same)information in a battlefield command-and-control situation relative to the
different perspectives (ranks) of the users and the different degrees of
granularity (detail). In other words, one must understand and character-
ize the most likely and useful level of complexity for each potential user,
from the warfighter to the commander, so that the complexity of the
information can be tailored to provide an optimal amount of information
for battlefield decision-makingÑnot a paucity of data, but not data over-
load either. Visualization (interactive visualization in particular) is an
important topic. Because this subject is receiving much attention as part
of DARPAÕs Command Post of the Future program, AFOSR should work
to complement the DARPA investment.The issue of how to ensure security pervades the topic of HSIÑinparticular because human behavior regarding security has a great influ-
ence on the effectiveness of embedded security protocols. User behavior
can reinforce or undermine security systems, and we do not know enough

about how the interface influences those behavioral choices. The most fre-
quent cause of system failure is human error, and even under the best of
circumstances (good training, no stress, well-designed interface system,Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSsimple tasks), human operators have been shown to have a finite (non-zero) rate of placing a system outside its operational allowed boundaries.1Usability and error-free HSI design may work at cross purposes in certain
cases. For example, the Therac-25 medical radiation device allowed
operators to bypass error messages and apply treatment even if lethal
dosages were being used. In interface design, unusual system circum-
stances must be prominently flagged. It is well known that a high level of
stress increases the errors that may cause security or system failures. A
modicum of system sensor display redundancy (from different sensors)
also gives the user greater confidence in the validity of critical information.
HSI research could lead to improved design and evaluation of IT-based
systems to achieve better usability, safety, and security simultaneously.Much of the research on influence operations goes beyond IS&T andrequires fundamental research into behaviors and how they can be
affected. To this base must be added research into information interpreta-
tion and presentation, personnel training, and modeling and simulation
for influence operations, building on what is known about cultural and
behavioral factors. As an example, characterization and recognition of
normal and abnormal behavior, in general, would help in surveillance at
all levels. Characterizing those behaviors requires ongoing research in
social sciences, and automatic recognition of the identified characteristics
is an ongoing challenge for IS&T.Power consumptionÑconcerns about which were noted in Chapter3Ñ
may also be improved through HSI research into how users interact with
mobile devices with small displays whose display component consumes
a significant proportion of the deviceÕs energy. While hardware advances
allow for the dimming of displays and the use of screen savers to lower
power consumption, the possibility of selective dimming of display areas
necessitates a better understanding of which display regions to dim and
when and of which display effects may be acceptable to the users or
allowed by different operations (e-mail, for example, will have different
criteria on dimming than video streaming). Research efforts could be
shared by industries that are also seeking power-efficient displays.HSI challenges also arise when using commercial off-the-shelf hard-ware and software, which when merged into complex systems may
present the user with a confusing, even contradictory, set of interfaces.
HSI challenges certainly present in specialized equipment interfaces such
as those used by the remote operators of UAVs. Such applications drive
the development of context-aware, cross-modal analysis techniques that1Barry Kirwan, A Guide to Practical Human Reliability Assessment, Taylor and Francis,Ltd.: London (1994).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN INTERACTIONS WITH AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMS73provide input to automated systems. In other cases, the analysis tech-niques can assist human decision makers in sorting through huge amounts
of information. In such cases, data-mining and machine-learning tech-
niques can simplify complex multidimensional data. How to represent
such information in multimodal form to facilitate its use is an important
area of research. New approaches for the display and rendering of
multimodal signal sets, such that important context-dependent features
are highlighted and subtle features are not obscured, will be necessary to
provide context-aware, user-oriented interfaces that allow effective deci-
sions to be made in complex situations. Such system interfaces must allow
users to probe deeper layers to capitalize on uniquely human analysis
capabilities.Finally, two issues related to the sharing of information should bekept in mind when planning the HSI research program:¥DOD and the services have a range of geographically distributedR&D efforts in HSI and modeling. Because the HSI challenge is so
huge, it is important that these resources and accomplishments be
shared, striving for commonalities of icons, network services, stan-
dards, interoperability, response time, scalability, and so on.¥Some key concerns with respect to information sharing in battle-field situations include scalability, allocation and management of
bandwidth, message and resource priority allocation policies, time
order of the processing steps used in publish-subscribe systems,
intelligence needed to establish logical and semantic relations on
the information objects, potential deadlocks, etc. These concerns
are closely related to the shift to network-enhanced operations,
where multiple sites and organizations need to share common
information on a timely basis.Interfaces for Air Force Decision MakersThere is a general need within the Air Force for decision-support toolsproviding more effective interfaces between decision makers and the
voluminous information available to them. Over the years, various soft-
ware packages have been developed to support decision-making. One of
the simplest and most useful is the spreadsheet, but others such as critical
path methods and the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
have also found a place. However, most real-world problems involve
uncertainty. Whether we are dealing with scientific issues, engineering
problems, or capabilities of individuals, we make decisions based on
imprecise assumptions and incomplete and time-varying data. Decision-
making under uncertainty is usually studied as an offshoot of probabilityBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDStheory, merged with ideas of risk. In principle, decision theory offers a setof structured procedures that assist decision makers.Classical decision theory is most widely studied in a static setting inwhich the data are given and then analyzed and acted upon. In the real
worldÑand especially in Air Force information operations and influence
operationsÑthe inputs to the decision often change before the solution
can be implemented. Thus, one needs to pay attention to techniques that
lend themselves to rapid, perhaps approximate, solutions and techniques
for rapidly updating given solutions when small parts of the problem
change. Stochastic programming methods could be useful in some proba-
bilistic settings, although problems involving military logistics are often
too large to be treated successfully using these methods. There is also the
need to develop software that incorporates Bayesian inference, although
a completely resolved Bayesian inference model might not be realistic
given the computational resources likely to be required. As a consequence,
statistically sound heuristics could be developed and explored to extend
computational feasibility to much larger problems. As a model one might
think of greatly extending the functionality of spreadsheet software by
combining it with packaged statistical algorithms and an appropriate user
interface designed to help users formulate questions and display the
probabilistic information associated with the results. Part of any effective
system of this type would be effective optimization algorithms, because
every nontrivial what-if question requires optimization. (See Chapter 3
for some discussion of optimization, dynamic programming, and game
theory in complex systems.) It would be desirable for this type of research
to develop new classes of statistical models for complex phenomena that
(1) are rich enough to capture relevant physical laws and other known
constraints in large classes of problems of interest to the Air Force and
(2)have exploitable structure that allows the development of new methods

for information extraction and for the development of bounds on achiev-
able performance for problems that previously defied practical solution.Another example where better decision support is needed is in con-trol systems that involve humans as essential parts of the decision chain.
TechnologyÑespecially IT, collaborative work analysis, and communica-
tion technologyÑcan provide such decision makers with better local and
global awareness, e.g., about the weather and other environmental condi-
tions, including other aircraft and machines in the environment. The
research community has been quite successful in modeling and predict-
ing the behavior of machines interacting with relatively well-understood
or well-measured environments, including those with uncertainty and
some bounded nonlinearity. But people in the loop make decisions that
are highly nonlinear and not always predictable, and therefore theirBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN INTERACTIONS WITH AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMS75inclusion creates a greater modeling challenge. In addition, the Air Com-bat Command told the committee that it was increasingly concerned with
winning the local populationÕs hearts and minds as the most effective
means of achieving military goals, and in such a context, improved under-
standing of people can be more important than improved models of
equipment. To address all of these people-dependent modeling chal-
lenges, there is a great opportunity to devise research experiments that
instrument people and their environment with cameras, microphones,

stress and pressure sensors, and other measurement devices, perhaps
collecting data via wireless technology. Such measurements would offer
objective observations about peopleÕs behavior under varied conditions,

which could help in its modeling.One specific need is HSI systems that make the control of UAVs moreefficient.  Currently, Global Hawks and Predators require as many as

25people for each operation: at least three ground-based pilots, one for

each 8-hour shift, and various support personnel to launch and capture
UAVs, process collected data, etc. While some attention has been paid to
the design of ground control units, significant improvements could prob-
ably be made using state-of-the art knowledge of HSI design and collabo-
ration. However, significant advances in intelligent control, HSI methods,
and other areas of interactive-collaboration research will be needed to
move toward the goal of having one person control a single UAV, with
even more research being required before one person could control mul-
tiple UAVs.Machine Learning to Support HSISystem components that adapt and learn from their environment orfrom coaching by a human supervisor would open an amazing number of
doors, from intelligent control systems to intelligent decision aids.
Machine learning is a critical technology for eventually enabling software-
intensive systems to (1) adapt and extend their functionality in response
to specific training and (2) make intelligent inferences either from general
human guidance or through reasoning based on interaction with the
systemÕs domain.One particularly important application area for intelligent systemswould be immersive environments for training and exercise support. This
will require advances in modeling and simulation, eventually yielding
virtual worlds that can be used to support training, exercises, and critical
decisions about system development and acquisition. All too often model-
ing and simulation are underused because technical difficulties prevent
reuse and combination.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSSimulation as a Design and Training Tool for HSIAnother challenge for human interactions with complex IS&T systemsis the need for realistic, validated simulations that allow humans to design
systems and learn about their management, operations, and vulnerabili-
ties. Design options and capabilities of systems as complex as a network-
enabled battlefield force or a publish-subscribe system with 100,000 users
can only be explored via simulation. The software engineering and vali-
dation and verification aspects of such simulations are known to be chal-
lenging. Less well known is the need for the proper design and analysis of
experiments run via simulation. Without attention to this need, complex
simulations often lead to inaccurate or imprecise results. Moreover, the
widespread use of simulation for Air Force training presents more chal-
lenges owing to the presence of a human in the loop. The simulation
modeling of human behavior is not well developed or understood, though
efforts along these lines (e.g., models of crowd behavior) are ongoing. In a
training mission, the vagaries of human behavior make careful attention
to statistical design and analysis even more critical.Another area where the potential of simulations is underutilized isinput/output sensitivity analysis. The simulation model is not only for
obtaining predictions but also for investigating which inputs are impor-
tant and which are not (often of equal interest). The same statistical
design/analysis methods for ÒproductionÓ runs can be used for sensitivity
analysis to elucidate things like main effects, interactions, and so on. This
leads rather naturally to validation and verification, because validation
relies on statistical comparisons between the outputs from the simulated
system and those from the real system. A rigorous simulation procedure
offers the potential for objective and rational validation. And a good simu-
lation system can also be a good training tool for users.BASIC RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS FOR HSIFOR AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMSSome of the most valuable basic research efforts that would addressthe challenges in this chapter are listed below. The committee recom-
mends that these topics be addressed in an interdisciplinary manner with
goals that could enhance multiple capabilities (e.g., network security,
simulation, information operations). Some of this research would seem to
be appropriately conducted collaboratively with other branches of the
military or with the National Science Foundation. The research should
strongly articulate basic design principles, goals, and evaluation of human
interfaces with complex IS&T systems. The committee recommends a
focus on the following areas:Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN INTERACTIONS WITH AIR FORCE IS&T SYSTEMS77¥Behavioral models for individuals, groups, and organizations.¥Specification of an information operations testbed and experi-mental metrics for evaluating its effectiveness in distributed envi-
ronments that preserve realistic situation awareness.¥Better understanding of mixed-modality methods (systems thatunderstand speech, gestures, sound, touch, etc.) for imparting infor-
mation 
and effecting control. Research should aim to illuminate theminimum speech capability (or iconography, haptic stimuli, etc.)
needed under varied conditions.¥Design of communication methods that combine text, speech, andvisual modalities appropriate to the information being communi-
cated.¥Understanding user needs that have implications for power usage(and energy efficiency) in displays, such as how users scan areas of
a display.¥Exploration of the theoretical tools used to design, implement, andfield complex, time-critical information systems. Topics include the
development of large-scale deterministic, stochastic, convex and
nonconvex, dynamic, and integer-constrained mathematical pro-
gramming; algorithms for large-scale Bayesian analysis, including
approximate techniques, partial evaluations, and update algo-
rithms; game theory; multiscale modeling and multiscale analysis;
and formal approaches to data mining, knowledge representation,
and reasoning.¥Development of better tools for automated reasoning and infer-ence under uncertainty. Such tools can draw on diverse techniques,
such as data mining and knowledge discovery in databases; models
that learn from data; information retrieval; automated diagnosis
and decision support; and machine learning. The goal is to enable
users to quickly navigate complex data sets, to set up and analyze
decision trees or Bayesian networks, to understand the effects of
decision rules, and so on.¥The paradox of automation is that the more automation is added toaid humans, the more work the humans have to do to understand
both the automation and the task(s) which the automation is
designed to support. To counter this, specific research is needed to
enhance models of usersÕ capabilities to interact with and under-
stand systems via different modalities; to automate acquisition and
enhancement of information fusion models; to create models of
users that can be trained from instruction or in exercises with
humans; and experimentation in domains of Air Force relevance.¥Interactive system components that can adapt and learn from theirenvironment or from human supervision should be investigated.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSAppropriate methods include indexing, retrieving, and reusing
past problem-solving episodes; encoding problem-solving methods
from instruction or observation; explanation-based methods; infer-
ring or suggesting improved problem-solving methods; enhancing
the efficiency of algorithms based on past problem solving; induc-
tively inferring regularities using, for example, graphical models
(Bayesian networks); reinforcing learning methods; understanding
emergent behavior; transferring lessons learned in one domain to
another domain; using multiagent teams to learn how groups col-
laborate to solve problems; integrating multiple machine learning
techniques; developing toolkits and frameworks that integrate and
facilitate adoption of learning methods and provide guidance on
the best methods to use in different situations; and experimenting
in domains of Air Force relevance.¥Research on the modeling and simulation of scenarios of impor-tance to the Air Force, including more rapid and cost-effective con-
struction of domain-faithful models of information and influence
operations; support for the authoring of scenarios and their trans-
lation into the models and databases required for simulations; and
software tools to allow users to tailor and understand the behavior
and functionality of software components.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.797Priorities in Basic IS&T Research
for the Air Force
It is the committeeÕs consensus that the basic research topics describedin Chapters 3 through 6 are of great importance for enabling the capabilities
sought by the Air Force and that none of them are likely to be adequately
explored by the private sector. Recognizing, too, that AFOSRÕs resources
for IS&T are relatively limited, the committee recommends in this chapter
how to prioritize among those research topics given different funding
scenarios. As background for that discussion, it first presents its overall
vision for Air Force basic research.A MODEL FOR AIR FORCE IS&T BASIC RESEARCHGiven the limited availability of 6.1 funds for IS&T research, the com-mittee believes it is best to give priority to those research areas that AFOSR
gives a realistic chance of enabling significant new Air Force capabilities.
This is not to say that all of AFOSRÕs basic research in IS&T should be tied
to particular technology goalsÑin fact, such tie-ins should be an unusual
exceptionÑbut that IS&T basic research should normally be motivated by
the recognition of a gap in the knowledge base that underpins desired Air
Force technologies. The committee suggests that these knowledge gaps be
seen as Ògrand challenges,Ó which is a helpful way to motivate research
and build research communities and a useful mechanism for communi-
cating the relationship between basic research and future Air Force tech-
nologies. Topics designated as grand challenges would normally be ones
that are properly addressed by a cross-disciplinary community of basic
researchers, and such a designation gives that community an identity andBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSstrengthens its coherence. Grand challenges should be defined in termsthat are recognizable to the basic research community, but AFOSR should
also be able to map the grand challenges to future Air Force technologies,
strengthening the linkage between basic research and the rest of Air Force
R&D. The grand challenges are not part of, nor do they compete with, the
AFRL focused long-term challenges (which are more oriented toward
technologies), but they should link to them.Some examples of grand challenges in a general sense are included ina recent paper by well-known computer scientist Butler Lampson:1¥Development of a computer that hears, speaks, and sees as well asa person;¥A system architecture that scales up by 106; and¥An information system that can be used by millions yet only re-quires a part-time support staff.Such grand challenges quite naturally facilitate new interdisciplinary re-search communities: ÒinterdisciplinaryÓ because the breadth of the chal-
lenges calls for varied expertise and ÒnaturallyÓ because the associated re-searchers 
are interested in the whole range of efforts addressing the grandchallenges. The Computing Research Association has for several years

held conferences that similarly seek to identify grand challenges for com-
puter science more generally.  Information about these meetings may be

found at http://www.cra.org/grand.challenges/.Figure 7-1 suggests how the grand challenges model would contribute
to cohesion across the total Air Force R&D enterprise. The grand chal-
lenges would be defined by AFOSR as a clear response to AFRL and Air
Force technology needs, but in terms of concepts that motivate the basic
research community. They have the advantage of not biasing the research
directions chosen to address a particular Air Force need:  They define a

challenge for the research community that relates to desired capabilities
but do not present the research community with specific technology goals,
as would be the case if the basic research program were motivated directly
by current Air Force technology programs. In turn, the 6.1 research builds
up a base of knowledge related to the grand challenges (the arrow on the
lower right of Figure 7-1), and the rest of the Air Force R&D community
can track progress on the grand challenges that support its technology
goals. That transition (indicated by the arrow at the lower left of Figure 7-1)
is aided by the computational laboratories recommended in Chapter 9.1B. Lampson, ÒComputing meets the physical world,Ó The Bridge 33(1) (2003).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81FIGURE 7-1Mapping of Air Force needs to basic research through grand challenges.
6.1 ResearchMultiple and diverse scientific explorationfocused in common grand challenge areasShared, repeatable experimentsMetrics that are grounded in good science6.2-6.3a ResearchAFRL computational laboratories(related to battle labs/testbeds)Experiments with operational personnelMeasures with operational significance(e.g.,  , not expected from the commercial sector)AFOSR 6.1 JustificationGrand challenges support  AFOSR investment strategyAir Force NeedsLeap-Ahead Research  High-risk but high-payoff researchthat would provide significant advances in military capabilitiesAir Force needs translated into research issuesPotential research impactexplained in Air Force termsAs articulated in Air Force Flight Plan 2004, recent USAF SAB studies, and 
AFRL S&T plansGrand ChallengesVisionary capabilitiesbased on Air Force needs andrequiring breakthroughtechnologies that likely
will not come without AFOSRinvestmentBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSThe characteristics that are important in defining grand challenges for theAFOSR are these:¥They should be representative of important systems that the AirForce would like to have but that are well beyond the state of the
art, like the examples in the next paragraph.¥The key component technologies that would make them realizableshould be technologies where the Air Force wants research advances.¥They should be readily comprehensible to researchers who do nothave domain-specific knowledge of the Air Force system.¥They should bound the research somewhat, so that researchers canaim toward specific applications rather than general capabilities.The committee recommends that AFOSR consider the following aspossible grand challenges, but the list is by no means exhaustive:¥Control of multiple UAVs. Research to enable the control of multipleUAVs by one human in mixed manned and unmanned airspace, in
contrast to todayÕs requirement for many humans for a single UAV
in carefully deconflicted manned and unmanned airspace.¥Taskable airborne network. Research to enable cost-effective andrapidly deployable tactical intelligence networks in urban environ-
ments, where the nodes generally are sensors carried on UAVs or
lighter-than-air vehicles and the networks are taskable by ground-
and air-based commanders.¥Mixed-reality training environments. Research to enable training forair crews, command post staff, and commanders in an environ-
ment of such fidelity that it would be indistinguishable from the
real world (and in fact would sometimes involve the real worldÑ
hence ÒmixedÓ rather than ÒvirtualÓ or ÒaugmentedÓ).  The com-

puter tools used in such training environments should be the same
as those used in the real world.¥An automated Air Operation Center staff assistant. Research to enablesoftware that can learn from being told, much as human staff
members learn on the job.¥Rapid system integration. Research to enable the rapid integration ofIT-based systems, such as those belonging to different members of
ad hoc coalitions. This research would encompass HSI, networks and
communications, security, software, and information management.It is envisioned that an interdisciplinary community would engage incollaborative research focused on each grand challenge. Researchers
would describe repeatable experiments and metrics with which to assessBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIORITIES IN BASIC IS&T RESEARCH FOR THE AIR FORCE83the research results. Greater synergy with 6.2-6.3a research programs
could result in shared research environments or computational laborato-
ries. Funding for 6.1 research should continue to be used to find solutions
but not (normally) to develop or demonstrate particular technologies.RECOMMENDED BASIC RESEARCH PRIORITIES IN IS&TThe committee recommends that in determining program priorities,AFOSR should emphasize research that clarifies Air Force problems,
impacts operational procedures, and advances the state of the art in areas
of interest to the Air Force. Prior collaboration with Air Force laboratories
should not be essential to obtaining program support. AFOSR should also
continue to monitor the emergence of possibly disruptive technologies or
Air Force missions and adapt the research program and strategy accord-
ingly:  The rise of network-enabled systems and the emergence of a global

war on terrorism have been recent disruptive changes, and they will not
be the last.The reader is reminded that the committee did not examine the entireportfolio of the AFOSR Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate,
which manages most of AFOSRÕs IS&T research, and it did not mean to
imply that other topics covered by that directorate are less important.
Rather, the topics funded by the programs in physical mathematics and
applied analysis, computational mathematics, electromagnetics, and space

sciences were not within the scope of this study, and it is not the com-
mitteeÕs intent that IS&T topics should be emphasized at the expense of
those topics in other programs. Even greater care is necessary in interpret-
ing the priorities given here that overlap the current AFOSR programs in
dynamics and control, optimization and discrete mathematics, high-
performance computing and advanced architectures, and signals commu-
nication and surveillance, which overlap with IS&T only in part. Thus,
any high-priority research identified by the committee in Chapters 3
through 6 that would be funded by one of those programs was not
weighed against other topics covered by the same program, only against
other IS&T topics. For instance, challenges in the control of complex ad
hoc networks, distributed information systems, and multiple UAVs were
considered by the committee in setting priorities, but it did not weigh in
the importance of other challenges in control, such as control theory for
avionics.Recommendation. The committee consensus on how to prioritize AirForce IS&T research in networks, communications, information manage-
ment, software, and HSI under different funding scenarios is encapsu-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSlated in Table 7-1. See Chapters 3 through 6 for detailed recommendationsabout research directions in each of these five areas.With the current funding available for IS&T (the column labeled
ÒStableÓ), the committee recommends that networks, communications,
and HSI portfolios merit the highest priority, while the information man-
agement and software research portfolios would be better able to weather
any forced reductions in effort. The committee is not saying that the latter
two research areas are less important to the Air Force. Rather, it is the
committeeÕs judgment that if cutbacks are required, reductions in those
programs would do the least harm in limiting future options. If the overall
IS&T funding dropped by 10 percent, the committee would give software
the lowest priority only because other organizations, and commercial
enterprises, are performing some related research. If overall funding
increased by 10 percent, the priority for information management research
should be increased. Finally, if overall IS&T funding were to increase by
25 per cent, the committee recommends a balanced portfolio drawn from
the recommendations of Chapters 3 through 6.TABLE 7-1Relative Priorities Under Four Funding Scenarios
IS&T Topic10% reductionStable10% increase25% increase
NetworksHHHH
CommunicationsHHHH
Information managementMMHH
SoftwareLMMH

Human-system interactionsHHHH
NOTE: ÒHÓ means the general topic is a high priority, and its funding should be protected or
increased. ÒMÓ means the general topic is of medium priority for AFOSR support, given thecontributions by other players, but not of medium importance to the Air Force. ÒLÓ meansfunding in that area should be sacrificed so that a critical level of effort can be supported in
other areas. ÒLÓ does not mean that the topic is not of importance to the Air Force, only thatif resources are tight, it is a reasonable candidate for cuts because other organizations arecontributing to the area and/or the challenge is so great that a small AFOSR effort is unlikely
to lead to significant progress. These priorities pertain to the five general research areaslisted in the left-hand column as weighed only against one another, not against otherprograms funded by AFOSRÕs Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate. The priorities
are meant to show the committeeÕs consensus on which of the areas to (de)emphasize withany change in funding for their support. They take into account not only the importance ofthe research but also the relative need for Air Force-specific research. They reflect the
committeeÕs general sense of what can be meaningfully accomplished within the fundingscenarios posited. The committee did not develop a detailed estimate of the resources
required for each of the research topics in the left-hand column.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIORITIES IN BASIC IS&T RESEARCH FOR THE AIR FORCE85Because all five major research areas listed in Table 7-1 contributesynergistically to the future fielding of team-focused, network-enabled
systems, progress toward that vision is dependent on a balanced research
effort across all five areas. However, overall funding would have to
increase significantly to support such an effort, a conviction that is con-
tained in the following recommendation:Recommendation. The committee recommends a significant increase inIS&T funding within AFOSR, centered around research to support team-
focused, network-enabled systems of interest to the Air Force.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.868Funding MechanismsThe AFOSR is responsible for oversight and management of the AirForce program in basic (6.1) research. AFOSR program managers orches-
trate the research program with universities, industry, other government
organizations, and the AFRL technical directorates. The goal is to create
revolutionary breakthroughs and to facilitate the transfer of research
results to support Air Force challenges and needs.In FY 2004, AFOSR managed funding for approximately 1,350 grants,cooperative agreements, and contracts. The total funding of $394 million
was distributed to approximately 380 academic institutions and industrial
firms. As shown in Figure 8-1, the AFOSR FY 2004 budget authority included
$205 million for 6.1 defense research and $104 million for university research
initiatives (URI), both distributed in the form of extramural grants to univer-
sities, contracts to industry, and intramural grants to Air Force in-house
laboratories. AFOSR also executed approximately $85 million for otherprograms, such as the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program
and programs at DARPA.One task given to the committee was to recommend an appropriatebalance of funding mechanisms for IS&T research. The committee was
briefed by John Tangney of AFOSR on funding mechanisms used by the
AFOSR Directorate of Mathematics and Space Sciences, and it had the
benefit of several reports,1 excerpts from AFOSR BAA 2005-1, notes from1Among them, National Research Council, Review of the U.S. Department of Defense Air,Space, and Supporting Information Systems Science and Technology Program, NationalAcademy Press:  Washington, D.C. (2001).
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDING MECHANISMS87FIGURE 8-1Funding for all of AFOSR in FY 2004.
49%27%9%15%33%
16%
51%
Universities
Industry/
Other
Operations
Research
(MURI)
Education
DefenseResearchSciences, 6.1
UniversityResearchInitiatives
$205 million$104 million
Air ForceIn-houseInstrumentationa review of the Partnership for Research Excellence and Transition (PRET)for Advanced Concepts in Space Situational Awareness, which a member
of the committee attended, and an overview briefing of AFOSR.The current AFOSR IS&T program is executed through a variety ofmechanisms:¥Individual investigator grants at universities, at Air Force laboratories,and in industry. A large majority of these grants are held by aca-demic researchers. The committee agrees with that choice, because
the academic setting is well suited for long-range, basic research
and has a time-tested record of success. A small number of grants
are held by investigators within AFRL, which is appropriate for
topics that require in-depth understanding within the Air Force or
that have not yet caught the attention of strong academic researchers.¥Multidisciplinary university research initiatives (MURIs). These longer-term 
group grants (up to 5 years) provide a good mechanism forinvestigating challenges requiring an unusual and/or concerted
mix of efforts.¥University centers. These grants enable the Air Force to establish acritical mass of expertise focused on particular Air Force challenges
at selected institutions. Those institutions in turn become a resource
for in-house Air Force scientists and engineers.¥Partnerships for Research Excellence and Transition (PRETs). Thismechanism brings together mixtures of academic, industrial, and
Air Force researchers to jointly develop a new area of research (e.g.,
space situational awareness) while also establishing some path-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSways for technology transition. The industrial partners must con-tribute resources.¥Small-business research, DOD Experimental Program to Stimulate Com-petitive Research (DEPSCoR), and grants designated for Historically
Black Colleges and Universities or Minority Institutions (HBCU/MI).These research mechanisms allow AFOSR to tap into a broader
portion of the research community while, in the first case, also
increasing the potential for technology transition.Finding. The committee concluded that all of these mechanisms providevalue of different sorts to the Air Force and that AFOSR program managers
understand their pros and cons and use the mechanisms appropriately.
Therefore, the committee concluded that the current choices appear to be
good ones and that AFOSR staff should continue to be given the latitude
to make choices.Recommendation. The committee recommends that AFOSR consideraugmenting these choices by implementing a young investigator award
along the lines of the National Science FoundationÕs Faculty Early Career
Development program or the Office of Naval ResearchÕs Young Faculty
Investigator Program. Such a program in the AFOSR would help attract
young science and engineering faculty of exceptional promise to work on
Air Force research problems early in their careers. In particular, the NavyÕs
program, which includes a basic award of $75,000 per year for 3 years,
coupled with possible equipment support and additional funding if the
investigator receives support from another part of the Navy, is a very
interesting model to consider since it includes incentives to connect to
Navy laboratories and systems commands.The committee also offers two related recommendations for consider-ation in planning and executing an expanded program in IS&T:Recommendation. Using whichever funding mechanisms are appropriate,AFOSR should maintain a healthy balance between theory, experimenta-
tion, and transition efforts. This balance can be achieved only by provid-
ing freedom to program managers to resist pressures toward short-term
goals, which in the long run will not serve the Air Force well because the
Air Force long-term challenges are dominated by IS&T. This recommen-
dation is almost a repeat of one from a 1996 review of AFOSRÕs math-
ematical and computer sciences program.22National Research Council, Review of AFOSR Programs in Mathematical and ComputerSciences, National Academy Press: Washington, D.C. (1996).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDING MECHANISMS89Recommendation. To accommodate the challenges of an expanded pro-gram in IS&TÑwhich is called for because of the pervasiveness of IS&T in
network-enabled Air Force operationsÑAFOSR should not only continue
to build a strong, world-class base of PIs but should also develop highly
interactive research communities of PIs with common goals and bench-
marks, probably focused on the grand challenges suggested in Chapter 7.
In some cases this will be possible through multidisciplinary activities
(MURIs, PRETS, etc.). In others it will be essential to develop teams of
researchers, perhaps on the scale of MURIs, to meet the challenges posed
by the Air Force long-term goals.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.909Future Considerations
PROGRAM ORGANIZATIONChapter 2 explained why the Air Force is growing increasingly relianton IS&T. Consistent with this explanation is the committeeÕs recommen-
dation that AFOSR significantly increase the Air Force investment in basic
research in IS&T, supporting such areas as decision-support systems for
all levels of command, real-time control of air and ground systems with
or without humans in the loop, human-system interfaces and interactions,
and ubiquitous connectivity of commanders, deployed forces, and manned
and unmanned systems.Currently, AFOSR is organized into four directorates: Physics andElectronics, Aerospace and Materials Sciences, Chemistry and Life Sci-
ences, and Mathematics and Space Sciences. The Mathematics and Space
Sciences Directorate has a mix of programs that include topics such as
dynamics and control, systems software and reliability, artificial intelli-
gence, and information fusion. Nowhere in this breakout of topics does
the term IS&T appear. In fact, as noted elsewhere in this report, the IS&T
efforts are spread over multiple programs, such as those listed above. As
it reviewed the available AFOSR information by topic and by budget, the
committee had difficulty in determining the full scope of what could be
categorized as IS&T research. While this might not hamper staff within
AFOSR and AFRL, it could be an unnecessary hurdle for interfacing with
outside organizations.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS91Recommendation. Given the Air ForceÕs increasing reliance on IS&T, itsrole in enabling revolutionary concepts in military affairs, and the
committeeÕs recommendation to significantly increase the investment in
basic research for IS&T, the committee recommends that AFOSR consider
identifying IS&T as a major area within AFOSR. In fact, as the investment
in that area increases over time, AFOSR should consider organizing a
separate directorate for IS&T and related topics. Given the committeeÕs
recommendation regarding human-system interfaces and interactions, it
would seem appropriate to also consider alignment of all human-system
and human-effects-related research within this separate directorate.RECRUITMENT OF PROGRAM MANAGERSWith the recommended increase in funding for IS&T and the corre-sponding increase in scope of the research investment, AFOSR will be
faced with a staffing challenge. This challenge can be viewed as an opportu-
nity to 
reach out to the IS&T research community to recruit new programmanagers. The DARPA model for recruiting and rotating program man-
agers has quite successfully made use of the Intergovernmental Personnel
Act and the more recent Experimental Personnel Hiring Authority. The
former has been used to recruit candidates from universities and non-
profit organizations such as federally funded research and development
centers (FFRDCs), while the latter has been used to bring candidates from
industry to government for a limited term to participate as program
managers in exciting new areas of R&D. These tools have been used at the
program manager and higher levels with great success. Aside from attract-
ing the best and brightest from universities, nonprofits, and industry,these tools also rotate program managers out of the agency and back to
endeavors of their choice when their term is completed. AFOSR then has
an opportunity to both staff the recommended growth in IS&T and main-
tain the vitality of the area by bringing in new program managers as
replacements for those who are rotating out.Recommendation. AFOSR has an opportunity as well as a challenge tostaff the recommended increase in funding for research in IS&T.  The com-

mittee recommends that AFOSR take advantage of mechanisms such as
the Intergovernmental Personnel Act to recruit new program managers
and, possibly, directorate directors for some if not all of the expanded
investment in IS&T. This approach would facilitate continued vitality in
this important and growing area of research.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSA MECHANISM FOR FOSTERINGEXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH IN IS&TThe committee recommends that AFOSR encourage and supportmore experimental science in its IS&T program. While visiting the Air
Combat Command in April 2005, the committee was briefed on an inter-
esting approach to collaboration, the Information Operations Innovation
Network. This network, while not a research effort, facilitates collaboration
and coordination among technologists and operators in the development
of experiments and supporting capabilities; it is used for carrying out tech-
nology demonstrations of new concepts in response to capability gaps.
Because the specifications for team-focused, network-enabled systems are
poorly defined both technically and operationally, there is a real need for
joint experiments involving R&D staff and Air Force operations personnel
working with early prototype systems. The experiments would then help
to define the system requirements, and researchers would gain a tangible
understanding of Air Force goals and emerging capabilities. The chal-
lenges posed by distributed information systems and their underlying
science and technology require a new approach, and the committee rec-
ommends establishing team-focused experimental environments for R&D,
data collection, experimentation, and demonstration of new concepts.
Examples of issues that present a serious challenge to both researchers
and Air Force operators include these:¥How to control distributed systems with or without humans in theloop.¥How to support decision-making by sharing information andintentions.¥How to fuse and manage heterogeneous information.¥How to test and evaluate techniques for offensive and defensiveinformation warfare.The committee uses the label Òdistributed research and experimentationenvironmentÓ (DREE) to describe a shared computation infrastructure

that supports experimentation within a community of researchers. As the
name implies, DREEs could be virtual centers (geographically distrib-
uted), and they could involve a mixture of physical and simulated assets.
In some cases, the scale or complexity of the experimental environment
might be too great to emulate in a DREE. In such cases, modeling and
simulation might enable experimentation and collaboration among dis-
tributed participants through micro world descriptions that are domain
faithful but presented in an unclassified environment. Such modeling and
simulation capabilities would enable a proactive discovery process
through which Air Force IT challenges come into clearer focus. In addi-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS93tion to their technical goals, DREEs would themselves add to the AirForceÕs experience base in team-focused, network-enabled systems and
contribute to interactions across various Air Force R&D communities.Such collaborative experimental arrangements are not unprecedented
in research. For instance, consider the following from the economics
research community:1Computational laboratories (CLs) are computational frameworks thatpermit the study of complex system behaviors by means of controlled
and replicable experiments. Agent-based computational economics(ACE) is the computational study of economies modeled as dynamicsystems of interacting agents. ACE researchers generally conduct their
studies in the context of CLs.Research groups frequently cite the need for support to create shareddata sets, testbed environments, and other infrastructure that will facili-
tate access to larger, scalable problems and community sharing. For
example, consider the following excerpt from a 2003 report on strategic
direction for artificial intelligence research at Cornell University:2A common theme that emerged in all workshop sessions was the impor-tance of data sets and testbeds. . . . Data sets and testbeds also have apowerful multiplier effect on research progress. A compelling, freelyavailable data set may motivate hundreds of separate research studies,
most by researchers with no connection (funding or otherwise) to theoriginal producers of the data set. Particularly in areas where it is diffi-cult to identify in advance the most promising technologies, the resulting
breadth of voluntary effort can be crucial. . . . Support for the creation offreely available, sharable resources is likely to do more to move forwardAI research in areas of interest to the Air Force than any other single
action.There are several examples of analogous testbeds already in use inthe IS&T research community:¥Many researchers in robotics are participants in periodic RoboCups.3These events are exciting, involve a large community of researchers,and provide a challenging shared domain for research in per-
ception, adversarial planning, cooperative agent behavior, and
machine learning.1Available at http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/acedemos.htm.2Available at http://www.cis.cornell.edu/iisi/SRDAI-workshop/srdai-iisi-report-2003.doc.3Available at http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/acedemos.htm.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS¥Similar benefits of sharing and leverage were seen in the DARPAspoken language experiments from the early 1990s. A large data
set based on military messages was prepared each year, and this
was used in a community-wide competition to benchmark progress
in spoken language research. DARPA-funded research groups
were expected to participate, and leading commercial groups joined
in; competition was intense and progress was rapid. The DARPA
investment was in creating and providing data sets that were
shared with the research community. Sharing in this domain
required no expensive testbeds or equipment, only shared data sets
and performance metrics. Replication of experiments was encour-
aged and, in fact, conducted intensely. It created an understanding
of how different approaches could achieve community-leading
performance according to the metrics.¥In the domain of network services, PlanetLab4 has evolved as acommunity-supported, distributed multiuser platform that serves
as a testbed for overlay networks. It currently consists of 578
machines hosted by 275 sites in more than 25 countries. Most of the
machines are hosted by research institutions, although some are
elsewhere (e.g., on Internet2Õs Abilene backbone). The key objec-
tive of the community-developed and community-shared software
is to support distributed virtualizationÑthat is, to allocate a slice
of PlanetLabÕs networkwide hardware resources to an application.
This allows an application to run across all (or some) of the machines
around the globe, where at any given time multiple applications
may be running in different slices of PlanetLab. The advantage to
researchers using PlanetLab is that they are able to experiment with
new services under real-world conditions and at large scale. An
arrangement offering capabilities would be of great value to the
Air Force as it tries to develop a better understanding of the design,
operation, and management of large, complex networks and sys-
tems and of the incorporation of such systems into Air Force opera-
tions. Although PlanetLab is more limited in scope than what the
committee has in mind, it is given here as an example that works.These examples have three things in common:
¥Each is directed at an exciting problem area.¥Each involves a research community that is willing, or encouraged,to share research ideas, experiments in which they investigate those4Available at http://www.planet-lab.org.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS95ideas, and results. Ad hoc teams focused on similar problemsspawn new ideas at the boundaries of their own idea sets.¥Each research community supports an infrastructure that can beshared, which may be as modest as data sets and repositories for
reports and shared code.The committee urges AFOSR to work with other parts of the Air Forceto establish DREEs as analogous testbeds that will allow researchers and
Air Force users to experiment with prototype IS&T concepts and systems.
Besides the inherent benefit of adding this experimental component to
other IS&T research efforts, such an approach would serve as an intellectual
crossroads between the scientific and operational communities in support
of the scientific discovery process. The approach also gives researchers
something very concrete to work on, perhaps including real Air Force
data and proposed system specifications, so they can measure the quality
of their solutions. The committee was encouraged by a presentation of the
AFRL chief technologist, who described how a C2 wind tunnel could pro-
vide a computationally based experimentation framework for exploring
new technologies and their operational utility. This is an area of great
interest to senior Air Force leadership, which has requested a study in
2006 by the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board on rapid, affordable ex-
perimentation.The committee believes that DREEs would be useful for each of themain areas of research covered in this report. A DREE for information
management, for instance, would enable the associated communityÑ
including universities, AFRL directorates, and perhaps FFRDCsÑto create
sample data sets and develop associated queries that illustrate how the
data are to be integrated. A DREE related to network-centric systems
would allow exercises that might generate concrete performance require-
ments, which are otherwise difficult to identify. While exercises are
ongoing, operational Air Force participants could clarify their real, not
hypothetical, needs; IS&T applied researchers could investigate engineer-
ing issues with the prototype network; basic researchers in IS&T could
experiment with fundamental changes (to, for example, communication
protocols); and HSI researchers could instrument the experiments and

learn from them.The DREE approach to experimental science should not be prohibi-tive in cost, because the necessary network infrastructure is rapidly fall-
ing into place and it may become possible to leverage the investments in
testbeds by other AFRL directorates. For example, a research version of
the distributed mission training (DMT) environment housed in AFRLÕs
Human Effectiveness Directorate might support experimental science in
areas ranging from control of UAVs to decision-making in real-time envi-Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSronments. The committeeÕs intent is that DREEs be established withoutexpending basic research funds, which would only be used to support the
involvement of basic researchers. Planning for such facilities should be
coordinated with AFRL and the Air Combat Command and funded with
6.2 and 6.3 money.Recommendation. The committee recommends that as AFOSR expandsits investment in basic IS&T research, it work with its 6.2 and 6.3 partners
to establish DREEs, which will not only speed the pace of research but
also facilitate the transition of critical technology.  The committeeÕs intent

is that 6.1 money not be used to establish these DREEs; they would be set
up by the technical directorates of AFRL or by operational arms of the Air
Force, which would use them to exercise early prototypes of complex,
software-intensive systems and provide feedback and guidance to the
research community. Basic researchers supported by 6.1 funds would con-
tribute to those exercises and extract lessons for further research.The concepts proposed for experimentation can start small and laterscale up to fully supported DREEs, as deemed appropriate to support
experimental research. Therefore, the committee recommends that AFOSR
start small but soon. In its next broad agency announcement that deals
with IS&T research, AFOSR could request an optional taskÑnamely, an
experiment that the proposer would create, publish, and share with other
research groups. AFOSR could also consider holding summer workshops
on DREE topics for doctoral students. For instance, AFRLÕs Human Effec-
tiveness Directorate is interested in revolutionary approaches to DMT and
would like a capability that is more like a free-play video game than the
current tightly scripted scenarios. Students at a summer workshop could
learn about Air Force needs in DMT, discuss and debate basic research
issues that have to be resolved to advance the associated technology, and
construct a DREE that they would take back to their respective universi-
ties for use in their research. In short, AFOSR, using only modest funding,
could seed the development of a DREE and its associated community.AFOSR should collaborate with other organizations to support thedevelopment and use of DREEs. For example, DODÕs High Performance
Computing Modernization Office (HPCMO), through its Defense Research
and Engineering Network, supports over 4,300 scientists and engineers at
government laboratories, universities, and industrial research laborato-
ries. HPCMO sponsors an annual call for Òchallenge problemsÓ and
invests up to 25 percent of its funding to solve these challenge problems.
AFRL might consider leveraging its own funding with some of HPMCOÕs
Òchallenge problemÓ funding to create one or more DREEs focused on Air
Force-specific IS&T needs.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesBasic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99AMeeting AgendasMEETING 1ROME, NEW YORKThursday, February 24, 2005Closed session8:00 amWorking breakfast
Open session9:30Car pool to AFRL Information Directorate (AFRL/IF)
10:00Welcome 
and introductions (Alan McLaughlin, committeechair)10:10Charge to the committee and discussion of goals (Clifford
Rhoades, head of Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate,
AFOSR).10:30Overview of Air Force IS&T priorities and Air Force long-
term challenges (Robert Herklotz, AFOSR).11:15Overview of the AFRL/IF and its response to Air Force IS&T
priorities and Air Force long-term challenges (Nort Fowler,
chief scientist, AFRL/IF).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS12:30 pmLunch
1:15Parallel sessions.  Committee breaks into groups to learn more
about AFRL/IFÕs major areas.3:15Break

3:30Overview of
 IS&T-related research sponsored by the AFOSRMathematics and Space Sciences Directorate (AFOSR/NM);
summary of investments and funding mechanisms; discus-
sion of AFOSR/NMÕs program-planning process and reviews
(Clifford Rhoades, head, AFOSR/NM).4:30Discuss with Air Force staff the flow of knowledge between
AFOSR/NM and AFRL/IF, AFRLÕs connections to the broader
research community, the transition of advances from AFOSR
and AFRL into Air Force technology, and other issues raised
during the day.5:30Adjourn
Closed session7:00 pmCommittee working dinner
Friday, February 25, 2005Open session8:00 amWorking breakfast

8:30Discussion with Brendan Godfrey, AFOSR director, on inter-
play between AFOSR and other AFRL directorates in address-
ing Air Force S&T goals and how the Air Force decides whether
or not it needs to sponsor or conduct R&D in a given area,
particularly for R&D related to IS&T and command and control.9:15Discussion with Shankar Sastry, University of California at
Berkeley, and Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University,
both members of the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, on
the recent review of AFOSRÕs IS&T research.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A1019:45Discussion with Clifford Rhoades and other AFRL/IF and
AFOSR/NM staff, as needed, about the information received
on February 24 to identify gaps and how to fill them.  Identify

site visits, telephone calls, and background information that
the committee should pursue.11:00Break

Closed session
11:15Committee discussion of preliminary impressions

12:15 pmLunch
1:00Report from Elwyn Berlekamp, who attended the January
program review of AFOSRÕs research consortium on space
situational awareness.1:30Develop initial points of committee consensus and identify
topics for investigation.3:00Develop plans for site visits and identify any additionalinformation needs.3:30Adjourn
MEETING 2HAMPTON, VIRGINIATuesday, April 26, 2005Closed session7:45 amWorking breakfast
Open session8:45Committee will be picked up by a shuttle from the hotel lobby
for travel to Langley AFB.9:15Welcome (Alan McLaughlin, committee chair)
Overview of the Air Combat Command (Janet Fender, ACC
chief scientist, and Gen Maluda, head of ACC Communica-
tions and Directorate).Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS9:45Presentation 
on communications and information systems(Col Kemp).10:30Presentation on the Air 
Force Information Warfare Center(John Kretzer).11:15Presentation on the Operations Directorate for Information
Operations (Lt Col Lance).11:45Presentation on requirements, ACC Information Operations
(Col Anninos and Lt Col Sowell).12:15 pmLunch with open discussion
1:00Presentation on selected IS&T challenge areas identified by
the C2ISR Center (Jon Vona).3:00Presentation on funding mechanisms used by AFOSR/NM
(John Tangney), followed by general discussion with AFOSR/
NM program managers.4:00Wrap-up discussions

5:00Adjourn
Closed session7:00Working dinner
Wednesday, April 27, 2005Closed session8:00 amWorking breakfast

8:30Discussion of preliminary drafts
NoonLunch
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A10312:45 pmContinue discussions. Develop plans for additional informa-
tion gathering and writing. Issue assignments.2:00Adjourn
MEETING 3WASHINGTON, D.C.Monday, June 6, 2005Closed session8:00  amWorking breakfast

8:30Discuss progress since last meeting and plan for the current
meeting.9:45Break
Open session
10:00Discuss goals of study with Tom Cruse, chief technologist,
AFRL. Brendan Godfrey, head of AFOSR, will also participate.Closed session
11:15Discuss Chapters 1 and 2 of the draft report

12:15 pmLunch
1:00Impressions of AFRLÕs Human Engineering Directorate(Steve Cross, based on his recent visit there).1:30Discuss Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of the draft report

3:30Break

3:45Discuss Chapters 7 and 8 of the draft report

5:00Identify questions for tomorrowÕs discussion with AFOSR
program managers.Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDS5:30Reception
6:30Working dinner

8:00Adjourn
Tuesday, June 7, 2005Open session8:00 amWorking breakfast

8:30Discussion with AFOSR program managers regarding their
current program and the committeeÕs open questions.Closed session9:30Revisit topics from MondayÕs discussion
10:00Break

10:15Discuss Chapter 6 of the draft report; convergence on research
priorities under different funding scenarios.NoonLunch

12:45 pmIdentify additional research topics and/or information-gath-
ering trips needed to explore topics or develop background.
Identify other issues and recommendations.2:00Detailed plans for completing the report

3:30Adjourn
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105BAcronyms
ACCAir Combat Command
AFOSRAir Force Office of Scientific Research

AFRLAir Force Research Laboratory

AFRL/IFAFRL Information Directorate

AFRL/NMAFOSR Mathematics and Space Sciences Directorate

AJantijamming
BAAbroad agency announcement

C4ISRcommand, control, computing, communications, intelligence,surveillance, and reconnaissanceDARPADefense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DEPSCoRDOD Experimental Program to Stimulate CompetitiveResearchDMTdistributed mission training

DODDepartment of Defense

DoSdenial of service

DREEdistributed research and experimentation environment
EAIenterprise application integration
EIIenterprise information integration

ETLextract, transform, and load
GIGGlobal Information Grid
GPSGlobal Positioning System
Basic Research in Information Science and Technology for Air Force NeedsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106BASIC RESEARCH FOR AIR FORCE IS&T NEEDSHBCU/MIHistorically Black Colleges and Universities or MinorityInstitutionsHCIhuman-computer interface

HPCMOHigh Performance Computing Modernization Office

HSIhuman-system interactions
IOinformation operations
IS&Tinformation science and technology

ISRintelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance

ITinformation technology
JBIJoint Battlespace Infosphere

LPDlow probability of detection
LPIlow probability of intercept
MACMedia Access Control
MAVmicro air vehicle

MIMOmultiple input, multiple output

MoBIESModel-Based Integration of Embedded Software

MPEG-7Moving Picture Coding Experts Group standard No. 7

MURImultidisciplinary university research initiative
NRCNational Research Council

PERTProgram Evaluation and Review Technique
PRETPartnership for Research Excellence and Transition
R&Dresearch and development
RPCremote procedure call
S&Tscience and technology
SOAservice-oriented architecture

SOAPSimple Object Access Protocol

STTRSmall Business Technology Transfer
TCPTransport Control Protocol

UAVunmanned air vehicle
URIuniversity research initiative

UWBultrawideband
XMLextensible markup language
