DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11573Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, andCultural Dimensions of Biometric Systems59 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10125-7 | DOI 10.17226/11573Kristen Batch, Lynette I. Millett, and Joseph N. Pato, Editors; WhitherBiometrics Committee; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Divisionon Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilSummary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Summary of a Workshop on the 
Technology, Policy, and 
Cultural Dimensions of 
Biometric Systems   
    Kristen Batch, Lynette I. Millett, Joseph N. Pato, Editors 
  
 Whither Biometrics Committee  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 

 
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences 

   
  
   
 
 
 
   THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
Washington, D.C. 
www.nap.edu 
  
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fi
fth Street, N.W.  Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are draw
n from the councils of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen fo
r their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance. 

 
Support for this project was provided by the Defe
nse Advanced Research Projects Agency (Award 
No. N00174-03-C-0074) and by the Central Intellig
ence Agency and the Department of Homeland 
Security with assistance from the National 
Science Foundation (Award No. IIS-0344584).  Any 
opinions expressed in this material are those of th
e authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the agencies and organizations that provided support for the project. 

 International Standard Book Number 0-309-10125-5 
 
Cover designed by Jennifer M. Bishop. 

 
Additional copies of this report are available from: 
 The National Academies Press 

500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285 

Washington, DC  20055 

800/624-6242 

202/334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area) 
http://www.nap.edu  
Copyright 2006 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 
  
 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished 
scholars engaged in scientific and engineering resear
ch, dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
 Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 
the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate th
at requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Ci
cerone is president of the National Academy of 
Sciences. The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National 
Academy of Sciences, as a paralle
l organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its 
administration and in the selection of its members,
 sharing with the National Academy of Sciences 
the responsibility for advising the federal governme
nt.  The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting na
tional needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure 
the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters 
pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institu
te acts under the responsibility given to the National 
Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, 
upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical 
care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technol
ogy with the Academy™s purposes of furthering 
knowledge and advising the federa
l government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies 
determined by the Academy, the Council has beco
me the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Acad
emy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engin
eering communities.  The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medi
cine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ivWHITHER BIOMETRICS COMMITTEE  
 JOSEPH N. PATO, Hewlett-Packard Labs, 
Chair BOB BLAKLEY, IBM Tivoli Software JEANETTE BLOMBERG, IBM Almaden Research Center 

JOSEPH P. CAMPBELL, Massachusetts Institu
te of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory 
GEORGE T. DUNCAN, Carnegie Mellon University 

DELORES ETTER, U.S. Naval Academy* 
GEORGE R. FISHER, Prudential-Wachovia (retired) 
STEVEN P. GOLDBERG, Georgetown University Law Center 

PETER T. HIGGINS, Higgins-Hermansen Group, LLC 

PETER B. IMREY, Cleveland Clinic  

ANIL K. JAIN, Michigan State University 
GORDON LEVIN, The Walt Disney World Company 
LAWRENCE D. NADEL, Mitretek Systems 

JAMES L. WAYMAN, San Jose State University 
 Staff 
 LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer 
KRISTEN BATCH, Associate Program Officer 
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant 

   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
__________________________ 
*Dr. Etter resigned from the committee in November 2
005 upon her appointment 
as assistant secretary, 
Research, Development, and Acquisition, U.S. Navy. 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD 
 JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair ERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC 
DAVID D. CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
CSTB chair emeritus
 WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University 

MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center 

DAVID J. DEWITT, University of Wisconsin, Madison 

DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles 
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University 
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation 

JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation 

MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley 
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley 
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University 
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation, 
CSTB member emeritus 
TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University 

TOM M. MITCHELL, Carnegie Mellon University 

FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University 
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University 
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC 

JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University 

 
RICHARD E. ROWBERG, Acting Director  

JON EISENBERG, Acting Associate Director 
KRISTEN BATCH, Associate Program Officer JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program Associate 

JANET BRISCOE, Manager, Program Operations 

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate 

MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant 
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer 

JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant 

TED SCHMITT, Program Officer 

GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program Assistant 

BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff Assistant 
 For more information on CSTB, see its Web site
 at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,  National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.
W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or 
e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii   Preface     
  
   
 
 
 
BiometricsŠthe automatic identification or id
entity verification of human individuals on the 
basis of physiological and behavioral character
isticsŠis receiving much attention from many 
quarters.  Promoted as a means to combat terrorism
, to increase security, to boost efficiency, and to 
lessen inconvenience, biometrics is being consider
ed, developed, and deployed in corporations, 
government agencies, and nonprofit institutions. 
 Questions persist, however, about the effectiveness 
of biometric security measures, biometric systems™ usability and manageability along with their 
appropriateness in widely varying contexts, the 
effects of federal privacy policy on use and 
deployment, and the social impact of such technologies.   
In 2003 the Committee on Authentication Technologies and Their Privacy Implications 
issued the report Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy. 
 Biometric technologies were one of several authentication technol
ogies considered in that report.   Subsequent 
to its publication, the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board held several discussions 
with various federal agencies inte
rested in biometrics.  Jonathon Phillips (then at the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency [DARPA]), Gary
 Strong (then at the Department of Homeland 
Security [DHS]), and Andrew Kirby (of the Ce
ntral Intelligence Agency [CIA]) were active 
participants in stimulating the discussions and m
oving them forward.  The discussions resulted in 
agreement to undertake a comprehensive assessment 
of biometrics that examines current capabilities, 
future possibilities, and the role of government in
 their development.  Funding for the project was 
obtained from DARPA and from the CIA and DHS with assistance from the National Science 
Foundation.  The Whither Biometrics Committ
ee was appointed to conduct the study.  
This report is the outcome of the first stages 
of the committee™s work, which culminated in a 
public workshop organized by the committee and at
tended by members of industry, government, and 
academia.  Held on March 15 and 16, 
2005, in Washington, D.C., the workshop featured a variety of 
participants invited to present their views on issues surrounding biometric technologies and systems 
(see Appendix A for the workshop agenda).  Five panels were organized, and each panelist gave a 
short presentation that addressed the theme of th
e panel.  Each panel session was followed by 
extensive discussion involving all of the works
hop participants and moderated by a committee 
member.  This report is the committee™s summary 
of the panelists™ presentations and the ensuing 
discussions. Although the summary is based on presenta
tions and discussion at the workshop, the 
participants™ comments do not necessarily reflect th
e views of the committee, nor does the summary 
present findings or recommendations of the National Research Council.  In fact, the committee took 

care in writing this report simply to summarize the 
discussions and to avoid any bias or appearance of 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS 
 viii bias in favor of one opinion or another. The comm
ittee limited itself to recording the overall sense of 
each individual panel session and did not attempt to
 distill sentiments across panels. Further, this 
summary is not intended to be an outline of th
e committee™s final report; topics that were not 
discussed at the workshop are not mentioned, however important they might be. 
In the second stage of the study, the committee 
will analyze the information gathered in the 
workshop and summarized here, along with informat
ion and input from other experts and related 
studies. This analysis phase will deliver a final re
port (planned for release in 2006) with findings and 
recommendations from the committee. 
The Whither Biometrics Committee consists of 14 members from industry and academia who 
are experts in different aspects of distributed systems, computer security, biometrics (of various 
flavors), systems engineering, human factors, and statistics, as well as in computer science and 

engineering (see Appendix B for committee and staff biographies). 
The committee thanks the many individuals who 
contributed to its work, including the project 
sponsors that enabled this activity.  It appreci
ates the panelists™ willingness to address the questions 
posed to them and is grateful for their insight
s.  It further wishes to recognize the energetic 
participation of the workshop attendees as a group. Th
eir active engagement stimulated a more robust 
discussion than might have been expected. Additi
onally, the reviewers of the draft summary report 
provided insightful and constructive comments that contributed significantly to its clarity. 
The committee is particularly grateful to the CSTB staff for their work.  Lynette Millett, 
Senior Program Officer, serves as the study director 
and has been instrumental in guiding this project 
from concept to practice with grace, humor, and ap
lomb. Kristen Batch went well beyond the call of 
duty in preparing the draft report for review.  Margaret Huynh has been ably coordinating logistics for 
meetings and providing administrative support to th
e committee between meetings.  She and Gloria 
Westbrook provided excellent staff support during the wo
rkshop.  Thanks also to Janet Briscoe, who 
provided oversight for the workshop, and to the edit
orial staff, Susan Maurizi and Liz Fikre, in the 
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences.
    
  Joe Pato, Chair Whither Biometrics Committee
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ix   Acknowledgment of Reviewers   
    
 
   
 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Research Council™s (NRC™s) Report Review Committee.
  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 
assist the institution in making its published report 
as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, 
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
confidential to protect the integrity of the delib
erative process.  We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report: 
 Vijayakumar Bhagavatula, Carnegie Mellon University, 

Tora K. Bikson, RAND Corporation, 

Austin Hicklin, Mitretek Systems,  
Wendy Kellogg, IBM, 
Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon University, 

James Matey, Sarnoff Corporation, 

K.A. Taipale, Center for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology Policy, and 
Andrew Viterbi, Viterbi Group, LLC.  Although the reviewers listed above have 
provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the 
conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the 
final draft of the report before its release.  The review of this report was ove
rseen by Stephen Kent of 
BBN Technologies.  Appointed by the National R
esearch Council, he was responsible for making 
certain that an independent examination of this 
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were ca
refully considered.  Responsibility for the final 
content of this report rests entirely with
 the authoring committee and the institution.
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi   Contents     
  
   
 
 
 
1 OVERVIEW OF WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS        1 
      2 SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS      5
            APPENDIXES            

A Workshop Agenda         35 
B Biosketches of Committee Members       40 
     WHAT IS CSTB?          47 
   Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1 1  Overview of Workshop Discussions   
   
 
 
   
 
 
This report summarizes a workshop on the technology, policy, and cultural dimensions of 
biometrics systems held March 15 and 16, 2005, 
in Washington, D.C., under the auspices of the 
Whither Biometrics Committee. Several items should 
be kept in mind when reading this report:  
 • The workshop focused on a subset of areas th
at the committee believed would provide a 
basis for its work during the remaining study pe
riod.  There are areas of direct relevance 
to the study that are missing from the workshop agenda, either because of time 
constraints or because the panelists chose to address different areas.  (For example, some 
application domains were not discussed explicitly, although it should be clear from the 

context when an issue applies to biometri
c systems broadly and when it applies to a 
particular system.)  The committee plans to ga
ther input on those domains in subsequent 
activities; feedback and additional input fro
m readers of this report are welcome. 
• Given the diverse backgrounds of participants at the workshop, a variety of technologies 
and measures were discussed, ranging from fi
ngerprints to facial recognition to DNA.  
While the applicability of high-level principl
es and systems considerations will change 
depending on a number of factors (for exampl
e, latent fingerprints can be captured long 
after a person has left the area, whereas 
a voiceprint disappears without a recording 
device available to capture it in real time), this report does not attempt to tease apart those 
considerations in detail. The committee™s fina
l report is expected to be a much more 
elaborated synthesis and analysis of what 
can be generalized about biometrics and will 
incorporate aspects of the workshop™s di
scussions as well as additional input received 
over the course of the study. 
• The committee has chosen not to extend the di
scussions in this first-phase report, instead reserving that task for the final report.  Consequently, this report does not provide a free-
standing overview of the current state of bi
ometrics technology, biometrics research, 
current application domains (some of which we
re not touched on at this workshop), or 
anything other than the views expressed at th
is particular workshop.  For readability and 
to promote understanding, background material
 on some of the topics raised has been 
interspersed with the record of presentations and discussions.   
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  2 Listed below are some of the main themes ar
ising from each panel session.  The themes are 
not conclusions or findings of the committee; they 
are ideas extracted from each panel that seem to be 
the main thrusts of each discussion.  Each panel 
session discussion is more fully elaborated in Chapter 2.  
  SESSION 1:  SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL CHALLENGES FOR BIOMETRIC 
TECHNOLOGIES AND SYSTEMS, INCLUDING SYSTEM INTEGRATION, 
ARCHITECTURE, AND CONTEXTS OF USE 
 In Session 1, participants from industry, government, and academic research centers 
discussed the state of the art of biometric sy
stems, the current bottlenecks, and areas where 
performance could be improved.  Among the different 
types of biometrics, three were highlighted by 
the panelistsŠfingerprint, iris, and faceŠas being those accepted by the International Civil Aviation 
Organization for use in border-crossing documents. 
All panelists agreed that biometric systems 
cannot be made perfectŠthat is, the focus should be
 on how to evaluate and reduce, rather than 
eliminate, error rates.  The challenges relevant 
in varying degrees to all biometric systems were 
grouped into three categories by the panelists, with
 primary emphasis during this discussion given to 
the first category of challenges. 
 • Improving the accuracy of biometric technol
ogies and related performance evaluations 
through research on sensor resolution and ergonomics, algorithms and techniques for 

biometric fusion, characteristics of biometric feature spaces, and scientific methods to 
better quantify biometric systems™ pe
rformance under realistic conditions.  
• Systematically and thoughtfully integrati
ng biometric systems with other security 
systems.   
• Promoting interoperability of biometric system
s, especially internationally, through a 
framework of standards, test methodologies, and independent evaluations. 
  SESSION 2:  MEASUREMENT, STATISTICS, TESTING, AND EVALUATION  
 Session 2 explored issues surrounding the measurement, statistics, testing, and evaluation of 
biometrics and biometric systems.    It should be noted that statistical analysis in the context of 
biometric systems is and can be employed for a range of purposes, including assessments of the 

underlying technology, analysis of user behavior, da
ta mining, and so on.  Indeed, such issues were 
discussed throughout the workshop in several different
 contexts.  Questions raised for this panel 
included these: Do biometric systems work? What is 
meant by ﬁworkﬂ in the context of a biometrics 
system?  
What
 is being measured, tested, and evaluated,
 and how can confidence in the experiments be created? The panelists presented a range of pe
rspectives on these issues, from broad explorations 
of the nature of experimentation and representativ
e populations to discussions of specific evaluation 
regimens and real-world deployment at a major in
ternational airport.  Several overarching themes 
arose:  
 • Evaluating biometric systems serves three purposes: to guide and support research and 
development, to assess the readiness of a sy
stem for deployment, and to monitor 
performance of a system in the field.  
• As in many other domains, appropriate e
xperimental design and solid statistical 
underpinnings are needed to produce effective testing and evaluation regimes. There is no 

one-size-fits-all solution, given the many types of systems that are deployed.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS 
 3• Data and data selection choices, which include understanding the reference and expected 
user populations, can have a large impact on the accuracy and effectiveness of testing and 

evaluation.   SESSION 3:  LEGISLATIVE, POLICY, HUMAN, AND CULTURAL FACTORS 
 In Session 3 panelists were asked to address the 
legal, policy, social, and cultural aspects of 
biometric systems, as well as the broad implications 
for society of the collection and use of biometric 
data in different contexts at both national and internati
onal levels.  Major threads of presentations and discussions at this session included the following:   • Three different modes of identifica
tion evidenceŠmitochondrial DNA, facial 
recognition, and latent fingerprintsŠwere di
scussed in relation to ﬁgeneral acceptanceﬂ 
and ﬁscientific validityﬂŠtwo legal standards 
for the admissibility of evidence in a court 
of law. • Lessons for biometric system security we
re drawn from the current uses of Social 
Security numbers (SSNs) and the growing inci
dence of identity fraud.  The proposition of 
a new law restricting the sale and disclosure of biometric identifiers was actively debated. 
• The meaning of ﬁprivacyﬂ in relation to th
e use of biometrics technologies was discussed in terms of legal principles and some preliminary public opinion survey research.  
• Issues related to the collection and use of 
data generated by biometric technologies and 
associated fair information practices were di
scussed in relation to an earlier study on the 
use of radio-frequency identification tags (RFIDs
) and access cards in the private sector.      
• The international legal and cultural dimensions of privacy were discussed, including their 
implications for the use of biometrics.  
 
 SESSION 4:  SCENARIOS AND APPLICATIONS  
 Session 4 participants were asked to discuss the 
impact of different application contexts on 
the performance of biometric systems and to describ
e general characteristics of successfully deployed 
biometric systems.  Other topics covered in this
 session included approaches to the fusion of multiple 
biometrics and methods for integrating biometrics into
 particular system contexts and environments. 
Among the themes that emerged during the discussion were the following: 
 • The challenges identified for biometric iden
tity management applications will vary 
depending on the application requirements, sy
stem scale, and the security environment.  
• Nontechnical factors such as human factors and user training can have significant impacts 
on biometric system performance. 
• Standards and interoperability are important 
for better system performance and the global 
use of biometric systems.  
 
 SESSION 5:  TECHNICAL AND POLICY ASPECTS OF INFORMATION  
SHARING AND COOPERATION  
 Session 5 panelists were asked to discuss a variety of issues related to biometric data sharing, 
including technical challenges as they relate to sy
nchronicity and connectivity of data on the one hand 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  4 and to security and privacy of data on the other hand; policy considerations for sharing biometric data 
between agencies; and practical considerations of
 standards development and cross-jurisdictional cooperation. The following are some of the topics covered in this session: 
 • Newly established and long-standing biometric da
ta sharing applications at the state, 
national, and international leve
l were described in the contex
ts of military defense, law 
enforcement, and immigration.  Systems 
discussed included the Automated Biometric 
Identification System (ABIS), the Criminal Alien Identification System (CAIS), the 

Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identifica
tion System (IAFIS), and the United States 
Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) program. 
• Technical and policy challenges related to information sharing among large-scale 
biometric systems were addressed, including da
ta integrity and pr
ocedural analysis, consolidation of biometric informati
on, and integration of databases.  • Broader policy challenges of biometric information sharing also were discussed, 
including (1) the importance of evaluating biometric systems based on their context, 
purpose, and the policies they serve; (2) estab
lishing criteria to determine the usefulness 
of data for decision making; and (3) institu
ting careful procedures for maintaining and 
sharing digital records.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 2  Summary of Panel Sessions and Presentations   
   
 
 
   
 SESSION 1:  SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL CHALLENGES FOR BIOMETRIC 
TECHNOLOGIES AND SYSTEMS, INCLUDING SYSTEM INTEGRATION, 
ARCHITECTURE, AND CONTEXTS OF USE  
 Panelists: Jean-Christophe Fondeur, James Matey, Sharath Panka
nti, Jonathon Phillips, and David 
Scott  Moderator: Anil Jain 
 In Session 1, participants from industry, government, and academic research centers 
discussed the state of the art of biometric sy
stems, the current bottlenecks, and areas where 
performance could be improved.  Among the different 
types of biometrics, three were highlighted by 
the panelistsŠfingerprint, iris, and faceŠas being those accepted by the International Civil Aviation 
Organization for use in border-crossing documents.
1 All panelists agreed that biometric systems 
cannot be made perfectŠthat is, the focus should be
 on how to evaluate and reduce, rather than 
eliminate, error rates.  The challenges relevant 
in varying degrees to all biometric systems were 
grouped in three categories by the panelists, with
 primary emphasis during this discussion given to 
the first category of challenges. 
 • Improving the accuracy of biometric technol
ogies and related performance evaluations 
through research on sensor resolution and ergonomics, algorithms and techniques for 

biometric fusion, characteristics of biometric feature spaces, and scientific methods to 

better quantify biometric systems™ pe
rformance under realistic conditions.  
• Systematically and thoughtfully integrati
ng biometric systems with other security 
systems.   
• Promoting interoperability of biometric system
s, especially internationally, through a 
framework of standards, test methodologies, and independent evaluations. 
 Underlying many of the scientific and technical challenges for biometric technologies and 
systems is the need to reduce the error and variab
ility that can be introduced at various stages. The 
                                                     
 1 While these particular types of biometrics were highlighted by these panelists, there are scientific and 
technical challenges across a range 
of biometrics, including non-imag
e-based measures such as voice 
recognition.  The committee™s final report will aim to incorporate and extend the discussions at this workshop 
and to include biometric measures and systems that 
were not specifically mentioned at this event.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  6 sources of error begin with insufficient distinguish
ing detail in the biometric identifiers themselves 
(such as faint fingerprint ridges) and extend to variability in their presentations to a sensing 
instrument (which, depending on what is being 
measured and how, may result from injury, changing 
lighting conditions, or the aging process). The capture
 of the biometric identifiers by the sensors is 
affected both by the human interaction with the 
sensor (such as assisted vs. nonassisted sample 
capture and cooperative vs. noncooperative system 
users) and by the precision of the acquisition 
device itself. The quality of the information extract
ed from the sensor and used in the subsequent 
matching process can vary as well. The metric used in the matching process to measure similarities 

may be faulty or lack sufficient information to 
determine a match or a mismatch. Furthermore, to 
understand how the various stages of the data acquisition and processing sequence affect the end 
performance of the biometric system and how they 
can be improved, each stage needs to be modeled 
independently as well as in different system architectures. 
 Biometrics and Accuracy  
 To increase the information captured by the biometric system and to facilitate matching, 
including the ability to discriminate between genuine
 and imposter matches, 
participants suggested that sensor improvements could involve higher resolution and a higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).  

In addition, sensors that collect multiple biom
etrics within one device or system may offer 
improvements with respect to a range of charact
eristics such as accuracy and efficiency and 
accommodation of a broader population.  Current rese
arch in this area aims to make multiple low-
resolution images from video surveillance systems us
able for facial recognition. An example was 
given of a system that uses several different cameras to track the location of a person in a room, with 

one of the cameras controlled by the location of th
e person™s head.  Such a system can log all the 
people who have been in a room and capture the 
frontal images that are best suited to facial 
recognition at higher resolution. 
Given that users of biometric systems may 
not be familiar with the technology, the 
ergonomics of the sensor and associated data capture 
hardware may affect the biometric information 
that is collected. To improve results, some participan
ts suggested that user interaction must be either 
intuitive or minimized to the point that there is 
little, or no, interaction with the acquisition device. 
The prototype discussed at the work
shop for on-the-move iris recogn
ition allows iris images to be 
captured while the individual is walking past the 
sensor.  This approach aims to minimize the 
acquisition constraints by expanding the standoff di
stance, or the distance of the acquisition system 
and the camera illumination from the subject, and th
e capture volume, or the area in which the 
biometric may be captured within a particular length of time.
2 However, additional improvements in 
algorithms will be required to further minimize 
these constraints as well as reduce orientation 
requirements that currently require a direct gaze into the camera.  
Continued algorithm development and better fu
sion of biometrics will generate more 
information to aid in the matching process. Though
 algorithms are continuing to improve and to 
process more information, additional research will 
be needed in coping with the variability of 
information over timeŠa consequence of the human
 aging processŠespecially for the processing of 
children and particularly for new biometric modes, 
such as three-dimensional facial recognition. For biometric fusion, panelists suggested potentially 
good combinations, such as face and finger, finger 
                                                     
 2 The performance of the off-the-shelf iris recognitio
n system described at the workshop, the LG-3000, 
includes a standoff of 10 cm, a capture volume of 0.04 liters, or 2 cm * 2 cm * 10 cm, within 3-10 seconds, and 
requires stationary use. In contrast, the on-the-move ir
is recognition prototype increases the camera standoff to 
3 m and illumination by 1 m, capture volume expands to 10 liters, or 60 cm * 30 cm * 5 cm, within 0.05 
seconds, and permits a walking speed of 1 m per second.
  Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 7and iris, and face and iris. Research in th
is area also includes mosaicking templates
3 that allow for the 
integration of multiple acquisitions of a 
biometric to enhance its representation. 
In addition to improving the collection, processing,
 and integration of biometric information, 
panelists also underscored the importance of unders
tanding more about biometrics feature spaces, 
including determining how many independent dimens
ions there are for each unimodal biometric, how 
many are required to determine distinctness, a
nd variation in feature space dimensionality across 
different biometric modes.  Biostatistical tools and 
processes could also be helpful in determining the 
effectiveness of dimensions in creating and usin
g representative but smaller test populations and in 
understanding changes in biometric identifiers over time. 
 Biometrics and Performance  
 Though many panelists believed that th
e performance issues surrounding biometric 
technologies are tractable, they agreed that resolv
ing these issues will require a systems approach 
rather than a focus on individual sensors and recognition algorithms.  This approach calls for 
collaboration by those involved with different stages 
of a biometric application and the integration of 
modalities, sensors, and application subcontextsŠfor
 example, the integration of liveliness detection 
with signal quality assessmentŠto promote better syst
em decisions. In general, effective system 
integration was considered to be necessary for improving accuracy and performance.   
To evaluate and to compare the current accuracy and improvements in accuracy of biometric 
systems, a more scientific approach to biometric 
performance research was suggested.  Participants 
recognized the progression of biometric research, 
from the early approach of selective performance 
tests to the recent use of more robust approach
es to technology evaluation, which can aid in 
organizing and comparing the results of the system under evaluation.
4  But some panelists stressed the 
importance of more systematic research.  Additiona
l progress could be made by the more systematic 
use of control groups (for example, testing a new algorithm against a control algorithm), by 
establishing confidence intervals to indicate statis
tical significance to achieve better consistency 
across studies,
5 and by aiming for repeatability of studies to verify performance improvements 
through independent evaluations. Various suggestions that were offered to develop a research agenda 
are described in Box 2.1.  
 Biometrics and Security 
 The panelists agreed that biometrics should not stand alone in security practices but should be 
systematically and thought
fully integrated with other security f
eatures.  Noting that a biometric (for 
example, a fingerprint or an iris pattern) itself is
 not secret, panelists observed that it is necessary to 
consider its integration with other security mech
anisms such as encryption and/or smart cards.  
Integrity mechanisms employing encryption, for ex
ample, are required to provide continuity of 
authentication for the duration of a session, somethi
ng that biometrics alone cannot provide for this 
sort of application. One suggestion was to pursue a 
holistic approach for integrating biometrics into a  
                                                     
 3 Anil K. Jain and Arun Ross, 2002, ﬁFingerprint 
mosaicking,ﬂ Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Orlando, Fla., May 13-17. 
4 Some formal technology evaluations conducted by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), for exam
ple, include the Face Recognition Grand 
Challenge (FRGC), the Iris Challenge 
Evaluation (ICE), the Speaker Recognition Evaluation (SRE), and the Minutiae Operability Exchange Test 
(MINEX04).  
5 This would be helpful when replicating experiments with different data sets and to verify the 
correctness of testing methodologies.
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  8 BOX 2.1 Suggestions for Improving Biometrics Research Endeavors 
 Various suggestions were offered 
to improve biometrics research: 
 • Improve the consistency of review policies 
by using a peer-review process  (such as is 
used for journals) to facilitate repeat
ability, documentation of experiments, and 
executability.   
• Provide access to large data sets and different types of data, such as multimodal data, to 
measure performance improvements and find ways to increase the amount of data used in 
biometric performance studies.
1 • Develop challenge problems to guide academic research and to create a baseline for 
comparisons and independent evaluations. 
• Increase the documentation of government-f
unded and -proposed research (see Session 2 
for additional discussion). __________________________ 
1 It was also noted that studies outlining new performance techniques may not require data for testing 
until later stages. 
  security system and to consider employing techniques like the Common Criteria certification 

approach. 6 
 Biometrics and Interoperability 
 An international framework to support the worl
dwide interoperability of biometrics requires 
the creation of standards, test methodologies, 
and independent evaluati
ons.  Interoperability challenges described during the workshop include iden
tity documents issued in one country using the 
system of a particular vendor, which must be accessi
ble in other countries using different systems of 
different vendors.  Standards are needed to facilitate
 this interchangeability, but it was noted that they 
will not solve all the problems, because they of
ten involve compromises among the different and 
sometimes competing interest groups that are involved in any given standards process. 

Incompatibilities in the interpretation of standard
s require evaluation tests to be conducted.  In 
addition, it was suggested that many operational 
pilot programs should also include interoperability 
testing in multiple countries to verify that systems will be compatible (see Session 4 for more 
discussion).  
 
 SESSION 2:  MEASUREMENT, STATISTICS, TESTING, AND EVALUATION 
 Panelists: George Doddington, Michele Freadman,
 Patrick Grother, Austin Hicklin, and Nell Sedransk  
Moderator: Joseph Campbell 
 Session 2 explored issues surrounding the measurement, statistics, testing, and evaluation of 
biometrics and biometric systems.  It should be noted that statistical analysis in the context of 

biometric systems is employed for a range of purposes, including assessments of the underlying 
                                                     
 6 For more information, see <http://csrc.nist.gov/cc/>.
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 9technology, analysis of user behavior, data mining, and so on.  Indeed, such issues were discussed 
throughout the workshop in several different contexts
.  Questions raised for this panel included these: 
Do biometric systems work? What is meant by ﬁwor
kﬂ in the context of a biometrics system?  What 
is being measured, tested, and evaluated, and how 
can confidence in the experiments be created?  The 
panelists presented a range of perspectives on these i
ssues, from broad explorations of the nature of 
experimentation and representative 
populations to discussions of sp
ecific evaluation regimens and 
real-world deployment at a major international 
airport (see Box 2.2).  Several overarching themes arose:  
 • Evaluating biometric systems serves three purposes: to guide and support research and 
development, to assess the readiness of a sy
stem for deployment, and to monitor 
performance of a system in the field.  
• As in many other domains, appropriate e
xperimental design and solid statistical 
underpinnings are needed to produce effective testing and evaluation regimes. There is no 
one-size-fits-all solution, given the range of
 types of systems that are deployed.  
• Data and data selection choices, which include understanding the reference and expected 
user populations, can have a large impact on the accuracy and effectiveness of testing and 

evaluation.  
 BOX 2.2 Early Biometrics System Deployment at an Airport 
 One panelist described the evaluation of di
fferent biometric technologies for several operational deployments, as well as the design of a future biometric system for controlling access to 
Boston™s air transportation system. At the time of 
this workshop the biometric systems deployed by 
Massport, the responsible government agency, included an ultrasonic fingerprint reader at the 
regional airport and hand geometry readers in the administration building. The planned system for 
Logan airport, soon to be deployed, takes a layere
d approach, following Secure Identification Display 
Area (SIDA) procedures, and uses a proximity card, a personal identification number (PIN), and a 
fingerprint reader.  The panelist emphasized th
e importance of examining an organization™s 
expectations of a biometric system and what such a system could accomplish, in particular 
recognizing that biometrics alone would not solve security concerns, and stressed the importance of 
initial enrollments and the need to educate both enroll
ment administrators and system users to acquire 
high-quality enrollments.  Educating employees w
as also critical to gaining acceptance for the technology.  To promote the success of the Mass
port system, the importance of addressing concerns 
about the technology as they arose was noted.  A ge
neral plan was also proactively put in place, 
increasing administrative staff to assist with any probl
ems or issues that might arise during the initial 
deployment period.  
   Purpose and Goals of Evaluation  Biometric technologies and systems are comm
only used for security purposes and for the 
sake of convenience.  One application of biometrics
 is to gain a privilege (for example, access to 
buildings or other resources).  Another class of bi
ometric applications is forensics and intelligence 
gatheringŠspecifically, the use of biometrics to va
lidate the identity of a person who does not want 
to be identified.  Both classes of applications s
hould be kept in mind when exploring testing and 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  10 evaluation approaches.  For both, the major challe
nge is obtaining a biometric trait sufficiently 
distinctive to determine differences between pe
ople in the face of measurement variability across 
multiple presentations of the user to the system
, which may vary greatly in time and circumstances 
(including degree of user cooperation), and in the 
face of possible attempts to manipulate and/or 
circumvent the system by imposters.    
There are many types of biometrics that might
 be used in a system. Some biometrics are 
based on physical characteristics, such as fingerpri
nts, hand geometry, facial features, and so on, 
whereas others are based more on performance or be
havior, such as signatures and speech.  Biometric measurements have a range of variabilities, including physical variabilities (due, for example, to 
aging or trauma) and physiological variabilities, such
 as emotional or metabolic changes.  Additional 
variability may be due to idiosyncrasies of the 
population (see Box 2.3).  All of these types of 
variability, and others, pose challenges for collecti
ng a corpus (training set) representing the problem 
space and for ensuring that quantitative indices of perfo
rmance are sufficiently pr
ecise.  They also can 
be sources of error when considering a distribution of subjects for enrollment and verification.  The 
challenges associated with data and data selec
tion are described further in a later section.  
 BOX 2.3 Sheep and Goats  The performance challenges to biometric system
s due to variability, particularly in the 
recognition of different speakers within a popula
tion, are a well-recognized problem within the 
speaker recognition community.  Variability among speak
ers has led some researchers to class them 
as ﬁsheep,ﬂ ﬁgoats,ﬂ ﬁlambs,ﬂ and ﬁwolves.ﬂ
   Sheep represent the largest portion of the populationŠ
their performance is both predictable and reliably recognized by the system. Goats are fewer in 
numberŠtheir performance in the system is unpredic
table and not reliably recognized, often resulting 
in detection errors. Lambs and wolves are easily confu
sed with others and can result in false matches. 
The characteristics of lambs are easy to imitate.  
Wolves, on the other hand, can imitate others easily. 
__________________________ 
1 For more, see George Doddington, Walter Liggett, Alvin Martin, Mark Przybocki, and Douglas 
Reynolds, 1998, ﬁSheep, goats, lambs and wolves: A sta
tistical analysis of speaker performance in the NIST 
1998 speaker recognition evaluation,ﬂ Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing, November. 
    Why Evaluate?  
 What is the reason for evaluation and testing of a biometric system?  At a high level, it was 
suggested, evaluation serves three purposes: (1) to guide and support research and development by, 
among other things, identifying important dimensions
 of variability and providing feedback on what 
works and what does not;  (2) to
 assess the readiness of a system for deployment and to provide a 
framework for characterizing performance as a functi
on of variability in a given system; and (3) to 
monitor performance of a system in the field, wh
ich includes characterizing system performance in 
terms of the failure mechanisms and identifying t
echnical challenges that can feed back to research 
and development.   
Over time, tension may result between research and applications.  For research, the 
requirement is to represent core technical challeng
es in a very distilled way that separates the  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 11technical issues from numerous application/operationa
l issues.  As application and operational issues 
arise, they may complicate and obscure the core rese
arch challenges. At the same time, if evaluation 
is needed to assess readiness, then
 the prediction of a system™s performance in the field may be based 
on what the system achieved on a corpus of eval
uation data.   Accurate predictions can be a challenge.   
 The Role of Technology  Regardless of the specific reasons for evaluating a given system, ultimately the role of 
technologyŠin this case of a biometric systemŠi
s to enable accurate and responsible decision making.  At heart, a panelist suggested, all pr
actical biometric applications are ﬁdetectionﬂ 
applications: The application seeks to assert that an identity is known or is not known.  It was 
suggested that this assertion can be formulated in terms of a probabilityŠname
ly, is the probability of 
the identity hypothesis, given the data, above a cer
tain threshold?  Partic
ipants acknowledged that 
answering this question is not solely a technical ma
tter.  Policy matters as well.  What are the criteria 
on which this judgment is based? What are the prio
r probabilitiesŠthat is, Is
 anything known about 
the probabilities associated with the population us
ing the technology? How will the answer that the 
technology is attempting to provide weigh into the 
ultimate decision making? Policy and adjudication 
mechanisms are needed in addition to what the 
technologists and technological systems can offer.  
Participants observed that the technical and polic
y components of decision making must inform and 
provide feedback to each other.   
 Experimental Design  Participants noted that good experimental design is important in evaluating systems and 
selecting evaluation data and that many of the issues 
that arise are not specific to biometrics.  Data 
selection issues need to be acknowledged up front rather than being hidden or elided in the evaluation 

of systems. Issues of proper data use were also raised
, such as including all data in the test evaluation.  
Removal of poor quality data from the test could have
 the effect of filtering out problems that would 
occur with real data and might produce over
optimistic assessments of system performance. 
Additionally, the operational and evaluation data need
 to be kept separate to prevent developers from 
tuning their systems to known evaluation data sets in preparation for testing.   
Some challenges specific to evaluating biometri
c systems are specific to each of the many 
types of systems that are deployed.  As one pa
nelist noted, evaluating 
ﬁoperational fingerprint identification systems on a large scaleﬂ is a speci
fic challengeŠchanging any of the characteristics 
mentioned in that phrase changes the evaluation pro
cess.  Another challenge relates to what is known as ground truth and the process of determining whet
her there is a matching error. Fingerprint 
identification may involve working with latent fi
ngerprint examiners, who, as is well known, can 
make errors.  Testing also needs to be done for system 
vulnerabilities, and distinctions should be 
made between active and passive imposters. Additionally, it was noted that a one-size-fits-all 
approach to testing might not be feasible, because 
the intended use for the system and the type of 
application might have an impact on the referent
 population and on the types of data necessary to 
evaluate the system.  It was suggested that la
yering the overall problem into general problems, 
biometric-related problems, specific biometric m
odalities issues, and so on would generally be 
helpful. One suggestion was to layer the problem so
 as to address all the generic problems first (such 
as defining the general-purpose evaluation and da
ta selection and corpus) and then to address problems relating to the specific biometric technologi
es and modalities in use. Of course, the generic 
and the specific may not always be easily separable.   

 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  12 Impact of Data Selection on Testing and Evaluation  Data selection is central to effective evaluati
on approaches.  That which can be learned from 
a data set that is not representative of the populat
ion of interest is of limited, if any, value.
7 The degree of similarity among different elements in
 a population is a related concern and must be 
considered when establishing a representative population sample and incorporating appropriate 
gradation and other challenges into test scenarios.   Biometric tests are almost universally based on 
ﬁopportunityﬂ samples, testing whatever volunteers happe
n to be available.  It might be possible to 
develop ﬁjudgmentﬂ samples chosen in some syst
ematic way to represent population variation.  The 
application of statistical methods to evaluati
ons in the biometrics domain would seem viable, 
provided that the methods are well desi
gned and the samples are representative.
8  One panelist argued that large quantities of operational data are needed for testing.  While 
most systems do not archive all of their data, much could be learned from the analysis of data that are 

routinely discarded if they are collected and stored
 (for example, retaining the information that a 
person had to make three attempts before the syst
em recognized him or her, and the biometric images 
or signals associated with those repeated attempts
).  Data also drive how thresholds are set for 
biometric systems.  Thresholds are predicated on what is known about the distributions of imposters 

and genuine subjects.  Developing an infrastructur
e to extract operational data from devices may be 
helpful, but techniques for anonymization and privacy protection along with authentication, where 
appropriate, will also be needed. It was suggested 
that a combination of interfaces, infrastructures, 
audit trails, metadata, and data formats is needed
.  Despite the difficulty of gathering data from 
subjects, participants were skeptical about the u
se of synthetic data (created through morphing and 
other techniques) for testing a system for deployment but allowed that such data might be useful in 

the early stages of research and development testing. 
Data distributions also vary by collection 
characteristics as well as population characteristics. 
For instance, data compiled by trained collectors 
in a controlled environment who aim to gather 
perfect samples from willing participants will likely be
 less variable than data collected in operational 
field tests under chaotic conditions by untrained 
collectors or from uncooperative participants.  
Additionally, the two kinds of 
dataŠcontrolled versus operationalŠalso have different uses. For 
purposes of research and development, controlled 
laboratory data might be more usefulŠfor 
example, in order to assess the sensitivities of one
™s algorithms.  However, for testing purposes, 
operational data are preferable.  
 Quality  In some biometric systems, annotations that i
ndicate the quality of a particular sample can be 
used.  For example, some data formats for face, finge
r, and iris have fields that allow a quality metric to be inserted.  This metric can be used to guide
 what sort of analysis might be needed or, at 
                                                     
 7 One example was of a data set collected in an Ohio
 prisonŠnot only was the collection process very 
controlled, but the population was homogeneous (primarily young and male) compared with the general 
population.  Another example addressing the issue of collection involved two different populations but used the 

same fingerprint scanners and the same software: one set 
of data was collected by the border patrol (primarily 
from Mexican illegal immigrants) and the other one was collected in an office environment (from people trying 
to get border-crossing cards). These systems were orders of magnitude apart in terms of error rates, presumably 

because the two populations from which the data we
re being collected had very different motivations.
   8 It was noted that statistical error bars on data w
ill indicate the degree of error only if the data reflect 
the population. If the data do not reflect the population, then the error bars will not have any bearing on the true 

magnitude of error.
    Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 13enrollment, to ask that the sample 
be collected again.  It can also 
be used in aggregate to assess or 
monitor the overall quality of the collected data. For 
example, if enrollment is being done at multiple 
stations, system operators can learn about the average quality on, for instance, Mondays, or in the 
afternoons.  Much of this falls under tr
aditional quality control and analysis.
9  How best to use such a quality metric, what standards it might be useful 
for, and what it actually means are being discussed 
in the biometrics community.  
   SESSION 3:  LEGISLATIVE, POLICY, HUMAN, AND CULTURAL FACTORS  
 Panelists: Tora Bikson, David Kaye, Lisa Nelson, and Peter Swire 
Moderator: Jeanette Blomberg  

 In Session 3 panelists were asked to address the 
legal, policy, social, and cultural aspects of 
biometric systems, as well as the implications for the collection and use of biometric data in different 

contexts at both the national and international levels.  Five main themes emerged during this session:  
 • Three different modes of identifica
tion evidenceŠmitochondrial DNA, facial 
recognition, and latent fingerprintsŠwere di
scussed in relation to ﬁgeneral acceptanceﬂ 
and ﬁscientific validityﬂŠtwo legal standards 
for the admissibility of evidence in a court 
of law. • Lessons for biometric system security were drawn from the current use of SSNs and the 
growing incidence of identity fraud.  The proposition of a new law restricting the sale and 

disclosure of biometric identifiers was debated. 
• The meaning of ﬁprivacyﬂ in relation to th
e use of biometrics technologies was discussed in terms of legal principles and some preliminary public opinion survey research.  
• Issues related to the collection and use of 
data generated by biometric technologies and 
associated fair information practices were di
scussed in relation to an earlier study on the 
use of RFIDs and access cards in the private sector.    
• The international legal and cultural dimensions of privacy were discussed, including their 
implications for the use of biometrics.  
 Admissibility of Biometric Identification Evidence  Two standards in common use for the admissib
ility of evidence in American trial courts,
10  typically called ﬁgeneral acceptanceﬂ and ﬁscientific
 validity,ﬂ  were discussed and later applied to 
three different biometric identification modes. In practice, which of these standards applies varies by 

jurisdiction. The first standard, ﬁg
eneral acceptance,ﬂ originated in 
Frye v. United States, a District of Columbia Court of Appeals case that upheld a rulin
g rejecting the admissibility of expert testimony 
                                                     
 9 The importance of image quality for biometric systems and the need to evaluate image quality across 
multiple factors jointly rather than a single factor at 
a time was also noted. To in
corporate a measure for image 
quality, the possibility of tagg
ing the quality was suggested to account 
for quality differences (difference in 
granularity, in lighting, in aging, and so on). 
10As a point of clarification and context, it was noted that before evidence can be put before a jury or, 
in theory, a court, there may need to be a number of preliminary determinations. Such determinations may 
include whether the evidence is excludable as hearsay or
 whether it is relevant, scientific, and sufficiently 
reliable. Additionally, the debate about admissibility takes pl
ace in front of the judge rath
er than the jury.  There 
may be experts on both sides, and federal judges may appoint their own experts.  However, these rules apply 
only to evidence presented to juries and not to warrant requests. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  14 about a then-new technique that could identify the 
act of lying by measuring systolic blood pressure.
11 The decision recognized, however, that courts 
would permit expert testimony derived from ﬁa well-
recognized scientific principle or discovery, when it
 is sufficiently established to have gained general 
acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.ﬂ
12 Over the years, the Frye standard became the 
dominant criterion for admitting scientific evidence. 
 Under Frye, a court would decide if general 
acceptance had been shown by looking to expert 
testimony and the existence of publications, by 
determining that the scientific technique had been 
put to nonjudicial uses, and by considering other 
cases that might manifest judicial acceptance.
  The second standard, ﬁscientific validity,ﬂ emerged in 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow 
Pharmaceuticals, a case that involved birth defects from an antinausea drug known as Bendectin.
13 In this ruling, the Supreme Court overturned the decision of the lower courts to exclude evidence of toxicological epidemiology on the grounds that ther
e was not general acceptance. Given the difficulty 
of determining when general acceptance has been re
ached, the Court deemed the Frye test to be 
inappropriate, under the Federal Rules of Evidence,
 for governing admissibility, and determined that 
the evidence admitted should constitute ﬁscientific
 knowledgeﬂ and ﬁbe supported by appropriate 
validation.ﬂ14  The general guidance offered for the admissibility of evidence obtained by new 
scientific techniques included the following considera
tions: whether the theory or technique has been 
or could be tested, with appropriate controlling st
andards in applying the test; whether it has been subjected to peer review and pub
lication; whether the potential rate 
of error is known; and, more 
broadly, whether the theory or 
technique is generally accepted.
15 As an example, in applying these standards to mitochondrial DNA evidence obtainable from 
a strand of hair, it was noted that this type of evidence has been admissible in 
courts even in the case 
of comparatively small or unrepresentative sample sets. In a mitochondrial DNA match, the 

proposition that it is ﬁalmost alwaysﬂ maternally inhe
rited and ﬁusuallyﬂ remains constant over time is 
generally accepted. Mitochondrial DNA has also been 
accurately sequenced in a laboratory, and the 
frequency of mitochondrial haplotypes can be estimated
 to determine if two samples being analyzed 
are similar.
16  It was noted that questions pertaining to th
e theory and appropriateness of the computer 
algorithms used to perform facial recognition, a rela
tively new type of biometric identification, would 
need to be answered to determine the technique™s
 admissibility in a court of law. It would be 
important to know if the algorithm has been adequate
ly tested and the results have been published or 
if it is proprietary and not published; whether ther
e is sufficient research literature demonstrating the 
validity of the approach; whether conditional error pr
obabilities have been established and, if so, their 
values; and how the matches are presented (e.g., in 
a binary form or as the probability that the two 
signals come from a common source); and, finally, 
whether it is generally accepted that the algorithm 
makes correct identifications. 
                                                     
 11 This technique has been described as a precursor to the polygraph test. 
12 Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (C.A.D.C 1923). The Frye
 opinion is available online at 
<http://www.daubertontheweb
.com/frye_opinion.htm>. 
13 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
, 509 U.S. 579 (1993). 
14 The Daubert decision is not binding on the states, 
but more than half the states have adopted the 
Daubert standard to determine the admissibility of evidence in state courts.   
15 These factors, from a nonexclusive list by Justice Blackmun in 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc
., have become known as the Daubert factors. 
16 An example of the use of DNA ev
idence in the Scott Peterson case was provided. An FBI analyst 
testified that a hair found in
 Scott Peterson™s boat could not have been
 his, and that it matched Lacey Peterson™s 
mother™s mitochondrial DNA that should have been in
herited by Lacey, the victim. Furthermore, the analyst 
testified that this haplotype would be seen in one out of 112 Caucasians, based on an FBI database of several 

thousand.  It was noted that this type of evidence is generally admissible despite the statistically 
unrepresentative sample population of the database. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 15With regard to latent fingerprints, the form of biometric identification evidence with the 
longest use, courts historically have accepted th
is type of evidence under the Frye standard, and it 
continues to be accepted.  However, the appli
cation of analysis, comparison, evaluation, and 
verification (ACE-V), performed by fingerprint an
alysts, has recently been challenged under the 
Daubert standard. The problem surrounding fingerpr
ints lies with ACE-V and the human analysis, 
which some claim lacks scientific rigorŠwith respec
t, for instance, to establishing the known error rates and in the controlling standards used by the ex
aminers. As a result, this identification technique 
continues to be subject to scrutiny; whether cour
t challenges to it will succeed is an open question.
17 It was noted that defense attorneys try to subpoe
na basic biometric methods information in an 
attempt to prevent biometric identification data from 
being introduced in courts; if it is introduced, 
they try to identify a factor that will compromise 
the accuracy and/or validity of the biometric method 
used.  In the discussion, it was suggested that a de
fense based on the Daubert standard is generally a 
last resort but can be important when fing
erprint evidence is critical to the case.   
 Lessons for Biometric System Security fr
om the Use of Social Security Numbers  
 Lessons learned from the use and treatment of 
SSNs and the related problem of identity fraud 
were applied to understand and strengthen the security of biometric systems. One problem with the 
expanded use of SSNs in combination with publicly
 available personal information (e.g., mother™s 
maiden name) as an identifier, or ﬁkey,ﬂ to gain
 access to an individual™s credit records and other 
authoritative credentials is their lack of secrecy, 
given the ease with which they can be shared, sold, 
and compromised.
18 In the computer science world, it was noted, keys or passwords are kept secret to 
prevent access to the system by an unauthorized user.
19  While keeping information secret may be a 
common practice for online and other remote appli
cations, it is common as well in the process of 
establishing credentials in the physical world, wher
e fake identities can be created by using SSNs and 
other personal information that is presumed secr
et or private to acquire so-called ﬁbreederﬂ 
documents (e.g., driver™s licenses) that can be u
sed to gain access to an individual™s personal or 
financial information.  
To prevent similar problems with new biometri
c identifiers and the loss of the ﬁkeysﬂ that 
breed fraud, a law was proposed at the workshop that would prohibit the selling or sharing of 
unencrypted biometric data.  Similar to recently pr
oposed legislation to prohibit the ﬁsale or display 
of social security numbers,ﬂ
20 the draft law aims to minimize access to high-quality images of 
biometrics (irises, fingerprints, and so on) to keep 
the new keys more secure, particularly for their use 
in legal identification.  Such a law would shif
t onto those who would sell or display biometric 
identifiers the burden of explaining why that sale or display should be warranted. Among the several 

biometrics that are excluded by the rule are photogr
aphs of faces, which have many nonsecurity uses 
                                                     
 17 The lengthiest Daubert hearing on fing
erprints that was recently affirmed was 
U.S. v. Byron 
Mitchell
, Criminal Action No. 96-407, U.S. District Court for 
the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, July 1999.  
 18 The personal and financial information for 145,000 people that was recently lost by ChoicePoint was 
provided as an example of compromised data, as key 
information that can be us
ed to gain access to an 
individual™s financial information be
comes accessible to others.     
19 For more on this approach, see Peter Swire, 20
04, ﬁA model for when disclosure helps security: 
What is different about computer and network security?ﬂ Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology 
Law, Vol. 2. Available online at <http://ssrn.com/abstract=531782>. 
20 In an effort to prevent identity theft, the Soci
al Security Number Misuse Prevention Act (S. 29), 
introduced by Senators Feinstein and Leahy in January 
2005, aims to prohibit, among other actions, the sale or 
display of SSNs to the public without the individual™s co
nsent. For more information, see also Mark Roy, 2005, 
ﬁFeinstein tightens ID theft proposal.ﬂ Inte
rnetnews.com, April 12. Available online at 
<http://www.internetnews.com/s
ecurity/article.php/3497161>. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  16 and are generally not secret, as well as DNA used for me
dical treatment and research.  Additionally, it 
was suggested that encryption should be encouraged
 as a best practice in the transmission and storage 
of biometric identifiers. The recent loss of unencry
pted backup tapes storing financial and credit card 
purchase data for 1.2 million federal employees and 
U.S. senators by the Bank of America was cited 
to illustrate the need for such practices.21  Without encryption, a database of biometric identifiers is as 
vulnerable to unauthorized release as other kinds of
 personal data.  Notwithstanding the challenges in 
acquiring a new SSN, it is certainly more difficult to
 replace a compromised fingerprint, for instance, 
than an SSN.  It was argued that without such a 
law and without encryption, biometric approaches to 
security, particularly their use as presumably privat
e keys, could fail just as applications using SSNs 
for secure authentication have failed already.  
During the discussion, several questions were rai
sed about the proposed biometric legislation, 
including how to distinguish which biometrics are worthy of protection and how they could be 

defined.  For instance, it was noted that it may 
be possible to obtain iris information from a high-
resolution photograph. However, there was some ag
reement by the participants that even though 
biometrics such as fingerprints are not secret and can be obtained by anyone determined to collect 
them, it may be useful to restrict the release of fi
ngerprint information online. It was noted that a 
fingerprint that can be collected from a surface may not
 have adequate detail to be used in an attack 
on a system. It was also suggested that such a 
practice would keep the cost of attack high, as 
obtaining fingerprints individually is much more 
expensive than obtaining them in a fingerprint 
database.  Legal and Societal Issues of Biometric Technologies 
 To assess what ﬁprivacyﬂ means 
in relation to the use of biometrics technologies, a few on-
going research efforts were discussed, beginning 
with an overview of the legal doctrine and 
normative expectations of privacy and its poten
tial applicability to biometrics technology and 
followed by a brief presentation of preliminary find
ings of some early survey research designed to 
elicit public opinion about privacy concerns re
lated to the use of biometrics technology.
22  A distinction was made between the factual parame
ters of privacyŠconstitutional, statutory, and 
common law protectionsŠand the normative perceptions
 of privacy. It was suggested that although 
factual legal doctrine does not directly relate to 
biometric technology, principles from constitutional 
cases defining protections against searches and seizures and in the realms of informational privacy 

and intimate decision making were applicable for 
the development of biometric technology policy. 
Furthermore, normative expectations of privacy also
 must be taken into consideration and might well 
be decisive for the acceptance of the br
oader use of biometric technologies.   It was noted that although the constitutional doc
trine of informational privacy is not fully 
developed, it provides general guidance for the bala
nce that should be struck between the use of 
biometric identifiers to enhance security and/or
 to increase convenience and the individual right to 
privacy. In 
Whalen v. Roe (1973), a foundational case, the Supreme Court was asked to consider if the 
accumulation of statistical information as part of the ﬁwar on drugsﬂ encroached on a reasonable 

expectation of privacy regarding an individual™s 
arrest and drug rehabilitation records. The Court ruled that in such situations an individual™s interest
 in informational privacy always has to be weighed 
against the societal objective. It was suggested 
that this constitutional case provides some principles 
                                                     
 21 See Paul Shread, 2005, ﬁBank™s tape loss puts s
potlight on backup practices,ﬂ Internetnews.com, 
February 28. Available online at <http://www.i
nternetnews.com/storage/article.php/3486036>.
 22 Part of a larger project being funded by the National Science Foundation and the Department of 
Homeland Security to explore obstacles to the maturity of biometric technology, this research aims to provide a 

sociolegal assessment through the use of various survey
s that would gauge the pub
lic™s privacy concerns and 
social perceptions of bi
ometric technology.    
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 17to consider, particularly in terms of the interest 
in storing and sharing biometrics information and the 
need to also protect privacy.  It was suggested that several cases within the realm of intimate decision making, though only 
tangentially related, may indicate some potential co
ncerns about and barriers to the collection of 
biometric information. 
Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) established a realm of intimate decision 
making around contraceptive usage. In a more recent federal case, 
Planned Parenthood Federation of 
America v. Ashcroft
 (2004), the Court was asked to consider whether or not individual privacy rights 
precluded the Justice Department from gathering 
information on how many abortions had been 
performed at a particular clinic. The Court found th
at the privacy rights in that information were a 
barrier, and it prohibited the gathering of the statistical information because it intruded on the intimate 
decision making of the individuals served by the clinic.  It was suggested that principles illustrated by 

this case might inform the limits to using biometri
c identifiers to access information on the intimate 
decision making processes of individuals. 
In addition to the overview of the legal doctrine of privacy,  the initial results from a limited 
100-person survey on privacy were discussed, and 
the designs of proposed surveys following on the 
initial survey were described.
23 The preliminary results from the sm
all survey sample as described to 
workshop participants include the following:  
 • Privacy was by far the greatest concern among the various concerns expressed.   
• Concerns about technological fallibilities and procedures to rectify technological failures 
were also raised.  
• Acceptance of biometric technology will in
crease as technology reliability improves.   
• Two of the lesser concerns were inappropriate 
information sharing, in either government 
or private sector settings, and the theft of biometric identifiers.  The low ranking of these 

concerns was a surprising survey result.  
• Perceptions of biometric technology varied depending on the context of use.  For 
instance, inconvenience was a concern with the use of biomet
ric identifiers at automated teller machines (ATMs) or banks, but there wa
s general support for biometric identifiers 
when boarding an airplane. 
 
A preliminary suggestion from the survey data
 was that the public may generally accept the 
need for give-and-take between expectations of pr
ivacy and societal objectives.  The public seemed 
willing to weigh privacy concerns against the purpose 
of biometrics usage. Relative to this finding, 
the importance of contextualizing the use of biom
etrics was also stressed so that polices could be 
constructed to address different privacy concerns. 
During the discussion, a participant suggested that legislation intended to control the use of 
biometrics technology and protect privacy through th
e creation of consent provisions is not a panacea, 
as it would not sufficiently address other issues, su
ch as technological and administrative safeguards 
and information-sharing rules, that might arise w
ith the use of biometrics technology and that are 
often not well understood by the public. It was sugg
ested that a broader policy perspective would help 
to address related issues that will have impacts on 
privacy.  Such concerns were echoed by other 
                                                     
 23 The proposed research surveys that will be conducted include (1) a 2,000-person end user survey of 
those who have been exposed to biometric technology
, to understand users™ perceptions and acceptance of 
biometric technology after ha
ving been exposed to it as well as ex
isting concerns and problems with the 
technology; (2) a 1,000-person national random digit dialing survey to compare the perceptions of biometric 
users with those of nonusers; and (3) a 2,000-person international end user survey to explore and compare 

different societal notions of privacy, needed since biomet
rics technologies such as 
those that are part of US-
VISIT (see summary of Session 5) will incr
easingly involve cross-jurisdictional issues. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  18 participants, who suggested that privacy issues and 
fair information practices should be proactively 
addressed rather than relying on the courts, which ma
y not be effective in de
veloping coherent policy. 
 Issues Related to Policies on Biometrics 
Data Collection and Use in the Workplace  Several issues emerging from a study recently
 conducted on RFID tags in the workplace
24 were discussed and related to those that might ari
se with the use of biometric technologies. The study 
gathered data from six large private corporations
 in the United States that required employees to 
swipe access cards embedded with an RFID chip to
 gain access to buildings. 
Four findings from the 
study were these:  
 • The data generated by the access cards were sometimes used for much more than 
controlling building access, including for mon
itoring adherence to workplace norms and 
rules, investigating inappropriate activities such as asset thefts, and accessing medical 
health information in emergencies.  
• Appropriate uses of data tende
d to be determined by security units rather than by 
executive management, without policies or 
guidelines for data sharing having been 
established.  • Data in all surveyed organizations were kept
 indefinitely, with no retention schedule, and 
were never independently audited.  
• Employees using the swipe cards had not b
een informed about data retention and 
alternative data uses.    
It was noted that the studyŠgiven that it explores issues related to access control and 
identification, and given that there are proposed 
applications that would combine biometrics and 
RFID tagsŠraised concerns about the use of biometric technologies in the workplace, including 
these:   • Were the practices seen in the gathering and u
se of RFID data likely to be precedents for 
similar practices with data generated by biom
etric technologies, or will explicit policies 
be developed comparable to policies fo
r computers, networks, and e-mail?   
• Because individuals may not be cognizant of 
the collection of biometric data, especially 
for remote-sensing applications, how should, or
 could, they be notified, and how could 
their consent be solicited?  
• As biometric data will probably be linked to
 other databases, either directly or through 
association with an RFID code, identifying in
dividuals by matching newly collected data 
sets against extant data sets will become more feasible.  How will concerns about this 
new capability be addressed?  How long should the collected data be retained?
25  • Will individuals be given the opportunity to inspect and to correct biometric information 
collected about them?  How will this be done? 
                                                     
 24 Edward Balkovich, Tora K. Bikson, and Gordon Bitko, 2005, ﬁ9 to 5: Do you know if your boss 
knows where you are? Case studies of radio frequency 
identification usage in the 
workplace,ﬂ Research brief 
and report available online at <http://www.rand.org/publications/RB/RB9107/>.  
25 Several models include the OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of 
Personal Data, available online at http://www.oecd.org
/document/18/0,2340,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html, 
and the European Union privacy directive, which limits retention to a period appropriate to the purpose for which 
the data were collected (more information can be found 
at <http://www.epic.org/priv
acy/intl/data_retention.html>).
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 19• Who should be entitled to access the collected
 data, and what will be this entity™s 
responsibilities for data integrity, protection, and notification?  
 International Perspectives  
 Participants also raised several internati
onal legal and normative concerns that have 
implications for the use of biometrics.  Different 
privacy and data collection 
laws and regulations may 
have an impact on what technological capabiliti
es will be permitted. Often, cultural and legal 
differences can affect monitoring rules in the wo
rkplace. While it is commonly understood in the 
United States that the employer runs the computer
 system and can monitor the network for security 
purposes, employees in France and Germany have th
e right to confidential communications while 
they are sitting at their office desks, and employ
ers are required to obtain a wiretap to read an 
employee™s e-mails that go through the employer™s system. This could present difficulties, 

particularly for a global company that is tryi
ng to implement standard procedures across the 
organization.  In addition, there is a broader view
 of personal information under European law, which 
uses the term ﬁidentifiableﬂ rather than the mo
re narrowly conceived term ﬁpersonally identified 
informationﬂ under American lawŠthe former 
suggesting that the connection between the 
information and the person is determinable even if
 no explicit connection is immediately accessible.  
During the discussion, a participant alluded to
 the current attempt of the International 
Organization for Standardization/International 
Electrotelecommunications Commission (ISO/IEC™s) 
Joint Technical Committee 1 Standards Committee 
37 to develop voluntary best practices for the 
international use of biometric technology in private 
corporations by 2006.  The international working 
group aims to bring together different cultural a
nd legal perspectives into a common framework of principles based on fair information practices.  The 
effort is intended to help companies recognize the 
importance of keeping their workforces informed 
about the use and implications of biometric 
technologies. 
 
 SESSION 4:  SCENARIOS AND APPLICATIONS 
 Panelists: Joseph Atick, Rick Lazarick, Tony Ma
nsfield, Cynthia Musselman, and Marek Rejman-
Greene  
Moderator: Gordon Levin 

 Session 4 participants were asked to discuss the 
impact of different application contexts on 
the performance of biometric systems and to descr
ibe the general characteristics of successfully 
deployed biometric systems.  Other topics covered 
in this session included approaches to the fusion of multiple biometric techniques and methods for inte
grating biometrics into particular systems and 
environments. Some of the themes that emerged during the discussion were the following: 

 • The challenges identified for biometric iden
tity management applications will vary 
depending on the application requirements, sy
stem scale, and the security environment.  
• Nontechnical factors such as human factors and user training can have significant impacts 
on biometric system performance. 
• Standards and interoperability are important 
for better system performance and the global 
use of biometric systems.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  20 Identity, Identity Management, and Biometrics 
  For identity management applica
tions, one panelist referred to biometrics as the glue that can 
bind four elements: authorized actions, trust, reputation, and identity.
26 In the identity management 
process being described, the decision to authorize an 
action, from logging into a network to entering a 
country, is operationally based on a level of trust 
that relies on an individual™s reputation, which is 
linked to an identity. By matching an individual™s live biometric against the enrolled or reference 

sample of that individual, the system can associate 
actions with an identity based on levels of trust 
and reputation established for the individual.
27   ﬁRiskyﬂ identities can also be flagged by comparing 
the biometric in question to biometrics in other data
bases to determine, for example, if an individual™s 
biometric matches that of someone who has been placed on a watch list. 
Though biometrics can be used to link these f
our elements, the panelists stressed that establishing a human identity involv
es more than capturing a biometric. An individual™s identity can 
be established initially in a number of ways, depend
ing on the application needs and context.  For 
instance, the identity can be linked to a unique en
rollment that tracks information from day one 
forward but does not reveal the individual™s legal na
me (the approach used by eBay, albeit not with 
biometrics). Alternatively, a legal identity can 
be established by linking historical and document-
based information such as that contained on a drive
r™s license or passport.  One account was given of 
a remote village chief vouching for an individual™s pr
oper name when no paper documents existed.   
An underlying problem with large-scale biometric 
identity management applications that rely 
on paper-based documents to establish a legal identity 
lies not so much in capturing the biometrics, it 
was suggested, but in creating and trusting the linkages.
28  A panelist called the mapping of a 
traditional, paper-based identity to a biometrics-based 
identity the Achilles™ heel of biometric identity 
management applications. This mapping process creates an opportunity for identity laundering (the 
legitimizing of a ﬁbadﬂ identity) when documents ca
n be falsified and used to bypass the reputation discovery processes to obtain a ﬁcleanﬂ identity. A pa
nelist also noted that tying a biometrics-based 
identity to multiple paper-based doc
uments is a time-intensive process that would require traditional 
investigations to determine if the documents are 
authentic. In discussion this problem was illustrated 
by national ID card applications, which would presuma
bly entail a gradual linking of an initial ID to 
more assets and information (e.g., mortgage and 
credit history) after initial establishment of the 
linkage between an individual and his/her nationa
l ID. However, national ID cards would probably 
not adequately deter identity theft or identity laun
dering, presumably an intended purpose of such an 
application. In addition to the challenges of li
nking identity information to a biometric, it was 
suggested that other applicationsŠsuch as an e-
passport intended for the global recognition or 
assignment of a legal identity for an individualŠ
would require open inter
operability standards to 
enable the exchange of information across government
s.  Such cards would likely require the creation 
of a federated identity system, or silos of iden
tity, rather than a single, centralized identity.
29                                                        
 26 There was not time for in-depth discussions of the 
meanings of these terms and their interrelationship 
at the workshop.
 27 Dynamic knowledge discovery was also briefly touc
hed on as a mechanism to
 reassess and update an 
individual™s reputation (based, for example, on periodic reinvestigations vs. a one-time investigation) in order to 
adjust levels of trust used to authori
ze or revoke access rights on a timely basis.
 28 One participant cautioned that the biometrics themselves, used to create and fix the linkages to 
identity, are not secret.
  29 A previous NRC report explored the question of a nationwide identity system at length: see S.
 Kent 
and L. Millett, eds.,
 IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationw
ide Identity Systems. National Research 
Council. Washington, D.C., 2002. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 21Application Contexts and Security Environments  Panelists discussed some of the characteristics 
of and challenges for biometrics systems in 
relation to different application contexts (e.g
., large versus small deployments) and security 
environments (in the case discussed, government ve
rsus commercial). Some of the challenges 
particular to a large-scale, government (rather than
 commercial) biometric identification application 
were discussed, and some solutions were presented.  
The national ID card
30 being developed by the United Ki
ngdom was described.  The central 
challenge identified at the workshop was the need
 to establish realistic policy and performance 
requirements for the biometric technologies in light 
of the system scale and the diverse enrollment 
population.  The system scale of 60 million user
s introduces significant challenges for achieving the 
required performance metrics (a false nonmatch rate of
 less than 1 percent, or 1 in 100, and a false match rate of less than 0.1 percent, or 1 in 1,0
00), as these rates are not directly measurable without 
an operational system or a large database for testi
ng. The system scale and related costs of enrollment 
also raise questions about the age requirement 
for initial enrollment and the frequency of re-
enrollment in the system. A second distinct and critical requirement for a national biometric system is 

the need for universal enrollment 
across all sectors of society.  It is not known if biometrics can be 
inclusive of all sectors, as few tests have been c
onducted that represent society as a whole.  However, 
it is known that a small fraction of
 the population will not be capab
le of providing an adequate 
sample, as a consequence of inherited biology or
 temporary or permanent conditionsŠfor example, 
fingerprint damage in the form of a cut, burn, or
 scarring; arthritic fingers for hand geometry, and 
some eye injuries or conditions for iris recogn
ition.  Furthermore, a policy requirement for a 
mandatory and universally deployed national syst
em in the United Kingdom is that it must be 
nondiscriminatory, both in perception and in actualit
y, to individuals with disabilities or specific 
cultural or ethnic backgrounds. The system must also accommodate those who are not familiar with 
the biometric technology and process as well as 
those who intend to be uncooperative.   
The potential solutions offered by the panelists
 for the false nonmatch rate and enrollment problems include the improvement of sensors a
nd system ergonomics in order to acquire higher 
quality biometrics. To further minimize enrollment 
problems, it was suggested that users be permitted 
to choose a second biometric modality for enrollment. If multibiometric fusion is involved, multi-
instance rather than multimodal fusion would simplify user training. 
Panelists drew clear distinctions between 
the purposes and functions of commercial vs. 
government biometric applications. Commercial a
pplications aim to provide convenience and 
assistance to voluntary users in targeted sectors. Tw
o possible applications are the personalization of 
services and the facilitation of individual accountability; in the latter, an individual™s name, 

reputation, and biometric accompany a transaction to allow for tracking over time.  To be 
operationally viable, commercial applications must be
 able to tolerate some error in enrollment rates 
among the user population.
31 Additionally, performance should 
degrade gracefully, and operations 
should include redundancy. Some hypothesize that to achieve widespread acceptance among a 

voluntary user population, the technology should facilita
te clever, personally useful applications that 
are reasonably routine, transparent, and, as one 
participant called for, ﬁcool.ﬂ  The use of the technology should be intuitive, and its purpose s
hould be clear and understandable to the user. The 
                                                     
 30 The national ID card aims to reduce the registration of multiple identities and establish a single, 
verifiable identity per individual that will be linked to a previously established (document-based) identity and 

used for national identification purposes when an individual appears to receive government services. 
 31 A panelist noted that in some cases an extra meas
ure of security (performance) might not be worth 
the reduction in throughput. It was suggested that ra
ther than always striving 
for 100 percent accuracy, the 
target error rate should depend on the type of application: In other words, it should be ﬁgood enoughﬂ for the 
application.
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  22 example givenŠan integrated mobile device, a 
hypothetical commercial application combining the 
functionality of a mobile phone and a persona
l data assistantŠillustrated some of these 
characteristics. It could be an individual™s prim
ary device for communication and information access, 
and the biometric could be used to provide secure 
access. Other information could be used by the 
system, including a personal identification number, an equipment-unique identifier, physical location, 

other biometrics (voice, face, fingerprint), and history of use.   
It was suggested that user-centered design principles be applied to develop application 
features and to determine the features™ value and u
sefulness.  Recent findings suggest that the utility 
and convenience of biometrics may somewhat lessen 
privacy concerns as individual users begin to 
explore and weigh the costs and benefits.
32   Nontechnical Factors and General System Characteristics 
 Panelists identified additional nontechnological factors that impact the performance of 
biometric systems: 
 • The type of biometric system will impact user behavior and system performance. For 
instance, in a system that aims to veri
fy a claim of enrollment, such as in the 
administration of government benefits, th
e individual is trying to produce a matching 
result. By contrast, in a system that aims 
to verify a claim (sometimes implicit) of 
nonenrollment, such as screening for inclusion on a watch list, the individual is trying to 
avoid a match.
33  • Human factors are critical for optimizing the capture performance of biometric 
techniques.  Attention to system ergonomics th
at automatically adapt to human factors, 
such as a facial recognition camera that adju
sts to differences in height and presentation, 
can make a system less intimidating and more natural for users and may significantly 
reduce enrollment error rates. It was suggested 
that systems that provide useful feedback 
to users and systems that incorporate touc
h screen technology rather than a keyboard 
enhance capture and enrollment performance. 
• Training is useful for system operators to un
derstand system operations but should not be 
needed for users as the systems should be suffi
ciently intuitive. Some panelists noted that 
training did improve sample collection in depl
oyed systems; others stressed that user 
training could have the opposite effect becau
se it could teach a user who chooses to be 
noncompliant how to improperly enroll.  
 Participants noted that successfully deployed
 biometric applications tend to have the 
following characteristics: 
 • The ability to select out individuals who cannot
 provide or have difficulty providing a 
good quality sample for a given modality.  
• Robustness to variation in the false rejection rate
, given that some error is to be expected 
with a biometric system. 
                                                     
 32 Findings from BIOVISION, a project sponsored by
 the European Commission to explore successful 
biometric deployments from a user and system integrator perspective. 
33 Adversarial analysis is a hard pr
oblem to solve because real number
s for false reject and accept rates 
are difficult to obtain from adversaries who have successfully defeated a system.  In addition, an adversary may 

purposely inflict an injury to create a legitimate proble
m of entering through a biometric system, requiring a 
secondary entry procedure. 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 23• Realistic system performance requirements w
ith respect to the application and the technology, offering an effective improveme
nt for the particular application at a reasonable cost.  
  Standards and Global Interoperability of Biometric Systems  To illustrate the importance of standards setting 
and the interoperability of systems, panelists 
highlighted early work in multibiometric standards 
formation and data collection as well as the results 
from a recent interoperability test.
 For future integration of multibio
metric systems, ISO/IEC™s Joint 
Technical Committee 1 Standards Committee 3734 has focused on defining multibiometric 
terminology to develop standardized approach
es for assessing and improving multibiometric fusion.
35 The terminology development process provided the 
background to break down the problem (see Box 
2.4).  It was suggested that if designed and implemented effectively, multibiometric approaches 
have the potential to improve biometric system pe
rformanceŠthat is, to reduce the false acceptance 
rate (FAR), the false rejection rate (FRR), the failu
re to enroll (FTE) rate, and the failure to acquire (FTA) rateŠand can be more resistant to spoofing.  
However, participants noted that one challenge to research in multibiometric fusion 
techniques has been the limited supply of true multib
iometric data (i.e., multibiometric data from the 
same human being).  Typical studies have involved 
tens to several hundreds of individuals.  In 
attempts to achieve large multibio
metric data sets, some researchers have assumed that biometric 
samples from completely different modalities (e.g., f
ace, fingerprint, iris) are fully uncorrelated.  Based on this assumption, they may create a chimer
ic multibiometric data sample by combining a 
facial image from one individual, a fingerprint 
from another individual, and an iris image from 
another individual. To validate 
this assumption and evaluate multibiometric systems, NIST and TSA, 
at the time of the workshop, were planning a 2005 deployment of the Multimodal Biometric 

Accuracy Research Kiosk (MBARK) to collect face, fingerprint, and iris data from the same 

individuals.  The importance of independent testing 
was discussed, along with the remaining work to 
be done in the development of wo
rldwide applications that will rely on biometric technology.  A 
third-party test to evaluate the compliance of several commercial technologies with a secondary 
standard modeled after the draft ISO standard re
vealed poor performance and interoperability among 
the vendors that were tested. The test, conducted on 
seven different products an
d using biometric data 
gathered from volunteers from the intended user population,
36 had three components: (1) 
conformance to the requirements of the standard; 
(2) performance of the system, consisting of a 
sensor and an algorithm each from different providers
; and (3) the interoperability of the systems.  
When multiple sensors were tested against one 
algorithm, there were large (up to 40 percent) 
differences in performance among the biometric system
s. Within the small test sample, only two sets 
of product combinations (each consisting of a dis
tinct sensor and an algorithm) were interoperable 
                                                     
 34 The technical report 
Multi-modal and Other Multi-biometric Fusion
 was issued by Working Group 2 
of ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 with support and technical contributions from the International Committee for 
Information Technology Standards (INCITS) M1 Technical Committee on BiometricsŠAd Hoc Group on 
Evaluating Multi-biometric Systems (AHGEMS). 
 35 Fusion has been implemented for many years in large automated fingerprint identification systems 
(AFISs) using multi-instance and multialgorithmic approaches.  
 36  The test sample of 125 was smaller than the anticipated 225 participants. Though it did not include 
any noncooperative users, it was dr
awn from the user population and was representative of some of the 
problems users of biometrics systems may confront. 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  24 and achieved the target FAR and FRR of 1 percent out of the 125 participants.37  Despite the few technologies that passed this independent evaluation, to
 be accepted in this arena, all future products must meet or exceed the performance and interope
rability levels that ha
ve already been set.   BOX 2.4 Multibiometric Systems  Multibiometric systems comprise four distinct
 subcategoriesŠmultimodalities (e.g., finger, 
iris, face), multi-instances (e.g., right and left index fingers or multiple images of a face or scene), 
multisensors (e.g., optical, capacitive, and ultrasoni
c), and/or multialgorithms (different matchers)Š
that can be fused at four different levels: the deci
sion level, the score level, the signal level, and the feature level.  At the feature level, the biometri
c samples can be combined to create a feature space 
for processing in the matching (score) and decision 
levels. Current fusion approaches occur at the 
score level, where scores assigned by each biometric 
channel are combined before the system issues a 
decision based on the score. To enhance score fusi
on, prior probabilities that approximate prior 
beliefs of experts can be taken into account and 
score normalization between matching algorithms can 
also be used to provide additional information 
when implementing a fusion scheme.  Other fusion 
approaches that can be systematically applied to 
improve fusion accuracy and/or throughput include 
combination techniques such as summing rules and pr
oducts or combining different classifiers, the 
use of layering or cascading logic when gather
ing and using multiple measures and sources of 
information, and simultaneous ve
rsus sequential sample presentation while capturing information.  
   SESSION 5:  TECHNICAL AND POLICY ASPECTS OF INFORMATION  
SHARING AND COOPERATION 
 
Panelists: William Casey, Patty Cogswell, Neal 
Latta, K.A. Taipale, and John Woodward  
Moderator:  Peter Higgins 

 In Session 5, panelists were asked to discuss a 
variety of issues related to biometric data 
sharing, including technical challenges as they rela
te to synchronicity and connectivity of data on the 
one hand and security and privacy of data on the 
other hand; policy considerations for sharing 
biometric data between agencies; and practical c
onsideration of standards development and cross-
jurisdictional cooperation. The following are so
me of the topics covered in this session: 
 • Newly established and long-standing biometric 
data-sharing applications at the state, 
national, and international leve
ls were described in the contexts of military defense, law 
enforcement, and immigration.  Systems 
discussed included the Automated Biometric 
Identification System (ABIS), the Criminal Alien Identification System (CAIS), the 

Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identifica
tion System (IAFIS), and the United States 
Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT) program. 
                                                     
 37 The test involved one-to-one verification between 
a seafarer™s biometric and the two fingerprints 
stored on the ID card.  A false accept scenario consiste
d of stealing the issued IDs and being a close enough 
match to another seafarer™s stored bi
ometric. Problems posed by larger databases, such as the legitimacy of 
issued IDs and other matching problems, were not part of the test. For more information, see International 
Labour Organization, 2004, Seafarers Identity Docu
ments Convention (Revised), 2003 (No. 185), ILO 
Seafarers™ Identity Documents, Biometric Testing Camp
aign Report. Part I. Ge
neva. Available online at 
<http://www.ilo.org/public/english/dial
ogue/sector/sectors/mariti/sid.pdf>. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 25• Technical and policy challenges related to information sharing among large-scale 
biometrics systems were addressed, including 
data integrity and procedural analysis, 
consolidation of biometric informati
on, and integration of databases.  • Broader policy challenges of biometric information sharing also were discussed, 
including (1) the importance of evaluating biometric systems based on their context, 

purpose, and the policies they serve; (2) estab
lishing criteria to determine the usefulness 
of data for decision making; and (3) institu
ting careful procedures for maintaining and 
sharing digital records.  
 Automated Biometric Identification System  
 The Automated Biometric Identification Syst
em (ABIS), a new biometric identification 
system designed by the Department of Defense (DOD), was described as a system modeled after the 

FBI™s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identif
ication System (IAFIS) (see Box 2.5) for the 
collection, storage, and sharing of overseas biom
etric data within the military and with other 
government organizations for counterterrorism purposes.  A guiding concept for the system was 

described as ﬁidentity dominance,ﬂ or the use of biom
etrics to increase the level of confidence in the 
linkages between individuals and their previous identit
ies, criminal histories, or terrorist activities in 
the United States and in other countries.
38   The conceptual architecture of ABIS, similar to
 the information architecture of IAFIS, aims 
to integrate into one database information (in el
ectronically searchable format) from operations and 
other sources that has been gathered by combat
ant commands (COCOMs). The collected biometric 
data would include 10 rolled fingerprints, mug shots, and a DNA sample.  The DNA sample, it was 

noted, would be handled separately; fingerprints 
and mug shots would be stored in ABIS and 
searched against the ABIS database fo
r possible matches.  The fingerprints also would be shared with 
the FBI, according to information-sharing policies,
 and searched against the FBI™s IAFIS database to 
identify any matches with existing U.S. criminal records.  
ABIS was described as a type of ﬁbiometric-b
ased identity management service providerﬂ in 
the situation where DOD determines if any samples 
match and sends those results to other national 
security organizations on a need-to-know basis.  
There is also general interest in developing 
procedures for sharing information with the De
partment of Homeland Security (DHS). Since 
becoming operational in the summer of 2004, ABIS h
as been used to identify individuals in Iraq as 
former detainees and as individuals with U.S. criminal histories. 

 Criminal Alien Identification System
   As presented by one of the panelists, the Criminal Alien Identification System (CAIS)  is a 
pilot biometric information-sharing system within
 the Boston Police Department that was developed 
to recognize foreign-born individuals illegally residi
ng in the United States and to facilitate access to 
information about immigration violations.
39  The panelist described the process as follows: When an 
individual is arrested on any charge, 10 rolle
d fingerprints, mug shots, and information on 
distinguishing features such as tattoos are entered 
and stored in CAIS.  The same information is 
entered in the Massachusetts State Police Departme
nt™s Automated Fingerprint Identification System 
(AFIS), the FBI™s IAFIS (see Box 2.5), and, if necessary, shared with Immigration and Customs 
                                                     
 38 Identity dominance is analogous in some ways to the concept of identity management discussed in 
Session 1.    
39 Based on a study conducted by the Boston Police Department, 19 percent of its arrestees had 
immigration issues of varying seriousness.   
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  26 Enforcement (ICE).
40 These data are searched against the 
FBI™s IAFIS database, with responses 
generally returning in 15 to 20 minutes.
41 If the arrestee was not born in the United States, the 
information is sent to ICE in Boston, which begins an
 investigation. For serious crimes, Interpol also 
has fingerprint search capability across multiple jurisd
ictions. The panelist also noted that the Boston 
Police Department audits department practi
ces and issues sanctions for data misuse.   
 BOX 2.5 Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System 
 As described by several panelists, the FBI™s In
tegrated Automatic Fingerprint Identification 
System (IAFIS) criminal master file is a crim
inal law enforcement technical capability with a 
database consisting of over 48 million electronically searchable sets of fingerprints and corresponding 
criminal history information on individuals arrest
ed in the United States for a felony or serious 
misdemeanor charge.
1 The panelists highlighted some of the system capabilities that facilitate the 
linking of past criminal records across jurisdictions
 and contribute to a high degree of accuracy and 
effectiveness in biometric identification. 
 IAFIS became operational in July 1999.
   The panelists described the information ente
red into IAFIS during the criminal booking 
process as including 10 rolled fingerprints and a m
ug shot. They noted that the FBI receives around 
25,000 criminal fingerprint submissions per day from 
law enforcement at the local, state, and federal 
level and around 25,000 civil requests from DHS,
 the Office of Personnel Management, school 
boards, etc. that are searched against IAFIS to de
termine if the individual has been involved in any 
previous criminal activities.2 Unlike the criminal transactions, 
the majority of the civil search 
transactions are not entered into the IAFIS repository
. As most information that is entered into the 
databases, including criminal bookings, investig
ations, and other operations and information
3 comes from state and local police departments,
4 the panelists emphasized the importance of the advisory 
policy process conducted by the FBI™s Criminal Ju
stice Information Services (CJIS). The advisory 
policy boardŠconsisting of local and state repr
esentativesŠserves to advise the FBI on data 
management issues and has worked to develop sta
ndards, perform audits of state repositories, and 
issue sanctions for misuses of data.   
__________________________ 
1 In addition to storing criminal fingerprints in IAFI
S, the panelists noted that military fingerprints are 
also stored in the database but are not searched rou
tinely in criminal cases.  Federal employees™ and police 
officers™ fingerprints also are enrolled in the database, but not all are in electronic form. Furthermore, IAFIS 
contains fingerprints for both living and deceased individuals (albeit with conservative criteria by which a set of 
prints may be marked as belonging to a deceased individual).  
 2 Law enforcement studies have found that 62 percent of arrestees have a previous criminal history.  
3 The FBI is the repository of U.S. criminal data, in
cluding fingerprints, the Interstate Identification 
Index, national files for warrants, sex offenders, etc. 
4 The Boston Police Department was the first agency to
 send fingerprints electronically to the FBI in 
1995, an early implementation of an IAFIS function. 
                                                     
 40 The information is also shared with the Commonw
ealth of Massachusetts Probation Department and 
the Suffolk County District Attorney. 
41 The panelist indicated that since 2002, 62,000 arrests had been processed, including 8,153 flagged 
individuals.  Among these were 43 with illegal reentries, 
166 with outstanding warran
ts for removal, 51 with 
overstayed visa waivers, 207 in removal proceedings, 19
 who had been granted relief or whose proceedings had 
been terminated, and 377 foreign juveniles. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 27United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology
   As discussed in this session, the US-VISIT program
42 centers on issues of immigration and border management during preentry, entry, status 
management, and exit procedures. In contrast to 
criminal law enforcement applications, US-VISIT ai
ms to collect, maintain, and share information, 
including biometrics information, on foreign nationa
ls to help determine who should be permitted to 
enter, who should be removed, and who should be
 provided special protection, such as refugees.
43 One of the largest and busiest deployments,
44 US-VISIT captures and stores a digital photograph and 
two electronically scanned fingerprints for each entrant. 
 The panelists noted that a core component of US-VISIT
45 is the Biometric Identification 
System (IDENT) database of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
  The IDENT database, 
separate from the IAFIS database, comprises seve
ral databases, including the following:  
 • The US-VISIT enrollment database containi
ng biometric information and allowing 
verification of an individual™s records upon entry and exit.  
• A watch list and lookout database 
with information related to terrorists, wanted criminals, 
sexual offenders, immigration violators, 
and international fugitives, among other 
categories. This database is populated with information from the FBI, state or local 
authorities, DHS, the Department of State, and Interpol. 
• A recidivist database46 containing information (for example, the number of illegal border 
crossings) about previous DHS apprehensions that does not qualify for entry into the 

IAFIS or watch list databases.                                                      
 42 The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Re
sponsibility Act (IIRIRA) Section 110 created the 
US-VISIT program in September 1996. Subsequent legislation expanding the program requirements includes 
the Data Management Improvement Act (DMIA) of 2000
; the Visa Waiver Permanent Program Act in 2000, 
the USA Patriot Act and the Aviation Transportation Secur
ity Act in 2001, and the Enhanced Border Security 
and Visa Entry Reform Act in 2002. More recently, th
e Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act in 
December 2004 added the requirement to
 expedite the addition 
of a biometric to the entry and exit system. 
43 The panelists indicated that since the beginning of the US-VISIT program in January 2004, there 
have been 5,342 watch list hits, with a 1 percent error rate, out of more than 4.2 million visa applications.  At 
entry, for travelers who are not entere
d in the systems, 2,375 watch list hits have resulted from the 18.9 million 
travelers processed. As for the identity verification of tr
avelers, among those who had been previously enrolled, 
there have been 11,622 mismatches out of about 4.4 million one-to-one matches. For status management, 
175,234 new watch list records have been generated, with 
131 hits against entry records, 86 hits against visa 
records, 165 cases referred to ICE, an
d 4 arrests. Identity verification at the border has resulted in 11,600 false 
matches among the 4,369,569 one-to-one matches performed.  The number of travelers processed through exit 
controls via an automated kiosk was 355,967, resulting in 54 watch list hits, with no stops or arrests.  IDENT 

has made seven identifications. The panelists noted that all watch list matches, based on a threshold level set by 
NIST guidelines, go to secondary processing, where human 
examiners determine if the ma
tch is true, false, or a 
mismatch.
  44 As of January 2004, US-VISIT was operational at 115 airports and 15 seaports; as of December 
2004, coverage included 50 land border ports of entr
y, with the remaining 115 to be covered by December 
2005.  
45 US-VISIT includes the interfacing and integration 
of over 20 existing systems, including, among 
others, the Arrival Departure Information System (ADIS), storing traveler arrival and departure information; the 

Advance Passenger Information System (APIS), containing arrival and departure manifest information; 
Computer Linked Application Information Management System 3 (CLAIMS 3), holding information on foreign 
nationals who request benefits; the Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS), containing 

information on foreign students in the United States
; and the Consular Consolidated Database (CCD), 
containing information about whether an individual holds a valid visa or has previously applied for a visa.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  28 The US-VISIT process was described as follo
ws: During the preentry phase, information on 
the visa applicant is captured at an overseas consulate and searched against the IDENT and watch list 
databases.  At the point of entry, an individual is enro
lled and a search is performed against only the 
watch list database. The response time for issuan
ce of a visa at a consulate is, on average, 
approximately 15 minutes; at the point of entry, responses are returned in approximately 10 seconds.
47  Other potential program capabilities include generating an exit record of visitors
48 based on one-to-one verification and status management and main
taining an accurate record of changes in an 
individual™s residence eligibility (for example, ma
rriage to a U.S. citizen) or ineligibility (for 
example, an expired visa or other immigration vi
olation). The panelists explained that status management consisted of checking IAFIS records (including the new criminal records, which are 
updated every 24 hours) and the 1.8-million-entry 
watch list database against the 14-million-entry 
US-VISIT database to identify new watch list record
s and to pursue investigations. Requirements for 
the future evolution of US-VISIT include biomet
ric comparison and travel document authentication 
for both U.S.-issued travel documents to permanen
t residents, such as refugees, and visa-waiver 
program passports issued by other countries.
49 A privacy protection program for US-VISIT was also 
discussed that included information use rules and notif
ication requirements, redress policies to request 
corrections of errors, and privacy impact and pr
ivacy risk assessments. There is ongoing work to 
develop information-sharing models
 with other governments, such as the Enhancing International 
Travel Security program, intended to enable gove
rnments to validate ﬁgoodﬂ people, not just to 
identify the ﬁbad.ﬂ 
 Policy Challenges Related to Large-Scale Systems 
 Technical and policy challenges raised by information sharing among large-scale biometrics 
systems were also discussed.  Such
 challenges include maintaining da
ta integrity, consolidation of 
biometric information, and integration of databases.
 Participants also underscored the importance of 
clearly defining the purpose of a system before adding new requirements to the existing system.  
The panelists indicated that to ensure military 
and civilian agencies are collecting data to the 
necessary technical standards would require the devel
opment of policy to determine that the data are 
being collected uniformly and by high-quality, sufficiently-trained staff using proper equipment. 
Panelists also stressed the need to improve the 
quality of information transmission to facilitate 
decision making.  However, improvements to the anal
ysis procedure also require other organizations to perform intelligence link analysis
50 quickly, which is often difficult given the different missions of 
the different agencies. For instance, the US-VISIT program operates under certain efficiency 
constraints, given the need to manage the flow of
 travelers quickly. When individuals are held in 
custody suspected of wrongdoing, such as occurs in
 law enforcement and military operations, more 
time may be available to return results. Particip
ants noted that the Defense Science Board is 
                                                                                                                               
                                     
 46 The recidivist database, which began in 1994, is the original biometric foundation of US-VISIT and 
has grown with the addition of the biometric enrollment database. 
47 Currently, more then 25,000 people a day are biometrically checked as part of the visa process.  
Since January 2004, there have been more than 4 million visa applications. At entry, approximately 75,000 

people a day are run through the US-VISIT system. 
48 The panelists noted that the exit record may also be used for identification against watch lists, but it 
will not be used to enable enrollment. 
49 One factor that could delay the implementation of these requirements is the current difficultly most 
visa waiver countries are experiencing to meet the deadline and the inability of the United States to acquire 
readers for these passports. 
50 Intelligence link analysis refers to the process of associating 
other pieces of data with the biometric 
match. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 29beginning to address improvements in the communica
tion of results from the biometric information 
captured and stored in different agency databases. 
The panelists suggested that the greatest challenges in integrating databases were not only the 
differences in the number of samples (e.g., prints) 
collected, the time constraints, and conditions of 
the facilities51 but also the different contexts in which the information is collected. For instance, 
IDENT/US-VISIT is generally used in a context 
where people have incentives to tell the truth and 
describe their real identities; IAFIS is not.  Additi
onally, individuals in the US-VISIT database are not 
usually in IAFIS, because they are not likely to have
 been charged with a crime in the United States.  
As the information that a system collects will 
depend on its intended use, some participants stressed that it is important to clearly identify the 
problems that the system intends to address before 
the collection of biometric information is consolid
ated across government agencies. For instance, the information DHS collects regarding the entry of a fore
igner is not necessarily related to the threat that 
individual poses to a plane, a separate area in wh
ich DHS also collects information.  Panelists 
suggested that existing problems should be defined 
and the best technology should be selected before 
missions change or are expanded.  Broader Technical and Policy Challenges Related 
to Biometric Information-Sharing Systems 
 In examining the broader goals for and challe
nges of biometrics systems, the importance of 
evaluating such systems with respect to their pur
poses and context was stressed, along with the need 
for policies to establish appropriate error rate goals or thresholds, facilitate the identification of potential sources of error, and promote a bette
r understanding of what improvements biometric 
systems offer over existing security, access control, and other systems (see Session 3). Furthermore, it 

was suggested that the scope of the difficult polic
y problems that should be addressed extends beyond 
issues of biometric technology and system accuracy to
 considerations of the usefulness of the data for 
decision making and to policies for maintaining and sharing digital records. 
There was a discussion on the adequate alignment of policy and technological capabilities. 
Not only is it economically infeasible from a technolog
y and policy perspective to have an error rate 
of zero, but also such an error rate requirement
 would imply that no risk assumptions need be 
considered in designing policy. As both system
s and policies must be designed to accommodate 
failure, it was suggested that redundancies and erro
r handling procedures should be created for both. 
Additionally, the interaction between the technologyŠ
a tool for a particular purposeŠand the system 
must be considered, because the technology choice 
may also have policy implications. For instance, 
when liveliness is being screened for (to ensure that the biometric information being detected comes 
from a living human being), it may be easier for an a
ttacker to emulate liveliness than to defeat or 
circumvent nonliveliness detection. Given the ti
ght coupling between the technology selection and 
policy goals, it was suggested that the explicit biom
etric technology designations in recent legislation might be too specific for Congress to mandate effectively. 
In addition to the potential sources of error previo
usly identified in the wo
rkshop (see Session 1), 
it was suggested that human factors should also be 
considered in addressing insider threats. By some 
measures, 70 percent of IT system breaches or compromises are reportedly attributable to insider 
threats. All systems are subject to both intentional 
and unintentional errors.  Participants discussed the 
                                                     
 51 It was noted that military field facilities for capturi
ng biometrics differ significantly from those for 
law enforcement booking and DHS. Currently, the National Institute of Justice has an initiative to design 
equipment capable of taking 
10 high-quality rolled fingerpri
nts accurately in 10 seconds.
  Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  30 trade-offs between secrecy and security: When is
 openness necessary (for example, in terms of 
algorithms or error rates) to achieve a robust 
system, and when is secrecy a better strategy?
52   It was emphasized that understanding the intended purpose of a biometric systemŠbe it 
security, ﬁsecurity theater,ﬂ or social controlŠ
is necessary to properly appraise the system™s 
effectiveness. Security theater (for example, requiring
 display of a driver™s license to enter a building, 
or removal of shoes before entering an airport 
boarding areaŠprovides little real security protection 
but may have social value by allowing people to feel more secure. On the other hand, while 

improving the document security and issuance pro
cesses for driver licenses might be worthwhile, 
there is a need to clarify the purpose of such me
asures and to carefully distinguish between measures 
aimed at increased social control and measures ai
med at counterterrorism or national security. For 
instance, the proposed provision of the Real ID Ac
t that requires states to issue drivers™ licenses only 
against proof of legal U.S. residence may begin to 
address issues of illegal immigration.  However, it 
also may exclude a significant portion of the popul
ation from the driver™s license system and from 
any identification systems based on drivers™ licenses, 
preventing the identification of such individuals after the fact.  One consequence of this may be
 to increase the size of the suspect pool that law 
enforcement and national security resources must be devoted to. 
Several participants emphasized that biometri
cs may improve identification procedures but 
are not a panacea. Different types of identificati
on have different characteristics, and determining 
which type is appropriate will depend on the applica
tion.  Verification of a claim of enrollment, for 
instance, stands in contrast to identification of 
a person without an enrollment claim.  The former, 
verification of an enrollment claim, serves to verify
 the individual identity, often with the subject 
retaining control over his or her own information.  
In the latter, identification without an enrollment 
claim, additional data are attributed and tied to an
 individual based on biometri
c identifiers, with third 
parties generally controlling data attr
ibution and reputation of the subject.
53   With respect to limiting identity theft, it w
as suggested that claim verification, where 
individuals have an incentive to control their reputatio
n, might be more useful than a system in which 
biometrics are aggregated in a database and later so
ld, which would not be much better than current 
processes that aggregate and sell SSNs. With r
espect to security screening, when attempting 
identification absent a claim, there are concerns
 not only about the accuracy of the biometric 
identifier but also about the usefulness of data that 
are linked to an identity and used by the system for 
decision making.54  If a watch list is being employed, the inte
grity and usefulness of the data (and by 
extension the list itself) will depend on the crite
ria for inclusion on the watch list, on who has 
responsibility for different segments of a presumably 
integrated list, and on policy limits that prevent 
the inclusion of minor offenses that might dilute the data.
55  Various issues related to information sharing were identified, including clarifying the role of 
privacy and the differences between the rules for 
preemption and counterterrorism and those for due 
process in criminal prosecutions. Several principles 
for information sharing and biometric system use 
were offered, including these:  
                                                     
 52 For a recent take on this issue, see Peter Swire,
 2004, ﬁA model for when disclosure helps security: 
What is different about comp
uter and network security?ﬂ 
Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology 
Law, Vol. 2. Available online at <http://ssrn.com/abstract=531782>.  
53 Participants suggested that clear policy rules an
d mechanisms are needed for managing reputation 
elements and more general data in systems, for matching systems to needs, and for addressing data issues such 
as transience (or how long information shou
ld be maintained) and error correction. 
54 The panelist suggested that data mining presents the re
verse problem, as data are used to try to reveal 
the legal identity; biometric systems begin with the identity to try to reveal the data. 
55 For an overview of problems that
 can arise with watch lists see, K.A. Taipale, 2004, ﬁPublic safety 
vs. personal privacy: The case for and against secure flig
ht,ﬂ presented at the InfoS
ecurity 2004 conference in 
New York on December 8.  Availabl
e online at <http://www.stilwell.org/pr
esentations/CAS-InfoSec2004.pdf>. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PANEL SESSIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 
 31• Make clear the purpose of the system and how potential intrusion on rights is balanced 
with functional requirements.  
• Identify alternatives and choose less intrusiv
e means to accomplish the objective once the 
technology has been selected.  
• Ensure the ability to correct
 errors in the system. 
• Design system policies that appropriately cons
ider the consequences of different system 
errors (for example, the consequence of some
one gaining access to an airplane versus the 
consequence of someone™s flawed prosecution and wrongful incarceration).   
 It was emphasized that the lack of clear policies and rules creates problems, particularly 
because preemptive counterterrorist actions take pl
ace in a context that presumes the innocence of 
foreign travelers and U.S. citizens.  Several principles were offered for biometric system use. First, do no harm. Understand the 
system design and features that are necessary fo
r the policy purpose. For instance, do not build 
systems that center on identification rather than secur
ity if the rationale for the system is security.  
Second, limit the harm. Include only those features 
that are necessary to support the system purpose 
and process. Third, be aware of unintended consequences (see Session 3). Consider when transaction 
records are necessary, when they are not, and wh
en records should expire.  Additionally, it was 
suggested that technical systems should include ﬁpol
icy appliances,ﬂ or mechanisms that (1) permit 
an intervention point for human beings to make a 
decision to control data sharing and (2) provide a 
technical means for carrying it out, which can be adjusted depending on the particular application, 
threat level, etc.   
 
   Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   
   
 
 
 
   
 Appendixes  Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35 A  Workshop Agenda     
 
 
   
 
 WORKSHOP ON TECHNICAL, POLICY, AND CULTURAL DIMENSIONS OF 
BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS 
 March 15-16, 2005 
Washington, D.C 
 Tuesday, March 15 
 9:15 a.m.  Welcome: Joe Pato
   
9:30-noon 
Session 1:  Scientific and Technical Challenges for Biometric Technologies 
and Systems, Including System Integration, Architecture, and Contexts of 

Use  Moderator:  Anil Jain  
 Potential Discussion Topics  
• Are there major technological breakthroughs on the horizon regarding 
new modalities, multimodal biometrics, new recognition algorithms, 

and/or new decision algorithms?  What might emerging sensors, MEMS, 

and nanotechnology offer to biometric systems? 
• Do you think biometrics can reliably solve the identity 
authentication/identification problem, 
especially when the user is an 
adversary? 
• What are the challenges regarding sign
al quality, feature persistence over 
time, statistical dependence among meas
urements of features within and 
across times and method of database indexing?  How do these challenges 
relate to the performance of a biometric system? 
• What are the advantages or disadvantages of using biometrics to enhance 
or replace cryptographic authentication protocols?   
• How does the context of use impact systems choice, integration and 
interoperability options, and effectiv
eness? How does system architecture 
influence effectiveness? 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  36 • What are the most significant open research questions and hard problems 
in biometrics, and how should they be prioritized? 
• Is the current research infrastructure ad
equate for the needs of biometrics 
researchers?  What kinds of exper
tise are required (e.g., biology and 
statistics)? To what extent should biom
etrics research be a part of federal 
IT and security research efforts, and which agencies should emphasize 

which aspects?  
 
Panelists: Jean-Christophe Fondeur, SAGEM 
 James Matey, Sarnoff Labs   

Sharath Pankanti, IBM  Jonathon Phillips, National Institu
te of Standards and Technology
 David Scott, Rice University 
  Noon-1:00 p.m.  Lunch 
 1:00-3:30 
Session 2: Measurement, Statistics, Testing, and Evaluation 
  Moderator:  Joe Campbell  
 
Potential Discussion Topics  
• How can the quality of biometric data
 capture be assessed with sensitivity 
to human rights, accessibility, a
nd due process?  How can such 
assessments be used to improve the operation and performance of a 
biometric system? 
• What do we have to know about biometric features in populations in order 
to accurately estimate the probability 
that (1) two individuals will be indistinguishable for a particular feature, (2) an individual who expresses 

one particular feature will also express another particular feature, (3) a 
particular combination of features is unique to one specific individual, (4) 
an individual does not express a particul
ar feature, and (5) an individual™s 
ethnic or family background predicts expression of a particular feature? 

What kind of studies do we need to c
onduct to collect this information? 
How large a population will be required for each of the necessary studies? 

Are the statistical methods currently used for modeling, representing, and 
reporting the performance of biometric systems fully appropriate? If not, 
what analytic technologies are available to improve them? 
• Is there a role for standard biometric databases made available for 
research, testing, and development? What are good strategies for reducing 

the costs associated with compiling test data for biometrics systems?  
• What is the appropriate role of government in biometrics testing outside 
of a procurement process? Should the government test products and 
should it test the vulnerabilities of biometric products? If so, are there any 

classification issues that arise, and 
what are they?  How effective are 
current government-led testing programs, and is their funding structure 

appropriate to the task?   Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A  37• To what extent should vendor-specific (and potentially market-affecting) 
information be made available together with the results of 

government/public tests of biometric systems?  
• What are reasonable time-frame expectations for the development, testing, 
and deployment of standards, technol
ogies, and systems, and how should 
the public and Congress be educated about these expectations?  Should biometric deployments be certified in some way, and what might that 

mean?  
 Panelists: George Doddington, National Institute of Standards and Technology
 Michele Freadman, Massport 
 Patrick Grother, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
 Austin Hicklin, Mitretek Systems
 Nell Sedransk, National Institute of Standards and Technology    3:30   Break 

 
3:45-6:15 
Session 3: Legislative, Policy, Human, and Cultural Factors  
 Moderator:  Jeanette Blomberg 
 Potential Discussion Topics  
• What usability, interface, social, and human factors issues arise with the 
deployment of biometrics systems, and how might they be addressed? 
How can these factors be used to in
form system and interface design? 
• How can or should cultural factors be
 taken into account when designing 
and deploying biometrics systems?  
• What have been the effects of legi
slative changes that necessitate the 
increased use of biometric technologies?  What new legal issues might be 

raised by more widespread use?  
• What recent policies have shaped the current and near-term use of 
biometrics technology deployments? Wh
at are the policies™ desired and actual effects?  
• What privacy and autonomy concerns does the increased use of 
biometrics technologies raise? What 
are the implications and how can 
they be addressed? What is the re
lationship between bodily integrity 
(personal space) and information privacy concerns?  
• What biometrics use principles should be developed regarding contexts of 
operation, appropriate use guidelines,
 application domains, economic and 
social factors, and usability concerns?  Are there domain-specific issues 

that arise (in connection with voting, e-commerce, large-crowd settings, 
or counterterrorism, for instance) th
at should be taken into account?  
• How does due process enter into the 
policy framework for biometric 
systems? 
• What approaches are courts likely to
 use in assessing the reliability of 
biometric evidence?   
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  38 • From an economic perspective, how can government and private inputs  
and markets best be utilized to ensure the development of biometric 

technologies and human capital in this area? 
 Panelists:   
Tora Bikson, RAND Corporation
 David Kaye, Arizona State University 
 Lisa Nelson, University of Pittsburgh 
 Peter Swire, Ohio State University 
     6:30   Reception for committee 
and workshop participants 
 Wednesday, March 16  
 9:00 a.m.  Welcome back: Joe Pato 

 
9:15-11:45  
Session 4: Scenarios and Applications
   Moderator:  Gordon Levin  
 
Potential Discussion Topics  
• What characteristics have contributed to various biometric systems 
successes and failures? Are there any general lessons that can be learned?  
• Are biometrics more or less appropria
te for different application contexts 
(e.g., closed versus open systems, la
rge versus small deployments, as 
password substitutes) and/or security environments (e.g., government 
versus commercial), and what characterizes those differences? 
• What kind of threat models do differe
nt application contexts presume, and 
how are they dealt with?  
• Have multibiometric fusion approach
es been used successfully, and how 
might they be applied in the future?  
• What strategies and approaches have been or are expected to be most 
successful in practice for overcoming biometric false rejection without 

compromising system security?  
• What principles should be taken into account when determining how best 
to integrate biometrics into particular systems and/or environments? 
• What role should training play for system users? 
 
Panelists:      Joseph Atick, Identix 
 Rick Lazarick, Transportation Security Agency 
 Tony Mansfield, U.K. National Physical Laboratory 
 Cynthia Musselman, Authenti-Corp 
 Marek Rejman-Greene, British Telecommunications   
 
11:45 a.m.-12:30 p.m. Lunch 
  Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A  3912:30-2:15    
Session 5:  Information Sharing and Cooperation: Technical and Policy 
Aspects  Moderator:  Peter Higgins  
 Potential Discussion Topics  
• What are the major challenges associated 
with  ﬁterrorist listﬂ file sharing 
and aggregation, and how are they impacted or mitigated by the inclusion 

of biometrics?  
• What are current biometric data-sharing activities, and to what extent have 
they been successful or unsuccessful (and why)?  
• What should data policy look like in te
rms of database integration, data 
mining, and data privacy aspects in biometric system development and 

integration? What are the data policy 
implications of using and comparing 
biometrics data with other data sources? How does policy deal with 
sensitive but unclassified sources and methods as well as third-party 

ownership of biometric data 
(such as NATO countries providing 
fingerprints of terrorists to add to watch lists)? • How is biometrics data- and information-sharing policy being shaped, and 
what should inform its development? What is missing from the national 
policy discussion that could facilitate the desired security objectives? If 
the issues center on legal policy, are they being addressed in a timely 

fashion or would a higher priority or higher-level legal authority help 

disposition of these issues? 
• What is the role of your organizati
on in international standards setting, 
forensics standards compliance, and cross-jurisdictional cooperation?  
 Panelists:   
William Casey, Boston Police Department 
 Patty Cogswell and Neal Latta, US-VISIT 
 K.A. Taipale, Center for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology 
Policy  John Woodward, Department of Defens
e Biometrics Management Office, 
Biometrics Fusion Center
  2:15-3:00 
Group Brainstorm 
(This session did not take place due to lack of time; 
follow-up input in writing was solicited from participants.)  
 
   Moderator: Joe Pato 

 Potential Discussion Topics 
• What are the important questions and issues that have come out of this 
workshop that the committee should seek to address in the rest of its 

study?  
• Who should the committee be sure to hear from (individuals, groups, 
institutions, or areas of expertise)?  
• How can this committee™s work be
 most helpful to the broader 
community?  
 Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40  B  Biosketches of Committee Members and Staff    
 
 
   
 COMMITTEE MEMBERS  JOSEPH N. PATO,
 Chair, is a Distinguished Technologist at Hewlett-Packard™s HP Laboratories, 
where he serves as lab scientist for the Trusted 
Systems Lab (TSL) and manager for TSL™s Princeton 
research group.  Previously he served as chief t
echnology officer for Hewlett-Packard™s Internet 
Security Solutions Division.  Since 1986, Mr. 
Pato has been involved in security research and 
development, spending much of his career studying auth
entication, identification, and privacy issues.  
Currently Mr. Pato is developing a research program that will analyze secur
ity issues in the health 
care industry. Mr. Pato™s current research focuses 
on the security needs of collaborative enterprises on 
the Internet, addressing both interenterprise models
 and the needs of lightweight instruments and 
peripherals directly attached to the Internet. Sp
ecifically, he is looking at critical infrastructure 
protection and the confluence of trust, e-services, a
nd mobility.  These interests have led him to look 
at the preservation of Internet communication in the event of cyberterrorism, trust frameworks for 
mobile environments, and how to apply privacy cons
iderations in complex systems.  His past work 
includes the design of delegation protocols for 
secure distributed computation, key exchange 
protocols, interdomain trust structures, the development of public- and secret-key-based 
infrastructures, and the more general development of 
distributed enterprise environments.  Mr. Pato is 
also the founder of the IT-ISAC (IT Information Sh
aring and Analysis Center), where he also serves 
as a board member.  Mr. Pato has participated on 
several standards or advisory committees of the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer
s (IEEE), American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI), National Institute for Standards and Tec
hnology (NIST), Department of Commerce, W3C, 
Financial Services Technology Consortium (FSTC
), and Common Open Software Environment 
(COSE).  He has represented Hewlett-Packard to 
the Open Software Foundation (OSF) Architecture 
Planning Council, the technical arm of the OSF Board of Directors.  He has also served on the 
Technical Planning Committee evolving the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) and chaired 

the Security and Remote Procedure Call (RPC
)/Programming Model/Environment Services working 
groups.  He has served as the vice-chair for the Distributed Management Environment (DME)-DCE-

Security working group of the OSF Security Special Interest Group.  In the past, Mr. Pato served as 

the co-chair for the OASIS Security Services 
Technical Committee, which developed Security 
Assertions Markup Language (SAML) from June
 2001 until November 2002.  SAML 1.0 was 
approved as an OASIS standard on November 1, 2002. 
 For the past 3 years, Mr. Pato has been an 
instructor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, teaching a course entitled Ethics and Law on 
the Electronic Frontier (electronic surveillance and copyright control).  Mr. Pato served as a key 

member of CSTB™s committee that wrote 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of 
Privacy (2003).  Mr. Pato™s graduate work was in computer science at Brown University. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B  41 BOB BLAKLEY
 is chief scientist for security and priv
acy at IBM Tivoli Software. He was the 
general chair of the 2003 IEEE Security and Priv
acy Conference and served as general chair of the 
Association for Computing Machinery™s (ACM™s) New Security Paradigms Workshop. Dr. Blakley 
was a member of CSTB™s committee that produced the report 
Who Goes There? Authentication 
Through the Lens of Privacy 
(2003). He was named Distinguished Security Practitioner by the 2002 
ACM Computer Security and Applications Conference (ACSAC) and serves on the editorial board of 

the International Journal of Information Security
 (IJIS). He was the editor of the Object Management 
Group™s (OMG™s) CORBA security specification and is the author of 
CORBA Security: An Introduction to Safe Computing with Objects
. Dr. Blakley was also the editor of the Open Group™s 
Authorization API specification and the OASIS 
Security Services Technical Committee™s SAML 
specification effort. He has been involved in cryptography and data security design work since 1979 

and has authored or coauthored seven papers on cryptography, secret-sharing schemes, access control, 
and other aspects of computer security.  He holds 
nine patents on security-related technologies. Dr. 
Blakley received an A.B. in classics from Princeton 
University and a master™s degree and Ph.D. in 
computer and communications sciences from the University of Michigan. 

 
JEANETTE BLOMBERG
 manages the Work in Organizational Context (WORC) group at the IBM 
Almaden Research Center.  She joined IBM Resear
ch in 2002 to help establish Service Research, a 
group focused on providing research in support of IBM™s Global Services division.  Her research 
focuses on the interplay between people, technology, 
and organizational practices.  Dr. Blomberg is 
also an industry-affiliated Professor of Human Work 
Science at the Blekinge Institute of Technology 
in Sweden, where she advises Ph.D. students and organizes a biennial Ph.D. course on work practice 
and design for students throughout the Nordic count
ries.  Prior to assuming her current position at 
IBM, Dr. Blomberg was director of Experience M
odeling Research at Sapient Corporation, where she 
helped establish the Experience Modeling practice and managed Sapient™s San Francisco Experience 
Modeling group.  While at Sapient she directed 
and participated in research projects for global 
technology, energy, automotive, transportation, c
onsumer products, and financial services companies.  
Dr. Blomberg was also a founding member of the pioneering Work Practice and Technology group at 

the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC).  Ov
er the years her research has explored issues in 
social aspects of technology production and u
se, ethnographically informed organizational 
interventions, participatory design, case-based prot
otyping, and workplace studies.  She received her Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Califor
nia, Davis, where she taught courses in cultural 
anthropology and sociolinguistics. 
 JOSEPH P. CAMPBELL
 received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in
 1979, the Johns Hopkins Univers
ity in 1986, and Oklahoma State 
University in 1992, respectively. Dr. Campbell is cu
rrently a senior member of the technical staff at 
the MIT Lincoln Laboratory in the Informati
on Systems Technology Group, where he conducts 
speech-processing research and specia
lizes in advanced speaker recognition methods. His current foci 
are high-level features for and forensic-style appli
cations of speaker recognition, creating corpora to 
support speech-processing research and evaluation, robust speech coding, biometrics, and cognitive 
radio. Before joining Lincoln, he served 22 years 
at the National Security Agency (NSA).  From 1979 
to 1990, Dr. Campbell was a member of NSA™
s Narrowband Secure Voice Technology research 
group. He and his teammates developed the firs
t DSP-chip software modem and LPC-10e, which 
enhanced the Federal Standard 1015 voice coder and improved U.S. and NATO secure voice systems.  
He was the principal investigator and led the U.S. government™s speech coding team in developing 
the CELP voice coder, which became Federal Standard
 1016 and is the founda
tion of digital cellular 
and voice-over-the-Internet telephony systems. Fr
om 1991 to 1998, Dr. Campbell was a senior 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  42 scientist in NSA™s Biometric Technology research group, where he led voice verification research.  
From 1994 to 1998, he chaired the Biometric Cons
ortium, the U.S. government™s focal point for 
research, development, test, evaluation, and appli
cation of biometric-based personal identification and 
verification technology. From 1998 to 2001, he le
d the Acoustics Section of NSA™s Speech Research 
branch, conducting and coordinating research on and evaluation of speaker recognition, language 
identification, gender identification, and speech ac
tivity detection methods.  From 1991 to 1999, Dr. 
Campbell was an associate editor of 
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing
. He was an 
IEEE Signal Processing Society Distinguished Lectur
er in 2001.  From 1991 to 2001, Dr. Campbell 
taught speech processing at the Johns Hopkins Univers
ity.  Dr. Campbell is currently a member of the 
IEEE Signal Processing Society™s board of governors; an editor of 
Digital Signal Processing journal; a chair of the International Speech Communication Association™s Speaker and Language 

Characterization Special Interest Group (ISCA SpLC
 SIG); a member of ISCA, Sigma Xi, and the 
Acoustical Society of America; and a fellow of the IEEE. 

 GEORGE T. DUNCAN
 is a professor of statistics in the H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy 
and Management and the Department of Statistics at Carnegie Mellon University. He was on the 
faculty of the University of California, Davis (1970-1974), and was a Peace Corps volunteer in the 

Philippines (1965-1967), teaching at Mindanao State University. His current research work centers on 

information technology and social accountability. He
 has published more than 50 papers in such 
journals as Statistical Science, Management 
Science, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 
Econometrica, and Psychometrika. He is a current and past recipient of National Science Foundation 
research funding and has lectured in Brazil, Ital
y, Turkey, Ireland, Mexico, and Japan, among other 
places. He chaired the Panel on Confidentiality 
and Data Access of the National Academy of 
Sciences (1989-1993), producing the report 
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and 
Accessibility of Government Statistics. He chaired the American Sta
tistical Association™s Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality. He is a fellow of th
e American Statistical Association, an elected 
member of the International Statistical Institute, 
and a fellow of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. In 1996 he was 
elected Pittsburgh Statistician of the Year
 by the American 
Statistical Association. He has been editor 
of the Theory and Methods Section of the 
Journal of the 
American Statistical Association. He received a B.S. (1963) and an M.S. (1964) from the University 
of Chicago and a Ph.D. (1970) from the University of Minnesota, all in the field of statistics. 
 
DELORES ETTER
 is a professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the U.S. Naval 
Academy.  Dr. Etter joined the electrical engineer
ing faculty at the United States Naval Academy in 
August 2001 as the first recipient of the Office of Na
val Research Distinguished Chair in Science and 
Technology. From 1998 to 2001, Dr. Etter served 
as the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology. In that position, she 
was responsible for the Defense Science and 
Technology strategic planning, budget allocation,
 program execution, and evaluation for the 
Department of Defense science and technology program
. Prior to that she was a tenured professor in 
electrical and computer engineering at the University of Colorado from 1990 to 1998 and at the 

University of New Mexico (UNM) from 1979 to 1989. In 1998, she served as associate vice president 
for academic affairs at UNM.  She also spent a y
ear in the Electrical Engineering Department of 
Stanford University as a visiting professor in the 
Information Systems Laboratory. Dr. Etter is a 
member of the National Academy of Engineering and the National Science Board. Her research 

interests are in biometrics and digital signal pro
cessing.  She is also the author of a number of 
textbooks on computer languages and software engineering. 

 GEORGE R. FISHER
 is formerly a chief administrative officer for Prudential-Wachovia, where he 
led the merger of Prudential Securities into Wachovia 
in 2002. Prior to joining Prudential, Mr. Fisher 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B  43was chief information officer at Fidelity Invest
ments, where he manage
d technology oversight, 
consolidating mutual fund and brokerage platform
s. Mr. Fisher also spent 16 years at Morgan 
Stanley, first as a principal for Technical Serv
ices Worldwide, transforming manual, low-volume 
systems into Wall Street leaders; later he became managing director of finance, administration, and 
operations for Morgan Stanley Asia, restructur
ing Chinese operations and managing the explosive growth of Asia™s regional markets. 
He also oversaw the first audit of a foreign securities firm by the 
Japanese Ministry of Finance. Mr. Fisher earned a B.A. in economics and computer science from the 

University of Rochester. He has also earned certifi
cations from the National Association of Securities 
Dealers (Series 3, 7, 63, 24, and 27), the National Association of Corporate Directors (Director of 
Professionalism), the American Chamber of Commerce 
in Japan, and the Association of International Education of Japan, earning Leve
l 4 language proficiency. 
 
STEVEN P. GOLDBERG
 is a professor of law at the Georgetown University Law Center.  An 
expert in law and science, Mr. Goldberg is the author of 
Culture Clash: Law and Science in America (1996), winner of the Alpha Sigma Nu Book Award, and coauthor of the widely used text 
Law, Science, and Medicine
.  He served as a law clerk to D.C. Circuit Court Chief Judge David L. Bazelon 
and U.S. Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan, Jr
.  He also served as an attorney in the General 
Counsel™s Office of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Comm
ission.  Mr. Goldberg is a member of the D.C. 
and Maryland bars and the Section on Science and Te
chnology of the American Bar Association.  He 
received his A.B. from Harvard College and his J.D. from Yale Law School. 
 
PETER T. HIGGINS,
 founder of Higgins & Associates, International (which he recently merged 
with ASCG of Nevada to form the Higgins-Herm
ansen Group, LLC), has 35 years™ experience in the 
information technology field and has been involved 
with biometrics since the late 1980s.  He is an 
instructor of biometrics at the University of Ca
lifornia, Los Angeles, Extension School. He chaired 
the International Association for Identification™
s AFIS Committee for 5 years and is a well-known 
consultant in the field of large-scale biometric pr
ocurement and testing. In 2002 he joined John 
Woodward and Nick Orlans in authoring the McGraw-Hill/Osborne book 
Biometric Identification in 
the Information Age
. Previously he served as deputy assistant 
director of engineering with the FBI 
and was the program manager for the FBI™s Integrat
ed Automated Fingerprint Identification System 
(IAFIS). Prior to this he served in technical, ope
rational, and executive positions with the Central 
Intelligence Agency. Mr. Higgins received a B.A. in 
mathematics from Marist College and an M.S. in 
theoretical math and computer science from Stevens 
Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey.  
 
PETER B. IMREY is a member of the Cleveland Clinic Department of Quantitative Health 
Sciences, teaches in the Clinic™s Lerner College 
of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, 
and is affiliate professor in the Department of Statis
tics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  
He previously served on the faculties of the Univer
sities of North Carolina (Biostatistics, 1972-1975) 
and Illinois (Medical Information Science; Statistics; and Community Health, 1975-2002).  Dr. Imrey 
has made research and expository contributions to 
statistical analysis of categorical data and to 
diverse health science areas, including meningoco
ccal disease, diet and cancer, and dental data analysis.  He has served on editorial boards of three statistical journals and the 
Encyclopedia of Biostatistics (2nd edition), on numerous federal special 
study sections and em
phasis panels, and on the National Academies™ committee that produced the report 
The Polygraph and Lie Detection
 (2003).  He has also held major elective posts in th
e American Statistical As
sociation, the American 
Public Health Association (APHA), and the International Biometric Society (IBS), including 2005 
president of the IBS Eastern North American Region. Dr. Imrey has been honored by APHA™s 
Statistics Section, and is a fellow of the American
 College of Epidemiology and a member of Sigma 
Xi and Delta Omega honorary societies.  He receiv
ed his A.B. in mathematics and statistics from 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  44 Columbia University and his Ph.D. in biostatistics 
from the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill. 
 ANIL K. JAIN
 is a University Distinguished Professor in
 the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering at Michigan State University and was the department chair from 1995 to 1999.  His 

research interests include statistical pattern recognition, exploratory pattern analysis, Markov random 
fields, texture analysis, three-dimensional object
 recognition, medical image analysis, document 
image analysis, and biometric authentication.  He
 received the best paper awards in 1987 and 1991 
and was cited for outstanding contributions in 1
976, 1979, 1992, 1997, and 1998 from the Pattern 
Recognition Society.  He also received the 1996 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks Outstanding 
Paper Award.  He is a fellow of the IEEE, the AC
M, and the International Association of Pattern 
Recognition (IAPR).  He was the editor in chief 
of the IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence (1991-1994).  He has received a Fulbright Research Award, a Guggenheim 
fellowship, and the Alexander von Humboldt Rese
arch Award. Dr. Jain delivered the 2002 Pierre 
Devijver lecture sponsored by the IAPR.  He holds 
six patents in the area of fingerprint matching and 
has written or edited three books on biometrics: 
Handbook of Face Recognition;
 Handbook of 
Fingerprint Recognition;
 and 
Biometrics: Personal Identification in Networked Society
.  Dr. Jain was the co-organizer of the NSF workshop on the biomet
rics research agenda, held in May 2003, and has 
organized several conferences on biometrics.  He recei
ved a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Ohio 
State University in 1973. 
 
GORDON LEVIN 
is senior engineer with the Advanced Systems group of Design and Engineering 
at Walt Disney World in Orlando, where the worl
d™s largest commercial biometric application has 
been operating since 1997. As a licensed electrical e
ngineer, he is the engineer of record for all physical security system design performed on the 
42-square-mile property. 
 Mr. Levin has been a 
member of the Biometric Consortium Working 
Group (BCWG) since 1999 and the sole commercial 
end user to be a participating representative ac
ting under NIST and the NSA to incubate biometric 
standards for submission to ANSI and the Interna
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO). In 
2002 he was the keynote speaker at the plenary 
meeting of ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1 
Subcommittee 37 on Biometrics. He also participat
ed in the Aviation SecurityŒBiometrics Working 
Group that was assembled in the wake of 9/11 to report on passenger protection and identity 
verification. This report was instrumental in th
e strategic planning for the soon-to-be-formed 
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and its plans for adopting biometric technology.  Prior 

to joining Walt Disney World in 1997, Mr. Levin had been a private consultant engineer working in 

the DOD and commercial sectors in specialized security and electronic system design and 

construction. 
 LAWRENCE D. NADEL 
is a fellow at the Center for Information and Telecommunications 
Technologies at Mitretek Systems.  His current focu
s is on the requirements for and issues associated 
with implementing effective and 
interoperable biometric identification and authentication systems 
and objective methods for testing and evaluating the 
performance of these systems.  He has provided 
technical leadership to a variety of national id
entification and security-related projects for agencies 
such as the TSA (Airport Access Control Pilot Program), the Department of Defense Biometric 

Management Office, and the FBI (IAFIS and the Un
iversal Latent Workstation).  Dr. Nadel has 
supported state and local law enforcement and the 
National Institute of Justice through Mitretek™s 
Center for Criminal Justice Technology (reference ba
llistic imaging, the impact of biometric encoded 
drivers™ licenses on law enforcement, and biometri
c-based identification credentials for criminal 
justice and public safety officials).  He is c
oprincipal investigator on a Mitretek-funded research 
project to assess and develop biometric fusion methods.  He chairs Mitretek™s Biometric 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B  45Identification Cluster Group, is Mitretek™s tech lead for biometrics, and is a participant in the 
INCITS-M1 biometrics standards group.  He earne
d a B.S. degree in electrical engineering from 
Polytechnic University and M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and biomedical engineering from 
Ohio State University.  
JAMES L. WAYMAN
 is a senior fellow and director of the biometric identification research 
program of the San Jose State University Research
 Institute. He served as director of the U.S. 
National Biometric Test Center in the Clinton administration (1997-2000). He holds four patents in 
speech processing and is a ﬁprincipal U.K. e
xpertﬂ (PUKE) on the ISO/IEC standards committee 
biometrics. Dr. Wayman is a senior member of 
the IEEE. He was a member of CSTB™s committee 
that produced 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy
.  Dr. Wayman received 
his Ph.D. degree in engineering from the Univers
ity of California, Santa Barbara, in 1980. 
 STAFF   
LYNETTE I. MILLETT
 is a senior program officer and study director at the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board of the National Academie
s. She is currently involved in several CSTB 
projects, including a comprehensive exploration of privacy in the information age, a study on 

certification and dependable software systems, an ass
essment of the Social Security Administration™s 
E-Government Strategy, and an activity on biomet
rics technologies, among other things.  Ms. Millett 
recently completed a small activity on the topic of radio-frequency identification technologies.  She 

also recently completed a CSTB project that produced 
Who Goes There? Authentication Technologies 
and Their Privacy Implications
 and IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity 
Systems.  Before joining CSTB, she worked on static 
analysis techniques for concurrent programming 
languages as well as research on value-sensitive design and informed
 consent online. She has an M.Sc. in computer science from Cornell University 
along with a B.A. in mathematics and computer 
science with honors from Colby College. Her graduate 
work was supported by both an NSF graduate 
fellowship and an Intel graduate fellowship.  

 KRISTEN BATCH
 is an associate program officer with CSTB. She is involved with projects 
focusing on wireless communication technologies and 
the work of the Whither Biometrics committee. 
While pursuing an M.A. in international communicat
ions from American University, she interned at 
the National Telecommunications and Information Ad
ministration, in the Office of International 
Affairs, and at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in the Technology and Public Policy 
Program. She earned a B.A. from Carnegie Mellon 
University in literary and cultural studies and 
Spanish and received two travel grants to
 conduct independent research in Spain. 
 
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH,
 senior program assistant, has been with CSTB since January 1999 
supporting several projects. She is currently supporting the projects Wireless Technology Prospects 

and Policy and Whither Biometrics. She previ
ously worked on the projects that produced 
Signposts in 
Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet
 Navigation; Getting Up to Speed: The Future of 
Supercomputing; Beyond Productivity: Informati
on Technology, Innovation, and Creativity; IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future
; Building a Workforce for the Information Economy; and The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age. Ms. Huynh also assisted with the 
project Exploring Information Technology Issues fo
r the Behavioral and Social Sciences (digital divide and democracy). She assists on other proj
ects as needed.  Before coming to the National 
Academies, Ms. Huynh worked as a meeting assistant 
at Management for Meetings, April to August 
1998, and as a meeting assistant at the American So
ciety for Civil Engineers from September 1996 to 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
  46 April 1998. Ms. Huynh has a B.A. (1990) in liberal studies, with minors in sociology and psychology 
from Salisbury University. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47 What Is CSTB?   As a part of the National Research Council, 
the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provid
e independent advice to the federal government on 
technical and public policy issues relating to compu
ting and communications.  Composed of leaders 
from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical national issues and makes 

recommendations to government, industry, and acad
emia.  CSTB also provides a neutral meeting 
ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may be premature.  It 

convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public and private sectors, ensuring 
consideration of key perspectives.  The majority of
 CSTB™s work is requested by federal agencies and 
Congress, consistent with its National Academies™ context. 
A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB is unique in its 
comprehensive scope and its effective, interdiscip
linary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and 
policy issues.  Beginning with early work in com
puter and communications security, cyber-assurance 
and information systems trustworthiness have been 
cross-cutting themes in CSTB™s work.  CSTB has 
produced several reports that have become classi
cs in the field, and it continues to address these 
topics as they grow in importance. 
To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country and from around the 
world, inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service.  Studies are conducted by 

balanced committees without direct financial inte
rests in the topics they are addressing.  Those 
committees meet, confer electronically, and build an
alyses through their deliberations.  Additional 
expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of review and critique, further enhancing the quality of 
CSTB reports.  By engaging groups of principa
ls, CSTB gets the facts and insights critical to assessing key issues. 
The mission of CSTB is to 

 • Respond to requests from the government, nonpr
ofit organizations, and private industry 
for advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for 

advice on computer and telecommunications
 systems planning, utilization, and 
modernization.  
• Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and 
telecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources, information 
infrastructure, and societal impacts.  
• Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology, and 
telecommunications as critical resources.  
• Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunications 
technologies and other fields, at large and within the National Academies. 
 CSTB projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of information 
technology.  Recently completed reports include 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens 
of Privacy; The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learni
ng from September 11; Cybersecurity Today 
and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later
; Youth, Pornography, and the Internet;
 Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits; and Innovation in Information Technology
.  For further information about CSTB 
reports and active projects, see <http://cstb.org>.  