DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11706Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: ImprovingMethods and Measures: Workshop Summary36 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10275-9 | DOI 10.17226/11706Alexandra Beatty, Rapporteur; Program Committee for a Workshop on ImprovingResearch on Interactive Media and Children's Health; Board on Children, Youth,and Families; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education;National Research Council; Institute of MedicineStudying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures  Workshop Summary  Alexandra Beatty, Rapporteur  Program Committee for a Workshop on Improving Research on 
Interactive Media and Children's Health 
 Board on Children, Youth, and Families Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education Institute of Medicine 
      Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.      Washington, DC 20001  NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members 
are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the Nationa
l Academy of Engineering, and th
e Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsib
le for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance. 
 
This study was supported by Contract No. 04-1101-310 between the National Academy of Sciences and the Henry J. Kaiser Family F
oundation.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or 
recommendations expressed in th
is publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.  
International Standard Book Number ISBN 0-309-10275-8 

 
Additional copies of this report are available from National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, 
N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (
800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); 
Internet, http://www.nap.edu  
Printed in the United States of America 

Copyright 2006 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved. 
 
Suggested citation:  National Research Council and Institute of Medicine.  (2006). Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth:  Improving Methods and Measures.  Alexandra Beatty, Rapporteur.  Program Committee for a Workshop 
on Improving Research on Interactive Media 
and Children™s Health.  Board on Children, Youth, 
and Families, Division of Behavioral and 
Social Sciences and Education and Institute 
of Medicine.  Washington, DC:  The National 
Academies Press. 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprof
it, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged 
in scientific and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general 
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the 
Academy has a mandate that requires it to a
dvise the federal governme
nt on scientific and 
technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 
 The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences
, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers.  It is autonomous in its administ
ration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Scien
ces the responsibility for advising the federal 
government.  The National Academy of Engine
ering also sponsors engineering programs 
aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the 
superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. 
Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering. 
 The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy 
of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the 
examination of policy matters pertaining to th
e health of the public.  The Institute acts 
under the responsibility given to the National 
Academy of Sciences by its congressional 
charter to be an adviser to the federal govern
ment and, upon its own initiative, to identify 
issues of medical care, research, and education.
  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of 
the Institute of Medicine. 
 The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad commu
nity of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge
 and advising the federal government.  
Functioning in accordance with general policie
s determined by the Academy, the Council 
has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and 
the National Academy of Engineering in pr
oviding services to the government, the 
public, and the scientific and engineering 
communities.  The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. 
Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
. Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v PROGRAM COMMITTEE FOR A WORKSHOP
 ON IMPROVING RESEARCH ON 
INTERACTIVE MEDIA AND CHILDREN™S HEALTH 
 
 ALETHA C. HUSTON (Chair), Department of Human Ecology, University of Texas, Austin 
DANIEL R. ANDERSON, Department of Psyc
hology, University of Massachusetts MARK P. BECKER, Office of the Provost, University of South Carolina NATASHA J. CABRERA, Depart
ment of Human Development, University of Maryland 
JUDY S. DeLOACHE, Department of 
Psychology, University of Virginia DAVID FORSYTH, Computer Scie
nce Division, University of California, Berkeley SANDRA L. HOFFERTH, Department of Family Studies, University of Maryland 
SHEPPARD G. KELLAM, American Institutes for Research, Baltimore 

SUSAN M. McHALE, Department 
of Human Development and Family Studies, Pennsylvania 
 State University 

DONALD F. ROBERTS, Department of 
Communication, Stanford University JANET WARD SCHOFIELD, Learning Research and Development Center, University of 
 Pittsburgh 

VICTOR C. STRASBURGER, School of Medicine, University of New Mexico  
ELLEN WARTELLA (
liaison to the Board on Children, Youth, and Families) Office of the 
 Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost, 
University of California, Riverside  
 
ROSEMARY CHALK, Project Director WENDY KEENAN, 
Program Associate
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi 
BOARD ON CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES 
  MICHAEL I. COHEN (Chair), Department of Pediatrics, Albe
rt Einstein College of Medicine BARBARA WOLFE (
Vice Chair), Department of Economics and Population Health Sciences, 
University of Wisconsin 
WILLIAM BEARDSLEE, Department of Ps
ychiatry, Children™s Hospital, Boston P. LINDSAY CHASE-LANSDALE, Institute for 
Policy Research, Northwestern University 
THOMAS DeWITT, Division of Ge
neral and Community Pediatri
cs, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center 
MARY JANE ENGLAND, Office of 
the President, Regis College 
BRENDA ESKENAZI, School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley CHRISTINE C. FERGUSON, School of Public Health and Health Services, George Washington 
University NEAL HALFON, School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles SUSAN MILLSTEIN, Division of Adolescent Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 
ELENA NIGHTINGALE, Institute of Medicine, The National Academies, Washington, DC 
LAURENCE STEINBERG, Department 
of Psychology, Temple University ELLEN WARTELLA, Office of the Executive Vice Ch
ancellor and Provost, University of California, Riverside  
 
ROSEMARY CHALK, Board Director WENDY KEENAN, 
Program Associate
  Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii 
CONTENTS 
 
   Page  
Preface ix  
1:  Introduction 1 

 
2:  Media Consumption as a Public Health Issue 4 

 
3:  The Current State of Media Research 8 

 
4:  Methodological Questions, Challenges, and Opportunities 13 
 
5:  Perspectives from Other Kinds
 of Epidemiological Research 16 
 
6:  Where Next? 19 

 
References 22 

 
Appendix:  Workshop Agenda and Participants 23 
 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  ixPreface    Concerns about the theory, 
quality, and rigor of methods
 and measures in studies 
of the impact of media technologies on child
 health and development have emerged in 
recent Academy studies.  A 2006 study of the im
pact of food marketing on the diets and 
health of children and youth (Institute of Medicine, 2006) and an earlier 2004 study on underage drinking (National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2004) both called attention to the pervasive nature of media in the soci
al environments of today™s 
children and youth and the limited capacity of research studies to understand its nature, 

intensity, duration, or effects. 
 In response to these concerns, memb
ers of the Board on Children, Youth, and 
Families of the National Research Council and In
stitute of Medicine sought to organize a 
planning discussion to explore the strengths and limitations of the methods and measures 
of interactions between media influen
ces and child and adolescent health and development.  Board member Ellen Wartella fr
amed a set of key questions that ultimately 
led to a collaboration with the Kaiser Family Foundation in organizing a planning 
meeting to examine these issues and to identif
y strategies that coul
d inform the design and implementation of future surveys a
nd studies.  A program committee chaired by 
Aletha Huston met by phone to plan the agenda
 for the meeting and to identify speakers 
and other participants. 
 The program committee commissioned two 
papers to guide the discussions:  Elizabeth Vandewater from the University of Te
xas prepared an overview of the types of measures currently employed in selected 
media studies, and Michael Oakes from the 
University of Minnesota presented an anal
ysis from the perspective of a social 
epidemiologist on the merits of selected 
study designs and assessment measures.  Both 
papers are available online, along with slides from presentations by other speakers (www.bocyf.org). 
 This workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical
 expertise, in accordance with procedures 
approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Research Council.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published re
port as sound as possible and to ensure that 
the report meets institutional standards for 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the charge.  The review comments and draft ma
nuscript remain confidential to protect the 
integrity of the process.  We thank the following individuals for their review of this report: Judy S. DeLoache, Department of 
Psychology, University of Virginia; Susan McHale, Department of Human Developmen
t and Family Studies, Pennsylvania State 
University; W. James Potter, Department of
 Communication, University of California at Santa Barbara; Richard Scheines, Depa
rtment of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon 
University; and Ellen Wartella, Office of the Executive Vice Chancellor and Provost, University of California, Riverside. 
 Although the reviewers listed above pr
ovided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.  The review of 
this report was overseen by Gary 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xSandefur, College of Letters and Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison.  Appointed 
by the National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an 

independent examination of this report was 
carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully
 considered.  Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entir
ely with the author(s) and the institution.
  
      Aletha C. Huston 

      Chair 

      Program Committee for a Workshop on 
Improving Research on Interactive Media 

and Children's Health 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1Chapter 1 Introduction 
  
 
 
 The presence and intensity of media 
influencesŠtelevision, radio, music, 
computers, films, videos, and the InternetŠa
re increasingly recognized as an important 
part of the social ecology of children and youth, and these influences have become more 
visible and volatile in recent decades.  Res
earch that explores the level and effects of 
media influences calls for measurements of 
the quantity and character of exposure to a variety of potentially overlapping media sources,
 an analysis of the content of the media 
output, and examination of the social context 
and relationships that are associated with 
the media experience. 
Additional effort is needed to develop theories that can identify underlying processes and mechanisms that 
link media influences to outcom
es.  Outcomes in turn call 
for tools that can measure, evaluate, and 
help explain how certain media experiences 
influence, and are influenced by, health and behavioral factors as well as cognitive and developmental processes.  Methodologi
es from a variety of disciplinesŠ
communications, economics, neuroscience, pe
diatrics, and psychology, to name a fewŠ
have been applied to these questions, and a strong body of research and valuable findings has emerged.  Nevertheless, the field is
 relatively young and many methodological and 
theoretical questions remain, even as new 
digital technologies continue to pose unique challenges to researchers. While current media studies focus on the social environment of the millennium 
generation, there is nothing new in adults being worried about corrupting influences on young people.  Early Greek philosophers argued about the relative merits of a focus on 
rhetoric in the education of their youth at the expense of reason and understanding.  When novels were first published during the eighteenth century, many people were 
concerned that readers, especially the young, would be corrupted by the licentious and immoral behavior described, as well as by the indolent lifestyle they perceived novel readers to follow.  By the twentieth cent
ury, the potential causes for concern had proliferated dramatically.  
Today, media experiences seem to expand by the month, and 
while much of the concern about their in
fluence on young people may represent older 
worries in new forms, the media ecology of 
today™s children and youth also presents a new frontier that offers unique challenges for research studies. 
A child born in the 1930s might have spent as much as several hours a week 
listening to the radio; reading comic books, news
papers, or magazines; or watching a film 
at a local theatre.  Since television was firs
t introduced in the 1950s, the number of hours 
young people spend interacting in some way with media, as well as the range and 
capabilities of the many devices and activ
ities that could be considered media 
experiences, have increased to an extent far beyond the imagining of today™s 
grandparents when they were young.  Children today use electronic media from two to 
five hours daily, and infantsŠeven in uteroŠare regularly exposed to a variety of media 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2stimuli.  This pervasive experience has rais
ed many questions about how media exposure, 
content, and context influence young people™s health, development, and behavior. 
Researchers are increasingly concerne
d not only with how much time children 
spend with the media in general, but also
 with how they apportion their exposure over different sources and types of media.  Furthe
rmore, interest is growing in examining how 
the experience with media expos
ure, content, and context has changed over the decades in response to new media features and technol
ogies as well as reflecting other social and economic trends.  As an increasingly pervasiv
e and vibrant part of the social ecology of children and youth, media influences have draw
n the attention of parents, practitioners, and policy makers who seek to curb risky e
xposures as well as to identify ways to promote positive media practices that can foster healthy development. 
These questions are extremely complicat
ed to investigate.  Recognizing the importance of this research, the Board on Children, Youth, and Families, under the 

auspices of the National Research Council a
nd the Institute of Me
dicine, and with the sponsorship of the Henry J. Kaiser Fam
ily Foundation, held a wo
rkshop in March 2006. Its purpose was twofold: to examine the quality of the measur
es used in studies of the effects of media on children™s
 health and development and to identify gaps in both 
research and practice.  The goal was for a 
variety of experts to consider steps and strategies that could move this research 
forward and improve its
 utility for helping parents, practitioners, and policy makers gui
de young people in navigating a media-rich 
environment. 
The specific charge to the Program 
Committee for a Workshop on Improving 
Research on Interactive Media and Children™s Health, which planned the workshop, was to consider:  1. The nature of key research literatures that examine different t
ypes of media exposure 
among children and youth; as well as the types 
of behaviors and interactions associated with media use (including television, vide
o games, computers, cell phones, and the 
Internet); 

2. The strengths and limitations of different type
s of measures used in
 studies of media, 
children, and youth; and 
3. Opportunities and strategies for developing one or more studies in this field that can 
inform the development of research, policy, a
nd practice guidelines regarding media use, 
content, controls, and guidance for children and youth. 
 The committee met once by phone and collabo
rated via electronic mail to develop 
strategies for describing how media research
 is conducted and the methodological issues 
it poses.  This planning effort prompted th
e development of two background papers and a 
subsequent day-long discussion that included sessions on the state of the art in current measures of media exposure; the research desi
gns, tools, and frameworks used in social 
epidemiological and prevention research; 
and the role of theory in explaining relationships among media exposure and outcomes.  In this way the committee was able 

to represent a variety of perspectives, even though the available time would not allow for 
comprehensive coverage of any of the issues. 
This report provides a summary of 
that discussion, supplemented with 
information from two papers prepared 
for the workshop, which are available at Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3<http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>.  It begins 
with an examination of the potential 
impact of media exposure, followed by a descri
ption of the basic research questions and the methods currently used to study them. 
 Methodological questions and challenges and theoretical approaches 
are described; they are discusse
d from the perspective of other 
kinds of epidemiological research.  The re
port closes with a discussion of future directions for the field. 
  Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4Chapter 2 Media Consumption as a Public Health Issue 
  
 
 
 A range of attitudes and beliefs are evident in public discourse about the effects of media exposure.  Parents are especially c
oncerned with how media exposure and content 
may influence the healthy development of th
eir children.  Yet efforts to restrict the 
content of media influences have raised importa
nt questions about the types of features or interactions that warrant attention, the extent to which medi
a choices should be restricted for certain age groups, and the need for policy interventions as well as parental and professional guidance.  Early proposals for parental warning labels on CDs with explicit lyrics, for example, have been part of an ex
tensive and frequently spirited public debate about puritanism, censorship, and the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  At 

present, only limited and frequently conflicti
ng data are available to examine the effects 
of music lyrics on health and development or th
e role that they play in the formation of 
youth identity, social networks, and parent-child relationships.  Claims and counterclaims 
about possible benefits and detrimental eff
ects of different kinds of media exposure 
appear regularly in the popular press, but often without strong grounding in peer-reviewed research. 
Survey data from the Kaiser Family 
Foundation indicate that many parents are 
concerned about the amount of sex and violence
 that their children see on television.  But many parents do not understand the available 
ratings systems for TV and other media, 
and only 6 percent of parents of young children are aware that the American Academy of 
Pediatrics has recommended that children under 
age 2 not watch television or videos at all (Kaiser Family Foundati
on, 2004).  The amount of television to which young people 
are exposed suggests that, despite their conc
ern, parents are not effectively limiting their 
consumption. 
Recent data provide a general overview 
of children™s current media consumption 
(see Box 1); sources and methods for collecti
ng these data are addressed in detail in Chapters 3 and 4. With these data as a backdrop, the wo
rkshop began with a conversation about why research on media exposure is important
, led by Ellen Wartella and Dan Anderson.  Both called attention first to the growing 
proliferation of media experiences.  The 
ubiquitousness of televisions in homes and pub
lic spaces and the large number of daily 
activities that adults now conduct online are only part of the story.  The advent of digital technology in particular has expanded the possibilities for the use of different media 
technologies simultaneously (the multitask
ing phenomenon) and in new settings.  
Computers now allow kids (and adults) to move
 rapidly between the Internet and a word 
processing program, frequently with music in 
the background, as well as detours to play an electronic game or to engage with e-ma
il or instant messaging functions.  All this can 
be done with earphones on, or with music or television (or both) on in the background, interspersed with cell phone calls, and so forth.  Cell phones can be used to transmit 
digital photographs, and new MP3 players allow users to download video clips, movies, 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5and television shows to be watched anywhere, any time.  Many media experiences, such 
as giant screens with surround sound, for example,
 are far more intense 
than ever before.  And software for babiesŠeven devices alleged to promote the development of fetuses in 
the wombŠare bringing new forms of sensor
y intensity to young nervous systems that 
are highly malleable and vulnerable to significant developmental changes. 
What impact might all this have on peopl
e and their behavior?  Anderson noted 
that multiple claims are made of negative e
ffects on social behavior, health, education, 
and cognition (e.g., increases in aggression and obesity, interference with reading, increase in problems with attention), as we
ll as positive effects and opportunities in the 
same areas (e.g., teaching or modeling prosoc
ial behavior, providing a vehicle for public 
health messages that reduce obesity, teach
ing reading and other skills, enhancing 
attention skills).  Some, he explained, vi
ew media in general as a toxin, exposure to 
which should be controlled in the same wa
y that environmental pollutants are permitted 
in small doses.  The problem with this approa
ch is that it does not address the significant 
variation in media content and the context 
in which exposure takes place, nor does it 
account for variations in the findings about the effects of exposure. A more promising approach may be to cons
ider the components of a media diet in 
terms of the different types, amounts, a
nd effects of media influences, Anderson 
suggested.  In this analysis, certain media influences could be viewed as desserts or stimulants rather than toxic agents.  As 
with food, the overall quantity ingested is important, but equally important are quality a
nd balance.  Thus, for example, children may benefit from information, edu
cational programmingŠand, most likely, 
entertainment, as wellŠalthough the research 
base for developing precise guidelines as to the recommended levels or proportions of
 each is insufficient.  While the harmful 
effects of media influences such as violen
t programming are well established, the basis 
for making concrete recommendations related to
 the degree or nature of the violence, maximum safe exposure, and so forth, is similarly absent.  The alternative concept of a 
media diet accommodates recommendations that
 address such qualitative aspects as the 
nature, content, and context of media expos
ure, as well as the quantity, allowing for flexibility in the face of almost overw
helming pressure to consume media. 
An extensive research literature is now av
ailable that examines the health effects 
of media use, especially in the areas of vi
olent and sexual behavior and, increasingly, in dietary choices and eating behaviors.  The workshop participants focused on these initial areas to review how research studies curren
tly measure important dimensions of media 
interactions with children and youth. 
 EFFECTS OF VIOLENT OR SEXUAL PROGRAMMING 
 Regardless of which metaphor is most us
eful for public health recommendations, 
a strong research base is available for some important conclusions about media exposure.  
Perhaps strongest is the case for the effects of violent programming, which some 
researchers have suggested is at least as strong as the evidence base regarding links between exposure to tobacco smoke and 
lung cancer (Oakes, 2006; Anderson et al., 
2003).  A meta-analysis of the varied research base on this issue has shown that exposure to media violence has demonstrable long- 
and short-term effects on the likelihood of 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6aggressive or violent behavior.1  Exposure can have the effect of glamorizing violence; 
trivializing its effects, cons
equences, and moral significance
; and desensitizing the viewer or participant to its impact.  The short-term 
effects include changes in behavior (such as reductions in helping behavior or increased willingness to inflict punishment in an 
experimental setting), thoughts, and emotions
; the long-term effect
s include increased likelihood of engaging in physical assaults or spousal abuse.  These casual relationships are disputed by others, however, primarily 
on the basis of imprecise measurement and 
confounding variables. Questions remain as to the potential 
influences of several variables on the outcome of exposure to media violence.  Th
e characteristics of viewers, the precise content of the programming, and mediation by pa
rents or others may all either intensify 
or mitigate the effects.  Moreover, the 
psychological processes through which these 
effects occur are not yet fully understood.  Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that the effects are pervasive and significant from a public health perspective. 
An association has also been demons
trated between media consumption and 
sexual activity among teenagers (L™Engle,
 Brown, and Kenneavy, 2006).  One recent study has shown that adolescents whose media diet include
s more sexual contentŠand 
content that presents sexuality in a risk-fr
ee lightŠare also likely to engage in more 
sexual activity and report a greater degree of openness to sexual activity.  Media that portray sexual content together with violence can have a particularly strong effectŠspecifically in increasing the likelihood that male viewers 
will behave aggressively or physically assault females who have provoke
d them (Anderson et al., 2003).  Findings 
such as these clearly indicate 
the importance of considering the media diet as part of any 
effort to address adolescent sexuality.  EFFECTS ON OBESITY  The possible links between obesity and food marketing on television are another 
public health concern that has been investigated, and the results illustrate well some of 
the difficulties researchers have in tracing 
media effects, Wartella pointed out.  A 
previous study reviewed 122 studies, covering fo
ur decades, of television advertising and 
children™s diets (Institute of Medicine and National Research Council, 2006).  The results established a causal connection between advertising and both food preferences and food choices, but they could not confirm a link to 
adiposity (i.e., fatness).  In her remarks, 
Wartella speculated that a possible explanation for this lack of strong relationship in the obesity studies may reside in the methodologi
cal limitations of earlie
r studiesŠand that other research designs might ye
t uncover a causal relationship.                                                             
 1  Although the majority of research has addressed violence in television programming, movies, and music 
videos, some similar findings have been produced with regard to violence in computer and video games. 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7   Box 1 Growing up in a Media Saturated Environment 
 ! The average American home contains: 
! 3.5 Television (82 percent of families 
have cable access or satellite TV) 
! 1.9 VCRs/DVD players ! 1.5 Computers (74 percent of families have internet access; 60 percent 
have instant messaging software) 
! Children use electronic media from 2 to
 5 hours daily, spending more time with 
television than in any other activity except sleep. 
! 75 percent of children ages 8-18 have a television in their bedroom; 36 percent of 
children ages 0-6 do. ! 44 percent of children ages 8-18 use a com
puter every day, and 39 percent play video games every day. 
 
 
Source: Vandewater and Lee (2006)   Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8Chapter 3 The Current State of Media Research 
  
 
 
 Research on children™s media exposure 
frequently begins with three basic questions:  How much media do children use? 
 What kinds of medi
a messages are they 
exposed to?  What are the e
ffects of this exposure?  E
lizabeth Vandewater provided an overview of the principal methods used to 
explore these questions, which, she explained, have proved generally unsatisfying, even before consideration of the complexities of multitasking in a digital era 
(Vandewater and Lee, 2006). 
 MEASURING USE  Current methods for measuring the amount
 of time spent with media include 
global time estimates, time diaries, media diar
ies, experience sampling methods, video or 
direct observation, and electronic monitoring systems. 
Global time estimates are obtained by asking subjects to answer such questions as 
how many hours they spent watching television 
the previous day or in a typical week, or how frequently they do a particular activity (e.g., on a Likert scale that ranges from 
ﬁneverﬂ to ﬁvery frequentlyﬂ).  Such questi
ons are frequently included in large-scale surveys and are an inexpensive, easy way to 
collect data.  However, the simplicity of the 
design yields imprecision.  The respondent is 
expected within 10-20 seconds to recall all relevant experiences, determine whether they
 should ﬁcountﬂ as a primary activity, and 
estimate the time spentŠand to not shape the an
swer to fit perceived social expectations. 
Time use diaries were first developed by economists interested in the ways 
Americans spend their paid work time.  They di
ffer from global time estimates in that the 
answer format is open-ended, allowing respondents to record their activities, usually for 24-hour stretches.  Questions typically include the principal and secondary activity, duration of the activity, other participants, and location.  This method is less frequently 
used in media research, in part
 because it is expensive, but it allows for a more accurate 
and complete picture of the activity being inve
stigated.  This technique easily captures routine or daily activities, but 
it usually misses sporadic activi
ties or those that occur only 
on days that are not monitored.  It also can
 easily miss activities that are so automatic 
they escape notice, are considered private, 
or occur simultaneously with more than one 
other activity.  Television watching that occurs while a meal is being prepared or eaten, 
for example, may be hidden, as might brief but
 frequent Internet use, such as using a computer to check the weather, movie reviews, or e-mail. 
Media diaries are targeted time use diaries,
 focused on a single activity.  Participants are asked to highlight the shows 
they watched on a program grid or to record whether the TV was on, who was watching, what 
channel, etc., by hour of the day.  This method is less burdensome than a diary of all da
ily activities and thus allows data to be collected over longer time periods.  It also 
allows for the collection of supplementary 
information, such as the participants™ reasons 
for doing the activity at a particular time.  
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9Media diaries do not generally allow for the collection of data regarding context, such as other activities done at the same time. 
Experience sampling methods provide a look at typical activities by sampling at 
random times of the day, often by paging particip
ants and asking them to fill in particular 
information in a booklet of self-report forms.  
This method can capture internal aspects of 
the experience (motivation, mood, cognition), as
 well as external information (location, 
context, etc.).  It is somewhat less burdenso
me than other methods, but it is useful only 
with participants who can write coherently about their experiences (i.e., not most children 
under 10Ša key target for media research). 
 It also does not allow researchers to determine the total amount of time spent on activities of interest. 
Direct observation
 (or video observation) is an ethnographic technique for investigating social phenomena in natural settin
gs.  It provides very accurate and rich 
information about such issues as television 
viewing habits, but it is extremely time- and 
labor-intensive and consequently expensiveŠwh
ich limits the sampling that is possible.  
Moreover, although observation eliminates bias 
in answering questions, the presence of the observer or camera may have significant in
fluence on participants™ media choices and 
behaviors. Electronic monitoring
 is a commercial method designe
d to collect the data that are used to generate ratings for television programming.  Two somewhat different 
technologies for this purpose are owned by tw
o companies, Nielson and Arbitron, which 
have occasionally made them available to re
searchers for a fee.  In the Nielson method, 
each viewer in the household 
is assigned a button on a device supplied by the company 
and is asked to push it when they begin and end a viewing session.  Thus all programming played on that channel before 
the button is pushed off is counted as ﬁviewedﬂ by that family member, although he
 or she may have wa
ndered off or begun a different activity.  The Arbitron company uses 
a device called the Portable People Meter, which can detect codes that are embedded 
in video and audio programming and thus 
record the viewing and listening patterns of the people carrying them.  Both these 
methods produce the same kind of data that 
a media diary yields; that is, they do not 
provide information about the context in whic
h the media use occurs or its relation to 
other activities in which the participant engages. Having called attention to the limitations 
of each of these methods of measuring 
the quantity of media consumption, Vandewa
ter raised the question of how much 
precision is really needed to answer impor
tant questions about media exposure.  The 
reliability and validity of these measures var
y.  Diary estimates, for example, are highly 
correlated with observational measures (.80 to
 .85), whereas global time estimates show 
only moderate correlation with observational da
ta (.20) or diary data (.40).  However, despite the variation, the big picture result from all of these 
sources is that the average level of television viewing for adolescents is 2.5 to 3 hours per day.  This figure may be 
sufficiently precise for many pur
poses, while a much greater degree of detail may be 
needed for predictive research, or for explor
ing error variance.  What is of greater 
concern is the introduction of imprecise measur
es as an independent variable in another study, such as the effect of parenting restrictions on media ha
bits.  In such cases, low reliability of the media measures can bias the estimate of the main effect. 
Dimitri Christakis commented that no mo
re studies demonstrating how much TV 
children watch are needed.  Instead, he argued, the focus should be on studies that Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10illuminate how and what they watch and that
 suggest opportunities to improve viewing 
and other media habits. 
A related question for Vandewater is what
, precisely, is meant by a ﬁuserﬂ of a 
given type of mediaŠand this question is crit
ical to the validity of a measurement.  The 
influence a given media stimulus may have
 is clearly dependent on the degree of attention the user is paying to it and the context in which it is being used, which are more 
difficult to measure than the amount of 
time a device is in use, for example. 
 MEASURING EXPOSURE TO CONTENT 
 The content of media exposure may be at 
least as important 
as the quantity of exposure, but existing research methods lack precision in measuring or capturing 
important dimensions of content, and many 
measures have serious validity problems.  
Moreover, they do not capture incidental messages, such as those contained in 
advertisements, movie trailers, or pr
oduct placements, Vandewater explained. Asking viewers is the most direct way to 
determine at least th
e general nature of what is being consumed.  Children might be
 asked to list their favorite shows or to 
include the names of the programs they watch in
 diaries or other records of their viewing.  Coding the content of television programs 
or video games is also possible, although 
current coding schemes have yielded onl
y general programming information in 
designated categories, such as educational (e.g., children™s programming on public 
broadcasting), drama, comedy, etc.  Some effort
s have been made to code the content and 
to capture more specificity of sample epis
odes of popular children™s programs.  This 
method allows for greater precision, but it do
es not readily allow researchers to connect particular viewing experiences to particular children, wh
ich would be necessary to examine possible effects. 
Sandra Calvert described some work sh
e has done on coding content on the Internet using categories similar to those us
ed to code television programming (Calvert, 
Alvy, and Strong, 2006).  However, site content, links, and advertising change frequently on the Internet; moreover, each of the links on an Internet site can be considered an 

independent part of the site and thus needs to be sampled and scored as well.  As a result, 
the results are not stable.  
Other participants mentioned 
recent efforts to analyze the 
content of computer games and to describe th
e ways in which users interact with them.  Participants agreed that, given the increas
ing time children and adolescents spend on these activities, more information and consis
tent classification codes are necessary for 
describing the content of and modes of intera
ction with different sources of electronic and interactive media technologies. 
 MEASURING DEVELOPMENTAL EFFECTS ON YOUNG CHILDREN 
 In addition to the public health effects of media as described in Chapter 2, the 
meeting participants discusse
d research on the potential effects of media exposure on 
very young children, who are the fastest growing segment of media audiences.  Dimitri 
Christakis and Judy DeLoache provided close looks at significant potential risks and benefits of media exposure to babies a
nd young children.  Christakis began with the observation that young children have only recently become heavy consumers of media 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11and that, consequently, compara
tively little research has been done on effects for this age group (Christakis, 2006; Zimmerman and Ch
ristakis, 2005).  Yet the developmental 
significance of the first three years of life 
has been well documented (National Research 
Council and Institute of Medicine, 2000), and exposure during these years has been increasing dramatically.  Moreover, because 
young children are still 
sleeping 12 or more 
hours a day, even a modest amount of exposur
e can occupy a significant percentage of their waking hours.  Television exposure in the early years is also highly predictive of later viewing pattern
sŠand once established, viewing patterns are very difficult to 
change. Christakis™s research has 
shown that children under age 3 watch television an average of 2.2 hours per day, and that 3- to 5-year-olds watch 3.3 hours per day.  Yet each hour of daily viewing by children in this age group is associated with measurable 

detriments to their cognitive development.  Benefits have been identified as well, 

although because much of the research is so
mewhat dated, it does not reflect changes in 
viewing patterns, such as the increase in the number of minutes of commercial time per 
hour, increases in sexual and violent content, and the increasing likelihood that children will watch alone.  Television programming and media or screen-based electronic 

products for very young children are an increasing businessŠalthough, as Christakis noted, their quality and content vary.  Christakis argued that media exposure is one of the 
most profound influences on children in the United States and that it intersects with many 
public health concerns: violence, obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, and risky sexual behaviors.  The public health question for him 
is to find ways to mediate the influences of 
this exposure on young children, to optimize their 
exposure in terms of time spent, age of 
exposure, and contentŠrather than hoping to eliminate it. 
 Other participants called attention to the importance of social context 
in heightening or diminishing certain types 
of media exposures. 
DeLoache raised questions about media influences on the development of very 
young children in terms of the perspective that
 all media, because they are symbolic 
representations of some kind, offer more
 cognitive complexity than does direct 
experience.  Thus, media e
xperiences may have profound 
impacts on very young children 
because they do not bring to these expe
riences the same context and background 
understanding of basic properties of reality (such as solidity, 
continuity, and support) that adults and older children have.  Her research has focused on five questions about media 
and early development.  Her answer to the firs
t, whether infants can learn from media, is 
yes.  The remaining questionsŠwhat and how 
well they can learn, and what the benefits 
and risks might be--follow from that conclu
sion.  Her research suggests that certain developmental pathways offer potential 
risks that could present challenges and opportunities for parental, policy, and practice interventions. DeLoache observed that the key developmental risks for infants and very young children of exposure to media are (1) 
interference
 with the acquisition of crucial developmental skillsŠtime spent with media is
 time taken from such activities as motor 
skill development and learning th
rough playing with objects; (2) 
deprivation of social interaction
Štime spent viewing media would decrea
se infants™ opportunity for crucial 
social interaction with other people; and (3) interference with 
learning about realityŠbecause infants can be confused about the 
basic nature of media, substantial media 
viewing could interfere with learning fundament
al facts about the nature of reality (e.g., Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12the fact that objects cannot pass through other 
objects or disappear into thin air).  A fourth risk, which may not rise
 to the level of a public health concern, is that products purporting to educate infants may not only wast
e parents™ time and money, but also the 
existence and advertising of such products may generate unrealistic concerns and goals 
with respect to their infants™ development. 
These analyses of media effects on ve
ry young children involve both studies of longitudinal data as well as experimental 
observations. Christakis described research studies in which he and his colleagues used data from the National Longitudinal Survey 
of Youth 1979 to investigate the effects of frequent television viewing on cognitive development.  Measures of cognitive devel
opment in children at ages 6 and 7 were 
regressed on television viewing at younger ages.  The conclusion was that modest adverse effects can result from viewi
ng at young ages, when potential confounding variables, such as parental characteristics, were
 controlled.  In contrast, other participants observed that certain educational programs
 for young children are associated with improvements in their cognitive developments.  These differences suggest that media 

influences may differ by developmental stage 
as well as across social and cultural groups. DeLoache described experimental research
 that has explored the effects of 
symbolic representations and media exposur
e on the development of very young children, 
noting that the potential for both beneficial learning and harm needs to be further investigated (DeLoache, Pirroutsakos, and Uttal, 2003; DeLoache, 2005).  The experimental research she desc
ribed was mainly based on the pr
emise that the best way to 
determine what infants and toddlers can learn 
or be taught is to try to teach them, for 
example, to imitate a series of actions or 
problem-solving exercises.  In addition, simple 
observations of the length of time 
that infants look at particul
ar displays can be used to assess what kinds of visual stimuli they pref
er.  Such research can help identify what 
kinds of media might have beneficial eff
ects on infant learning and development. 
Participants were intrigued with the research on young children, but many 
commented on how much remains to be unde
rstood.  Socioeconomic differences and 
many other contextual factors, for example, 
have not been thoroughly investigated.  At the same time, the mechanisms by which many influencesŠfrom early literacy 

experiences, to family placement, to the natu
re of their media exposureŠaffect children 
are also not yet fully understood.  Such mech
anisms may include the content or exposure 
of certain forms of media, the social cont
ext and relationships surrounding the child™s experience with different types of media, a
nd the displacement eff
ects of media on other 
behaviors and exposures.  Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  13  Chapter 4 Methodological Questions, Ch
allenges, and Opportunities   
 
 
 The overview of current research methods
 generated a variety of ideas about ongoing challenges in media research, at both a practical and a theoretical level.  To start, participants pointed out, at a time when new forms of medi
a are proliferating, the field lacks operational definitions both of what constitutes a medium of interest from a public 
health perspective and of what counts as media exposure.  Current distinctions among 
media are platform-based; that is, they 
are based on the kind of technology that determines the way they operate.  Yet the rapi
d arrival of new technologies is blurring the uses of electronic devices, now that com
puters and handheld devices can be used for activities traditionally available 
only with a television or radio,
 and so on.  Electronic toys and other new gadgets are likely to further complicate the question until the field can 
develop a functional, comprehensive definition. The definition of media use is complicated 
by the fact that different media require 
different kinds of processing and yield different kinds of interactions.  For example, the 
nature of a child™s experience with ambient media (such as music, which may be 
prevalent in multiple settings) may be substantially different from the experience with 

media that is confined to certain times of 
the day or certain locations.  Questions of attention, of what else is taking place in the 
vicinity of the media user, and of new roles 
that media experiences may play in people™s 
lives are not generally taken into account 
conceptually or methodologically, yet they ma
y be critical to understanding how this powerful influence really affects people. On a practical level, the field lacks baseline information about some of the 
fundamental processes of concern in this ki
nd of research, Anderson and others noted.  Such processes may include information retr
ieval patterns, attention, memory, pattern 
recognition, and the ways in which children interpret narratives.  To understand the ways in which users interact with media, for exam
ple, it would be useful to have a clear taxonomy of the technical design features used
 in many media, such as cuts, zooms, 
screen sizes, and the like.  Similarly, exis
ting descriptive research about eye-tracking 
patterns and other physiological processes as they relate to media exposure is not 
sufficient.  For example, Anderson noted, t
housands of EEG (electroencephalogram) and 
ERP studies have been done in other clinical and psychological studies, but their potential 
for improving understanding of media effects ha
s not been fully explored.  A far more 
detailed understanding of how the brain responds to media stimuli, as well as how 
cognition and behavior are affected in turn, would be possible if a stronger taxonomy to 
classify media technologies based on th
eir design features was available. Concerns such as these are linked to broader issues and to research questions in related fields.  In order to understand how media exposure might affect children™s 
attention spans, for example, one must begi
n with a theory of how certain internal 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  14   processes and ecological interactions contribute to the development of attention.  
Without that understanding, it is difficult to iden
tify the effects of rapid scene changes or other specific aspects of media exposure on na
tural or unusual developmental processes.  
This kind of investigation is truly interdisciplinary, Anderson pointed out.  The lack of a disciplinary ﬁhomeﬂ for this type of research 
has contributed to its marginal status in 
many research centers and th
e lack of systematic trai
ning and the development of 
rigorous theoretical frameworks, causing 
its importance to be often overlooked. 
A number of participants stressed th
e point that, although available research methods may be unsatisfying in some respec
ts, existing methods and levels of precision 
are sufficient to begin to address important 
questions.  For example, differences in the 
exposure of socioeconomic subgroups to vari
ous mediaŠand possible differences in the 
resulting effects on groupsŠcan be identified using large-scale surveillance studies.  The 
degree of accuracy typical of current studies would be sufficient for exploring potentially significant differences in the overall media diet
s of different groups, but relatively little has been done in this area.  AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO THE STUDY OF  
YOUTH AND THE MEDIA 
 Susan McHale brought the perspective of a researcher in human development and 
family studies to bear on the analysis of
 media influences on developmental processes 
and family interactions.  She began with a 
reference to the theory of the ecology of children™s development, a model developed by 
Uri Bronfenbrenner in the late 1970s.  In this ﬁonionﬂ model, the child is seen as nested
 within successively mo
re distal layers of environmental influences, the impact of each 
of which is mediated by the impact of the 
others.  In this model, media are placed 
in the outermost layer, along with cultural 
attitudes and values, influencing children from some distance.
  In Bronfenbrenner™s view, each of these influences can affect a child™s 
interactions, and the focus of attention should 
be ﬁmolar activitiesﬂŠthose the child chooses 
in a particular setting and that therefore reflect his or her predilections, opportunities, and constraints. The ecological approach calls attention to 
who is participating 
in an activity, how it is carried out, and why it is undertaken.  With regard to television viewing, for 
example, the important questions are, Who tu
rns on the TV in this kind of family?  Who 
decides what will be watched?  What kinds
 of conversations accompany TV viewing?  
An ecological perspective is not a theory but a perspective from which processesŠor they might be termed mechanisms or me
diatorsŠwork.  Much of the research on children™s time use has focused on links be
tween activities and outcomes, but this 
approach does not directly address the ways in which selected activities produce 
outcomes.  Using an ecological approach, a re
searcher would dig much deeper into the 
patterns of social interactions 
and relationships that influence development.  For example, 
if a family watches television 
during dinner time, the nature and form of exposure may be 
affected by the conversation among family me
mbers.  Conversely, the timing or setting 
of the dinner event itself may be affected
 by certain media features or programs. 
Daily activities, such as media consumpti
on, are viewed as both the causes and consequences of development.  The focus 
is on the social and psychological processes that link the activities to development and on 
identifying discrete interactions in these 
processes that may be influenced by varia
tions in the characteristics that children, 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  15  adolescents, or families bring to the activities
 or the contexts in which they live.  By 
improving understanding of the mediating pr
ocesses that link activities (media 
consumption) to outcomes of interest, resear
chers can assess the strength of hypotheses about the causes of particular outcomes. 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  16  Chapter 5 Perspectives from Other Kinds 
of Epidemiological Research  
  
 
 
 The field of media research is relativ
ely young and its methods and contributions 
are not widely understood or appreciated beyond its borders.  Social epidemiologist 
Michael Oakes brought the perspective of an outsider to an analysis of the extant research on the effects of media consumption on ch
ildren (Oakes, 2006).  The discussion began with Mark Becker™s point that the prevaili
ng research model for media studies has been 
based on research methods typical of psychology.
  He suggested that other statistical or epidemiological models may be more eff
ective for some types of media research 
analysesŠmost especially for developing the kinds of causal links that are needed to support policy and public health measures th
at could influence behavior and improve 
outcomes for children. 
The focus of Oakes™s presentation was to compare the research designs, standard 
measures, and modeling frameworks used in 
media research with those used in other 
social epidemiology and prevention studies. 
 He began by stressing the high quality of much of the media research he has reviewe
d.  He was favorably impressed by the volume 
of compelling studies and reiterated the poi
nt that the evidence for links between 
exposure to violence in the media and aggressi
on is as strong as that for links between cigarette smoking and lung cancer.  From hi
s perspective, the measures of media 
exposure are effective and are likely to improve, although he recommended an intensified 
focus on the coming challenges of new technol
ogies and changing ways of interacting with media, as well as marketing innovations. 
Several gaps in the research base were evident as well.  One notable lack was in 
what Oakes called the study of effect modifi
cation by social subgroup.  In this category he included examination of media eff
ects by social subgroup and by other social-environmental contexts besides race and class, 
as well as efforts to investigate the effects 
of social interactions on individual and group outcomes.  Wh
ile differences between boys and girls and across age categories are fre
quently explored, unexamined differences 
related to wealth, region of 
the country, and other factors related to socialization may 
have profound influences on how children are affected by media.  Other contextual 
effects insufficiently addressed in medi
a literature include
 school settings, neighborhoods, family structures, and social 
and cultural interactions; all these factors may have important influences on the way 
children process media exposure and may in 
turn be influenced by media themselves. 
 Other types of social subgroups may be 
categorized by the preferences of
 children and youth for certain types of media content or 
technology (including design features as well as technical source).  Significant differences may reside in how
 light or heavy media users respond to certain program 
themes or stimuli. 
Traditional regression models make it di
fficult to isolate selected contextual 
effects, Oakes explained, since media exposure is frequently pe
rvasive.  This challenge is similar to studying the effects of smog or wa
ter quality on different populations; the level Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  17  of exposure cannot be determined with pr
ecision.  Multilevel regression models are increasingly being used in epidemiology and 
public health studies to examine contextual influences in a variety of areas.  He used John Snow™s discovery that removing the handle of a pump reduced the incidence of chol
era in the neighborhood (by limiting access to 
tainted water) to emphasize the importance of
 exploring all potential factors.  This finding led to efforts to disentangle more proximal causes for diseaseŠwhich in turn led 
to the breakthrough discovery of germ theory and the effects of bacteria in sewage. Oakes also found little innovation in me
dia research methodologies in their 
approaches to inferring cause in observational studies.  The axiom that correlation does 
not imply cause remains true, but the potenti
al of surveys and correlational studies to illuminate cause, even in the absence of 
an explanatory theory or mechanism, is 
dismissed too readily, he argued.  Other resear
ch fields are making significant strides in 
finding innovative ways to infer causation.  Counterfactual causality, originally identified by philosopher David Hume as the ﬁbut fo
rﬂ conditionŠthe case in which situation 
x would not be true but for intervention yŠhas been used in contemporary research to 
account for alternate outcomes that result 
from differing exposure to particular 
influences.  This line of analysis compares 
scenarios in which two conditions with similar 
features produce very different outcomes as a result of the presence or absence of 

intervening factors. This model helps to compensate for the ba
sic challenge of causal inferencesŠthat 
it is never possible to observe the exposure of one individual to two different sets of influences in the same period of time.  
A substitute for the unobservable conditionŠthe individual exposed to influences other than those to which he or she was in fact exposedŠmust be found.  Bias creeps in when the substitutes are not good controls because they are not sufficiently similar to 
the research subjects.  Randomized groups of 
sufficient size provide one means of ensuring 
that the control group is similar to the targeted group, but in observational studies, in which no intervention is done, there is no opportunity for randomization. 
To approximate the benefits of randomiza
tion when it is not po
ssible, a variety of new statistical techniques can be used to analyze the data from observational studies to 
identify causal relationships.  One such method, developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin 
(1983), is called propensity score analysis.  This approach begins by developing a statistical model to predict exposure independent of the outcome in question.  In a study 
of the impact of exposure to media on children™
s diets, for example, 
logistic regression could be used to estimate the probabilityŠc
alled the propensity scoreŠthat a child is exposed to food advertising on TV as a function of parental monitoring and other factors.  The probability of exposure, known as the propen
sity score, is then used as a control 
variable in an analysis of the relationship between diet and food advertising.  Under certain assumptions, it has been shown that the relationship between the outcome (diet) 
and exposure (advertising) that can still be observed after controlling for other factors using the propensity score can be attributed to food advertising.  Like any other statistical method, however, the validity of the inference depends on the assumptions, and 

propensity score analysis results can be biased if the assumptions are not correct (Rubin, 
1997). Oakes stressed that propensity score anal
ysis is a relatively new approach that may be particularly well suited to the kinds of
 questions that media researchers tackle.  
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  18  Not only epidemiologists, but al
so economists, political scie
ntists, and other researchers who are especially concerned with public policy, have been struggling to find new ways 
to make inferences about people™s behaviors 
and the choices they make.  Instrumental 
variable analysisŠanother method of accounting for the unmeasured confounding 

variable used in econometricsŠmight also 
have an application in media research.  
Another approach is group randomized trials, 
in which the effects of policies are assessed 
using random samples of families, schools, neighborhoods, and even towns. 
Oakes noted that longitudinal research designs, although they are the prototype for epidemiological research, may not be as he
lpful in media studies as other approaches.  
Longitudinal designs, he explained, are very useful for identifying random, unintentional 
exposures or the natural occurrence and progression of a disease.  But when individual choices affect outcomes, the background char
acteristics and preferences that influence those choices are too difficult to disentangle.  Moreover, factors that change over time, 
such as the nature of media technology or 
content, and the cumulative effects of ongoing exposure, have changing effects on outcome
s, which can affect the findings in a longitudinal study. The general challenge underlying most 
epidemiological research, and media 
research in particular, is that research subjects are not R
obinson Crusoe, affected only by the conditions on a small island.  Individuals 
respond to certain stimuli on the basis of 
their prior experiences as well as current cond
itions, and they are affected as well by the 
presence or absence of others.  Individuals™ choices and experiences are dependent on an infinite number of choices that others have ma
de, as well as infinite other ways in which they are influenced by the individuals and groups that surround them.  The more basic 
question is the perennial one about how social environment influences biological, 
psychological, and social processes, and vice versa. 
Thus, Oakes argued, the most valuable approach may be to use field experiments 
to investigate the potential impact of interven
tions.  While models that posit causality are 
needed to support the choices of interventions to evaluate, conclusively resolving the relative contributions of individual versus social factors (nature versus nurture arguments) may not be necessary to 
achieve public health objectives.  Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  19  Chapter 6 Where Next?   
 
 
 
In her comments, Wartella observed that
 new researchers are increasingly drawn 
to study media and their potential effects, 
and this new generation has brought different perspectives about how to measure, what
 to measure, and how studies should be 
designed.  The preponderance of existing me
dia research has focused on television viewing, but the research models developed for that purpose may have limited value in 
studying new, very different kinds of mediaŠa
nd different kinds of questions about their effects.  The field is in need, she explained, of some consensus and guidelines about 
methods and standards of evidence, particularly
 because of the intens
e public interest in 
and press coverage of findings about media e
xposure.  In the current budgetary climate, 
funding for large-scale research studies on children and media is uncertain, although bills 
have been proposed to foster studies in this area.  In the interim, researchers in this field will need to proceed without extensive 
public support to develop consensus about 
research agendas, methods, and designs. 
 KEY THEMES  Several key themes emerged in the di
scussions that provided a basis for formulating areas of future
 interest and attention. 
First, current media studies focus pred
ominantly on process measures (exposure, 
content, and other media features).  Alt
hough these dimensions are important, the field 
lacks a deeper understanding of the underlyi
ng biological, cognitive, and developmental 
mechanisms that may affect the experience wi
th the timing, duration, or content of media 
influences.  Limited opportunities exist for medi
a researchers to interact with colleagues from these other fields, and few research 
studies have emerged that build from truly 
interdisciplinary work. 
Second, linking the study of process measur
es with theory-driven research will 
require more attention to experimental and 
longitudinal research designs.  If current measures of media exposure and content ar
e ﬁclose enoughﬂ to achieve reliability and consistency across study designs, researchers can turn their attent
ion to other, more 
important questions that can deepen unders
tanding of important social phenomena. 
Third, emerging theory and inte
rdisciplinary research designs also need to address 
the increasing proliferation and complexity of highly versatile media technology.  
Measures that were initially developed for st
udies of television viewing must be adapted to capture the new features of cable television, TiVo, iPods, and other digital technologies that emphasize the power of 
choice, selection, and customizing media 
preferences. 
Fourth, although most media research w
ith children focuses on school-age and adolescent populations, a virtual explosion of media exposure has occurred among very 
young children.  The ubiquity of media exposur
e and the rapid pace of developmental 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  20  changes in infants and toddlers introduce new complexities in understanding the pathways by which media influences ma
y interact with developmental stages. 
Fifth, new research designs are emerging that make it possible to infer causal 
relationships from nonexperimental data.  Me
thods drawn from social epidemiology and 
environmental studies offer a unique opportunity
 to strengthen the quality and rigor of 
current and future media research designs.  
These methods are especially valuable in 
examining conditions in which it is not possibl
e to isolate certain media exposures or to 
establish control conditions because of the 
pervasiveness of the media environment. 
 SUGGESTED RESEARCH TOPICS  In the course of the discussions, a number
 of participants offered suggestions for specific research topics that deserve further exploration, including:  ! how children and adolescents watch television and how viewing habits can be improved; 
! the potential benefits of media consumption; 
! interventions that might dilute negative effects or promote positive ones; 
! how family contexts influence the impact
 of media exposure on children™s health 
outcomes; 
! how people choose media experiences; 
! documentation of what aspects of contemporary media have negative or positive 
effects on development, at what ages they 
have those effects, and what individual or familial characteristics affect risk
 or opportunity for benefit; 
! whether appropriate use of educational video games increases language 
acquisition and reading in preschool children; and ! whether modeling appropriate eating and 
sexual practices reduces obesity and risky sexual behaviors.  This brief sampling of the kinds of issues researchers want to explore suggests that the field has much work to do, but severa
l larger themes emerged as well.  First, 
many participants noted that a greater degr
ee of interdisciplinary cooperation, as is common in research on diet and nutrition, would be very useful in media research.  
Communications, economics, neuroscience,
 pediatrics, psychology, psychiatry, sociology, all have valuable contributions to make, but not all have been as involved in 
media research as they could be.  Several pa
rticipants pointed out structural problems, 
such as lack of funding and a 
dearth of younger researchers, that have limited both this kind of cooperation and the growth of the field. Others focused on methodological challeng
es, such as the kinds of validation studies that are needed and th
e question of the degree of precision that is needed in measuring exposure.  For Vandewater, for ex
ample, priorities in 
the field should be nationally representative samples, longit
udinal designs, samples incorporating very 
young children, the inclusion of family cont
ext and interaction measures, a focus on 
program and game content, and the in
clusion of appropriate covariates. Others focused on practical concerns.  For them, ways to influence two key 
targetsŠparents and producers of mediaŠshould be the guiding goal of media research.  
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  21  There is a need to incorporate this nearly universal activity into what is already known 
about children™s development.  The isolation 
of media research studies from other fields 
could be addressed if better links to basic developmental, psychological, or social 
processes could be established.  This would make it easier to
 offer credible and effective 
guidance and tools to parents, policy make
rs, and those who control media content. 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 22  References 
  
 
 
 
 Anderson, Craig A., Leonard Berkowitz, Edward Donnerstein, L. Rowell Huesmann, 
James D. Johnson, Daniel Linz, Neil 
M. Malamuth, and Ellen Wartella
. (2003).  The influence of media violence on youth.  
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(3), 81-110. Calvert, S.L., L. Alvy, and B.L. Strong. (2006). Children's websites content analysis scoring system.  Children's Digital Media Ce
nter, Georgetown University. Christakis, Dimitri.  (2006).  
Media as a public health issue. Editorial. 
Archives of 
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 160, 445-446. DeLoache, Judy S.  (2005, August 7).  Mindful of symbols. 
Scientific American, 3-77. DeLoache, Judy S., Sophia L. Pirroutsakos, and Davis H. Uttal.  (2003).  The origins of pictorial competence. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12
, 4. Institute of Medicine and National Research Council. (2006).  
Food marketing to children and youth:  Threat or opportunity?  Washington, DC:  The National 
Academies Press. 
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2004).  Parents, medi
a, and public policy:  A Kaiser survey.  Available online at <http://www.kff.org/entmedia/entmedia092304nr.cfm>. 
L™Engle, Kelly Ladin, Jane D. Brown, and Kristin Kenneavy. (2006).  The mass media 
are an important context for a
dolescents™ sexual behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38, 186-192. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. (2000).  From neurons to neighborhoods: The science of early childhood development.
  Washington, DC:  
National Academy Press. 
Oakes, J. Michael.  (2006).  The effect of media on children: A methodological assessment from a social pathologist. Background paper prepared for Workshop 
on Media Research Measures and Methods.  Board on Children, Youth, and 

Families, National Research Council and In
stitute of Medicine, Washington, DC. 
Available at <http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>. 
Rosenbaum, P., and Donald B. Rubin. (1983). The 
central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects.  Biometrika, 70, 41-55. Rubin, Donald B.  (1997).  Estimating causal e
ffects from large data sets using propensity 
scores.  Annals of Internal Medicine, 127(8), 757-763. Vandewater, Elizabeth, and Sook-Jung Lee.  (2006).  Measuring children™s media use in the digital age: I
ssues and challenges. Background paper prepared for Workshop on Media Research Measures and Methods.  Board on Children, Youth, and 

Families, National Research Council and In
stitute of Medicine, Washington, DC. 
Available at <http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>.
 Zimmerman, Frederick J., and Dimitri A. Ch
ristakis.  (2005).  Children™s television viewing and cognitive outcomes: A long
itudinal analysis of national data.  Archives of Pediatric an
d Adolescent Medicine, 159, 619-625.  Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23APPENDIX 
Workshop Agenda and Participants   
 AGENDA  Workshop on Media Research Methods and Measures March 2-3, 2006 National Academy of Sciences Building 
Washington, DC   
 
Thursday, March 2  
Welcoming remarks and introductions 

   
  Aletha Huston, University of Texas 

  Vicky Rideout, Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 

  Rosemary Chalk, Board on 
Children, Youth, and Families 
 
  Participant Introductions 

 
Session 1:  Why Should We Care 
About Media Research Measures?  
  Moderator   Aletha Huston 
   Presenters 
  Ellen Wartella, University of California at Riverside 
  Dan Anderson, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 

 
  General Discussion 
  Friday, March 3  
Session 2:  Assessing the Current Landscape of Media Research Measures  
   Moderator   Aletha Huston 
   Presenter   Elizabeth Vanderwater, University of Texas 
 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 24  General discussion 
 
 
Session 3:  Research Design and Measurement 
Issues:  Lessons Learned in Other Fields    Moderator   Mark Becker, Univer
sity of South Carolina 
   Presenter   Michael Oakes, Univ
ersity of Minnesota  
  General discussion 

 
 
Session 4:  The Role of Theory in Expl
aining Relationships Among Media Exposure and Selected Outcomes 

 Moderator Victor Strasburger, University of New Mexico  Presenters 
  Dimitri Christakis, University of Washington 
  Judy DeLoache, University of Virginia 

  Susan McHale, Pennsylvania State University  

 
  General Discussion 
  Session 5:   Next Steps and Future Directions    Moderator   Aletha Huston  
  General Discussion 

 Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25  PARTICIPANTS 
  Daniel R. Anderson,* Professor, Department of Psychology, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst 
Mark P. Becker,* Executive Vice President for Academic Affairs and Provost, University 
of South Carolina, Columbia Martina Bebin, Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Fellow, Senate HELP Committee 
Jane D. Brown, James L Knight Professo
r, Department of Journalism and Mass 
Communication, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
Natasha J. Cabrera,* Professor, Department
 of Human Development, University of 
Maryland, College Park 
Sandra L. Calvert, Professor, Departme
nt of Psychology, Georgetown University Rosemary Chalk, Director, Board on Children, Youth, and Families, The National 
Academies 
Dimitri Christakis, Director, Child Health In
stitute, University of Washington, Seattle  
Judy S. DeLoache,* Professor, Department
 of Psychology, University of Virginia Niki Denmark, Department of Human Devel
opment, University of Maryland, College Park Rachel Fisher, Program Analyst, Division of
 Nutrition Research Coordination, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD  Lauren Lynch Flick, Pillsbury Winthr
op Shaw Pittman LLP, Washington, DC 
Melissa Ghera, Department of Human Deve
lopment, University of Maryland, College Park Lisa Guernsey, Independent Journalist, Alexandria, VA Christine Hartel, Director, 
Center for Studies of Behavior and Development, The National Academies, Washington, DC   
Lynne Haverkos, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, 
MD James C Hersey, Senior Resear
ch Psychologist, Research Triangle Institute, Washington, 
DC Sandra L. Hofferth,* Professor, Department of
 Family Studies, University of Maryland, 
College Park Aletha C. Huston,* Associate Director, Center for Population Research, University of Texas, Austin Sheppard G. Kellam, Senior Research Fe
llow and Director, Center for Integrating Education and Prevention Research in Sc
hools, American Institutes for Research, 
Baltimore, MD 
Woodie Kessel, Senior Child Health Science Advisor, Office of Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, Washington, DC 
Jennifer Kotler, Director, Education & Research, Sesame Workshop, New York 
Deborah Linebarger, Annenberg School of Communication, University of Pennsylvania Valeria O. Lovelace, Media 
Transformations, Teaneck, NJ 
Studying Media Effects on Children and Youth: Improving Methods and Measures: Workshop Summary Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 26Susan M. McHale,* Professor, Human Devel
opment and Family Studies, Pennsylvania State University 
Jeff J. McIntyre, Senior Legislative and Federal Affairs O
fficer, Public Policy Office, 
American Psychological Asso
ciation, Washington, DC 
Patricia L. Morison, Associate Executive Director, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, The National Academies, Washington, DC 
Gail M. Mulligan, National Center for Education Statistics
, Washington, DC Michael Oakes, Assistant Professor, Division of Epidemiology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis 
Deborah A. Phillips, Professor and Chair, Department of Psychology, Georgetown 
University Vicky Rideout, Vice President, Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, CA 
Michael Robb, Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside Donald F. Roberts,* Professor, Departme
nt of Communication, Stanford University Victor C. Strasburger,* Professor, Pediatrics Adolescent Medicine, Deptartment of 
Pediatrics, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque Georgene L. Troseth, Assistant Professor of Psychology, Department of Psychology and 
Human Development, Vanderbilt University 
Elizabeth Vandewater, Director, Center for Research on Interactive Technology, Television & Children, University of Texas, Austin 
Rong Wang, Department of Sociology, Un
iversity of Maryland, College Park Ellen Wartella,* Executive Vice Chancellor a
nd Provost, University of California, Riverside Robert C. Whitaker, Senior Fellow, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., Princeton, NJ Amy Yaroch, Program Director, Health Prom
otion Research Branch, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD 
  
*Members of the program committee 
 