DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11710Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to ScientificData in China: Summary of a Workshop152 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10230-8 | DOI 10.17226/11710Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, Rapporteurs; U.S. National Committee forCODATA; Board on International Scientific Organizations; National ResearchCouncilStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, Rapporteurs
U.S. National Committee for CODATA
Board on International Scientific Organizations
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, DCwww.nap.edu
StrategiesforPreservationof 
andOpenAccessto
SCIENTIFICDATA 
IN CHINASummary of a Workshop
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS ¥ 500 Fifth Street, NW ¥ Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils
of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the
Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were

chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Institutes of Health (under Grant
No. 467-MZ-400266), the National Science Foundation (under Grant No. GEO-
0407487), and the Open Society Institute (under Grant No. 40006515). Additional
support was provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, Chinese

Academy of Sciences, Chinese National Natural Science Foundation, the Committee
on Data for Science and Technology, the International Council for Science, and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Any opinions, find-
ings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that
provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number 0-309-10230-8
Copies of this report are available from the Board on International Scientific Organiza-
tions, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20001; 202-334-2807; Internet, http:
//www7.nationalacademies.org/biso/.Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500
Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202)
334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the

furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a
mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical

matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It
is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal govern-

ment. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed
at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the supe-
rior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National Academy

of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sci-
ences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the ex-
amination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional

charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to
identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is presi-
dent of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences
in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs

purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become
the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the Na-

tional Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and
the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by
both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A.

Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STEERING COMMITTEE ON STRATEGIES FOR
PRESERVATION OF AND OPEN ACCESS TO
SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA*
WILLIAM ANDERSON (Co-Chair), Praxis101
XIANÕEN ZHANG (Co-Chair), Ministry of Science and Technology of
ChinaPETER ARZBERGER, University of California, San Diego
ROBERT CHEN, Center for International Earth Science Information
Network
HUADONG GUO, Department of International Cooperation, Chinese
Academy of SciencesHEATHER JOSEPH, BioOne
CHUANG LIU, Global Change Information and Research Center,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
BAOPING YAN, Computer Network Information Center, Chinese
Academy of SciencesPrincipal Project Staff
PAUL UHLIR, Project Director
JULIE ESANU, Program Officer
VALERIE THEBERGE, Communications Associate
AMY FRANKLIN, Program Associate
Representatives of Chinese Program Committee
JUN CHEN, China Association for Geographical Information Systems
JIANGUO HAN, National Natural Science Foundation of China
DINGCHENG HUANG, Institute of Geophysics, Chinese Academy of
SciencesZONGQI SHEN, Ministry of Science and Technology of China
MIANZHEN TENG, Ministry of Science and Technology of China

JINNING ZHU, Chinese Association for Science and Technology
*Chinese names are presented here, and throughout the rest of this report, in the
Western approach to personal names, with given name first and family name second.
ivStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.U.S. NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR CODATA
ROBERTA BALSTAD (Chair), Center for International Earth Science
Information Network
WILLIAM ANDERSON, Praxis101
PETER ARZBERGER, University of California, San Diego
KATE BEARD, University of Maine

HELEN BERMAN, Rutgers University
CHRISTINE BORGMAN, University of California, Los Angeles
BONNIE CARROLL, Information International Associates

JANET GOMON, Smithsonian Institute*
SARA GRAVES, University of Alabama, Huntsville
MYRON GUTMANN, Inter-University Consortium for Political and
Social Research
JAN HOPMANS, University of California, Davis*
MAUREEN C. KELLY, Consultant*

GARY KING, Harvard University*
REYNALDO MORALES, Los Alamos National Laboratory, retired
KRISHNA RAJAN, Iowa State University

JAMES SWEENEY, Consultant*
ALEXANDER SZALAY, The Johns Hopkins University
StaffPaul Uhlir, Director
Julie Esanu, Program Officer (until May 2005)
Amy Franklin, Program Associate
*Member until June 30, 2004.
vStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPrefaceThe U.S. National Committee for CODATA in collaboration with
the Chinese National Committee for CODATA and the CODATA Task

Group on Preservation of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in
Developing Countries, and together with the Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology, jointly organized an international workshop on ÒStrate-

gies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data.Ó Local logisti-
cal support and meeting planning was provided by the Chinese Academy
of Sciences and the Chinese Association for Science and Technology. The

International Council for Scientific and Technical Information provided
additional substantive expertise.
The workshop, which was held June 22-24, 2004, in Beijing, China,
served as an international and interdisciplinary forum to promote a deeper
understanding of, and requirements for, long-term preservation and open
access to digital scientific information resources. The meeting was orga-

nized into seven sessions, each led by two co-chairs and including several
invited presentations. The first two sessions introduced the workshop par-
ticipants to the Chinese strategies and initiatives for implementing scien-

tific data sharing. The following sessions explored the policy and legal,
institutional and economic, management and technical, and local and re-
gional issues in preserving and providing open access to data in the life

sciences and public health; data in the earth and environmental sciences;and scientific information, journals, and digital libraries. This publication
presents a summary of the workshop.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACE
The statements made in this summary are those of the individual
rapporteurs based on presentations made at the workshop and do not nec-
essarily represent the views of the steering committee, the U.S. or Chinese
National Committees for CODATA, or the sponsoring organizations in
China or the United States. This volume does not contain summaries of all
of the presentations.
Paul F. Uhlir
Director, U.S. National Committee
for CODATA
Julie M. EsanuProgram Officer, U.S. National Committee
for CODATA (until May 2005)
William L. AndersonPraxis101Planning Committee Co-ChairChuang LiuChinese Academy of Sciences
Planning Committee Co-ChairStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgments
The U.S. National Committee for CODATA and the Board on Inter-
national Scientific Organizations of the National Research Council of the
National Academies wish to express their sincere thanks to the many indi-
viduals who played significant roles in planning the International Work-
shop on Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data.
The Workshop Steering Committee was chaired by XianÕen Zhang, Minis-

try of Science and Technology, China, and William Anderson, Praxis101,
United States. Additional members of the Steering Committee were Peter
Arzberger, University of California at San Diego, United States; Jun Chen,

China Association for Geographical Information Systems; Robert Chen,
Columbia University, United States; Huadong Guo, Chinese Academy of
Sciences; Jianguo Han, National Natural Science Foundation, China;

Dingcheng Huang, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Heather Joseph, BioOne,
United States; Chuang Liu, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Zongqi Shen,
Ministry of Science and Technology, China; Mianzhen Teng, Ministry of
Science and Technology, China; Baoping Yan, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences; and Jinning Zhu, Chinese Association for Science and Technology.
We also would like to thank the following individuals (in order of
appearance) who made presentations during the workshop (see Appendix
A for symposium agenda):  Jinpei Cheng, Ministry of Science and Technol-
ogy, China; Roberta Balstad, Columbia University, United States; William

Anderson; Zhihong Xu; XianÕen Zhang; QIN Dahe, China Meteorological
Administration; Depei Liu, Chinese Academy of Medicine, Chinese Acad-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xACKNOWLEDGMENTS
emy of Engineering; Qiheng Hu, Chinese Association of Science and Tech-
nology; Yasuyiki Aoshima, UNESCO; Peter Schrıder, Ministry of Educa-
tion, Culture, and Science, The Netherlands; Carthage Smith, International
Council for Science; Michael Clegg, U.S. National Academy of Sciences;

Peter Weiss, U.S. National Weather Service; Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, United States; Menas Kafatos, George Mason Uni-
versity, United States; Qinmin Wang, Fujian Province, China; Jun Chen,
Basic Geographical Information Center, China; Jerome Reichman, Duke
University Law School, United States; Paul Uhlir, U.S. National Academies;
Panqin Chen, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Tieqing Huang, Chinese
Academy of Sciences; Lan Zeng, National Macro Economic Research Insti-
tute, China; Jun Li, National Macro Economic Research Institute, China;
John Willinsky, University of British Columbia, Canada; Chuang Liu, Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences; Belinda Seto, National Institutes of Health,
United States; Yun Xiao, Chinese National Committee for CODATA;
Shunbao Liao, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Theodore Carl Bergstrom,
University of California at Santa Barbara, United States; Yixue Li, Shanghai
Biomedical Center, China; Anne Linn, U.S. National Academies; Chengquan
Sun, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Zukang Feng, Protein Data Bank, United
States; Helen Doyle, Public Library of Science, United States; Shuichi Iwata,
University of Tokyo, Japan; Honglie Sun, CODATA; Ling Yin, Chinese PLA
General Hospital; Yiyuan Tang, Dalian Polytech University, China; Baoyan
Liu, Chinese Academy of Medicine; Donglie Qin, The Capital Hospital Uni-
versity, China; James Edwards, Global Biodiversity Information Facility, Den-
mark; Xiaofeng Fu, Administrative Center for ChinaÕs Agenda 21;

Khudulmar Sodov, National Remote Sensing Center, Mongolia; Dingsheng
Liu, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Jiansheng Qu, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences; Zhengxing Wang, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Paul Richards, Co-

lumbia University, United States; Raymond Willemann, GEM Technologies,
United States; Dake Yang, China Earthquake Administration; Xiaolin Zhang,
Chinese Academy of Sciences; Lulama Makhubela, National Development

Agency, South Africa; Liansheng Meng, Chinese Academy of Sciences; and
Pippa Smart, International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publica-
tions, United Kingdom.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proce-
dures approved by the National AcademiesÕ Report Review Committee.

The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical
comments that will assist the institution in making its published report asStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xisound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional stan-
dards for quality and objectivity. The review comments and draft manu-
script remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this
report: Heather Joseph, SPARC; Goetz Oertel, Consultant; John Rumble,
Consultant; and Wang Zhengxing, Global Change Information and Re-
search Center.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of
the report, nor did they see the final draft before its release. Responsibility

for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authors and the
institution.The U.S. National Committee for CODATA would like to recognize
the contributions of National Research Council staff and consultants. Paul
Uhlir, Director of International Scientific and Technical Information Pro-
grams, was project director of the symposium and served as the primary

editor of this report. Julie Esanu helped to organize the symposium and edit
the report. Valerie Theberge organized and coordinated the logistical arrange-
ments, and Amy Franklin assisted with the production of the manuscript.
In addition, the committee would like to thank the other individualswho contributed to the success of the workshop:  Wenneng Zhou, secre-
tary-general of the local organizing committee, and Kathleen Cass, execu-

tive director of CODATA.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContents1Introduction1
2Presentations on ChinaÕs Scientific Data Sharing
Policy and Project6
The Development of ChinaÕs Scientific Data Sharing Policy, 6
Jinpei Cheng, Vice Minister, Ministry of Science and Technology
of  ChinaIntroduction to the China Scientific Data Sharing Project, 12
XianÕen Zhang, Director General of the Division of Basic Research,
Ministry of Science and Technology of China
3Summaries of Presentations on International Perspectives21
Trends in Development of International Scientific Data and
Information, 21Yasuyuki Aoshima, United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
Towards International Guidelines for Access to Research Data
from Public Funding, 25
Peter Schrıder, Ministry of Education, Culture, and Science,
The Netherlands
International Perspectives on Data and Information for Science, 26
Carthage Smith, International Council for Science, France
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSInter-Academy Panel Initiatives on Promoting Access to
Scientific Information, 29
Michael Clegg, Inter-Academy Panel and the U.S. National
Academy of SciencesFuture Role of the Committee on Data for Science and
Technology, 31
Shuichi Iwata, University of Tokyo, Japan, and President,
CODATA
ChinaÕs National Committee for CODATA, 33
Zhihong Xu, Chinese National Committee for CODATA,

ChinaU.S. National Committee for CODATA, 34
Paul F. Uhlir, U.S. National Academies
4Summaries of Presentations on Cross-Disciplinary Issues35
Panel Discussion on Legal and Policy Issues, 35
Introduction, 35Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies
Global Trends to Restrict Access to Data from

Government-Funded Research, 37
Jerome Reichman, Duke University School of Law,
United States
A Contractually Reconstructed Research Commons for
Scientific Data in a Highly Protectionist Intellectual
Property Environment, 38Jerome Reichman, Duke University School of Law,
United States
Balancing the General Public Interests and Copyright in
Scientific Information Management, 39
John Willinsky, University of British Columbia, Canada
Borders in Cyberspace:  Maximizing Social and Economic

Benefit from Public Investment in Data, 40
Peter Weiss, U.S. National Weather Service
Policy Considerations on Government Information
Sharing in China, 42Jun Li, National Macro Economic Research Institute, China
Comparative Aspects of Policies for Open Access to Scientific

Data in the United States, European Union, and China, 43
Chuang Liu, Global Change Information and Resource
Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvData Sharing in Scientific Databases of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 44Yun Xiao, Computer Network Information Center,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
The Data Sharing Policy of the Chinese Ecosystem Research
Network, 45
Panqin Chen and Tieqing Huang, Bureau of Science and
Technology for Resources and Environment, Chinese Academy
of SciencesData Sharing Policy of the National Institutes of Health, 45
Belinda Seto, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, United States
Panel Discussion on Economic and Institutional Issues, 47
Introduction, 47Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies
The Peculiar Economics of Scientific Information, 47
Theodore Carl Bergstrom, University of California,
Santa Barbara, United States
Launching an Open-Access Journal, 49
Helen Doyle, Public Library of Science, United States
Involving the Private Sector in the Environmental Enterprise, 50
Anne Linn, U.S. National Academies
Panel Discussion on Management and Technical Issues, 52
Introduction, 52Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies
Operating a Twenty-First-Century Data Center, 52
Roberta Balstad, Center for International Earth Science
Information Network, United States
Managing the Effects of Programmatic Scale and Enhancing
Incentives for Data Archiving, 53
Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States
Managing the Effects of Change on Archiving Research Data, 54
Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States
Special Considerations for Archiving Data from Field
Observations, 56
Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTSToward a Balanced Performance Appraisal System in the
Digital Era for Data Archiving and Sharing in China, 58
Zhengxing Wang, Global Change Information and Research
Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Earth Science Data and Information Management in
Western China, 59Chengquan Sun, Scientific Information Center for Resources and

Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Data Integration and Management:  The Protein Data Bank
Perspective, 60Zukang Feng, Protein Data Bank, United States
5Summaries of Presentations on Thematic Issues62
Examples of Life Sciences and Public Health Data Activities, 62
The Chinese Management and Sharing System of
Scientific Data for Medicine, 62
Depei Liu, Chinese Academy of Medicine and Chinese
Academy of Engineering
International Medical Scientific Data Sharing, 64
Ling Yin, PeopleÕs Liberation Army General Hospital and
Graduate Medical School, China
ChinaÕs Contributions to the Organisation for Economic

Co-operation and DevelopmentÕs Neuroinformatics Data
Sharing Initiative, 65
Yiyuan Tang, Institute of Neuroinformatics, Dalian University

of Technology; Ling Yin, Neuroinformatics Center, PLA
General Hospital and Graduate Medical School; and Xiaowei
Tang, Neuroinformatics Center, Zhejiang University, China
Long-Term Studies of Human Anatomy Using the Digital
Human and Scientific Data Sharing, 67
Donglie Qin, BME College, Capital University of Medical
Sciences, ChinaThe Protein Data Bank:  A Key Biological Resource, 68
Zukang Feng, Protein Data Bank, United States
The Safeguarding and Sharing of Traditional Chinese
Medicine Database Resources, 69
Baoyan Liu and Meng Cui, China Academy of Traditional
Chinese Medicine
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxviiOpen Access to Scientific Data on Biological Diversity:
An Urgent Need for China, 70
James Edwards, Global Biodiversity Information Facility,
Denmark
The NIH Roadmap for Medical Research, 72
Belinda Seto, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, United States
Examples of Earth Sciences, Environmental, and Natural
Resources Data Activities, 73
Progress in Meteorological Data Sharing in China, 73
Dahe Qin, China Meteorological Administration
The World Data Center for Renewable Resources and
Environment, 75Shunbao Liao, Geosciences and Natural Resources Institute,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Information System for Earth Science Data of China, 76
Jiansheng Qu, Scientific Information Center for Resources
and Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Present Status and Future Development Strategy of ChinaÕs
Sustainable Development Information Network, 76
Xiaofeng Fu, Administrative Centre for ChinaÕs Agenda 21,
Ministry of Science and Technology, China; and Xintong Li,
State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environment
Information System, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Progress Toward a National Spatial Data Infrastructure in
China, 77Jun Chen, National Geomatics Center, China
Uses of Seismic Data and the Importance of Open Access
to Major Data Centers in Seismology, 78
Paul Richards, Columbia University, United States
Existing Infrastructure for International Exchange of
Seismic Data, 80
Raymond J. Willemann, GEM Technologies, United States
Digital Fujian, 81
Qinmin Wang, Department of Science and Technology,
Fujian Province, China
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTSLocal and Regional Earth System Science Applications and
Associated Infrastructure: The Mid-Atlantic Geospatial
Information Consortium, 82
Menas Kafatos, George Mason University, United States
Thematic Issues in Scientific Information, Journals, and
Digital Libraries, 84Policies and Mechanisms for Literature Resource SharingÑ
The Practice of the Chinese National Scientific and Technical
Library, 84
Qiheng Hu, Chinese Association for Science and Technology
Perspectives on the Future of the Library and on the
Economics of Open Access, 87
John Willinsky, University of British Columbia, Canada
An Open-Access Future, 88
Helen Doyle, Public Library of Science, United States
Other Opportunities in the Changing Information
Environment, 90Pippa Smart, International Network for the Availability of
Scientific Publications, United Kingdom
Scientific Information and Digital Libraries:
Can Developing Countries Become Key Players in the
Information Society?, 91
Lulama Makhubela, National Development Agency,
South AfricaAppendixesAWorkshop Program97
BBiographical Summaries of Workshop Speakers and
Steering Committee Members111
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This study is dedicated in fond memory of
Peter Weiss,
National Weather Service
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11IntroductionAs a major producer of scientific data,
1 and as a partner for interna-tional cooperative research, China has a great deal to offer to the worldÕs

knowledge base. Although ChinaÕs research capabilities are rapidly improv-
ing, some significant problems remain. Among the recognized impediments
are inadequate digital archiving and access policies and practices that in-

hibit progress and improved international cooperation. Particularly note-
worthy in this regard was the high-level data access initiative announced in
February 2003 by Guanghua Xu, the Chinese Minister of Science and Tech-
nology (MoST), and supported by the National PeopleÕs Congress. This
China Scientific Data Sharing Program includes Òcreating a law to ensure
that scientific information is communicated more widely, and coordinating

efforts by government departments to develop information centers and da-
tabases to facilitate the communication of scientific and technological in-formation.Ó2 This new policy toward greater openness with publicly funded
scientific data is part of a broader effort to modernize the national research
and development infrastructure and its management in China.
In 2000, the U.S. National Committee (USNC) for CODATA and
the Chinese National Committee for CODATA held two bilateral meet-
1In the context of this report, Òscientific dataÓ refer to scientific, technical, and medical
data, and literature.
2Hepeng Jia, ÒChina urges its researchers to share data,Ó SciDevNet, March 14, 2003.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
ings with senior science officials and data managers from both countries to
discuss various data management and policy issues.3 Following these two
initial meetings of the U.S. and Chinese CODATA committees, the Chi-
nese side was augmented by other experts from the Chinese Academy of

Sciences and MoST who are leaders of the Scientific Data Sharing Pro-
gram. The USNC for CODATA hosted a delegation of these Chinese data
policy experts in the summer of 2002.The fourth of these bilateral meetings of data experts was held in
Beijing in October 2003. Focused on scientific resources sharing policy,
that meeting provided some of the advance groundwork for the June 2004

workshop that is the topic of this report. It also re-confirmed the commit-
ment of the Chinese science policy community to promoting greater open-
ness regarding Chinese scientific data and identified the priority areas for

additional focus.The effective long-term preservation of and open access to digital sci-
entific resources in all countries increases in importance as an essential com-

ponent of the global public research infrastructure, which can now be inte-
grated through the Internet. The challenges in storing and maintaining
access to these growing collections of data and information are substantial,

even in economically more developed countries. Moreover, although many
of the challenges that require sustainable solutions are the same for digital
data and information across all disciplines, others are distinct or unique to

certain disciplines or types of information. And while all solutions are con-
text dependent, some may be based on extending or emulating existingsuccessful models, and others may require and benefit from entirely new

approaches.China faces substantial hurdles in this regard. Although many of its
data resources and especially journal literature still reside in paper formats,

China already has significant digital information preservation and access
requirements that in many cases are not being successfully addressed. Fac-
tual databases and journals can provide an important research and eco-

nomic tool for ChinaÑjust as they do in more economically developed
countriesÑfor capacity building in science and education, for supportingsustainable development of commerce and industry, and for promoting

good governance. Resolving the many difficulties in preserving and making
3For additional information, see http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/China_US_Data_Seminars.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION3broadly available the digital scientific data resources successfully today will
provide great benefits for future generations; the costs of inaction are incal-
culable, but certain to be substantial. At the same time, it is important to
recognize that even the most economically developed countries have en-
countered various difficulties with the preservation and open access issues.
Careful consideration is needed to develop long-term plans for sustainable
digital archiving in China, as in all other countries.
WORKSHOP ON STRATEGIES FOR PRESERVATION OF AND
OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
The international Workshop on Strategies for Preservation of and
Open Access to Scientific Data was held on June 22-24, 2004, in Beijing. It
built on the results of the four previous bilateral CODATA meetings and
on the new Chinese scientific data access policy initiative noted above. The
workshop explored in detail the various scientific and technical, legal and

policy, institutional and economic, and management aspects that need to
be addressed in successfully implementing sustainable and accessible ar-
chives of digital health and environmental data resources in China. It ex-

amined various models of open archiving that might be adopted or adapted
for use within the Chinese context. It also provided much needed high-
level attention to these typically under-appreciated problems by bringing

together scientific information managers, digital archiving experts, national
science policy and funding officials, and representatives of development
organizations, who will be able to incorporate the results of this project

into their future planning.
4The workshop was organized pursuant to the following statement of
task:1.Identify research areas in which preservation of and open access to
digital scientific information require high-priority attention in China, and

provide the underlying rationales for the areas chosen.
2.Identify and discuss the scientific and technical, institutional and
economic, legal and policy, and management factors relevant to providing

open access to digital scientific information resources (both the data and
the literature), including an examination of different possible models and
4See Appendix B for the biographical summaries of all the speakers at the workshop.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
their potential benefits and shortcomings in China, and drawing on ex-amples of other digital archiving and access regimes in related areas.
3.Review and discuss the current status of access and archiving re-
gimes for the types of scientific information identified in task 1.4.Identify possible follow-up activities to improve open access and
preservation for each major type of digital scientific information selected
for discussion in task 1, taking into consideration the results of the discus-

sions under tasks 2 and 3.The workshop addressed these four tasks over two and a half days
through a mix of invited presentations, focused panel presentations, and
some discussion by all of the participants in both plenary and breakout
sessions.5 The primary areas of focus were on biomedical data, earth and
environmental data, and related scientific, technical, and medical litera-
ture. Although many of the issues identified and discussed during the work-
shop were focused on the Chinese context, they also likely are relevant

throughout much of the developing world. Because of significant language
barriers and time constraints the identification of follow-up activities re-
quested in task 4 could not be done through group discussions in the

breakout sessions. Any potential follow-up activities were identified only in
the context of individual presentations.
STRUCTURE OF THIS REPORT
Because this report is a summary of the workshop, it is limited in scope
to the presentations and other information identified during the meeting.
Chapter 2 presents two keynote speeches in their entirety by high-ranking
officials at the Ministry of Science and Technology who describe the devel-

opment and status of ChinaÕs national Scientific Data Sharing Policy.
Subsequent chapters include summaries of the other speakersÕ presen-
tations. Several international perspectives on the preservation of and open

access to public scientific data are presented in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 dis-
cusses the cross-disciplinary issuesÑpolicy and legal, institutional and eco-
nomic, and management and technicalÑthat affect the preservation of and

open access to public scientific information. The report concludes with a
discussion of these issues in the areas of life sciences and public health data;
5See Appendix A for the workshop agenda.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION5earth sciences, environmental, and natural resources data; and scientific
information, journals, and digital libraries.The appendixes to the report provide additional background informa-
tion, including the workshop agenda and the biographical summaries of
the workshop speakers. The presentation materials used by the invited
speakers are available in English on the USNC for CODATA Web site at
http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/chinese_workshop.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Presentations on ChinaÕs Scientific Data
Sharing Policy and Project
6THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC
DATA SHARING POLICY
Jinpei ChengVice Minister, Ministry of Science and Technology of China
At the present rate of rapid advances in modern science and technol-
ogy many areas, such as cosmology, earth system science, cognitive science,
and nonlinear science, are becoming the new scientific frontiers. The inte-
gration of information science, bioscience, and materials science, as well as

the interaction between natural sciences and social sciences, marks our en-
trance into a decade of unprecedented intensive knowledge and innova-
tion.Since opening to the outside world, the Chinese government has at-
tached much importance to the development of science and technology, as
evidenced by the national strategies of ÒNational Renewal through Science

and EducationÓ and ÒRealization of a Prosperous China through Human
Education.Ó The Chinese government recognizes that knowledge and in-
novation are essential elements for realizing the goals outlined in these strat-

egies, and the key components for obtaining and fostering national andinternational competitiveness. In recent years, China has achieved a series
of advances in science and technology, including manned space flight, su-

per-hybridized rice breeding, and supercomputer research and develop-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
7ment. These achievements highlight some of ChinaÕs ability for innovation.
Science and technology are playing important roles in agricultural advance-
ment, industrial technology upgrades, socially sustainable development, and
the evolution of ChinaÕs advanced-technology industries.
In 2002, the Chinese government established a new initiative with the
central objective of building an affluent society throughout the country. In
2003, the Third Plenary Session of the 16th Central Committee of the

Chinese Communist Party formulated and adopted five scientific develop-
ment goals that collectively direct the national economic and social devel-
opment. A large gap still exists, however, between the requirements for

economic and social development in China and the capacity of its science
and technology to meet these requirements. For example, insufficient in-
vestment in science and technology infrastructure, lack of world-class re-
search teams, and an outdated research management system greatly con-
strain ChinaÕs innovation and international competitive ability in science
and technology. Among these constraining factors, the inefficient use of

scientific and technological resources and the repetitiveness and duplica-
tion of research efforts have been prominent bottlenecks to ChinaÕs ad-
vancement in innovation.
In 2002, the State Council authorized the Ministry of Science and
Technology (MoST) to initiate a pilot project of the national science and
technology infrastructure platform in coordination with 16 other minis-

tries and departments. Based on reforms that strengthen data sharing and
scientific resource system integration, this project focuses on increasing
ChinaÕs international competitiveness and science and technology innova-

tion potential. China will use modern information technology and interna-tional resources to construct the public, fundamental, and strategic science
and technology infrastructure platform. The primary objective is to create

an environment that fosters scientific and technological innovation by pro-
viding the necessary infrastructure that best enables advancements in sci-
ence and technology, and that best supports long-term developments that

are the cornerstones of discovery and innovation. The sharing of scientific
data is the core component in this project.
MoST regards scientific data sharing as a national science and technol-
ogy infrastructure platform, considers it of national interest, and treats it as
an important research component based on several factors. Scientific data
are the most active and innovative resource in the information era.
 Scien-tific data have remarkable research and application possibilities, and deci-
sion-making potential. They are fundamental for meeting the needs for the
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
advancement and innovation of science and technology, and for social de-
velopment, economic growth, and national security. The value of scientific
data resources is strongly correlated with their sharing characteristics in two
respects. First, scientific research requires the use and sharing of data, infor-
mation, and knowledge from other pertinent disciplines to make innova-
tive advancements most efficiently and effectively. Solutions to world prob-
lems require an interdisciplinary approach. Second, the envisioned Chinese

scientific data sharing platform would facilitate simultaneous and unlim-ited copying and uses of data. The scientific data-sharing platform will thus
be based on the principle that all data be fully shared to facilitate the use of

the data for fully realizing their maximum value.
Scientific data are derived from scientific and technological activities
such as observation, monitoring, investigation, experiments, and research

analysis in various organizations and institutions. The types of scientific
data include numerical, spatial, graphical, and text data, which are com-
plex, widely distributed, in multiple formats, and massive in scope.
Scientific data are a knowledge resource for the whole society, so China
should manage the data sharing to best serve the entire country. ChinaÕs
massive data holdings are obtained and accumulated as a result of national

investment plans. As such, they are a national asset and resource shared by
the whole society. The capital accumulated by the taxpayers is used to ob-
tain scientific data. Therefore, the taxpayers should have the right to access

and share the data resources, which means that the producer of public data
must distribute the data to the public and serve the whole country and
society. It is on this basis that the data should be shared.
The insufficient use of ChinaÕs massive data holdings has been an ur-
gent problem.
 Over time, the Chinese government has organized different
observations, surveys, and experiments in many scientific fields, and accu-

mulated large quantities of scientific data. However, most of these data are
not shared or used efficiently because of the lack of a policy of openness
and the lack of a mechanism for sharing the data. This results in great waste

since the national investment is used primarily for repeatedly collecting
basic data. For example, there are 18 data receivers in the United States for
the moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer sensors on National

Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Observing Satellites,
while in China there are more than 30 stations, and their number contin-
ues to increase. Overall, the existing 5,000 to 6,000 scientific databases in

China do not really support the development of the country and society.
One can see that the problem of not sharing scientific data is pervasive
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
9because of policy, management, technology, and other factors. As a result,
it is difficult for scientists to obtain the needed research information, and
precious national resources are wasted due to repeated and redundant col-
lection. Therefore, scientific data sharing and the means for China to use

its resources more effectively are essential.
The development of international scientific data sharing policies has
provided good references for the Chinese data sharing project. In recent

years, many developed countries have carried out scientific data sharing
activities. For example, in the United States NASA established distributed
active archive centers for earth and environmental data, the White House

developed an open data management policy for global change research in
1991, and the federal government has adopted other regulations and poli-
cies concerning data management, many of them since 1990. Some inter-

national scientific organizations have also strengthened the work of data
exchange and sharing. For example, the World Meteorological Organiza-
tion manages a data exchange system of global meteorological data. There

is also the Global Disaster Information Network, and many other global
data sharing projects have been established. These examples all provide
approaches that China can adopt in carrying out its own scientific data

sharing.The quick growth of ChinaÕs massive data holdings and the develop-
ment of information technology have provided support for scientific data

sharing. According to the statistics for the past 30 years, rapid develop-
ments of science and technology in the world have produced massive scien-
tific dataÑmuch more than the data produced during all previous history.

China has entered a new phase, with its national information infrastructure
and information superhighway developing quickly. Series of networks are
being established successively (e.g., the Science and Technology Network,

Education and Science Network, Gold Bridge Network, Chinese Public
Network, and the new broadband networks). These can all help to ensure
that the scientific data are extensively, conveniently, and quickly shared. It

is not only an urgent requirement for the scientific and technological inno-
vation system to implement scientific data sharing and to create the new
order of opening and distribution for scientific data, but also to promote

ChinaÕs participation in the global economy.
In the process of implementing its scientific data sharing policy, China
must consider national strategic requirements and the worldÕs technologi-

cal evolution. There are five major steps that need to be emphasized as
China moves forward on its data sharing strategy.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
1. Change and enhance perspectives, and advocate resource sharing.
 For
a long time, the attitude that public scientific data in China are the exclu-
sive private possessions of individuals and departments has made the devel-
opment of scientific data exchange and sharing difficult. In order to raise

the awareness of scientific data sharing and to enhance its effectiveness,
China must break the Òinformation exchange barrierÓ; that is, change the
traditional view that the scientific data resources are private property, and

foster a new culture of scientific resource sharing.
Chinese researchers need to recognize that public scientific data are
national resources that no organization or individual is allowed to keep

privately. Public scientific data are derived from observations and experi-
ments that are established through a national investment, as a national
resource. This call for open scientific data sharing and reinforcement of
the national interest subrogates the individualÕs interest to the national
interest, facilitates the active circulation of scientific data among science
departments, and develops its substantial value in the economy, society,

and research.
China should encourage organizations to devote their efforts toward
scientific data sharing through improved data management systems and

mechanisms. MoST has established special funds to facilitate these devel-
opments of data sharing. At the same time, MoST also has created and
implemented an evaluation policy for scientific data sharing to help ensure

that data sharing develops in an orderly manner.
Through the demonstration of data sharing benefits, people gradually
will be encouraged to change their traditional views and to make scientific
data sharing part of their research activity. Some organizations that have
initiated data sharing have provided scientific data conveniently and quickly
to many users, which helps to change the data usersÕ and the data managersÕ

thinking and approach. This encourages more organizations and individu-
als to adopt a data sharing ethic and practice.2. Plan and develop the scientific data sharing policy and system.
 Inorder to ensure the implementation of a scientific data sharing project, it is
necessary to develop and integrate a national policy and operational sys-

tem. ÒSharingÓ requires a management system to regulate and ensure data
exchange; to streamline scientific data linkages among data collection, inte-
gration, and application; and to promote the relationships between data

owners, administrators, and users to ensure data sharing progress.
Scientific data sharing is not limited to one type of industry, depart-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
11ment, or person; it needs the cooperation of the state and the whole society.
The adoption of new laws can aid the national-level policy and regulation
to help normalize the various social relationships associated with data shar-
ing. Under a sound legal system, scientific data resources can be valued

fully and serve scientific innovation and national development.
3. Strengthen the establishment of scientific data sharing standards.
 Inorder to share scientific data fully, a standard approach must be established.
This should include establishing the technological system for the scientificdata sharing platform, enacting standards for scientific data sharing and

distribution, classifying data into different categories for different users,
adopting the data distribution policy, and guiding data integration and
communication. During the establishment of such a standard approach, it

is necessary to import and use the related standards from other countries, as
appropriate. It also is important to emphasize the combination of basic and
universal standards, and their application.
4. Construct a service system for national scientific data sharing.
 It alsois a very important task to implement scientific data sharing for existing

data resources and for all new scientific data. Scientific data resources that
are derived from government scientific and technological programs and
distributed among research groups and individuals should be organized

and shared efficiently.
Scientific data centers typically need to be organized at the department
or organizational level. MoST has chosen some initial departments and

organizations, such as resources and environment, medicine and sanita-
tion, and agriculture, and established related data centers and networks.
This preliminary work can demonstrate successful experiences and pro-

mote the development of scientific data sharing platforms.5. Strengthen cooperation and improve the sharing of global data re-
sources.
 International cooperation is essential for data resource sharing.
Many important and complex scientific problems cannot be solved by only
one country. Researchers need to share scientific data resources globally.

China is reforming and opening, learning from other advanced experiences
abroad, and encouraging its scientists to show their research results to the
world. China also believes that the challenges it addresses can serve as an

example for other countries.MoST has signed bilateral and multilateral treaties on scientific and
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
technological cooperation with more than 100 countries. On the basis of
these treaties, the Chinese government is developing activities to encourage
its scientists to cooperate with international scientific organizations and totake active part in data exchanges with international data centers. China

also welcomes other international scientists to China to establish long-term
cooperation in the scientific data and information fields.The worldÕs scientific community is rapidly entering into a new era
dominated by digital technologies. Scientific data sharing, which is a basic
strategy for this coming decade, can strongly improve worldwide scientific
and technologic abilities with the combined efforts of international organi-

zations, national governments, and individual scientists and engineers. A
new knowledge society based on data and information sharing will be cre-
ated soon.INTRODUCTION TO THE CHINA SCIENTIFIC
DATA SHARING PROJECT
XianÕen Zhang
Director General of the Division of Basic Research
Ministry of Science and Technology of China
1Scientific data have become a new resource in the information era and
will play a key role in the process of scientific and technological innovation.
More reliable, comprehensive, and richer scientific data mean more oppor-
tunities for original innovation. The fact that innovations in science and

technology are, for the most part, interdisciplinary indicates that such col-
laboration is the future of science. Successful research depends on open
access to data, information, and knowledge from various fields to the great-

est extent possible.The current status for scientific data sharing is far from meeting the
demands of ChinaÕs scientific and technical development, its emerging

economy, and growing national power. The scarcity of scientific and tech-
nical data resources has become a major obstacle for innovation. The exist-
ing, limited resources cannot be used fully because of the outdated research
1Based on a presentation available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
Zhang_Xianen_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
13management system. Funding also is not sufficient, and the supporting
funding system needs to be improved immediately.
The China Scientific Data Sharing Project (China-SDSP) was
launched in 2002 in response to this situation, as well as in response to

meeting ChinaÕs need for sustainable development based on science and
technology in the information society. China-SDSP is a part of the Na-
tional Facility Information Infrastructure for Science and Technology. This

presentation provides a brief introduction to China-SDSP activities.
General Considerations and Objectives of China-SDSP
The major objective of China-SDSP is to establish a data sharing ar-
chitecture that facilitates the use of scientific data by establishing laws, poli-

cies, and standards that are supportive of scientific data preservation and
sharing and taking advantage of information and communication technol-
ogy. China-SDSP is being developed through comprehensive planning at

the national level; it is collecting and reorganizing data from government
agencies, institutes, programs, and individual investigators while making
full use of international scientific data resources through cooperation.

China-SDSP should make all these data accessible to all interested users at
an affordable cost, or free if possible. By utilizing modern information tech-
nology, integrating scientific data resources from all kinds of departments,

establishing a data sharing policy, and improving management, scientific
data resources can be integrated into a uniform framework of national sci-
entific data sharing management. The methodology of the China-SDSP is

to build up a data center cluster and a sharing-oriented network, with the
goal of forming a multi-faceted, distributed scientific data sharing systemthat bridges the gaps between different agencies, institutes, and geographi-

cal regions. By 2020, the project is expected to achieve the following goals:
to form a scientific data management and sharing system that is more user-
friendly; to develop a set of supportive laws, policies, and standards; and to

establish a core base of data service professionals through a career reward
mechanism. By that time, 80 percent of scientific data funded by the gov-
ernment is expected to be made available to the general public.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Framework Architecture of China-SDSP
Logical Framework of the Project
China-SDSP has three major elements: master databases, scientific data
centers and networks, and a Gateway Web site.
Master Databases.
 A major part of the development of the master
database component is to reorganize the existing databases. Master data-
bases disseminate authoritative and reliable data to users. The
 Òmaster data-baseÓ designation normally corresponds with some specific academic disci-

pline, and contains and describes data that are important for innovations
and the advance of science. Approximately 300 such databases have already
been identified.Scientific Data Centers and Networks.
 As with the development of
the master databases, the establishment of scientific data centers and net-works is also a result of re-organizing existing data centers and networks.

Priority will be given to those centers or networks that have stable data
sources and well-planned data archiving in fields such as natural resources
and the environment.
Gateway Web Site.
 The Gateway Web site will link the master data-
bases to all of the other information in every data center. It will deliver
services, including content exchange, metadata, and information distribu-

tion in order to provide one-stop querying and information dissemination.
Figure 1 provides a schematic diagram of the Gateway Web site.
Scope of Data Sharing Supported by China-SDSP
China-SDSP also functions as a catalyst. Its original purpose has been
to integrate publicly funded data resources, but its long-term goal is to
leverage all possible data resources from government to the private sectors,
and make them available to the general public.
The data flow is illustrated in Figure 2. The data may come from three
types of sources: large programs funded by the central government, pro-
grams funded by other agencies and institutes, and international coopera-

tion programs. Data will be submitted and integrated into an easy-to-use
form at following common guidelines and standards. Qualified users will
have the right to access these datasets.Six data sharing systems will be on the priority list: natural resources and
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
15Gateway to  China Scientific Data Sharing ProgramNatural Scienceand EnvironmentAgriculturePopulationand HealthBasic and Frontier SciencesEngineering andTechnologyRegional DevelopmentMeteorological Scientific Data CenterRural Development SciData CenterAgricultural Scientific Data CenterBasic Medicine Scientific Data CenterRural Development SciData CenterPopulation Control SciData CenterEarth System Scientific Data CenterSpace Environment SciData CenterAbout300 Master DatabasesIn 40 Data CentersDisciplines                Disciplines                Data Centers / NetworksData Centers / NetworksMaster DatabaseMaster DatabaseData Users....................................................................ÄÄFIGURE 1Architecture and framework of China Scientific Data Sharing Program.
Scientific Data SharingScientific Data SharingSubmission from Submission from Agencies and Agencies and InstitutesInstitutesExchange Data Exchange Data with other with other CountriesCountriesSubmission from Submission from Major National Major National ProgramProgramData Data DisseminationDisseminationData Data Integration / Integration / SubmissionSubmissionData Data GeneratorGeneratorScientific Research & Scientific Research & Technology Development Technology Development SectorSectorObservation, MonitoringObservation, MonitoringSurvey and EvaluationSurvey and EvaluationStatistics SectorStatistics SectorFIGURE 2Data flow diagram for China-SDSP.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
environment management, agriculture, population and health, basic and
frontier science, engineering and technology, and regional development.
Service Architecture of China-SDSP
China-SDSP is expected to provide services in the following four ways:
Data management services will integrate up-to-date technologies,such as distributed databases, data warehouses, metadata, and networks,
and build up a distributed database system that facilitates data submission,
processing, archiving, and updating.Content services
 will provide content query based on metadata so that
users can obtain information about specific data in a timely and effective

manner.
Data services
 based on a successful content query service will support
data browsing and downloading of many kinds of data, either spatial or

nonspatial, well-structured or nonstructured.
Extended services
 will provide tools for various users to search in mas-
sive amounts of data, integrate data from different sources, and mining of

data to find new knowledge. Data centers may develop more customized
services, such as subject-oriented computation.
Major Tasks
Major tasks that need to be addressed include scientific data resource
development, standardization, and policy and law aspects.
Scientific Data Resource Development
Data resource development is the process of data collecting, integrating,
re-organizing, and mining. The master databases are the natural result of this

process. The major tasks are to improve existing data resources; safeguard or
rescue endangered scientific data and records; develop the master databases
for large research programs funded by the government; introduce interna-

tional data resources based on their scientific values, quality, and usability;
integrate multi-source data; and conduct value-added research.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
17Standardization
Standardization is a prerequisite for scientific data sharing in the digi-
tal era. There are two kinds of standards being addressed by China-SDSP:

platform technical standards and data sharing standards. Data standards
within major application areas will also be on the list of priorities.
Policy and Law AspectsThe policy and law aspects for scientific data sharing are also key tasks
that need to be addressed. Policy making should be considered first as a
means for guiding legislation, which is a long and complex process and
requires sufficient feedback from sharing practices. Thus both theoretical
investigations and case studies are important inputs for a sound data shar-
ing policy. The relevant policy and law system will be developed step-by-
step and should handle such issues as guidelines, data classification for shar-
ing, copyrights, incentives, performance evaluation, and so on.
The Chinese data sharing policies and legislation should be improved
for several reasons. The existing scientific and technical legislation has not

fully represented the sharing spirit and principles. Targets for data sharing
are not defined in current policies and regulations. No relevant description
for a specific data sharing system could be found in the current policies and

regulations. Finally, the existing policies and legislation provide no guid-
ance to research institutions about data sharing, or their proper rights and
obligations.As of this time, over 20 countries have issued relevant policies for sci-
entific data sharing management, thereby forming a primitive global sys-
tem for scientific data exchange and sharing services in some domains. The

policies and laws of these countries provide useful examples.
Tasks that should be addressed in the policy arena include the estab-
lishment and implementation of several types of guidelines: the implemen-

tation and management guidelines of the China-SDSP; data submissionguidelines of major science and technology programs funded by the gov-
ernment; guidelines for scientific and technological data classification for
data sharing; and performance evaluation (merit appraisal) of scientific data
sharing activities.Scientific data sharing legislation in China will be important for sev-eral reasons. It will provide one of the basic resources for transferring basic
scientific and technical results (i.e., data) into real productivity. The imple-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
mentation of scientific data sharing could produce new types of informa-
tion business, such as data product processing and data distribution ser-
vices. Scientific data sharing could also provide open scientific data re-
sources and a fair competitive environment for data resources in the

information industry. For the purpose of fully participating in worldwide
high-level collaboration and competition, China should improve its na-
tional scientific and technical competitive ability and lay a foundation for

efficiently supporting its emerging economy.
Data sharing legislation and regulations therefore need to define prop-
erty rights in data; encourage data sharing; and establish a system for super-
vising data sharing, for the technical decisions about data sharing, and fordata sharing evaluation. There are several legislative and regulatory actions
that should be taken in constructing a domestic legal system for scientific
data sharing.Revise the Scientific and Technical Improvement Law.
 As the basic na-tional law of science and technology and the standard for sharing scientific
and technical resources, this law should represent the most important Òshar-
ing principleÓ for platform construction. It should make sure the data re-

sources are open and shared with the public by data managers and public
research managers, give rights to relevant bodies that need access to data
resources, as well as define the characteristics of national scientific and tech-
nical data resources and regulate public scientific and technical data re-
source sharing on proper terms.
Draft a Scientific and Technical Resource Sharing and Protection Law.
This law should define basic obligations for data resource managers and
owners regarding open and shared data resources with the public, regulate
basic qualifications and procedures for users, and stipulate the requirements
for providing service and education. Such measures are needed to prevent
improper or illegal activities and to provide the national scientific and tech-

nical resource management center with adequate funding, information, and
timely data.Regulation on Scientific Data Sharing.
 This regulation should define
scientific data, clarify the obligations for scientific data owners and manag-
ers to open and share their resources, and establish a standard management

system for scientific data resource and standard data formats. The persons
in charge should be held accountable for the waste of resources and other
types of mismanagement.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHINAÕS SCIENTIFIC DATA SHARING POLICY
19Regulation on Opening Government Information.
 This national-level regu-
lation will clarify the principle for government to freely issue its information,
similar to the resource sharing in the scientific and technical fundamental
platform. The resource sharing on the platform could be greatly improved

with the announcement and implementation of this major regulation.
There may be other relevant laws and regulations that need to be con-
sidered or amended as well.
Summary of the China-SDSP Work Plan
The following activities are being implemented during the initial ex-
perimental period, 2001-2005: overall planning and design; research and

planning on the policy and legal framework; drafting and issuing relevant
policies and regulations; developing technology and standards; establishing
scientific data centers and networks and initiating a data sharing pilot

project; identifying the optimal mechanisms for existing data consolidationand sharing; launching of the program Gateway Web site, selecting 25 data
centers for the data sharing pilot project, and selecting other candidate

centers for further development; summing up experiences from various as-
pects of the experimental period; and preparing a feasibility report about
the overall implementation of public data sharing in the next period of

activity.
In 2001, the meteorological data sharing project was launched,
2 whichheralded the start of the scientific data sharing program in China.
The China-SDSP was formally initiated in 2002. By the end of 2002,
another five data centers (land survey, hydrology and water resources, seis-
mic, forestry, and agriculture) and three networks (earth system science

data center network, modern agricultural technology and rural develop-
ment network, and sustainable development network) had joined the pilot
project.In June 2003, a Coordinating Group and a Scientific Group were estab-
lished for scientific data sharing. The main task of these groups was to de-
velop the Plan for the China-SDSP by May 2004 with the following six
major components: current status and major national requirements; overall
2See the summary of the presentation on ÒProgress in Meteorological Data Sharing in
ChinaÓ by Dahe Qin in Chapter 4.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
considerations; principles and objectives; strategic framework and tasks;
implementation and measurements; and supporting conditions and facilities.
As of June 2004, the Gateway Web site has become pivotal to the
China-SDSP. Its function and technical specifications have been clarified

and the overall design and specific modules are finished. Data from the five
data centers and three networks are being integrated into this Gateway and
will be available by the end of 2004.
In terms of policy making, a working group for data sharing was estab-
lished and investigated the current status and trend of data policy, both at
home and abroad, compiled relevant materials and information, established

the ÒGuidelines of Data Submission from Major National Programs,Ó be-
gan researching the framework of relevant law and policy, and finished the
conceptual design for data classification for sharing.A research group for data standards also has been established. It has
investigated the current status and trend of data standards both at home
and abroad, compiled relevant standards, and drafted the framework and

guidelines for data sharing management. In general, the China-SDSP is
still in the overall planning phase, accumulating the experiences of technol-
ogy and policy making, as well as overseeing pilot data sharing projects.
During the implementation period, 2006 to 2010, the following work
will need to be done: continue the establishment of data sharing technol-ogy, policy, and law; extend the program coverage of scientific data centers

or networks and make them operational; gradually improve technology
and standards; enforce the cooperation among data centers in different re-
search areas; and enhance the capacity to develop high-level data products

and to ensure quality. After each yearly performance evaluation of the 25
pilot data centers or networks, the qualified ones will be included in the
ÒNational Scientific Data Master NetworkÓ and will start regular opera-

tion. The amount invested in each center will depend on its merits and
performance. Another 15 to 20 data centers will be launched, including
200 new master databases. By 2010, a mechanism is expected to be estab-

lished through which data are submitted from various governmental agen-
cies and programs and delivered to potential users efficiently.
In conclusion, it is important to emphasize that science respects no
border. The establishment and implementation of the China-SDSP needs
the support and assistance of the international community, and in turn will
contribute to the development of global science and technology.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.213Summaries of Presentations on
International Perspectives
The perspectives of five international organizationsÑthe United Na-
tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the
International Council for Science (ICSU), the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Inter-Academy Panel on In-
ternational Issues (IAP), and the Committee on Data for Science and Tech-
nology (CODATA)Ñwere presented at the workshop. These presentations,

summarized below, were focused on activities that are either under way or
recently completed by these organizations in the areas relating to the pres-
ervation of and open access to public scientific data and information. The

chapter concludes with brief overviews of the Chinese and U.S. National
Committees for CODATA.
TRENDS IN DEVELOPMENT OF INTERNATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC DATA AND INFORMATION
1The commitment of UNESCO2 to the essential good of the free flow
of information and access to knowledge sources is inspired by its Constitu-
tion, which states that Òthe wide diffusion of culture, and the education of
1Based on a presentation by Yasuyuki Aoshima, United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
Aoshima_Presentation.ppt.
2For more information about UNESCOÕs many activities see http://www.unesco.org.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
humanity for justice and liberty and peace are indispensable to the dignity
of man and constitute a sacred duty which all the nations must fulfill in a
spirit of mutual assistance and concern.ÓFor several years, various Resolutions of the UNESCO General Con-
ference and the Executive Board have urged member states and associate
members to promote free and universal access to public domain informa-
tion for the purpose of education, science, and culture. As a result,

UNESCO has taken several proactive measures in order to encourage mem-
ber states to establish a right of universal access to information and formu-
late policies and regulatory frameworks, which would determine the future

orientations of the information society.
After an extensive round of negotiations, the General Conference of
UNESCO adopted at its 32nd session in October 2003 the Recommenda-

tion concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal
Access to Cyberspace. The Recommendation recognizes the importance of
promoting equitable access to information and knowledge, especially in the

public domain, and reiterates UNESCOÕs conviction that the organization
should have a leading role in encouraging access to information for all,
supporting multilingualism and cultural diversity on the global informa-

tion networks. The Recommendation proposes a number of specific mea-
sures fostering universal access to digital resources and services, and facili-
tating the preservation of their cultural and language diversity. UNESCO

thereby encourages its member states to support equitable and affordable
access to information and to promote the development of a multicultural
information society.
The current evolution towards knowledge societies through an in-
creased use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) facili-
tates the movement and handling of data as well as the process of generat-

ing and validating information and knowledge. Thus, the various aspects of
access to scientific data and information in the digital world, including thevery important questions concerning intellectual property rights, will con-
tinue to attract attention.Public-domain information, which is free of copyright and other intel-
lectual property rights, often is not sufficiently well known to potential

contributors and users. In some countries, there are growing restrictions on
the availability and use of public data and information. The public-domain
principle also can be extended conceptually by the adoption of Òopen ac-

cessÓ to information, which is made freely and openly available by its rights
holders. One example of open access is the open-source software license, by
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
23which computer programs are distributed free of charge by their authors
for exploitation and further development. Another is the documentation
produced and made available free of charge by the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, as well as public data and official information pro-

duced and voluntarily made available by governments.
A significant aspect of the Recommendation concerning the Promo-
tion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to Cyberspace is the

promotion of the social and cultural dimensions of universal access and the
equitable balance between the interests of rights holders and the public
interest. It is a major challenge for all those involved in the expansion of the

emerging information society to contribute to maintaining a balance be-tween copyright protection and access to information in the public do-
main. International copyright systems have been changed over time to ad-

just to the new digitally networked environment. In this sense, adopting
coherent national legislative measures and ensuring international harmoni-
zation among countries is essential to avoid potential conflicts of interests

in an increasingly globalized world. Through the adopted Recommenda-
tion UNESCO recognizes the importance of an equitable balance between
the interests of rightsholders and those of users when valuable works and

performances are exploited in the digital environment in the fields of edu-
cation, science, and culture.
As one specific follow-up to the Recommendation, UNESCO pub-
lished in 2004 policy guidelines regarding governmental public-domain
information3 in order to advise countries on policies for the development
and promotion of such information, taking account of both national needs

and international practices. These guidelines serve as an advisory tool for
governments. They emphasize the importance of governmental public-do-
main information, which contributes to economic and social development,

promotes democratic ideals through greater transparency of governance,
enhances public health and safety, and serves essential scientific and techni-
cal research functions. The guidelines also encourage governments to de-

fine the scope of available governmental public-domain information ac-
cording to national needs, adopt a ÒFreedom of InformationÓ law, and
3See Policy Guidelines for the Development and Promotion of Governmental Public
Domain Information prepared by Paul F. Uhlir. 2004. Paris: UNESCO, available at: http://
portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.php-URL_ID=15863&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_

SECTION=201.html.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
develop and implement a comprehensive Governmental Public Informa-
tion Policy Framework.
Freedom of expression and freedom of opinion, as enshrined in Article
19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
,4 are essential premises of
the information society. In building such a society, the ability for all to
access and produce information, and generate ideas and knowledge is
indispensable.Scientific research leads to the development of new technologies and
to the production of data and information that can benefit society as a
whole.While some countries are leading or keeping up with scientific and
technical progress and with the digital information revolution, developing
countries have to make huge efforts to gain access to the necessary infra-

structure and to take full advantage of ICTs. It is indeed paradoxical that if
ICTs facilitate communication from the global to the local levels and vice
versa, they can also broaden the digital gap between those who participate
in the information society and benefit from it and those who cannot.
The impact of ICTs in the production, use, and dissemination of sci-
entific knowledge is immense. There are many opportunities to bridge the

science gap, for example by improving networking among scientists locally
and internationally, and by providing scientific information and knowl-
edge to decision makers for better governance. Moreover, ICTs are central

to scientific research itself. They enable scientists to perform fundamental
and applied research, build partnerships and scientific international con-
sortia, conduct experiments, manage data, coordinate laboratory activities,

and communicate their findings to their colleagues and the public.Based on the assumption that scientific knowledge produced through
public investments is a Òpublic good,Ó scientific data and information

should be as widely available and affordable as possible, since the more
people that are able to share such information, the greater the positive ef-
fects and returns will be for society. The importance of scientific data to

society therefore should be described clearly since all areas of research now
require availability of high-quality data for their progress.
Finally, in light of all these developments, the sustainable, long-term
preservation of digital data and information is a very important concern.
For several years now, specialized agencies and organizations of the United
4See http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
25Nations have highlighted the fact that despite the growing efforts of the
various stakeholders involved in generating, organizing, and providing ac-
cess to digital scientific data and information, these resources are still at risk
of being lost to future generations. The issue of digital archiving is thus

essentially a matter of scientific and public policy, which should be of con-
cern to decision makers.TOWARDS INTERNATIONAL GUIDELINES FOR ACCESS TO
RESEARCH DATA FROM PUBLIC FUNDING
5The ever increasing use of information communication technologies is
bringing dramatic changes to the way our global science system operates.Digitization has become an essential part of the scientific process and the
management of research. YesterdayÕs scientists studied nature. TodayÕs sci-
entists study digital dataÑdigital data on nature to be sure. Sir Isaac New-
ton did not need more than a pencil and a pad to process his observational

data into ground-breaking scientific laws. But today the next advance in
high-energy physics requires a Large Hadron Collider that will produce 12
to 14 petabytes of digital data per year, the full capacity of about 16 million

CD ROMs. These data will be analyzed by some 6,000 researchers scat-
tered around the world, but tightly knit by the Grid computer network of
our global science system.The use of ICTs has made collections of scientific data in many re-
spects comparable to musical scores: to be used time and again for a diver-
sity of performances by a diversity of artists for different audiences of soci-

ety. Optimum access to research data should enable researchers from all
over the world to compose the full score for our knowledge-based interna-
tional society. Consequently, access to the gold mine of research data quickly

has become a major issue in international science policy and research man-
agement. The traditional exchange arrangements between scientific col-
leagues no longer suffice to guarantee the necessary openness of access to

digital data resources. Optimum access requires formal agreements on the
conditions of access at both the national and international levels. The main
task of establishing an adequate regulatory framework lies within the re-
5Based on a presentation by Peter Schrıder, Ministry of Education, Culture, and Sci-
ence, The Netherlands, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/

Schroder_Presentation.pdf.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
search communityÑat the national research councils, scientific institutes,
universities, and funding agencies. The general principles to build data ac-
cess regimes should be a responsibility of governments, however. Consider-
ing the international dimensions of the scientific effort in general and of
access to data in particular, national data access policy regimes will only
work when closely connected to international agreements.
At the ministerial-level meeting of the OECD Committee for Scien-
tific and Technological Policy on January 30, 2004, the ministers respon-
sible for science policy endorsed the ÒDeclaration on Access to Research
Data from Public Funding,Ó
6 including a draft set of principles and therecommendation that OECD should develop these principles into more
detailed guidelines. The Declaration is an important step towards further
international scientific cooperation.The guidelines will address the technical, institutional, financial, legal,
and cultural aspects of data access regimes. The basic premise of the guide-
lines will be open access to and unrestricted use of publicly funded research

data, subject only to legitimate restrictions. At least nine areas will be ad-
dressed in the guidelines: transparency, formal responsibility, professional-
ism, protection of intellectual property, legal conformity, interoperability,

quality, efficiency, and accountability.
In short, new governmental science policies on data access and new
data policies of research funding organizations will influence the future

course of international research practices. The development of international
approaches to data access holds the promise of opening up exciting new
dimensions of international scientific cooperation.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES ON DATA AND
INFORMATION FOR SCIENCE
7The mission of ICSU is to strengthen international science for the
benefit of society. One of the key principles that underpins this mission is

the ÒUniversality of ScienceÓ; that is, all scientists should have the possibil-
ity to participate, without discrimination and on an equitable basis, in le-gitimate scientific activities whether they be conducted in a national, trans-6See http://www.codataweb.org/UNESCOmtg/dryden-declaration.pdf.
7Based on a presentation by Carthage Smith, International Council for Science, avail-
able at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/CarthageSmithPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
27national, or international context. Scientific data and information are the
input and product of scientific research, and the practices and policies that
dictate their use must reinforce the universality of science. In so doing they
will improve science for the benefit of everyone.
Since its inception, ICSU, whose membership includes both interna-tional disciplinary science Unions and national interdisciplinary science
bodies, has been involved in scientific data and information issues. A par-

ticular focus has been on the international and interdisciplinary issues relat-
ing to data production, management, and access. When ICSU was estab-
lished in 1932, the challenges were very different than they are today. While

data exchange was logistically more difficult and much slower in 1932, it is
paradoxical that the incredible advances in information and communica-
tion technologies that have taken place in the last decade have also, in

many ways, made the exchange of data much more complex.
In order to address the key management and policy challenges, ICSU
has established a number of specific interdisciplinary bodies for data and

information, including CODATA, a co-organizer of this workshop, and
the International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications,
also represented at the meeting. Moreover, ICSU has developed the major

international research programs on global environmental change and is cur-
rently planning large new scientific initiatives, such as the International
Polar Year (2007-2008), which produce, collect, analyze, and disseminate
large amounts of diverse scientific data from and for many sources around
the world.With regard to data policy, ICSU is a strong advocate of Òfull and open
accessÓ
8 to scientific data and Òuniversal and equitable accessÓ
9 to scientificpublications. ICSU also has been very actively involved with CODATA,
UNESCO, and other international science partners in the two phases of

the United Nations World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS).
On behalf of the international science community, these groups argued
8ICSU defines Òfull and open accessÓ to data as equitable, nondiscriminatory access to
all data that are of value to science. It does not necessarily equate to Òfree of costÓ at the point
of delivery, although this is certainly the ideal in many situations, particularly with regard to
publicly funded data that are made available online.
9ICSU defines Òuniversal and equitable accessÓ to scientific publications as ensuring
equal opportunities both to publish and to obtain scientific information for all scientistswherever they are located. It does not necessarily imply without any cost at the point of

delivery.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
very strongly for recognition of the critical role and needs of science in the
information society. In particular, an agenda for actionÑScience in the
Information Society10Ñwas developed by ICSU and its partners. It high-
lighted the key issues relating to preservation of and access to scientific data

and information. This agenda was very influential because its main recom-
mendations were incorporated into the formal documents that were agreed
by Heads of State at the end of phase I of WSIS, which was held in Geneva
in December 2003.
In light of the rapidly changing international scientific (and political)landscape and in parallel to WSIS, ICSU recently completed a Priority

Area Assessment of the international needs for scientific data and informa-
tion11Ñproduction, management, access, and dissemination. The report
addresses many of the future challenges related to data preservation and

access and identifies clear actions for ICSU, the scientific community, policy
makers, funders, and other stakeholders. Many of the existing practices,
mechanisms, structures, and policies relating to scientific data and infor-

mation need to be updated and improved if the optimum benefit from data
and information is to be obtained for both science and society.
The Priority Area Assessment report also identifies a number of priori-
ties and needs in the area of scientific data and information, including
long-term strategic planning and investment, professional data manage-
ment, and modernization of current infrastructure and systems, as well as

new infrastructure in some areas. It also underscores the need for interna-
tional cooperation and supportive data and information policies at the na-tional and international levels.In the area of data preservation, the report recommends that there
must be a prioritization of what data to preserve. Other areas of importance
are data rescue and recovery and the need for Òopenly availableÓ metadata.

The report also identifies long-term support for archiving and consider-
ations regarding data integrity and data privacy as essential requirements
for effective data preservation.
10See http://www.icsu.org for the full agenda for action and details of other ICSU
publications and activities relating to the WSIS.
11International Council for Science. 2004. ICSU Report of the CSPR Assessment Panel on
Scientific Data and Information
. The background description, terms of reference, final report,
and panel membership for the ICSU Priority Area Assessment on Scientific Data and Informa-

tion can be obtained from http://www.icsu.org/1_icsuinscience/DATA_Paa_1.html/.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
29The ICSU Priority Area Assessment defines access in two ways: (1) to
provide data and information and publish them, and (2) to be able to use
and read the data and information. Minimal constraints on access should
be maintained. The report recommends the development of stable systems

for providing universal access to quality data and information. New eco-
nomic models for providing access to scientific, technical, and medical lit-
erature need to be developed. Scientists also should become more involved

in the development of policies, such as intellectual property rights, that
affect access. Finally, the interests and needs of scientists in developing coun-
tries must be considered and addressed.
INTER-ACADEMY PANEL INITIATIVES ON PROMOTING
ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION
12The IAP is a global network of over 90 Academies of Science designed
to promote their greater participation in science policy discussions as well

as policies that strengthen scientific institutions. Toward that end, the IAP
creates partnerships among its member institutions and works closely with
other scientific organizations. The IAP is governed by an Executive Com-

mittee with a rotating membership of 11 member Academies and two co-
chairs. In 2003-2006, the co-chairs are Professor Zhu Chen of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Professor Yves Qu”r” of the French Acad”mie des
Sciences. The Third World Academy of Sciences and ICSU are also ex
officio members.Since its inception, the IAP has issued statements on population growth
(1994), urban development (1996), sustainability (2000), human repro-
ductive cloning (2003), science education (2003), health of mothers and
children (2003), scientific capacity building (2003), science and the media

(2003), and access to scientific information (2003).13 The IAP also orga-nizes its activities according to major programs and shorter, more focused
initiatives. Currently, its programs are in the areas of capacity building for

Academies, science education, health education for women, and water. It
also has three initiatives focused on biosecurity, genetically modified organ-
isms, and access to scientific information.12Based on a presentation by Michael Clegg, foreign secretary of the U.S. National
Academy of Sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
MichaelCleggPresentation.ppt.
13For more information on the Inter-Academy Panel, see http://www4.
nationalacademies.org/iap/iapGA.nsf/.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Because of the importance of the issue of improving access to scientific
data and information as a matter of science policy at the national and inter-national levels, the IAP issued a policy statement on this topic in December
2003.14 The IAP Statement on Access to Scientific Information focuses on
access to numerical scientific data, databases, and scientific literature. It
also attempts to address the high cost of scientific journal subscriptions.
The statement recommends that:
Electronic access to journal content be made available worldwide
without cost as soon as possible, within one year or less of publication for

scientists in industrialized nations, and immediately upon publication forscientists in developing countries;Journal content and, to the extent possible, data upon which re-
search is based be prepared and presented in a standard format for elec-
tronic distribution to facilitate ease of use;
Journal content be archived collectively, either by private or govern-
ment organizations;Governments and publishers work together to raise awareness in
the scientific community of the availability of free electronic access to sci-

entific journals; andScientific databases obtained by intergovernmental organizations be
made available without cost or restrictions on reuse.
As noted above, the IAP also has launched a new initiative under the
leadership of the U.S., Chinese, and Senegalese Academies of Science on

access to scientific information in developing countries. The IAP will con-
vene a meeting of interested members to define this new initiative.
15 Inaddition, it may also develop positions on subcategories of the broad topic

of information access including electronic access, access to databases, re-
sponsibilities of the publishing industry, public-sector responsibilities, and
the information communication technologies infrastructure supporting ac-

cess to data and information.14See the Inter-Academy Panel on International Issues. 2003. An IAP Statement on Ac-
cess to Scientific Information, Mexico City, December 4. http://www4.nationalacademies.org/
iap/iaphome.nsf/weblinks/WWWW-5U6HHG?OpenDocument.
15Since this workshop, the IAP convened two related meetings in Paris in November
2004 and in Dakar, Senegal, in January 2006.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
31FUTURE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE ON
DATA FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
16CODATA
17is an interdisciplinary committee of ICSU concerned with
various types of quantitative data resulting from experimental measure-
ments or observations in the natural and social sciences, and the engineer-
ing disciplines. Particular emphasis is given to data management problems

common to different scientific fields and to data sharing among these disci-
plines. CODATAÕs objectives focus on:
Improving the quality and accessibility of data, as well as the meth-
ods by which data are acquired, managed, and analyzed;
Facilitating international cooperation among those collecting, orga-nizing, and using data;Promoting an increased awareness in the scientific and technical
community of the importance of these activities; andConsidering data access and intellectual property issues.
In addition to traditional activities such as meetings, workshops, and pub-
lishing, CODATA is now working to enhance such international activities
by (1) promoting project-oriented approaches to highlight models to
follow up on fruitful ideas; (2) articulating issues in global access to scien-

tific and technical data through intensive commitments to global and soci-
etal activities, such as the WSIS; and (3) expanding human dimensions
to enhance data flows beyond borders, disciplines, organizations, and

generations.CODATA has identified data preservation and data access as priority
mandates. There is a diverse portfolio of activities focused on the preserva-

tion of scientific and technical data, primarily through the work of its Task
Group on Preservation of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in
Developing Countries. The Task Group has been working to identify the

scientific, technical, management, and policy issues related to the preserva-
tion of scientific and technical data, and the Task Group members have
compiled a comprehensive, annotated bibliography of archiving resources.
16Based on a presentation by Shuichi Iwata, University of Tokyo, Japan, and President,
CODATA, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Iwata_6_
Presentation.ppt.17For more information, see http://www.codata.org/.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
They also have initiated a series of international, interdisciplinary work-
shops, including this workshop, to highlight the importance of permanent
access to scientific information resources, and to examine the policy and
legal, management and technical, and institutional and economic issues
that are important to providing permanent access to digital scientific data.
Finally, CODATA, along with the Task Group, has worked with the Inter-
national Council for Scientific and Technical Information (ICSTI) to cre-

ate an online portal of resources related to the Permanent Access of Scien-
tific Data and Information.
18In the area of access to scientific data, CODATA has worked closely
with ICSU as well to provide an international voice in support of Òfull and
openÓ access to scientific and technical data as new legislative and treaty
regimes have been considered and implemented. Between 1997 and 2003
the joint ad hoc ICSU-CODATA Working Group on Data and Informa-
tion monitored the implementation of the European Union Database Di-
rective in Europe, and participated as an official ÒObserverÓ in the discus-
sions of a potential new database treaty at meetings of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO). The ICSU-CODATA White Paper on
Data Access (1997)
19 was a major defining document on this subject from
the scientific community perspective at the WIPO. A workshop involving
representatives from the U.S. and European Academies of Sciences and
data law experts was held in conjunction with the 2000 CODATA Confer-

ence in Baveno and Stresa, Italy. Several sessions on these issues were con-
vened during the 2002 CODATA Conference in Montreal as well.
Finally, CODATA, in collaboration with the U.S. National Commit-
tee for CODATA, ICSTI, ICSU, and UNESCO, organized a major inter-
national symposium on open access and the public domain in digital dataand information for science in March 2003. This activity also helped to

identify and analyze important issues for follow-up by the ICSU family of
organizations and for the development of an Action Plan in this area by
ICSU and UNESCO in preparation for the WSIS. The first phase of WSIS

was held in Geneva in December 2003, and the second was held in Tunis in
November 2005. CODATA discussed WSIS at its General Assembly in
18See http://www.nap.edu/shelves/data for the CODATA/ICSTI Portal on Permanent
Access to Scientific Data and Information.
19See Access to Databases: Principles for Science in the Internet Era 
at http://www.codata.org/codata/data_access/principles.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES
33Berlin in 2004. CODATA will continue to highlight the role of science in
the information society in preparations for the Tunis phase of the Summit.
The resulting documents from this process are expected to create solutions
on Òdigital divide issuesÓ based on the individual care principle with respect

to the institutional, legal, ethical, emotional, and cognitive aspects of data.
CHINAÕS NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR CODATA
20China joined CODATA in 1984, with the Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences serving as the national member organization. Since then, the Chinese

National Committee for CODATA
21 has made efforts to promote ChinaÕs
scientific and technical data activities through its executive bodyÑthe Sec-
retariat located at the Computer Network Information Center of the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences.
The mission of the Chinese National Committee for CODATA is to
facilitate construction of scientific databases in China and to promote in-

terdisciplinary and international exchanges, cooperation, and data sharing.
The committeeÕs main activities are to:
1.Investigate the domestic data activities and trends for establishing
scientific and technical databases;2.Convene an annual general assembly of the Chinese National Com-
mittee for CODATA, with the purpose of discussing its activities, provid-
ing an overview of the on-going tasks of its data groups, and updating the
community on the academic achievements of CODATA;
3.Promote domestic scientific and technical information resources to
make more efficient use of scientific and technical data;
4.Organize domestic working groups and relevant meetings within
different academic spheres; and
5.Initiate and organize the implementation of programs on scientific
database construction and data sharing.20Based on a presentation by Zhihong Xu, representative of the Chinese National Com-
mittee for CODATA, China, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
XuZhihong_Presentation.ppt.
21See http://www.codata.cn for more information.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
U.S. NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR CODATA
22The U.S. National Committee (USNC) for CODATA
23 provides a
bridge between the scientific and technical community in the United States

and the international CODATA on data issues. The USNC operates within
the National Research CouncilÕs Board on International Scientific Organi-
zations and is the principal organizational entity within that BoardÕs Office

of International Scientific and Technical Information Programs.
The USNC undertakes special studies and activities, counsels the U.S.
National Delegate to CODATA on the U.S. position regarding official
CODATA business, and provides a link between U.S. and international
data compilation and evaluation activities, taking into account the needs of
the scientific and technical user community.
Finally, the USNC works closely with the international CODATA on
permanent access to scientific and technical data. It is a co-organizer of the
aforementioned series of workshops relating to permanent access to scien-

tific and technical data, including this one.22Based on a presentation by Paul F. Uhlir, director of the U.S. National Committee
for CODATA at the U.S. National Academies.
23See http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.354Summaries of Presentations on
Cross-Disciplinary Issues
Three parallel breakout panel discussions focusing on cross-disciplin-
ary issues in open access to and preservation of scientific data and informa-

tion from the viewpoint of China were convened during the course of the
workshop. These sessions were organized according to (1) legal and policy,
(2) institutional and economic, and (3) management and technical issues.
The objective of these thematic breakout discussions was to examine differ-
ent possible models in these areas and their potential benefits and short-
comings in China.PANEL DISCUSSION ON LEGAL AND POLICY ISSUESIntroduction1With regard to scientific data resources, most databases and data cen-
ters in China are managed directly or funded by government ministries and
are subject to a relatively restrictive state information regime based on offi-
cial secrecy requirements. This is a major challenge to the adoption of an

open-access model because the past policies have been based on deeply
rooted political, institutional, and cultural factors. Some of the restrictions
have applied generally to the overall public information regime, while oth-
1Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
ers have been more specific to science and based on perceived political or
economic sensitivities (e.g., domestic disease statistics or high-resolution
geospatial data). The Chinese government, however, increasingly recognizes
that many types of scientific data should be made openly available and

usable, especially within the country, and not just for research purposes. As
discussed in Chapter 2, the recent high-level focus by the Chinese govern-
ment on the laws and policies regarding access to government-produced

and government-funded academic research data has made this a very propi-
tious time to examine these issues.The case for change in access policies to governmental scientific data
can be made at many levels, both internally and externally. The most effec-
tive approach is one based on the realization of national self-interest. A
comparison with the policies of other countries can be effective as well.

Particularly auspicious is the trend over the past decade by many develop-
ing countries to adopt Freedom of Information laws.
2Of course, there are legitimate public-policy reasons for limiting access
to certain types of data, including appropriate national security restrictions,
the protection of privacy and confidentiality, and the protection of private
(as opposed to government) intellectual property rights. A related and very

significant problem exists in getting scientists to contribute the data pro-
duced in the course of their research to public repositories. Barriers include
the lack of an appropriate data center in which to deposit the data, no

requirement by the funding source to deposit the data or to share them
openly, insufficient recognition of the importance of data activities by the
scientistÕs institution, a lack of effective incentives or rewards to make the

data available, the desire of researchers to sell their data at unreasonable
prices despite very weak market estimates, inadequate funding to prepare
the data sufficiently to make them usable by others, and a lack of training

to do so.
With regard to scientific, technical, and medical journals, these too are
mostly published by government or government-sponsored organizations

in China. Because they are meant to be read by the research community,
they do not have many of the same official constraints based on nationalsecurity considerations as the underlying data. They are, however, still pub-

lished almost exclusively in print form, so their open availability on digital
networks raises new policy issues for the Chinese journal publishers and
research establishment.2For more information, see, for example, http://www.freedominfo.org.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
37The presentations summarized in this section focus on some of the
legal and policy barriers to more open access for publicly funded scientific
data at both the national and international levels, outline some of the policy
arguments in favor of greater unrestricted access, and offer some policy

guidelines in support of open availability.
Global Trends to Restrict Access to Data from
Government-Funded Research
3Scientific data produced from government-funded research constitute
a fundamental element of the modern research infrastructure and, if well
managed, can greatly accelerate scientific progress at the national and inter-
national levels. Newly emerging possibilities for enhancing this role of sci-

entific data resources in the digital environment truly constitute another
Òendless frontier.Ó High-level policy attention is necessary at the national
and international levels in order to maximize the inherent value of data

collections and to minimize the negative effects of restrictions on access
and use.Indeed, many economic, legal, and technological restrictions have been
placed on public-domain scientific data throughout the world. From an
economic perspective, the trends to privatize governmental public-good
functions and to commercialize more of the academic sectorÕs research ac-

tivities have been under way over the past two decades, particularly in bio-
medical and engineering areas. While these trends can support significant
research advances and economic benefits, they are not without their own
economic and social costs. A further continuation of privatization and com-
mercialization of upstream public-sector information resources can be
viewed as potentially having greater associated costs than benefits.
Recent changes to international and national intellectual property laws,
such as new digital copyright protection and the adoption of exclusive prop-
erty rights protection for noncopyrightable databases in many countries, as

well as the adoption of licensing agreements on onerous terms for research
toolsÑincluding dataÑin academia are further diminishing the broad
availability of public-domain data in science. Moreover, these highly

protectionistic legal mechanisms are increasingly enforced by more effec-
tive digital rights management technologies. Such developments are inten-
sifying the tensions that already exist between the policies that favor shar-
3Based on a presentation by Jerome Reichman, Duke University School of Law.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
ing of scientific data and the perceived need to restrict access to and uses of
data in pursuit of increased commercial opportunities. Restrictions on the
dissemination of potentially sensitive research data and information based
on national security considerations are further constraining the availability

of substantial amounts of material in the public domain. Finally, the recent
enactment of a powerful new database protection statute in Europe and
proposals for equivalent legislation in the United States and in other coun-

tries might be expected to push these tensions into other areas of public
research, which up to now have been less affected by the proprietary pres-
sures from the commercialization and privatization trends.
A Contractually Reconstructed Research Commons for Scientific
Data in a Highly Protectionist Intellectual Property Environment
4If the economic, legal, and technological pressures on public-domain
scientific data that were identified in the previous section continue un-

abated, they will result in lost opportunity costs across the entire research
enterprise. These pressures, which are especially pronounced in biomedical
and engineering research, could elicit one of two types of responses. One is

essentially reactive, in which the public research community continues to
adjust as best it can on an ad hoc basis, without organizing a response to the
increasing encroachment of a commercial and proprietary ethos on data

produced by government-funded research. The other would require a sci-
ence policy response to the challenge by formulating a strategy that would
enable the scientific community to take more active control of its basic data

supply. The idea is to reinforce, by voluntary means, a public space in which
the data sharing ethic in public science can be promoted and insulated
from some of the excessive privatization and commercialization trends,

without impeding socially beneficial commercial opportunities. There are
some contractual approaches that are now being considered in the United
States and Europe, which the Chinese science policy community might
consider as well in addressing this challenge in biomedical and other types
of publicly funded research.
54Based on a presentation by Jerome Reichman, Duke University School of Law.
5These approaches are examined in detail in an article by J.H. Reichman and Paul F.
Uhlir. 2003. ÒA Contractually Reconstructed Research Commons for Scientific Data in a
Highly Protectionist Intellectual Property Environment,Ó 
Law and Contemporary Problems,
Duke University School of Law, vol. 66, Winter/Spring.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
39Balancing the General Public Interests and Copyright in
Scientific Information Management
6In both the policy and legal arenas, there is a rising sense of research
and scholarship falling within the more general publicÕs right to know and
supporting initiatives for increasing and opening access to research. There
are two policy aspects to consider, as government policies can determine

how scientific knowledge circulates and as policies are affected by the re-
search that is consulted in their formation. Shifts are taking place in poli-
cies affecting science, and these shifts are motivated by the basic human

right to know as recognized, for example, by the United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. They also are motivated by greater demands
for accountability and transparency in the public administration of fund-

ing in areas such as government research grants. In Canada, for example,
one of the principal granting councils for the social sciences and humani-ties is transforming itself into a Òknowledge council,Ó which gives a high

priority to the public impact and awareness of research. According to a
University of British Columbia study of policy makersÕ actual use of re-
search,7 online access is having a substantial impact and is increasing the
amount of research consulted, even as the policy makers are largely re-
stricted to Òopen accessÓ or free materials due to budgetary restrictions and
the limited number of subscriptions held. Online access also has expanded
policy makersÕ circle of consultation, as they are relying less on a small set of
academics to advise them. The role of research in policy making is an issue
raised in many countries and in many contexts. Greater public access to the

research literature and to the underlying data sources would help support
more informed and rational policy making.In terms of legal issues, two pertinent areas of law are Freedom of
Information legislation and copyright. In the United States, for example,
recent legislation has brought federally funded scientific data produced in
universities that are used to support the formation of federal government

regulations within the purview of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
Previously, the FOIA applied only to data produced within the federal gov-
ernment itself. Charges also have recently been made in New York against a
6Based on a presentation by John Willinsky, University of British Columbia, Canada.
7See Willinsky, J. 2003. ÒPolicymakersÕ online use of academic research,Ó 
EducationPolicy Analysis Archives
, 11(2), January 11. Retrieved January 28, 2005, from http://
epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v11n2/.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
major drug company for suppressing research unfavorable to its medica-
tion. These examples are indicative of rising public expectations of science
and that people have a right to know what is known.
Copyright protection in scholarly publishing is occasionally portrayed
as a matter of protecting authors from plagiarism. Open access reduces
considerably the likelihood of getting away with plagiarism. The more sub-
stantial legal issue, however, concerns the basic principle of copyright,

namely, to protect the interests of the author and the public. Here a new
argument can be introduced in favor of open-access scholarly publishing,
serving the interests of the author and the public better than publishing

models that depend on subscriptions and copyright control, which actually
reduce both the authorÕs and the publicÕs rights in scholarly publication and
communication. In short, increasing access to research has much to con-

tribute to the policy and legal considerations in scholarly publishing.Borders in Cyberspace: Maximizing Social and Economic Benefit
from Public Investment in Data
8Many nations are now embracing the concept of open and unrestricted
access to public-sector informationÑparticularly scientific, environmen-
tal, and statistical information of great public benefit. Federal information
policy in the United States is based on the premise that government infor-

mation is a valuable national resource and that the economic benefits to
society are maximized when taxpayer-funded information is made available
inexpensively and as widely as possible. This policy is expressed in the Pa-

perwork Reduction Act of 1995
9 and in Office of Management and Bud-
get Circular No. A-130, ÒManagement of Federal Information Re-
sources.Ó
10 The policy actively encourages the development of a robust
private sector, improved access to critical information in the academic and
research sector, and offers to provide publishers with the raw content from
which new information services may be created, at no more than the cost of

dissemination and without copyright or other restrictions.
8Based on a presentation by Peter Weiss, J.D., U.S. National Weather Service. See also
Weiss. 1997. ÒInternational Information Policy in Conflict: Open and Unrestricted Access
versus Government Commercialization,Ó in 
Borders in Cyberspace
, Kahin and Nesson, eds.,
MIT Press.
9See http://www.cio.gov/archive/paperwork_reduction_act_1995.html.
10See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/a130trans4.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
41In a number of nations, particularly in Europe and in many develop-
ing countries, publicly funded government agencies treat their information
holdings as a commodity to be used to generate revenue in the short term.
They assert monopoly control on certain categories of information in an

attemptÑalmost always unsuccessfulÑto recover the costs of its collection
or creation. Such arrangements tend to preclude other entities from devel-
oping markets for the information or otherwise disseminating the informa-

tion in the public interest. The world scientific and environmental research
communities, and especially developing nations, are particularly concerned
that such practices have decreased the availability of critical data and infor-

mation. Moreover, firms in emerging information-dependent industries
seeking to utilize public-sector information find their business plans frus-
trated by restrictive government data policies and other anticompetitive

practices.Recent economic research and initiatives at the European Commis-
sion, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza-

tion, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
as well as in individual countries, such as ChinaÕs Scientific Data Sharing
Program, are helping to create an international framework for open and
global data sharing. There has been an emerging recognition in Europe as
well that open access to government information is critical to the informa-
tion society, environmental protection, and economic growth. A Ògovern-

ment commercializationÓ policy for public information cannot succeed in
the face of social and economic evidence and evenhanded application of
competition policies. Conversely, open government information policies

foster significant, but not easily quantifiable, social and economic benefitsto society.
In order to achieve a successful international framework for open ac-
cess to public scientific information, governments should:
1.Support full, open, and unrestricted international access to scien-
tific data for public interest purposesÑparticularly statistical, scientific, geo-
graphical, environmental, and meteorological information of great public
benefit. Such efforts to improve the exploitation of public-sector informa-

tion contribute significantly to maximizing its commercial, research, and
social values.
2.Allow the private sector to take an active role in using public-sector
information to meet the diverse needs of citizens and users for such prod-
ucts and services. Meeting these needs requires entrepreneurial and pub-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
lishing skills that are most evident in the private sector. Market needs are
best served by open and unrestricted access to public-sector information.
3.Prohibit copyright protection for government information, limit
fees to recouping the cost of information dissemination only, and eliminate

restrictions on reuse. This will allow diverse entities to make new and inno-
vative uses of public-sector information. However, attribution of data
sources should be made, e.g., through the use of electronic watermarks or

appropriate citations.4.Avoid asserting a monopolyÑeither public or privateÑon public-
sector information. Governments and societies both lose when governments

treat their information as a commodity to be sold or allow a private-sector
entity to ÒcaptureÓ the information on an exclusive basis.
5.Develop and maintain strong freedom of information laws to foster
greater transparency and public trust in government.
Policy Considerations onGovernment Information Sharing in China
11Information policy research may be divided according to government,
public, and commercial information. This section focuses on government
information policies in China.As in the United States and other countries, government information
sharing activities in China must be based on policy studies. The key issue is
whether government information should be free and open or not. The
opening up of government information is subject to competing policies of

state security, commercial confidentiality, and personal privacy. There are
conflicts and coordination between the state and the private sectors, and
among different groups. Information sharing is also subject to information

system security.
There are several key values and principles informing the sharing of
government information. Information is a strategic national asset of poten-

tial value to society and the economy. Government policy should seek to
promote information sharing and the information sector. However, this
needs to be done by balancing the costs and benefits to the providers and

users of the information. The principles of open access, public-domain sta-
11Based on a presentation by Jun Li, National Macro Economic Research Institute,
China.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
43tus, and free use of information must be balanced against the protection of
rights of the producers of the information. Government information shar-
ing requires consideration of the following aspects:
Planning the national system as a whole;Developing directories and catalogs for government information;
Establishing a chief information officer system for government in-
formation, and responsibility for information access and restrictions;
Development of a one-stop information service;
Understanding the social and economic benefits of access and sharing;Marketing and exploitation of information;Classification of information by users;
Integrating government information research across the govern-
ment; andEnhancing exploitation and usage of government information to
increase information availability and benefits to government, and to drive

the information industry.
Comparative Aspects of Policies for Open Access to Scientific Data in
the United States, European Union, and China
12Effective management of scientific data has become a vital component
of the research infrastructure in the information era. Many countries have
developed their own policies and mechanisms to manage and share their
scientific data and, as a result, a set of laws and regulations governing these

activities has been gradually formed and improved. The United States, the
European Union, and China have different policies regarding access to pub-
licly funded scientific data. The United States supports Òfull and openÓ

access to many kinds of scientific data and considers publicly funded dataas a public good. However, European dissemination policies are based on
the market value of public-sector scientific data. As a potentially big pro-

ducer and user of scientific data, China needs to clarify its policies and12Based on a presentation by Chuang Liu, Global Change Information and Resource
Center, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sci-

ences. See also, Chapter 18, ÒRecent Developments in Environmental Data Access Policies in
the PeoplesÕ Republic of China,Ó by Chuang Liu in 
Open Access and the Public Domain in
Digital Data and Information for Science: Proceedings of an International Symposium,
 NationalAcademies Press, Washington, DC, 2004.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
establish different management mechanisms for various data produced or
funded by the government. China has already begun to do so with its re-
cent Scientific Data Sharing Program, as discussed in Chapter 2.
Data Sharing in Scientific Databases of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences13Ever since its initiation in 1983, the Chinese Academy of SciencesÕ
Scientific Database and Applications System (SDAS) has developed quickly
in its construction, technology application and development, information
services, and other functions. It has become the largest scientific database
cluster in China, with 45 collaborative institutions providing over 8
terabytes of data through 313 specialized databases. There are still greater

challenges to scientific data sharing and services, however, requiring inno-
vation for the traditional project management and application models.
Therefore, from the beginning of the tenth Five-year Plan of the Chinese

Communist Party, the SDAS has focused on research on data sharing poli-
cies with standard criteria, in addition to its data resources and system
platform construction, to meet the growing external and interdisciplinary

demand for data sharing through remote access, research collaboration, and
information integration.Setting up sharing policies for the SDAS is a major project to promote
scientific data exchanges, enable further applications, and establish a series
of fundamental standards for continuous data development. The methods
for data sharing and management involve the establishment of sharing prin-

ciples, classification, distribution requirements, collective management, and
the protection of data ownersÕ rights and interests. The principle of Òfull
and openÓ data access is being clarified and costs and revenues are distrib-

uted on a reasonable basis. Based on current legal sources in China, the
rights, obligations, and proper conduct relevant to data sharing are defined
in three main categoriesÑthe data producers, distributors, and end users.

The sharing policy of the SDAS is not merely an ordinary administrative
management regulation, but the creation of a new scientific tradition based
on data sharing in research developed from changing legal sources. The

policy encourages data sharing, which can provide theoretical and practical
13Based on a presentation by Yun Xiao, Computer Network Information Center, Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/

Xiao_Yun_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
45guidelines for data sharing services and the continuous development of
scientific databases, consistent with the trends of the knowledge economy.
The Data Sharing Policy of the
Chinese Ecosystem Research Network
14The Chinese Ecosystem Research Network (CERN) has 36 field ob-
servation and research stations across China, and each station has produced
a large amount of data through monitoring, experiments, and research.
Users worldwide can share most of those data, in accordance with the
CERN Data Sharing and Management Rule, which was issued in 2002 by
the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
15 This rule protects the rights of the
data producers and permits these data to be shared widely, following the

principle of keeping a balance between rights and obligations. The regula-
tion divides data into two types, monitoring data (e.g., observational data
from sensors) and data from research projects. In addition, it specifies five

classes of users: related national departments, CERN members, members
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, domestic research and other non-
profit institutions, and others. This last category includes non-Chinese re-

searchers. Users in each class have the same rights and obligations.
The rule established initial periods of exclusive use for data producers,
typically ranging from one-half year to two years. The producers have pri-

ority to use their own data within the initial protection periods; other users
can access those data following those periods, or even within the periods, if
they obtain permission from the producers and provide attribution. Data

producers may make data available on their own initiative.
Data Sharing Policy of the National Institutes of Health
16The sharing of biomedical data is essential for expedited translation ofresearch results into knowledge, products, and procedures to improve hu-
14Based on a presentation by Panqin Chen and Tieqing Huang, Bureau of Science and
Technology for Resources and Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
15Both CERNÕs data policy and metadata are available on the CERN Web site at
http://www.cern.ac.cn:8080/index.jsp.
16Based on a presentation by Belinda Seto, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering, U.S. National Institutes of Health, available at http://www7.

nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/SetoPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
man health. The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) endorses the
timely sharing of research data to serve these and other important scientific
goals, particularly research data from NIH-supported studies for use by
other researchers.
The NIH established new guidelines through its Data Sharing Policy,
which became effective on October 1, 2003.
17 The NIH expects timelyrelease and sharing of final research data for use by other researchers. In
general, timely release means no later than the acceptance for publication
of the main findings from the final dataset. No timeline is specified; how-
ever, the time of release will vary depending on the nature of the data

collected. The policy also recognizes that investigators who collected the
data have a legitimate interest in benefiting from their investment of time
and effort, and have a right to an initial period of exclusive use. NIH also

expects grant applicants to include a plan for data sharing or to state whydata sharing is not possible, especially if $500,000 or more of the direct
cost is requested in any single year. Finally, NIH expects contract offerors

to address data sharing regardless of cost.
The NIH recognizes that there are different ways to share data. The
researcher may provide the data in publications, share the data upon re-
quest, place datasets in public archives, or place data in restricted-access
data centers. The NIH also provides support for data sharing, either di-
rectly through the grant application through a budget line item and budget
justification or through administrative supplements.
Nonetheless, there are challenges to sharing data from research on hu-
man subjects because of data sensitivity, the need to protect confidentiality,

and the danger of deductive disclosure. Investigators need to carefully con-
sider release of data in studies with very small samples or studies collecting
very sensitive data. However, even these data can be shared if safeguards
exist to ensure confidentiality and protect the identity of subjects.
The solution is a multi-tiered system that divides data into three cat-
egories: open public-use data, restricted-use contractual data, and a cold

room for on-site data use for certain authorized users only. Additional spe-
cific procedures are used to help ensure the privacy of all human subjects.
17See http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-032.html. Addi-
tional details about the NIH Data Sharing Policy and privacy restrictions are available from

the NIH Office of Extramural Research Web site on Data Sharing Policy at http://
grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/data_sharing; from the Office for Civil Rights Web site with
Departmental guidance on privacy at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/; and from NIH and

other research agencies about the Privacy Rule at http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
47PANEL DISCUSSION ON ECONOMIC AND
INSTITUTIONAL ISSUESIntroduction18Scientific data and journal activities in publicly funded research
throughout the world have public good characteristics that make their broad

availability especially beneficial. Some of these aspects were already dis-
cussed in the previous section on Legal and Policy Issues. In this section,
the first two presentations briefly examine some of the economic and insti-

tutional issues associated with the publishing of scientific journals. The
final one looks at the interface of the public and private sectors in the area
of environmental data.
The Peculiar Economics of Scientific Information
19The technology of the production and distribution of information is
very different from that of producing and distributing consumer goods like
automobiles or shoes. The marginal cost of providing an automobile or a

pair of shoes to one more consumer is about the same as the average cost
per consumer of producing these goods. In contrast, while there are costs to
gathering or creating information, the marginal cost of supplying this in-

formation to an additional consumer is small. In fact, with access provided
on digital networks, this marginal cost of dissemination to each additional
user is almost zero. Because of this simple technological fact, efficient pric-

ing methods are very different for information goods than for ordinary
physical goods. Prices for ordinary commodities serve the dual purpose of
repaying the producers for the costs they have incurred and of restricting
consumers from consuming goods that are worth less to them than the
costs to others of providing these goods. With information goods this does
not happen. The social cost of allowing an extra reader online access to

information is negligible. Thus it will not be possible to repay the costs of
producing information in the first place by pricing at marginal cost. If, on
18Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies.
19Based on a presentation by Theodore Carl Bergstrom, University of California, Santa
Barbara, United States, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
BergstromPresentation.ppt and http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
BergstromPresentation7.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
the other hand, prices are set high enough so that revenue from users will
repay the total supply cost of the information, then many potential userswill be excluded from access to this information even though they would
benefit.Institutions responsible for provision of scientific information, par-
ticularly journals, that have been prominent in the academic community
include not-for-profit scientific societies and university presses, for-profit

publishers, and government agencies. In recent years, there have been ex-
tensive discussions regarding the benefits and costs of the not-for-profit
versus the for-profit business models, open access versus subscription-based
publishing, and the practice of some of the ÒnonprofitÓ societies of using
profits from their journals to subsidize other activities.
The professional scientific societies publish journals, books, and data-
sets. They usually charge subscriptions to libraries and individuals to cover
their costs. Some make a profit from their journal subscriptions and use it
for other activities (e.g., Science of the American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science). University presses are used to enhance the prestige
of the university.
For-profit commercial publishers own journals and charge subscrip-
tions to libraries and individuals in order to make profits. Because they
own copyrights to the articles in their journal, they have a monopoly onthese articles. The prices charged by the commercial publishers are usually

much higher than not-for-profit journal prices.
There are several potential advantages of the professional society jour-
nals. Societies can lend prestige and attract top authors. Society journals are

not-for-profit and usually very cheap. The society journals also tend to
maintain very high quality standards. The professional society journals also
have some disadvantages, however. Societies tend to be conservative. They

often are slow to adopt new ideas and are controlled by an aging elite.
There is little incentive for officers of society journals to invest new effort,
or expand into new fields.
One advantage of commercial journal publishers is their entrepreneur-
ship. For example, in the 1970s the economics profession was growing
rapidly, but society journals expanded slowly. Specialized field journals were

rare, so North-Holland (and other companies now merged into Elsevier)
started about 30 new journals. About 12 of these could now be called lead-
ing field journals. Nevertheless, there are substantial disadvantages from

commercial journals. High prices to libraries mean access only for the
wealthiest users. There is also great inefficiency in restricting access to pub-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
49licly funded scientific information when the marginal cost of providing
access online to each additional user is near zero.
Overall, the policies for electronic journals that publish the results of
publicly funded research in the networked environment should seek to:
Promote open Internet access to scientific papers by supporting
open-access archives for scientific work and requiring government sup-

ported research to be posted in these archives.
Encourage evaluation and quality standards without discouraging
innovation.
Avoid intellectual monopolies and cliques.Encourage independent scientific societies and university pressesÑ
more than one per discipline, to prevent monopoly and cliques.
Encourage innovative Òjournal substitutesÓ with alternative forms
of evaluation and certification.Search for new solutions to match new technology.
Launching an Open-Access Journal
20The rapid spread of the Internet and concurrent innovations in elec-
tronic publishing have dramatically transformed scientific publishing and
the dissemination of technical information and data. Electronic publishing

has spawned an entirely new economic model for the sharing of scholarly
research, just as the Internet has transformed other areas of commerce and
information management. This model, known as open-access publishing,

is predicated on the fact that an article published on the Internet can be
read by ten readers or ten million with virtually no additional cost to the
publisher. Many new open-access publishers, including the U.S.-based Pub-

lic Library of Science (PLoS) and the U.K.-based BioMedCentral, generate
revenue through one-time publication charges, which are generally paid
from the authorÕs research grant or from institutional or library funds, rather

than by charging subscriptions or fees for readers. Covering the cost of
publication once through publication charges then allows the content to be
made free to all readers.
New open-access journals face many challenges, just as any new journal
trying to compete with the most prestigious ones in their field would. In
20Based on a presentation by Helen Doyle, Public Library of Science, United States,
available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/HelenDoylePresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
addition to questions about the viability of the open access economic model,these challenges include: convincing authors to submit their best work; estab-
lishing a rigorous peer review system and respected editorial board; creating a
high-quality production; and marketing the journal to the appropriate audi-

ences. Conversely, there is also great opportunity for new electronic open-
access journals to be innovative in their publishing practices. Some recent
innovations include managing manuscripts and the peer review process elec-

tronically; developing interactive Web functionalities for different content
and audiences; and encouraging the creative reuses of the content allowed by
a more liberal copyright license. These challenges and opportunities are all

being confronted by the PLOSÕs new open-access journal, 
PLoS Biology
, whichwas launched in October 2003.Involving the Private Sector in the Environmental Enterprise
21The conduct of environmental (atmosphere, ocean, land) research and
applications requires extensive and thus costly observations taken from all
parts of the world and participation by the government, academic, and
private sectors. Ten years ago, the roles of these sectors in the United States

were reasonably straightforward: government agencies collected observa-
tions and disseminated information to the public; academia used govern-
ment-collected data for research; and private-sector organizations used ob-

servations collected by governments for developing information products
targeted to paying customers.However, advances in science and technology have made it possible for
private-sector organizations and academia to perform many government
tasks, including collecting data, running models, and disseminating infor-mation. These overlapping activities create potential inefficiencies and fric-

tion, especially because the sectors have different goals and require different
data policies.On the one hand, U.S. government agencies and environmental sci-
ence researchers require full and open access to data (i.e., data are available
without restriction for any use for no more than the cost of reproduction).
On the other hand, private-sector organizations generally need to restrict
21Based on a presentation by Anne Linn, U.S. National Academies, available at http://
www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/AnneLinnPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
51access to data in order to generate a financial return and their policies are
usually proprietary. Two recent National Research Council reports provide
guidelines for resolving these different data policy requirements and for
easing friction between the sectors.22The Fair Weather: Effective Partnerships in Weather and Climate Ser-
vices report examined conflicts among government, academia, and the
private sector dealing with weather data. It concluded that establishing

rigid boundaries between the sectors and defining what each should do iscounterproductive.
The Resolving Conflicts Arising from the Privatization of Environmental
Data report examined these issues for all environmental data and provided
criteria for purchasing data from the private sector and for transferring
government data collection and product development to the private sector.

The report concluded that transferring government data collection and
product development to the private sector can be beneficial as long as the
following conditions exist:
Avoiding market conditions that will give private companies a mo-
nopoly;Preserving full and open access to key data sets and products;
Assuring that a supply of high-quality information will continue toexist; andMinimizing disruption of ongoing uses and applications.For economic and data policy reasons, however, public funding for data
collection and analysis should continue, focusing contributions of the pri-vate sector primarily on distribution of value-added products and collec-
tion of certain observations.
22National Research Council (NRC). 2003. 
Fair Weather: Effective Partnerships in
Weather and Climate Services
, National Academies Press, Washington, DC; NRC. 2001. 
Re-
solving Conflicts Arising from the Privatization of Environmental Data
, National Academy
Press, Washington, DC.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
PANEL DISCUSSION ONMANAGEMENT AND TECHNICAL ISSUES
Introduction
23Although the technical aspects of digital scientific data and informa-tion activities are typically quite well understood and do not raise inordi-
nate barriers except, perhaps, related to costs, the proper management of

such activities, especially data preservation and dissemination, poses some
unique hurdles. In the discussion below we identify some of the problems
that ought to be considered in properly planning scientific data center

activities.Operating a Twenty-First-Century Data Center
24In the past several decades, large-scale data resources have assumed an
increasing role in scientific research, particularly research on Earth and its
environment. There are a number of reasons for this, including advances in

computational technologies, software, and observational capabilities, and a
growing emphasis on empirical and interdisciplinary research. One of the
consequences of the increasing dependence on data resources across fields

of science is that in the coming years, the scientific community must de-vote a larger share of its resources and energies to data management and
preservation than it has in the past.
A recent Priority Area Assessment on Scientific Data and Information,
presented to the strategic planning committee of the International Council
for Science (ICSU) in June 2004, emphasized that the scientific community

needs to develop strategies for data management over time periods of decades
to centuries.25 Effective planning for long-term data management requires
clarification of the role of data centers versus archives, obtaining regular sci-

entific advice on data management and archiving decisions, and developing
long-term financial support for data center and archival operations.
The report also stressed the critical importance of professional man-
agement of data. That is, it is no longer sufficient for the scientists who
analyze scientific data to be responsible for managing those data; profes-
23Paul F. Uhlir and Julie M. Esanu, U.S. National Academies.
24Based on a presentation by Roberta Balstad, Center for International Earth Science
Information Network, Columbia University, United States.
25The final Priority Area Assessment on Scientific Data and Information report is
available from ICSU at http://www.icsu.org/1_icsuinscience/DATA_Paa_1.html.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
53sional data managers, with professional expertise, are needed. Professional
data managers must be knowledgeable about the technological drivers of
data center operations. They have to understand the financial implications
of hardware, software, and training. They must be able to manage the rapid

pace of change and the timely updating of data, software, and hardware.
And they should develop career incentives and rewards for effective data
production and management.Finally, the report recommended that there be a common interna-
tional approach to data and information management. The benefits of an
international approach to scientific data need to be properly understood

and communicated so that common strategies, standards, and software
interoperability can be developed.
Managing the Effects of Programmatic Scale and
Enhancing Incentives for Data Archiving
26The challenge of a digital scientific archive is to engage scientists in the
process of archiving their data and provide the mechanism for archiving.
The functions of an archive are to store data safely and reliably; build a

catalog and structure; maintain storage across technology generations; re-
view new data (quality assurance, metadata); ÒadvertiseÓ contents; find data
for users with query and browse logic; and distribute data by providing

access and references to documentation.
An effective scientific data archive operates on several presumptions.
Information sharing is important. Multidisciplinary data access will foster
more robust scientific discoveries. Archiving can always be improved. The
number of permanent data archives will increase, which will increase the
value of all archives connected on an interoperable basis through digital
networks.
Even if an appropriate archive exists, however, there are many reasons
why scientists do not archive their data. They lack incentives and proper

acknowledgement; they may be concerned about giving up publication
rights; their research may have poor planning or insufficient resources for
data management and preservation; they may not believe the archive will
26Based on a presentation by Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Raymond
McCordPresentation5.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
get long-term support; and they may lack training or be unsure about the
metadata content they should provide.
Nevertheless, research managers can provide many good arguments
and incentives to scientists for archiving their data, including the following

points:Recognition for archiving. Scientists need to receive some career
benefits for their archiving-related work. Consider scientific journals that
also provide companion Òdata publications.Ó
Emphasize good scientific practice.
Promote professional development and training. Provide daily in-
teractions between scientific and information specialists. Allow a reason-
able time for initial discovery. Provide support for long-term Òstewardship.Ó
Provide institutional incentives. Archiving should be required by
the sponsor. Data archiving should be Òin the planÓ and resources available
to support it. Interweave archiving with the planning and publication pro-

cesses.Exploit technological advances. It is technically easier now and there
are more options.
Plan for managing change. Change is inherent in research, but man-
aging change without prior planning can become consumptive. Changes
may cause confusion and diminish data usefulness. (See the next section for

more details about managing change in archiving.)
Perhaps the best argument is that effective archiving supports better
science. Archiving extends data usefulness. Archived data increase the vol-
ume and diversity of our information base for doing research.
Managing the Effects of Change on Archiving Research Data
27The archiving of scientific data and information is made more difficult
by the evolving changes associated with research accomplishments. Research
discoveries lead to a continual series of revisions to sampling schemes,
measurement methods, and scientific objectives. All of these changes add to
27Based on a presentation by Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Raymond
McCordPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
55the scope and complexity of information that must be recorded and logically
organized as part of a successful data archive. Recording and communicating
these changes for future data users is facilitated by additional supporting in-
formation and an evaluation of the rules that define the information. Most of

the available information technology (hardware, software, and implementa-
tion methodology) originates from business applications, which are designed
to accommodate fundamentally different patterns of change. Managers of

scientific data archives will need to adapt the traditional designs of informa-
tion systems to meet these special features of research data and its users.
Management also needs to encourage extra effort during initial design andlater operations to accommodate the future changes that will occur.
The structure and content of scientific data and information can be
very complex. Successful archiving of data requires that the variation in this
complexity be minimized. The efficient operation of information systems
and effective communication with future data users are enhanced by mini-
mizing the variation in the logic, concepts, and keywords used in the

metadata. Some of the complexity is inherent to the variety of measure-
ments and materials included in the research and cannot be avoided. Addi-
tional complexity occurs as archived information is aggregated into more

extensive systems and accessed by broader user communities.
There are many management and institutional issues that must be con-
sidered to avoid unnecessary complexity and uncertainty in the archived

information. The effects of the varying dimensions of programmatic scale
(volume, diversity, longevity of data and research programs) need to be
considered. Institutional impediments and incentives also affect the will-

ingness of scientists to contribute information to archives. The documenta-
tion and archiving of data should be integrated with the publication pro-
cess as part of the Òmodern scientific methodÓ and should receive similar

incentives. Management should reinforce these practices by insisting on
early planning for data archiving and providing specific rewards for these
activities. Other management issues include protecting initial discovery

opportunities, supporting long-term stewardship of data (answering ques-
tions after the project is completed), and providing Òcross-trainingÓ of
archive personnel in both scientific and information disciplines.There are several key rules for creating data sets for archiving:
Unique occurrences
. Each type of measurement should be represented
in a consistent way and each measurement event should be represented by
only one value. If multiple versions of datasets accumulate, provide version
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
information, explain version differences, and document the effective data
range for each version.Identifiers. Each value should be associated with a parameter nameand each measurement value should have a quality indicator and link to a

method description. Whenever possible, remove multiple aliases for the
same identifier (e.g., sample identifier, site identifier or name, measure-
ment name, etc.).Place and time. Each value should be associated with a unique placename with a quantitatively defined location (geographic coordinates). Each
value also should be associated with a date and time. Do not confuse data
and time for measurements with data and time for storage revisions or data
and time ranges for measurement or encoding methods.
Data storage and transport
. Data should be stored or managed with a
database management system or self-documenting data format. Include
data analysis software in the data management suite. This is useful for com-
paring versions of data that accumulate over time. Also include data format

conversion software in data management suite, which is useful for migrat-
ing data from one storage technology to another.
Finally, there are a number of best practices for preparing ecological
and ground-based data sets to share and archive:
28Assign descriptive file names;
Use consistent and stable file formats;Define the parameters;Use consistent data organization;Perform basic quality assurance;Assign descriptive data set titles; and
Provide the necessary documentation.
Special Considerations for Archiving Data from Field Observations
29Archives depend on logical rules for information structures and consis-
tent codes for metadata. Different types of data and information pose dif-
ferent types of challenges and archiving requirements, however. For ex-
28Cook et al. 2001. Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America. Available at http://
www.daac.ornl.gov/DAAC/PI/bestprac.html.
29Based on a presentation by Raymond McCord, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
United States, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Raymond
McCordPresentation5.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
57ample, scientific data from field investigations are fundamentally different
from laboratory observations. Laboratory studies are conducted under con-
trolled conditions, whereas field observations are collected from incom-
pletely controlled environments. Data archives for field observations must

include additional design features to accommodate, but minimize and ra-
tionalize, this additional complexity. These features include a need to ad-
dress multiple schemes for location information, temporary changes in

methods, unmeasurable events, evolving reference lists, and a containment
strategy for exceptions.
Location information typically involves multiple geographic coordi-
nate systems. Conversions from one system to another may not be revers-
ible without some loss of information. It is important, therefore, to test
changes before large-scale conversions are made. A visualization capability

is essential. Location information also usually encounters multiple namingschemes, such as unofficial ÒfolkÓ names; divergence in naming schemes at
local, regional, and national scales; and connecting historical name changes.
Archives also must take account of temporary changes in data collec-
tion methods. For example, the field sampling protocol may be insuffi-
cient, resulting in a need to restructure the metadata to record the tempo-

rary change. Field observations at remote sites can experience various
anomalies and instrument malfunctions. A robust scheme for missing value
representation is needed and data analyses must correctly exclude missing
values.There also may be unmeasurable events that are either too small or too
large. How do you record values that are below the detection limit (but not

zero)? You can set all values to the minimum detection limit, set all values
to the midpoint between detection and zero, set all values to zero, or retain
estimated value, but include a quality flag. You will need to select one of

these strategies and document the choice, realizing that the choice can have
significant impacts on summary statistics.
How do you record the biological population when there are too many
individuals to count? You can record some arbitrary large number or flag it
as unmeasurable. Similar problems can occur with wide ranges in chemical
concentrations. Different schemes may have impacts on results from statis-

tical analyses or on setting quality assurance limits.Evolving reference lists pose further challenges. Taxonomic lists assume
agreement on a single and accepted classification scheme, which may not

be true. Individuals who are involved only infrequently also may not be
fully identifiable. Later samples may enable fuller identification, which mayStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
require recoding earlier records to match newer identification. Chemical
constituents may have similar classification problems.
A containment strategy is thus needed to deal with the exceptions. The
Ò90/10Ó rule is a useful guideline: approximately 90 percent of the data can

be described by a few logical rules, while approximately 10 percent of the
data cannot be described by rules and contain numerous and isolated ex-
ceptions. Put the information that cannot be described by rules in an alter-

native structure that can be labeled as Òuser beware,Ó support detailed and
various documentation, and accommodate and communicate numerousexceptions. However, when there are Òtoo manyÓ logical rules, the archiving

process will become inefficient and tedious, so it is important to makeadjustments as needed.Toward a Balanced Performance Appraisal System in the Digital Era
for Data Archiving and Sharing in China
30Although data archiving and sharing are not new problems in China,
they became worse with the advent of the digital era. Traditionally, the data
producers and the data users were not very different in terms of their aca-

demic recognition and reputation. They collected, archived, and used data,
and most of the data products were published and thus were available to
the public at affordable prices. The published data sets were also regarded

as academic achievements by their peers and funding agencies. This mecha-
nism encouraged some scientists to archive and publish their research data.
In the early years of the digital era, however, a number of factors began
to hinder data sharing, some of which have continued to the present. First
of all, data management as a whole became more expensive and needed
more investment. Second, digital publishing of research data is not the

same as in the print format and the authorship of digital data products is
less clear. Third, those scientists who are both data producers and data users
(as is true in most cases) have a competitive edge over their peers if they can

use their data exclusively forever. Fourth, public funding agencies may not
be able to make data available to other scientists, because even the agencies
sometimes have obtained the data according to restrictive contracts. Fi-
30Based on a presentation by Zhengxing Wang, Global Change Information and Re-
search Center, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of

Sciences.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
59nally, ChinaÕs scientific community has not been fully aware of the funda-
mental role that data have played in scientific inquiry. Data collection,
processing, validation, archiving, and sharing all have not been included in
ChinaÕs Òacademic performance appraisal system.Ó In a system in which

print publishing gets nearly all the information funding and digital dataarchiving and sharing get much less, one has little incentive to continue
working in data archiving. Therefore, it is critical to develop a more com-

prehensive and balanced performance evaluation system to foster and sus-
tain digital data archiving and data sharing in China.
Earth Science Data and Information Management in
Western China
31Over the past few decades, the western regions of China have been the
focus of important earth science research and a lot of earth science data and
information have been accumulated there. Recent studies have focused on

the plateaus, mountains, deserts, vegetation, hydrology, and ecosystems in
that region from the perspective of different fields of study, including ecol-
ogy, environmental and earth sciences, sociology, and regional development.

The historical data and information resources are valuable for such studies.
Based on the analysis of the distribution of information resources and
users, and on user requirements and the support of data, many functions

need urgent attention in the national framework of earth science data shar-
ing in China. For example, reproducing single copies of data and informa-
tion, accelerating the sharing of data and information, meeting the de-
mands of potential users, and promoting the use of information to benefit
the western region of China all require attention.
There are several actions that could be taken in this regard. One should
be to assist institutions that have not organized and digitized their histori-
cal data, and encourage them to provide an index and to become members
of the data sharing system. Another is to establish a special management
program to reduce the costs of data collection and promote their applica-
tion. Finally, it would be very useful to establish a digitally networked clear-
inghouse for earth science data and information that involves the relevant

organizations and persons in western China.
31Based on a presentation by Chengquan Sun, Scientific Information Center for Re-
sources and Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, available at http://www7.

nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Sun_chengquan_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Data Integration and Management:
The Protein Data Bank Perspective
32The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the worldwide repository for the
structures of biological macromolecules.
33 The PDB provides a rich his-
tory from which to explore the practices of biological data management,
because its data set has many characteristics found in other biological dataÑ
diversity, complexity, and variable quantity and quality of annotation.
A database resource is only as good as the data it contains. Data repre-
sentation, acquisition, annotation, and distribution are all essential func-

tions. The data representation (metadata) used by PDB is the macromo-
lecular Crystallographic Information File (mmCIF) standard dictionary.
The mmCIF dictionary conforms to a subset of encoding rules embodied

in a Self-defining Text Archival and Retrieval (STAR) syntax. STAR has
provisions for defining scope, resting, looping, and other aspects. Con-
forming to STAR is a Dictionary Definition Language (DDL) that defines

how dictionaries are described. DDL has provisions for fully characterizing
the terms in the domain and is relational in nature; that is, there is the
notion of relations (categories), attributes (specific data names), primary

and secondary keys (mandatory data items), and so on. The data defined by
mmCIF consist of name-value pairs where each name must be defined in
the mmCIF dictionary. The mmCIF dictionary can be characterized as

having the features of extensible markup language (XML) document type
definition or schema. Although the dictionary was written in the STAR
format, the ontology and its derivations are independent of STAR or any

other particular file format. It can be automatically converted to other for-
mats. It provides the foundation of integrated software systems for building
robust automated data pipelines. The PDB has been actively involved in
various aspects of automated and accurate data acquisition, annotation,and distribution.Biological data management concerns more than just the technical as-
pects, however. There are sociological and political issues as well. A key
element for success is good communication among those running the re-source, who need to have diverse skill sets, and among every member of the

team and the communities they represent. Community feedback must be
32Based on a presentation by Zukang Feng, Protein Data Bank, United States, available
at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/ZukangFengPresentation.ppt.
33See http://www.wwpdb.org/.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSS-DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
61treated seriously and lead to a prioritized set of action items to be addressed
by the resources available. The technology must take advantage of the most
recent innovations in hardware and software. These technological develop-
ments, however, must be introduced so as to enable and not disrupt the

users of the resource. It is critical to maintain an interactive dialogue with
the user community about desired new functionalities and the feasibility of
their implementation. Beyond all else is the need for good data and a ro-

bust data representation that is flexible enough to meet the needs of the
changing science.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.625Summaries of Presentations on
Thematic Issues
There were several examples of existing scientific data and information
activities in China, the United States, and internationally highlighted at the
workshop. These activities can benefit from the policies and management

practices outlined in the previous chapter. They also provide practiced ex-
perience at the working level and models for other similar activities in other
institutional, disciplinary, and national contexts. They thus represent a bot-

tom-up approach to the evolution of national and international policy and
practice with regard to public scientific data and information resources.
The examples summarized below are organized according to three thematic

areas that were the focus of the workshop: (1) life sciences and public health
data; (2) earth sciences, environmental, and natural resources data; and (3)
scientific information, journals, and digital libraries.EXAMPLES OF LIFE SCIENCES ANDPUBLIC HEALTH DATA ACTIVITIES
The Chinese Management and Sharing System of
Scientific Data for Medicine
1The initiation of the Management and Sharing System of Scientific
Data for Medicine (the Medical Data Sharing System) was a key project in
1Based on a presentation by Depei Liu, Chinese Academy of Medicine and Chinese
Academy of Engineering, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
Liu_Depei_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
632003 of the China Scientific Data Sharing Program (SDSP) under the Na-
tional Basic Platform for Science and Technology in the Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology. Oversight of this Medical Data Sharing System has
been undertaken by the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, the Chi-

nese Center for Disease Prevention and Control, the Chinese PeopleÕs Lib-
eration Army General Hospital and Graduate Medical School, and the
Chinese Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
Various scientific data resources in medicine are being integrated to-
gether by the Medical Data Sharing System. The system covers most fields of
medicine, including basic and clinical medicine, public health, traditional
Chinese medicine, other special areas of medicine, and pharmacology. The
system also has a database specifically for SARS and respiratory diseases.
The Medical Data Sharing System has important roles in many re-
spects. It is used to:
1.Serve medical research and teaching, and improve innovation in
medical sciences and technology;2.Improve the overall level of prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of
diseases;3.Enhance the personal health consciousness of people, thus promot-
ing good health in society;4.Strengthen ChinaÕs ability to plan for and respond to sudden inci-
dents in public health; and5.Provide an improved basis for government policies, as well as pro-
mote the development of the national economy and the medical system.The organizational and management model for this system consists ofa leading group, an expert group, and a working group. The leading group

consists of the leaders of participating institutions and the professionals in
charge of scientific administration who are responsible for the decision
making, organization, and coordination of the system. The expert group is

composed of experts from the China-SDSP and professionals in project-
supported institutions. The expert group is responsible for steering and
authorization of the general design, selection of participating institutions,

and inspection of the projectÕs progress. The working group consists of
members selected from the working group of the China-SDSP and em-
ployees of the participating institutions. It is responsible for drafting the

feasibility report, general project design and implementation, and develop-
ment of the main database.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
The Medical Data Sharing System benefits all sectors of society, in-
cluding the government; medical, scientific, and educational institutions;
private enterprises; and the general public. The system promotes a coopera-
tive environment and will be operated on a free and not-for-profit basis.
International Medical Scientific Data Sharing
2There are many kinds of medical scientific data that can be shared
internationally. They include primary data, data products, and related in-
formation obtained from the activities of medical clinics, teaching, and

research. Medical data are necessary resources for the development of medi-
cal sciences and have characteristics common to other kinds of scientific
data, including reusability and potential long-term value.
The Human Genome Project has provided a successful example of
access to and sharing of biomedical scientific data. This project used mod-
ern informatics techniques in human genomic research and organized top

scientists and facilities to cooperate on the same project based on the same
standards. In recent years, similar data sharing projects have been initiated
in other areas of science internationally, such as neurology, human anatomy,

and proteomics, all of which are described in the sections that follow. These
projects have produced large changes in the behavior of medical researchers
toward greater cooperation, but there are many unmet needs for medical

scientific data access and sharing by the research, teaching, and biomedical
industry communities.
Several problems can be identified. The lack of data access and sharing
is especially acute in developing and least-developed countries. This results
in redundant research and inefficiencies. Medical data resources are sepa-
rated and many lack quality and uniform international standards and data

exchange protocols. There also is a lack of adequate investment and atten-
tion to these problems.
The following suggestions are focused on improving the status of in-
ternational medical scientific data access and sharing:1.It would be helpful to set up an international coordination commit-
tee for access to and sharing of medical scientific data, responsible for de-
veloping plans for such activities and proposing appropriate guidelines.
2Based on a presentation by Ling Yin, PeopleÕs Liberation Army General Hospital and
Graduate Medical School, China.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
652.In order to strengthen international cooperation in the establish-
ment of medical scientific databanks it is necessary to establish relevant
standards and uniform criteria for data contributions by the globally dis-
tributed scientists and facilities. New databank groups for medical scien-

tific data similar to Genbank and the Protein Data Bank need to be estab-
lished to make the data sharable, extendable, and authoritative.
3.To truly implement data access and sharing among the different
medical specialties, China needs to establish an integrated internationalservice system to break the barriers among basic, clinical, and preventive
medicine, public health, pharmacology, and other areas. This will offer one-

stop service via index and catalogue inquiries for data services, and a net-
worked environment for therapeutics, prevention, control, and research on
specific diseases.4.China also needs to speed up the recruiting of expert personnel to
implement access to and sharing of medical scientific data, and to offereffective training programs.
5.Finally, funding needs to be secured from multiple sources to guar-
antee long-term financial support and to facilitate global access to and shar-ing of medical scientific data and information.ChinaÕs Contributions to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and DevelopmentÕs
Neuroinformatics Data Sharing Initiative
3The human brain is the most complex system known. Achieving a
better understanding of it is a key scientific challenge for the 21st century.
Having developed sophisticated methods to investigate the brain in the
finest possible detail, neuroscientists now face the challenge of managing

the enormous amounts of raw data and the many useful inferences drawn
from them. The neuroinformatics field therefore would benefit greatly from
increased data sharing. Neuroinformatics research already has received bil-

lions of U.S. dollars and Euros to establish individual databases and plat-
forms and to lay the groundwork for data sharing in the future.
3Based on a presentation by Yiyuan Tang, Institute of Neuroinformatics, Dalian Uni-
versity of Technology; Ling Yin, Neuroinformatics Center, PLA General Hospital and Gradu-
ate Medical School; and Xiaowei Tang, Neuroinformatics Center, Zhejiang University, China,

available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Yin_Ling_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
In 2000, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
mentÕs (OECD) Global Science Forum approved the international Work-
ing Group on Neuroinformatics (WG-NI), which included 21 members
and observers from OECD countries. Their goal was to establish a global

knowledge management system and Internet research environment in
which the data and results from research on the human neurological system
would be available. Such an information initiative would be helpful for

improving public health, scientific research, medical education, and the
pharmaceutical industries. The three principal aims of the WG-NI group
were to promote: (1) the establishment of databases and the integration ofdata resources; (2) data sharing policies for OECD members and observers
and the development of working guidelines and rules for neuroinformatics
data; and (3) the establishment of international neuroinformatics research

networks.
The Chinese government also began to pay more attention to the Hu-
man Brain Project (HBP) and to neuroinformatics research. The Xiang

Shan Science Conference for HBP and neuroinformatics, held in Septem-
ber 2001, was a major event that included senior Chinese government rep-
resentatives from the National Natural Science Foundation of China and
the Ministry of Science and Technology. The conference participants agreed
that China should start work on the Chinese neuroinformatics project as
soon as possible. Since 2001, the Chinese government has awarded several

grants in the neuroinformatics field and supported the development of a
neuroinformatics platform and digital network according to the OECDÕs
WG-NI standards.
In 2003, the WG-NI requested the establishment of an international
coordinating mechanism, the International Neuroinformatics Coordinat-
ing Facility (INCF). The proposed role of INCF was to optimize the accu-

mulation, integration, standardization, exploitation, and sharing of very
large amounts of highly diverse primary data and of large, structured neu-
roscience databases that are being generated worldwide by researchers who
study the brain. The first INCF meeting was held in April 2004 at OECD
in Paris to establish the INCF secretariat, initiate substantive activities, and
develop a proposed funding scheme (the Program in International

Neuroinformatics). This new international program is intended to pro-
mote international collaboration among researchers whose work will be
funded by existing (or possibly new) national programs, eliminate national

and disciplinary barriers, and provide a more efficient approach to global
collaborative research and data sharing.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
67In order to accelerate Chinese neuroinformatics development, the
neuroinformatics project has been suggested to become an important part
of the China Science Data Sharing Project, especially for promoting inter-
national collaboration. Consistent with INCFÕs working plan, the Chinese

neuroinformatics community will develop tools for manipulating and man-
aging the data and standards and mechanisms for sharing these data among
global researchers. The Chinese also will design and develop special-pur-

pose analytical tools and algorithms, and create computational models of
brain structure and function that can be validated using diverse data. These
actions will advance the understanding of the human brain and may be

expected to lead to breakthroughs in the prevention and cure of nervous
system disorders and to improvements in the quality of life for humanity.
Long-Term Studies of Human Anatomy
Using the Digital Human and Scientific Data Sharing
4Human anatomy is a cornerstone of modern medicine. In 1543, Vesalius
published the seminal anatomy book, On the Structure of the Human Body
,which was one of the starting points of modern medicine. Digital anatomy

and the digital human represent a new revolution in medicine. The U.S.
National Library of Medicine (NLM) began to discuss a long-range plan for
the digital human in 1985. In 1989, the NLM Board of Regents submitted a

long-range plan for the next 10 to 30 years of electronic imaging in biomedi-
cal research. The first stage of the plan was the Visible Human Project (VHP).
The plan encouraged scientists to conduct research in various fields, includ-

ing anatomical structure informatics, graphics technologies in biomedicalimaging, basic medical research (e.g., developmental biology, neuroscience,
cell and histological science, and molecular structure), clinical applications
(e.g., image-guided surgery, actinotheraphy, anaesthesia, radiology, organ sys-
tem imaging, orthopedics), and the development of related medical equip-
ment using digital technologies.In 1991, the University of Colorado signed a VHP contract with NLM.
They completed two cryomacrotoming data sets (one male and one fe-
male) separately in 1994 and 1995. Since that time, the digital anatomy

community has developed important applications for medical teaching and
4Based on a presentation by Donglie Qin, BME College, Capital University of Medical
Sciences, China.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
clinical practice, including breakthrough advances in medical imaging, such
as more realistic rendering of three-dimensional images.
In 2001, the Federation of American Scientists presented the digital
human initiative, which is based on human body digital simulations at

three levels: the microlevel (molecular, gene, cell, and nanoscale), the meso-
level (tissue and organ), and the macrolevel (whole body). Since 2001, the
emerging Grid, Internet 2, and other advanced information technology

capabilities and imaging devices have been used in the VHP and similar
digital human activities.In addition to the VHP, there are now many other digital human
projects outside the United States, including the European Union, Japan,
Korea, Singapore, and China. In China, the proposed draft for a digital
human initiative was submitted to the government by scientists in 2001.

Two experimental whole-body data sets and several high-resolution organ
data sets (heart, kidney, and liver) have been completed. The next genera-
tion digital data sets and applications in medical teaching and clinical prac-
tices are expected to occur within the next 5 to 10 years. This brief history
of digital human research underscores the need for implementing scientific
data sharing in support of both research and applications in these digital

human initiatives.
The Protein Data Bank: A Key Biological Resource
5As noted in the previous chapter, the Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the
single international repository of three-dimensional data for biological mac-

romolecules and currently contains over 25,000 entries. The concept of the
PDB began to be formed during the late 1960s and early 1970s with com-munity discussions about the need for such a resource. Protein crystallogra-

phy was still in its infancy, but it was apparent to the producers of these
structures as well as to the potential users that every structure contained
valuable information that needed to be archived and maintained for poster-
ity. In June 1971, key representatives of the two communities attended the
Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology and agreed that
the time was right to create the PDB. The PDB was established in October

of that year at the Brookhaven National Laboratories as an archive for bio-
logical macromolecular crystal structures.
5Based on a presentation by Zukang Feng, Protein Data Bank, United States, available
at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/ZukangFengPresentation7.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
69In the 1980s, the number of deposited structures began to increase
dramatically. This was primarily due to the improved technology for all
aspects of the crystallographic process, the addition of structures deter-
mined by nuclear magnetic resonance methods, and the changes in the

research communityÕs views about data sharing. By the early 1990s, the
majority of journals required a PDB accession code and government fund-
ing agencies adopted the guidelines published by the International Union

of Crystallography requiring the deposition of data for all protein struc-
tures. The archiveÕs growth has been accompanied by increases in both data
content and the structural complexity of individual entries over the years.
In October 1998, the management of the PDB became the responsi-
bility of the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB)
at Rutgers University, together with the University of San Diego

Supercomputing Center and the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology. The vision of the RCSB is to create a resource based on the most
modern technology that facilitates the use and analysis of structural data
and thus creates an enabling resource for biological research. Its mission is
to provide the most accurate, well-annotated data in the most timely and
efficient way possible to facilitate new discoveries and advances in science.
The challenges that the PDB is addressing include the continuing in-
crease in the number and complexity of structures, the need to develop new
methods for structure determination, satisfying user demands for response

to complex queries and better annotation, integrating PDB data with othergenomic and proteomic information, and serving a growing and more di-
verse community of users. The PDBÕs strategy for meeting these challenges
involves the adoption of new technologies, creating extensible and portable
data systems, making the archive as uniform as possible, improving com-
munication with the users, and helping to create and enforce community

policies and standards.
The Safeguarding and Sharing of Traditional
Chinese Medicine Database Resources
6A big effort to develop traditional Chinese medicine database resources
began in the 1980s. Since that time, nearly one hundred such databases of
various sizes have been constructed by numerous universities, colleges, and
6Based on a presentation by Baoyan Liu and Meng Cui, China Academy of Traditional
Chinese Medicine.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
institutes. The digitization of information in traditional Chinese medicine
information has been completed on a preliminary basis, including modern
and ancient literature databases, factual and structural databases, and data
warehouses.
The main organizations involved in the modern literature and factual
databases are the Traditional Chinese Medical literature center and branch
center, which are affiliated with the State Administration of Traditional

Chinese Medicine. The national structural databases are being developed
now. In 2001, the scientific experiments information database of tradi-
tional Chinese medicine was initiated using data warehouse technology

and a virtual research center platform, which is now operational. The an-
cient literature database contains various e-books.
The development of traditional Chinese medicine databases already
has made significant achievements and established a basis for the digitiza-
tion of traditional Chinese medical information at the national level. Be-
cause this scientific and technical literature, and the underlying data and

scientific experiments, are the result of fundamental research work for the
public welfare, it needs the public support and funding of the government
to guarantee its continuation. If this initiative obtains the support of the

government, the main database can be completed quickly and provide a
sharing mechanism as a public good.Open Access to Scientific Data on Biological Diversity:
An Urgent Need for China
7Biological diversity (also called biodiversity) is generally divided into
three categories: genetic-level diversity, species-level diversity, and ecosys-
tem-level diversity. The focus here is on data in the latter two categories in

China.ChinaÕs species-level biodiversity is immense. For example, it contains
about 30,000 different plant species, and nearly 500 mammal species. In

fact, it has been estimated that the 17 so-called ÒmegadiverseÓ countries,
which include China, contain 70 percent of the worldÕs species of plants
and animals within their borders. China has databases for some of its spe-

cies-level biodiversity. For example, the State Environmental Protection
7Based on a presentation by James Edwards, Global Biodiversity Information Facility,
Denmark, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/JamesEdwards
Presentation.ppt.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
71Agency of China lists 67 databases of plants, animals, and microorgan-
isms.8 However, these are mostly small databases, except for birds and
plants, and most do not have georeferenced data or follow international
standards. Moreover, unlike some of the other megadiverse countriesÑfor

example Costa Rica and MexicoÑChina has not initiated systematic ef-
forts to develop computerized databases about its biota, or to access the
great wealth of biodiversity information about China that is contained in

the worldÕs natural history collections. As a result, China cannot currently
use this considerable body of knowledge for informed decision making.
The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) is an interna-
tional consortium aimed at making the worldÕs primary biodiversity data
freely and openly available over the Internet to benefit society, science, and
a sustainable future. Begun in 2001, GBIFÕs members as of June 2004

include 41 countries and 24 international organizations, each of whichagrees to set up a computer node to share primary biodiversity data. Con-
trol of the data, including the decision on what information to make avail-

able, resides with the data providers in each country or organization. GBIFÕs
role is to aid the data providers in setting up their databases and to provide
a portal that allows users to search all the databases at once.
9 GBIF is thus anetwork of participant nodes and other partners that agree to use common
standards for data and metadata, encourage the generation and contribu-
tion of additional data and information for the network, and assure that

data providers retain control of their own data.
As of June 2004, the GBIF data portal (initiated only a few months
earlier) is serving nearly 24 million records containing information about

specimens in natural history collections, as well as observational data. These
records are being served by 63 data providers from around the world. Even
though China is not yet a member of GBIF, the portal already contains

approximately 45,000 records of plants and animals, representing more
than 9,000 species that were collected in China.
The data being served by GBIF can be a valuable resource for many
scientific and societal problems, including tracking invasive species, pre-
dicting the spread of emerging infectious diseases, optimal design of pro-
tected areas, and making decisions about where to undertake field trials of

genetically modified crops. Other innovative examples of how megadiverse
countries have used these data are being compiled by GBIF.
8See http://www.zhb.gov.cn/english/.
9See http://www.gbif.net.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
China has been much more successful at developing and archiving
ecosystem-level biodiversity data than species-level data. The Chinese Eco-
system Research Network (CERN)
10 is a consortium of 33 field research
stations and one synthesis center. CERN was established in 1988, and cur-

rently provides access to a wide range of ecological and environmental data,
including more than 3,000 historical datasets.
11 CERN has also developeda comprehensive data sharing policy and joined the International Long-

Term Ecological Research Network. China should be encouraged to give
similar attention to developing and archiving its species-level biodiversity
information.The NIH Roadmap for Medical Research
12The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) launched the Roadmap
for Medical Research initiative in 2003. It is focused on important public
health challenges such as acute and chronic medical conditions, an aging

population, health disparities in society, emerging diseases, and biodefense
concerns. The roadmap provides a framework of priorities and a vision for
a more efficient, innovative, and productive research system. It also estab-

lishes a set of initiatives that are central to improving the quality of healthy
life for people in the United States and around the world.
One research priority of the NIH roadmap is the reengineering of the
clinical research enterprise. This reengineering effort has multiple compo-
nents, including integration of a clinical research network and facilitating
data mining to advance data sharing goals. Examples of health databases

and technologies that are part of this NIH focus are the lung image data-
base, a network for translational research for optical imaging, a biomedical
informatics research network, bioinformatics roadmap centers, and an in-

sight segmentation and registration toolkit in support of the VHP.
The National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, a
component of the NIH, is addressing specific issues in the clinical research

network initiative. There are a number of barriers to creating a successful
10See ÒThe Data Sharing Policy of the Chinese Ecosystem Research NetworkÓ in Chap-
ter 4 of this report.11See http://www.cern.ac.cn:8080/index.jsp.
12Based on a presentation by Belinda Seto, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering, U.S. National Institutes of Health, available at http://www7.

nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/BelindaSetoPresentation7.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
73network, which can include fundamental differences in informatics infra-
structure and communication tools used at various research sites. To the
extent that interoperability can be implemented and data and tools shared,
studies can be initiated more quickly. From the perspective of the Institute,

there is a need to create imaging databases and repositories where research-
ers can access such data. However, access to databases and data mining also
requires user-friendly informatics tools. Approaches that combine images,
genomic, gene expression, and patient medical records data will ultimately
deliver patient-specific information at a time and place where clinical deci-
sions are made regarding risk, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up.
The overall implementation strategy involves the development and
standardized validation of application-specific software for integration and
knowledge extraction of heterogeneous, clinically relevant data. Specific

functions that need to be addressed include:
Quantitative data integration, knowledge extraction, and clinical
interpretation;
Linking imaging and other databases with software tools;
Managing software in the scientific and clinical workflow;
Partnerships between industry and academia for software develop-
ment and dissemination;Database development specifically for software validation and regu-
latory approval; and
Standards related to interoperability of imaging and other databases,
and including results of quantitative analysis of metadata.
EXAMPLES OF EARTH SCIENCES, ENVIRONMENTAL,
AND NATURAL RESOURCES DATA ACTIVITIES
Progress in Meteorological Data Sharing in China
13Meteorological data are a vast resource that applies to many fields.
Such data are indispensable for economic and social development, scien-
tific and technological innovation, and general human welfare. The collec-
13Based on a presentation by Dahe Qin, China Meteorological Administration, avail-
able at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Qin_Dahe_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
tion of meteorological data by the China Meteorological Administration
(CMA) is supported operationally by polar-orbiting and geostationary sat-
ellites; a ground-based observation network consisting of various types of
sensors; the synthesized operational transmitting system, which covers the

entire world; a supercomputer; and many other facilities and equipment.
The total amount of archived data is over 100 terabytes.
As a member of the World Meteorological Organization, the CMA has
cooperated extensively with the international community in the exchange
of meteorological data products. In December 2001, under the support of
the Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST), the CMA initiated the

meteorological data sharing services program as part of the China SDSP.
Developments in meteorological data sharing over the past three years
include the integration of data resources, the compilation of technical stan-

dards, and the construction of service systems. The project has provided
online and in-house services for scientific research, education, national con-
structing projects, and the public. Its data services are based on policy,

technical standards, an operational data management system, and the clas-
sification of data and users. The work and experience of this project can be
used as a reference in developing the China-SDSP and its other projects.
The next step is for the meteorological data sharing project to take a
leading role in the China-SDSP. To accomplish this, it must:
Increase the capability of its service functions, and provide more
and better services for national economic development and social welfare;
Build upon the advances in science and technology, improve data
security, and provide high-quality data products for sharing;
Optimize the allocation of resources in the climate system and es-
tablish a Òclimate systemÓ data sharing platform; and
Develop extensive cooperation with domestic sectors and with in-
ternational meteorological Web sites, institutes, and organizations.
The project is expected to increase the sharing of meteorological data
and promote the proper configuration and effective utilization of national
information resources. The project also plans to quicken the implementa-

tion of the Chinese Climate Observation System, advance climate system
data sharing as part of the Global Climate Observation System, and help in
the enactment of the new national data sharing law and policy.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
75The World Data Center for Renewable Resources and Environment
14The World Data Center (WDC) system was established by ICSU in
1957. It consists of 52 discipline centers, which are distributed in the

United States, Russia, Europe, Japan, India, Australia, and China. China
joined the WDC system in 1988 and it now has nine discipline centers
(Astronomy, Geology, Geophysics, Glaciology and Geocryology, Meteorol-

ogy, Oceanography, Renewable Resources and Environment, Seismology,
and Space Sciences).
The WDC for Renewable Resources and Environment (WDC-RRE)
is maintained by the Global Change Information and Research Center at
the Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research in the
Chinese Academy of Sciences. The mission of the WDC-RRE is to cooper-

ate actively with ICSU to promote exchange and sharing of data in the
fields of natural resources and the environment. The WDC-RRE attaches
great importance not only to data collection, but also to data exchange and

services to users. It seeks to play an important role in supporting scientific
research, public decision making, scientific popularization, personnel train-
ing, and international cooperation.The WDC-RRE is funded by the Chinese Academy of Sciences and
MoST. The WDC-RRE carries out its work under the direction of the head
of the Global Change Information and Research Center, and is engaged in

the following activities:
Researching the present situation regarding renewable resources and
environmental data inside and outside China;
Investigating user requirements for such data;
Working out a metadata standard for WDCs in China;
Establishing the Web site of the WDC for RRE;
15 andProducing data and providing data services.
14Based on a presentation by Shunbao Liao, Geosciences and Natural Resources Insti-
tute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-

codata/Liao_Shunbao_Presentation.ppt.
15See http://eng.wdc.cn:8080/Metadata/index.jsp.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Information System for Earth Science Data of China
16The Information System for Earth Science Data is a project initiated
in 2002 by the Scientific Information Center for Resources and Environ-

ment (SICRE) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Since that time, SICRE
has established regulations and policies for the collection, processing, man-
agement, and sharing of earth science data. The draft of the Chinese

metadata requirements for this system is compatible with international ap-
proaches and is based on a synthesis of the main metadata criteria for earthscience data. The system has begun to provide data and information ser-

vices online.The China-SDSP will be a great benefit to the researchers and the scien-
tific activities in China. Presently, more detailed polices are being established

and the common understanding of data sharing is developing. One challenge
is that the standardization and digitization of earth science data is compli-
cated, and there is a great demand for it.
This tension between the supply and demand for these data will be
mitigated once the Clearinghouse of Earth Science Data is established. The
Clearinghouse will reproduce and organize the primary data with lower

costs and less time. With such a Òtop-downÓ process, the actualization of
ChinaÕs scientific data sharing can be realized in all respects. So far, an
effective data management and information catalogue has been completed
and the data service function is available for researchers and decision mak-
ers. It is with these goals in mind that the Clearinghouse of Earth Science
Data in China has been launched.Present Status and Future Development Strategy of ChinaÕs
Sustainable Development Information Network
17ChinaÕs Sustainable Development Information Network (CSDIN) was
created by the Administrative Center for ChinaÕs Agenda 21 and nine aca-

demic institutions and scientific organizations in 1997 with the support of
the Chinese MoST. The main goal of CSDIN is to provide data and infor-
16Based on a presentation by Jiansheng Qu, Scientific Information Center for Re-
sources and Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
17Based on a presentation by Xiaofeng Fu, Administrative Centre for ChinaÕs Agenda
21, Ministry of Science and Technology, China and Xintong Li, State Key Laboratory of
Resources and Environment Information System, Institute of Geographical Sciences and
Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
77mation for research, management, and decision-making related to sustain-
able development strategies that are being implemented in China. A related
goal is to improve the public awareness of sustainable development issues
through information dissemination, and to achieve the objectives for long-

term development that were established in ChinaÕs Agenda 21 program.
The data and information in the CSDIN system are focused on natu-
ral resources, biodiversity, forestry, agriculture, macroeconomics, environ-

mental protection, environmental technology transfer, and natural disas-
ters, which together may be called sustainable development information.
CSDINÕs multidisciplinary data have been integrated and analyzed for

implementing sustainable development strategies implemented in China,
such as national or regional sustainable development capacity evaluation
methodologies and experiences. As of June 2004, there were 50 gigabytes

of data and 17 databases.The formation process and outcomes of the data sharing policy, and the
standards for promoting information sharing in China are key aspects of

CSDIN. The policy regulates CSDINÕs data access and Internet dissemina-
tion activities according to data pricing, user status (e.g., government sector,
the general public, and private enterprises), and data use. For the data stan-

dards, certain metadata and data dictionary standards, a geo-grid standard,
and a data classification and encoding standard have been proposed. These
standards will be used in the whole country. These CSDIN standards provide

important application experiences for the Chinese national e-government
and scientific data sharing program. Other major elements for the develop-
ment of CSDIN include the technology for the legacy systemÕs reconstruc-

tion, the architecture of the data warehouse, the development of a geospatial
database, and technologies for geo-information services.The future development of CSDIN will focus on geo-information service
standards and technical specifications; implementation of a more user-friendly
interface; enabling interoperable spatial, thematic, and temporal geo-informa-
tion services; and building a sustainable development decision support system.
Progress Toward a National Spatial Data Infrastructure in China
18As society is becoming more and more information dependent, multi-
scale digital spatial data are urgently needed by a variety of users for sup-
porting their planning, monitoring, management, and decision making in
18Based on a presentation by Jun Chen, National Geomatics Center, China.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
a broad range of applications. In this context, ChinaÕs National Spatial Data
Infrastructure (NSDI) is providing the digital geospatial framework. It con-
sists of vertically and horizontally integrated geospatial databases and com-
munication networks, as well as necessary institutional arrangements for

effective flow and exchange of geospatial information.
There are four main components of ChinaÕs NSDIÑdata sets, the
clearinghouse, policy and standards, and institutional arrangements. There

are multiscale fundamental geospatial databases at the national, provincial,
and municipal levels. For example, 1:1,000,000 and 1:250,000 scale data-
bases have already been completed, and a 1:50,000 scale database is ex-

pected to be developed. Finer-scale databases are being produced at the
provincial and local levels.
Several key factors influence the sharing of geospatial data. These in-
clude the data resources that are available, the policies that apply to these
activities, and technical and institutional coordination. User needs also must
be considered. Administrative licensing regulations in 1999 created three

pricing categories for data users: government agencies can obtain data freely,
not-for-profit institutions at 10 percent of full commercial cost, and corpo-
rations at full commercial prices. E-government initiatives are now driving

a variety of applications that require greater data integration.
Uses of Seismic Data and the Importance of Open Access to
Major Data Centers in Seismology
19Earthquakes originate at places where stress levels in the Earth have be-
come too high. Rocks rupture, and slip occurs on a fault surface in order to
release stress. The resulting seismic waves spread throughout the EarthÕs inte-
rior. Eventually they reach the EarthÕs surface where they may be recorded.
Every day, there are about one or two hundred earthquakes, large
enough for their seismic signals to be recorded more than 1,000 kilometers
from the earthquake source. Also every day, some earthquakes are large

enough for their signals to be recorded all over the world. The only way to
study such earthquakes effectively is to work with data recorded by seismo-
graphic stations in different countries.
19Based on a presentation by Paul Richards, Columbia University, United States, avail-
able at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/PaulRichardsPresentation.pdf.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
79Scientists and engineers use seismic signals to make earthquake cata-logs and bulletins, which provide basic information for various kinds of
research and applications, including the study of earthquake hazards, the
physics of the earthquake sources, and the structure of the EarthÕs interior.

The great progress in seismology in all these fields has been stimulated
principally by the availability of improved and improving data.
Both China and the United States are developing major new net-
works of seismometers at a cost of hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars
to each country. The experience in the United States indicates that data
centers that do not have open data policies are rarely able to attract

researchers who apply state-of-the-art methods of data analysis. Such
data centers consequently find it difficult to maintain high-quality op-erations. The best research is usually associated with centers that make

their data openly and easily available. For example, users draw attention
to errors that inevitably arise in the data, they find ways to correct the
data, they share information about how to use the data center effec-

tively, and they contribute to new ways to process the data. Information
from users of the data thus is needed to provide guidance for the man-
agement of a data center. From this perspective, it appears that an im-

portant part of providing international scientific leadership in seismol-
ogy is making seismic data easily available to all interested potential
users.China too has excellent data sets of seismic waveforms, which will yield
new insights into earthquake physics, tectonics, and the EarthÕs internal
structure. New methods of locating earthquakes have recently been applied

to limited datasets. They indicate the potential for China to produce one of
the best bulletins of seismicity in the world, covering a large region (more
than 10,000,000 square km). Bulletins are a starting point for hazard man-

agement, as well as for scientific projects in the study of the EarthÕs struc-
ture and earthquake physics.
Presently there are handicaps, however, in that station coordinates are
not made easily available, and waveform data are accessible for only a very
limited number of stations. For many years, China has not allowed even
the locations of seismographic stations to be known to western scientists,

except for a network of 24 stations. A consequence of these restrictions is
that the locations of earthquakes in China are not as well known as they
would be if more data were made generally available.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Existing Infrastructure for International Exchange of Seismic Data
20As noted in the preceding section, knowledge of earthquake hazards can
advance as a result of unrestricted sharing of seismic data, including seismic

station information, bulletins, and waveforms. The infrastructure to arrange
for and carry out international data exchange has existed and been used suc-
cessfully for many years. The International Association for Seismology and

the Physics of the EarthÕs Interior (IASPEI) includes commissions to discuss
specific arrangements and to establish data format standards. The Interna-
tional Seismological Centre (ISC) collects, merges, and redistributes seismic

bulletin data. The Federation of Digital Seismic Networks (FDSN) helps
broadband seismic networks to coordinate their activities. The United States
and China help to fund and participate in each of these organizations, but
the amount of data that the Chinese have shared lags far behind most other
countries with similarly extensive earthquake monitoring.
It is useful to have data from more stations for a number of reasons in
addition to the ones outlined in the preceding section. Seismology is ad-
vancing beyond computing ÒformalÓ estimates of uncertainty that are based
on questionable statistical assumptions. To estimate ÒabsoluteÓ location

uncertainty, seismologists must calibrate new techniques using very accu-
rate locations. Many seismologists accept a location computed by a local
network as absolutely accurate within 5 kilometers only if it is computed

from arrival times at stations at least one of which is within 30 kilometers
of the earthquake; at least ten of which are within 250 kilometers of the
earthquake; and with a very good distribution around the earthquake.
Local networks may be reconfigured frequently to meet new needs, so
using their data depends on detailed knowledge of the network. Thus, seis-
mologists recognize that there may be advantages from arranging some ex-

changes of local network data individually.
Regional networks cover a broader area but with somewhat more
sparsely distributed stations. Regional networks usually have a more stan-

dardized configuration, so data from them can be used with greater confi-
dence by more seismologists. Many seismologists accept a location com-
puted by a regional network as absolutely accurate within 20 kilometers if

it is computed from arrival times at seismic stations that are all within
20Based on a presentation by Raymond J. Willemann, GEM Technologies, United
States, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/RaymondWillemann
Presentation.ppt.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
811,000 kilometers of the earthquake and have very good distribution around
the earthquake.Achieving good distribution around an earthquake usually requires at
least ten seismic stations. Because China is so large, several hundred sta-

tions are needed to obtain a good distribution of regional stations around
all of the earthquakes in China.Two recent changes offer an opportunity to improve the international
contributions of seismic data from China. First, IASPEI passed at its 2003
General Assembly in Sapporo, Japan, a resolution urging all seismic net-
works to share information about all seismic stations. The resolution states:
RECOGNIZING the need to accurately locate earthquakes and determine
earthquake size, and compile complete earthquake bulletins,URGES all operators of seismic stations and networks to deposit unique sta-
tion codes with the international registry maintained by the International
Seismological Centre and by the World Data Centre for Seismology, Denver,
and to freely share the coordinates of all seismic stations,
URGES all operators of seismic stations and networks to keep accurate record
of instrument response and performance.
China might respond to this IASPEI resolution by starting to send the
ISC a computer-readable bulletin from the China Earthquake Administra-
tion that is complete for a network of several hundred seismic stations in
China. Second, the FDSN has broadened the definition of membership to

include many more regional and local networks of broadband seismic sta-
tions. In response, numerous provincial networks in China might join the
FDSN. This would provide the networks an opportunity to contribute

data from selected stations to the FDSN archive and access to software and
other assistance from the FDSN to establish their own data centers to dis-
tribute their own data on the Internet.
Digital Fujian
21The digital Earth has the allure of a diamond; people from different
angles all can appreciate its prism and reflection. Consistent with the con-
21Based on a presentation by Qinmin Wang, Department of Science and Technology,
Fujian Province, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
Wang_qinmin_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
cept of digital Earth, thinking globally and acting locally has become the
approach for organizing the regional e-government information sharing
program in Fujian Province. The governor of Fujian Province formed the
Digital Fujian program to promote regional modernization during the
2001-2005 time period. The program includes the establishment of an
information network, the creation of data resources (a data warehouse with
metadata, data processing, modeling, and other related functions), the for-

mation of data standards and a data sharing policy, the training of qualified
technicians, and the funding of an information applications infrastructure.
After the three years of development, the Digital Fujian program has
established successfully the e-government information networking and
data sharing platform between the provincial government and the city
and county government departments. It now includes approximately one

terabyte of standardized data resources among 21 government agencies, 9
information application systems, 20 government information application
projects, a provincial information technology technician training center,

and a set of information sharing standards and regulations. Another key
technical issue of the program is how to extract useful information from
the huge Earth observation satellite databases. Therefore, data mining,

data analysis, data integration, information extraction, information pre-
sentation, and intelligent decision making are also important parts of the
program.Local and Regional Earth System Science
Applications and Associated Infrastructure:
The Mid-Atlantic Geospatial Information Consortium
22The Mid-Atlantic Geospatial Information Consortium (MAGIC) is
a federated consortium of universities in that region of the United States.
Their mission is to develop a distributed remote sensing, applications,
geospatial data and information system, serving a variety of users at the

local, state, and regional levels. It extends wide usage of National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration (NASA) data. It focuses on the use of
such data for NASA priorities and on the dissemination of such data
through interoperable information systems that are coupled to NASAÕs
22Based on a presentation by Menas Kafatos, George Mason University, United States,
available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/MenasKafatosPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
83systems and that promote open solutions and standards. It prototypes
applications for regional effects of climate phenomena and change, land
use, pollution mitigation, agriculture, health, wetlands, and forestry, cou-
pling to NASA priorities.There are many factors related to providing open data access that must
be considered by MAGIC, including the following:
A federated data and information management system
. Support de-
pends on individual partners and changes are not reflected at all sites.
Standards
. MAGIC uses standards developed by the Federal Geo-
graphic Data Committee, WebGIS (Geographic Information Systems), and
the Web Mapping Service.
Diversity of users. MAGIC serves users at the local, state, regional,
and federal levels, and from the private and public sectors. These users have
different needs, different expertise, and different infrastructure.
Large number of data types. There are over 2,000 databases with
many different types of data (e.g., GIS, swath, gridded, socioeconomic).
These data sources require different tools and metadata to make them use-
ful and interoperable with federal government agencies and across all other

MAGIC sources. Help desks are needed for user support.
Infrastructure
. High-speed network access is required, but not all
partners have the same access capabilities.
Funding. The NASA Earth System Science Applications program
provided initial funding. Funding priorities change, however, and the users
are a mix of public- and private-sector entities. Ultimately, the funding

sources should reflect this diversity of users and include the state govern-
ment and industry.
Training. Remote-sensing and other geospatial data are difficult to
use. Users therefore frequently require training, including in the applica-
tion of geographic information systems to remote-sensing data.
Free versus proprietary data
. NASA Earth System Science data are
freely and openly available. Other government (e.g., from the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
data are low-cost and unrestricted. Local and state data are not free, and

commercial private-sector data are proprietary. An important question is,
how can a federated, Web-based system make access free to different users?
This key question is still being addressed.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
THEMATIC ISSUES IN SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION,
JOURNALS, AND DIGITAL LIBRARIES
Policies and Mechanisms for Literature Resource SharingÑ
The Practice of the Chinese National Scientific and
Technical Library
23Information resource sharing benefits society and the economy by the
spread of knowledge at a low cost. Intellectual property rights (IPRs) stimu-
late and protect creative innovation, but restrict the public diffusion and
application of knowledge. They are thus positive on the one hand, but

negative on the other. Enhancing the resource sharing requirement may
limit the interests and benefits of the IPR owner, whereas increasing the
IPRs of the owner may limit the benefits that society could gain from re-

source sharing. A proper balance between the two needs to be found to
maximize the social benefits. The policy and legal system is facing an in-
creasing challenge in reconciling these opposing effects.
Information resource sharing is a powerful instrument for reducing the
digital divide, but the threshold for doing it is quite high due to the price of
literature. At the same time, the strengthening of IPRs is the current trend

in international law and trade. This is related with the fact that the main
exporters of knowledge and information products are in developed coun-
tries. For developing economies, the level of IPR protection should be syn-

chronized with the level of development of the economic and legal system.
Setting the protection standards too high can be harmful. There are choices
and tradeoffs in enacting these policies.If the rigorous application of copyright law requires payment for every
drop of knowledge, then the capacity of public libraries will be very limited by
the shortage of funds. The urgent problem is: How to observe international

IPR regulations while at the same time improving the scientific information
resource capacity building and meeting the demands of social progress?
The Practice of the Chinese National Scientific and Technical Library of
ChinaThe National Scientific and Technical Library (NSTL) of China is a
virtual scientific literature service center initiated in June 2000 by the MoST
23Based on a keynote presentation by Qiheng Hu, Vice President, Chinese Association
for Science and Technology, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/
Hu_Qiheng_Presentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
85and the Ministry of Finance in cooperation with five other ministries, and
approved by the State Council. The NSTL is composed of seven member
libraries: the Center for Literature and Information of the Chinese Acad-
emy of Sciences, the China S&T Information Institute, the Machinery

Industry Information Institute, the Metallurgy Industry Information Stan-
dard Institute, the Chemical Industry Information Center, the Literature
Center of the Chinese Academy for Agricultural Science, and the Informa-

tion Center of the Chinese Academy for Medical Science. The NSTL office
is in charge of coordinating and managing the services.
The principles for operation of the NSTL are: Òunified purchasing,
normalized processing, combined networking, and resource sharing.Ó The
main goals are to:
Build and share the scientific literature and information resources
among all members through a convenient network so that this virtual li-
brary can provide better service to the research community in the areas of

basic science, engineering, agriculture, and medicine;
Develop a high-level scientific literature collection and service center;
Demonstrate effective applications of information technologies in
scientific literature and information services;
Become a pivotal force in cooperation with the broader Chinese
library system and the leader in the scientific library system of China;
Play a major role in exchanges with the international library com-
munity; andEstablish the information resource base for research, training, and
the popularization of scientific education.The responsibilities of NSTL are diverse, consistent with its main goals.
These responsibilities include: planning and funding of comparatively com-
plete literature resource acquisitions; coordination of the literature collec-
tion to avoid unnecessary redundancies; formulation of standards, norms,

and formats for the unified database; providing service to users throughout
the country with the NSTL network service platform; development and
application of in-depth resources; and domestic and international exchanges

and collaborations.The responsibilities of the NSTL are directed by a 19-member Coun-
cil, which is the decision-making and leading body, and also represents

NSTL members and users. The NSTL Director is appointed by the Coun-
cil. The Director General is in charge of operations and hires the office
staff. The Council and the Director are advised by two advisory groups, the
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Expert Advisory Committee for Literature Resource Construction and the
Expert Advisory Committee on Computer-Network Construction.
The NSTL has made significant progress in several areas, three of which
are highlighted here. First, it has increased the total number and variety of

the scientific literature resources in China. The investments in scientific
literature have been used more effectively since the NSTL member libraries
stopped the counterproductive duplication and competition in purchasing

international scientific periodicals as a result of NSTL planning. Prior to
2000, there were only about 3,000 English-language scientific journals and
periodicals in the NSTL member libraries. The NSTL increased the total

number to 10,653 in 2000. By 2003, the NSTL holdings of journals and
periodicals in English numbered approximately 13,500 with an additional
5,000 conference proceedings and handbooks in English. Also in English

are 15 kinds of network edition periodicals and 65 kinds (physics and chem-
istry) of network edition subscriptions with access controls. The NSTL also
has a rich variety of literature in the Chinese language, including more than

4,000 kinds of journals and periodicals, over 22,000 conference proceed-
ings, and 470,000 theses for Masters and PhD degrees.
Second, NSTL has constructed a 1 gigabit/second broadband network
linking the NSTLÕs seven member libraries, thereby making the separate
libraries a united library with digitized resources in the networked environ-
ment. The NSTL service network is also linked with the National Library,

the China Education and Research Network, and the China Scientific and
Technical Network via 100 megabit/second connections.
The third major area of NSTLÕs progress is in developing the rapid
growth of online digitized resources and related services. In 2000, before
the launch of the NSTL network, there were 1.7 million information items
of online data. This increased to 27 million items in 39 databases by De-

cember 2003. The NSTL provides many services including: literature
searches, full-text provision, periodicals cataloging, common directory
query, full-text database access for the network-edition literature, literature

directory database searching, expert consulting and information services,
online resources search engine, preprints system in Chinese, and a portal
for preprints in English. Services that are provided to users via the Internet

include free literature searching and online payment for services (around
44 percent of payable services are paid online). Requests for full-text provi-
sion are processed within two working days.
All users can access and download for free the 15 network-edition peri-
odicals in English for which NSTL buys access. The other 65 kinds of
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
87periodicals on physics and chemistry are available for 80 universities and
research institutes according to the subscription license, based on access
controls. Over 99 percent of the periodicals in English are accessed each
year.
Despite these accomplishments, the NSTL, like all public libraries,continues to face a serious problem. The benefit of using information tech-
nology to decrease the costs of knowledge sharing is greatly counteracted

by the rising costs of the imported information resources. From the experi-
ence of the NSTL, the network editionÕs cost is typically very high and is
proportionate to the scale of information sharing. There may be no other

choice than to go back to printed editions for such high-cost importedinformation. Does this sound like progress in the age of digital networks?
Perspectives on the Future of the Library and on the
Economics of Open Access
24The big question facing the circulation of scientific information is:
What is going to become of the emerging open-access movement? There
are growing numbers of arguments in support of increasing access to re-

search through a variety of open-access models. The case for increasing
access has components that can be roughly categorized as epistemological,
historical, developmental, political, and publicÑas well as economic and

legal, which are discussed elsewhereÑand is directed primarily toward fac-
ulty members, students, librarians, policy makers, and the public.The epistemological argument for open access, for example, has to dowith how dependent a knowledge claim is on being fully open to review
and critique. Anything that unduly restricts the circulation of knowledge,
especially among ÒlegitimateÓ participants in its construction, reduces that

body of knowledgeÕs claims to validity and reliability. If the current sub-
scription publishing model can be shown to contribute to suboptimal lev-
els of access, then those models are not what we might call epistemologi-

cally conducive to the development of knowledge.
The concern with exploring new publishing models leads to the his-
torical argument, which draws on precedents from an earlier era of publish-

ing innovation, using Isaac Newton as a leading instance. Newton is well
known for being a highly secretive scientist and a reluctant author. Neverthe-
24Based on a presentation by John Willinsky, University of British Columbia, Canada.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
less, after he had tracked for only a few years the birth and emergence of the
scientific periodical, with the launching of Philosophical Transactions
 in 1655,he understood that this publicly circulated, relatively inexpensive 16-page
journal represented something important to science. He allowed one of his

letters, on optics, to be published in that journal. It was a move he came to
regret and did not do again, but this early experience in open access went a
long way in shaping what became the norms of the scientific article.The developmental (or developing countries) argument for increasing
access has everything to do with the parallel development in China of both
economic growth and scientific papers published, with an increase by a

factor of 10 since the 1980s. Developing countries are suffering a knowl-
edge gap, even as their university population grows. The universities in the
West are contributing to that gap, as their work becomes increasingly ex-
pensive to access (with some generous exceptions negotiated with publish-
ers by the International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publica-
tions and some other organizations).The political and public arguments for open access to research are
about peopleÕs basic right to know, especially in matters of publicly funded
research and scholarship. The value of exercising that right is affirmed by
the health revolution brought about by public access to medical informa-
tion. Public access to research also speaks to greater accountability de-
manded of professionals (e.g., physicians, educators, lawyers) and the in-

creasing role of interest groups in selectively presenting information to the
public, against which full access to the research would act as a safeguard.
An Open-Access Future
25The open-access movement has gained momentum over the past sev-
eral years, with increased visibility and recognition from the various stake-
holder communities, including research and publishing communities. Since
the Budapest Open Access Initiative
26 began collecting signatures in Feb-
ruary 2002, more than 3,500 individuals and organizations have signed on
with their support for free access to information. The Directory of Open
Access Journals
27 at Lund University, which contained over 1,100 journals
25Based on a presentation by Helen Doyle, Public Library of Science, United States.
26See http://www.soros.org/openaccess/.
27See http://www.doaj.org/.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
89as of June 2004, has announced the launch of its second phase, allowing
sophisticated searching of the full text of the DirectoryÕs articles. The U.K.-
based open-access publisher BioMedCentral now publishes over 100 open-
access journals. Since its launch in October 2003, 
PLoS Biology
28Ñthe firstpeer-reviewed, open-access journal of the Public Library of Science
(PLoS)Ñis demonstrating remarkable strength as a competitive new jour-
nal: submissions are increasing; readership, measured as visits to the site

and as downloads of individual articles, is growing; and 
PLoS Biology
Õs repu-tation as a high-quality, peer-reviewed journal is improving among scien-
tists, publishers, librarians, and other stakeholder groups.
In addition to a transformation of the economics of scientific publish-ing, open-access publishing also represents a modernization of traditional
copyright laws that are based on an outdated print-based economic model.

In the open-access definitions used in both the Bethesda Principles
29 andthe Berlin Declaration,
30 an open-access article can be reused and redis-
tributed freely and without permission from the publisher, for any respon-

sible purpose. Authors retain their copyright. In the case of PLoS journals,
the copyright license is the Creative Commons
31 Òattribution license,Ówhich preserves the authorÕs right to be acknowledged for the original work.
Many journals that are labeled open access are in fact free access, mean-
ing that the restrictions on use and distribution are the same as for many
subscription-based journals. It is worth noting that researchers themselves

virtually never benefit financially from publication of their peer-reviewed
articles. Several recent policies that may appear to be a liberalization of
subscription policies are in fact small concessions to the growing demand

for greater access from the scientific community that produces the articles,
concessions made at little economic risk to the publishers.The sharing of data, reagents, and ideas is fundamental to the scientific
process itself. Open-access publishing, including both the unfettered distri-
bution and searching afforded by online free access and the unlimited cre-
ative reuses permitted by less restrictive copyright licenses, will facilitate the

advance of science and medicine.
28See http://biology.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=index-html&issn=1545-7885/.
29See http://www.biomedcentral.com/openaccess/bethesda/.
30See http://www.zim.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/berlindeclaration.html.
31See http://creativecommons.org/.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
Other Opportunities in the Changing Information Environment
32It has been recognized that research and access to research results play a
vital role in the development of all countries, and that transitional and

developing countries often cannot obtain and make use of research that
would benefit them. In response to this Òinformation divide,Ó the Interna-
tional Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications (INASP) was

established in 1992 as a program of ICSU to provide support to network-
ing and partnerships with the aim of bridging the increasing information
divide between the developed and developing world. It now operates a

range of programs to support access to information for researchers, health
workers, and rural development experts. Access to research information is
facilitated through its Programme for the Enhancement of Research Infor-

mation (PERI). This program not only provides access to international
research, but facilitates activities to support national publications to in-crease their visibility and long-term sustainability. Research information is

provided in many different forms (e.g., datasets, publications), but the
scholarly journal remains one of the prime vehicles for accrediting and dis-
seminating research information. Of course, both national and interna-

tional information is of importance to research. PERI provides support for
(1) access to global information, (2) increased visibility for local publica-
tions, (3) training in the use and management of online information, (4)
support for publishers and editors, and (5) research and networking sup-
port. INASP negotiates access to as many required resources as possible
with content owners and publishers. The exact cost of each resource is

related to the GDP of the country, and although many of the resources are
available without cost as part of PERI, others are obtainable at up to 98
percent discount on the normal subscription rates. Nearly all of the re-

sources are available on a countrywide license basis, meaning that anyone
in an educational, research, or nonprofit environment is eligible to access
them.The Journals OnLine (JOL) project supports a methodology to enable
national publications to have an online presence, to increase their visibility,
and to promote communication with readers and authors. It has been par-

ticularly successful in Africa with the African Journals Online (AJOL) ser-
32Based on a presentation by Pippa Smart, International Network for the Availability
of Scientific Publications, United Kingdom, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/

usnc-codata/PippaSmartPresentation.ppt.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
91vice that now includes 184 journals, and also supports full-text, online
publishing. This service has been operational since 1998 and was recently
re-launched on a new platform. The new software enables individual pub-
lishers to load, edit, and correct their own content to further support devel-

opment and use of online communication. The JOL methodology and
software are available for other countries and regions to adopt for their own
publications.Of course, there continue to be many challenges for information access,
and INASP is continually updating its activities to respond to requests from
partners and to increase its capabilities to develop sustainable methodologies.
Scientific Information and Digital Libraries: Can Developing
Countries Become Key Players in the Information Society?
33In most developing countries, politics rather than markets drive knowl-
edge diffusion. Whether new technology is adopted or not by a country is

largely determined by political will, its patterns of power and influence,
and resource-allocation policies. Politics are thus a decisive variable driving
the transition of developing countries to the information society.
In addition to the political hurdles in most developing countries, there
are many other factors working against preservation of and open access to
scientific information in developing countries. These factors may be char-

acterized as institutional, economic, and social, although many of themintersect and are difficult to separate out.
Generally speaking, the institutional culture creates barriers to the cre-
ation and diffusion of knowledge. For example, government officials tend
to believe that access to knowledge is automatic once connectivity to digital
networks is ensured. There is no institutional framework for data preserva-

tion mechanisms (e.g., the demise of the South African Data Archive).
Moreover, there is no legislative mandate that obliges researchers that are
publicly funded to make available research findings publicly accessible. The

lack of comprehensive strategies and policies for data management are a
major barrier to open access in developing countries.
From an economic standpoint, a large percentage of the population in33Based on a presentation by Lulama Makhubela, National Development Agency,
South Africa, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/Lulama
Presentation.ppt.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92OPEN ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA IN CHINA
developing countries currently falls below the poverty line. Income distri-
bution remains highly unequal, and poverty and inequality continue to
exhibit strong geographic and racial biases. Public funding for the develop-
ment and connectivity of information and communication technologies
(ICTs)Ñfrom both national and global sourcesÑcontinues to be inad-
equate. The resulting lack of access to ICTs further restricts the potential
use of even the information that is otherwise openly accessible online.
The social barriers are no less daunting. Human resources in the scien-
tific and technical domains are not adequately developed. Moreover, there
is a Òbrain drainÓ of highly trained scientists and professionals from the

developing to the more developed countries. The organizational complex-
ity of scientific communities and the esoteric language of scholarly journalscreate further roadblocks to the broad transfer of knowledge. Within the

broader society, the reading environment is poorly developed. Only a small
percentage of the population uses library facilities, and most rural areas do
not have libraries. Educational gaps mean that access to information does

not necessarily result in access to knowledge. The simple availability of
information technologies has shown to be insufficient to guarantee proper
diffusion of scientific knowledge across society. Achieving mastery of tech-

nological change in the economy and society remains elusive.
Some actions that may be considered to help ameliorate the barriers
outlined above include the following:
There must be a greater effort to develop human resources in re-
search, especially in national tertiary education programs, and to connect

research more effectively with productive sectors and the specific needs of
society. The curricula for research professionals should include digital data
and information management principles and techniques.The adoption of rigorous and more collaborative approaches in ad-
dressing the lack of leadership and professional management, which has
resulted in the poor implementation of data preservation in many areas, is
vital. This needs to be coupled with a greater effort on developing a better
understanding of the value of data and information preservation for future
access among working scientists.
A strategic approach is also needed to leverage resources and maxi-
mize effectiveness by increased collaboration among developing countries,
and to document and disseminate best practices. This goal can be pro-

moted by forming data archiving groups at different geographic levels to
overcome the isolation of individual data archivists and promote beneficial
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THEMATIC ISSUES
93exchanges. This will help harness the human intellectual capacity with col-
lective expertise in issues of data preservation and open access. Cooperation
should be encouraged for richer quality and more impact, rather than
merely for the sake of cooperation.
At the broader social level it is important to promote the use of
scientific knowledge and of information technologies among all popula-
tion strata, as well as to reach out to the literate poor. Investments in tech-

nological innovations deserve high priority because in some cases they can
overcome the constraints of low incomes and weak institutions.
In conclusion, the discourse on scientific data and information re-
sources and on digital libraries needs to be understood in the political,
economic, and social context of developing countries. The future global

information society may be one of widespread and beneficial international
collaboration, or one of highly stratified access to knowledge. In order for
the first scenario to prevail, the external barriers to access to knowledge

need to be reduced, and the perverse internal dynamics preventing many
developing countries from joining the global scientific community as active
participants must be changed. A search for effective strategies for preserva-

tion of and open access to scientific information in developing countries
will remain utopian unless those countries themselves become actively inte-
grated in the broader information society.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97AInternational Workshop on Strategies for
Preservation of and Open Access to
Scientific Data
International Conference Room
Century Golden Resources Hotel
Beijing, ChinaJune 22-24, 2004AGENDA*Tuesday, 22 June
Session 1:  Opening Remarks
Co-Chairs:¥ZHANG XianÕen, Director General, Department of Basic
Research, Ministry of Science and Technology of China
¥Shuichi IWATA, President, CODATA and Professor,
University of Tokyo, Japan
9:00Welcoming Remarks by Workshop Co-Chairs
CHENG Jinpei, Vice President, Ministry of Science and
Technology of ChinaRoberta BALSTAD MILLER, Chair, U.S. National  Committee

for CODATA and Director, Center for International Earth
Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia University,
United States
*The workshop agenda presented Chinese names with family names first and in capital
letters, and given names second.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98APPENDIX A
9:15Workshop Objectives
William ANDERSON, Principal, Praxis101 and Co-Chair,
CODATA Task Group on Preservation of and Access to S&T
Data in Developing Countries
9:30Keynote AddressÑStrategies of China Scientific Data Sharing
CHENG Jinpei, Vice President, Ministry of Science and Technology

of ChinaRapporteurs:
¥FU Xiaofeng, Director, Information Division, Administrative
Center for ChinaÕs Agenda 21 and Member, CODATA Task
Group on Preservation of and Access to S&T Data in Develop-
ing Countries¥Steve ROSSOUW, Member, CODATA Executive Committee
10:00 Break and Pictures
Session 2:  Overview of Thematic Areas in China
Co-Chairs:¥CHENG Jinpei, Vice Minister, Ministry of Science and
Technology of China¥Michael CLEGG, Foreign Secretary, National Academy of
Sciences, United States
10:30The Chinese National Committee for CODATA:  Its Mission and
Future
XU Zhihong, Representative of the Chinese National Committee for
CODATA
10:50ChinaÕs Scientific Data Sharing Program (China-SDSP)
ZHANG XianÕen, Director General of Department of Basic Research,
Ministry of Science and Technology of China
11:20Progress and Perspectives of Climate Data Sharing of China
QIN Dahe, President, China Meteorological Administration
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
9911:45The Management and Sharing System for Scientific Data in
MedicineLIU Depei, President, Chinese Academy of Medicine, and Vice
President, Chinese Academy of Engineering
12:10The Mechanism for and Management of the National S&T
Library of China

HU Qiheng, Vice President, Chinese Association of Science and
Technology of China
Rapporteurs:
¥XU Feng, National Information Center of China
¥John WILLINSKY, Professor, University of British Columbia,
Canada12:10Lunch

Session 3: International Perspectives on Preservation of and Open
Access to Public Scientific Information
Co-Chairs:¥SUN Honglie, Vice President of CODATA, Chinese Academy
of Sciences¥Roberta BALSTAD MILLER, Chair, U.S. National
Committee for CODATA and Director, CIESIN,

Columbia University, United States
13:30Trends in Development of International Scientific Data and
InformationYasuyuki AOSHIMA, Director, Beijing Office, United Nations
Scientific, Educational, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
13:45Towards International Guidelines for Access to Research Data
from Public Funding

Peter SCHR–DER, Ministry of Education, Culture, and Science,
The Netherlands
14:00International Perspectives on Data and Information for Science
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100APPENDIX A
Carthage SMITH, Deputy Executive Director, International Council
for Science (ICSU)14:15Initiatives on Promoting Access to Scientific Information
Michael CLEGG, Inter-Academy Panel (IAP) Member and Foreign
Secretary, National Academy of Sciences, United States
14:30General Discussion
15:00Break

Rapporteurs:
¥WANG Zhengxing, Deputy Director, Global Change
Information and Research Center, Institute of Geography and
Natural Resources, Chinese Academy of Sciences
¥Pippa SMART, Head of Publications, Publishing Initiatives,
and Publishing Training, International Network for the
Availability of Scientific Information (INASP), United
KingdomSession 4:  Policy and Management
Co-Chairs:¥SUN Shu, Director, Department of Earth Sciences and
Director, Expert Committee of China Scientific Data Sharing
Project, Chinese Academy of Sciences
¥Theodore Carl BERGSTROM, Professor, University of
California at Santa Barbara, United States
Policy and Legal Issues
15:20Borders in Cyberspace:  Maximizing Social and Economic Benefit
from Public Investment in Data

Peter WEISS, J.D., U.S. National Weather Service
15:45Reflections on the Legislation for National Scientific Data Sharing
ZHANG JingÕan, Director General, Department of Policy,
Regulation, and Reform, Ministry of Science and Technology of China
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
101Institutional and Management Issues
16:00Managing the Impacts of Change on Archiving Research Data
Raymond McCORD, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, United States
Local and Regional Issues
16:20Local and Regional Earth System Science Applications and
Associated Infrastructure: The Mid-Atlantic Geospatial
Information Consortium
Menas KAFATOS, Professor, George Mason University, United States
16:40Digital Fujian
WANG Qinmin, Vice Chairman, Fujian Political Consultative and
Director, Department of Science and Technology, Fujian Province,
China17:00The Role of the CODATA Task Group on Preservation of and
Access to S&T Data in Developing Countries
LIU Chuang, Co-Chair, CODATA Task Group on Preservation of
and Access to of S&T Data in Developing Countries
Rapporteurs:
¥YIN Ling, The PLA General Hospital, China
¥Carthage SMITH, Deputy Director, ICSU
17:20Preparation for Day Two and Announcements
17:30Adjourn
18:10Reception and Dinner
Wednesday, 23 June
8:30-12:15Individual Presentations and Panel Discussions
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102APPENDIX A
Session 5:  Breakout Panel Discussions on Cross-Disciplinary Issues
5-1:  Policy and Legal Issues
Co-Chairs:¥CHEN Jun, Director, Basic Geographical Information Center
of China¥Peter SCHR–DER, Ministry of Education, Culture, and
Science, The Netherlands
Panelists:Maximizing Social and Economic Benefit from Public Investment in Data
Peter WEISS, J.D., U.S. National Weather Service
Progress and Policy Issues on Geo-Spatial Framework of Digital China
CHEN Jun, Director, Basic Geographical Information Center of

ChinaGlobal Trends to Restrict Access to Data from Government-Funded
ResearchJerome REICHMAN, Duke Law School, United States, and Paul
UHLIR, U.S. National Academies
Data Sharing Policy of Chinese Ecosystem Research Network
CHEN Panqin, HUANG Tieqing, Deputy Director, Department of

Natural Resources and Environment Management, Chinese Academy
of SciencesOn Government Information Resources Sharing
ZENG Lan, LI Jun, National Macro Economic Research Institute
Balancing the General Public Interests and Copyright in Scientific
Information Management
John WILLINSKY, University of British Columbia, Canada
Comparative Study on Strategy and Policy for Open Access to Scientific
Data Among the United States, European Union, and China
LIU Chuang, Professor, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
103Rapporteur¥Paul UHLIR, J.D., U.S. National Academies
12:25Lunch

5-2:  Institutional and Economic Issues
Co-Chairs:¥XIAO Yun, Secretary General, Chinese National Committee
for CODATA
¥Dora Ann CANHOS, Centro de Refer’ncia en Informa“‰o
Ambiental (CRIA), Campinas, Brazil and Member, CODATA
Archiving Task Group
Panelists:Data Sharing Policy of the National Institutes of Health

Belinda SETO, Deputy Director, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, United States
Data Sharing in Scientific Databases of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
XIAO Yun, Secretary General, Chinese National Committee for CODATA
Operating a Twenty-First-Century Data Center
Roberta BALSTAD MILLER, Director, CIESIN, Columbia University,
United States
WDC for Renewable Resources and Environment
LIAO Shunbao, Associate Professor, Global Change Information and Research

Center, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources, Chinese Academy of
SciencesThe Peculiar Economics of Scientific Information
Theodore Carl BERGSTROM, Professor, University of California at Santa
Barbara, United States
Rapporteur:
¥Henda van der BERG, National Research Foundation, South
AfricaStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104APPENDIX A
5-3:  Management and Technical Issues
Co-Chairs:¥LI Yixue, Director of Shanghai Biomedical Center
¥Lulama MAKHUBELA,
 Research & Development
Directorate, National Development Agency, South Africa
Panelists:Information Infrastructure for Life Science Studies in Shanghai
LI Yixue, Director, Shanghai Biomedical Center
Managing the Impacts of Programmatic Scale and Enhancing Incentives
for Data Archiving

Raymond McCORD, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, United States
Involving the Private Sector in the Environmental Enterprise
Anne LINN, Director, Committee on Geophysical and Environmental Data,
U.S. National Academies
Earth Science Data and Information Management in Western China
SUN Chengquan, Director, Information Center for Natural Resources and
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Data Integration and Management: A PDB Perspective
FENG Zukang, Protein Data Bank, United States
Launching a New Open-Access Journal
Helen DOYLE, Director, Development & Strategic Alliances, Public Library
of Science, United States
Rapporteur:
¥William ANDERSON, Praxis101, United States
Session 6:  Summaries of Cross-Disciplinary Issues and Discussion
Co-Chairs:¥GUO Huadong, Associate Secretary General and Director,
Department of International Cooperation, Chinese Academy
of SciencesStrategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
105¥Khudulmur SODOV, Director, Information and Computer
Center, National Remote Sensing Center, Mongolia
13:30Cross-Disciplinary Rapporteur Reports

Policy and Legal Issues
Paul UHLIR, J.D., U.S. National Academies
Institutional and Economic Issues
XIAO Yun, Secretary General, Chinese National Committee for CODATA
Management and Technical Issues
LI Yixue, Director, Shanghai Biomedical Center, China
14:15General Discussion of Cross-Disciplinary Issues
15:00Break
15:30The Future Role of CODATA
Prof. Shuichi IWATA, University of Tokyo, and President, CODATA
16:00Open Journal Systems:  A Live Demonstration of Open-Source
Journal Management Software
John WILLINSKY, University of British Columbia, Canada
16:45Summary Remarks
SUN Honglie, Vice President, CODATA
Rapporteurs:
¥LI Zengyuan, Deputy Director, Institute of Natural Resources
Information, Chinese Academy of Forestry
¥Julie ESANU, Office of International S&T Information
Program, U.S. National Academies
16:55Preparation for Day Three and Announcements
17:00Adjourn
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106APPENDIX A
Thursday, 24 June
Session 7:  Breakout Panel Discussions on Thematic Issues
9:00-12:00Individual Presentations and Panel Discussions at Separate
Locations7-1:  Life Sciences and Public Health Data
Location:Chinese PLA General Hospital
Co-Chairs:¥YIN Ling, Director, Neuroinformatics Center, Chinese PLA
General Hospital
¥Vishwas CHAVAN, National Chemical Laboratory, India
9:00A Contractually Reconstructed Research Commons for Scientific
Data in a Highly Protectionist Intellectual Property Environment

Jerome REICHMAN, Duke Law School, United States and Paul
UHLIR, U.S. National Academies
9:20International Medical Scientific Data Sharing
YIN Ling, Chinese PLA General Hospital
9:40The NIH Roadmap for Medical Research
Belinda SETO, Deputy Director, National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, United
States10:00OECD-GSF-NI (Neuroinformatics) Data Sharing
TANG Yiyuan, Dalian Polytech University, China
10:20The Safeguarding and Sharing of Traditional Chinese Medicinal
Database Resources
LIU Baoyan, Chinese Academy of Medicine
10:40Break
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
10710:55Protein Data Bank: A Key Biological Resource
FENG Zukang, Protein Data Bank, United States
11:15Long-Term Study for Digital Human and Scientific Data Sharing
QIN Donglie, The Capital Hospital University, China
11:35Open Access to Scientific Data on Biological Diversity:
An Urgent Need for China
James EDWARDS, Global Biodiversity Information Facility,
Denmark
11:55Discussion
Rapporteurs:
¥HUANG Funan, Chinese PLA General Hospital
¥Paul UHLIR, J.D., U.S. National Academies
12:10Adjourn
7-2: Earth Sciences, Environmental and Natural Resources Data
Location:Institute of Geography and Natural Resources, Chinese Academy of
SciencesCo-Chairs:¥LIU Chuang, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
¥Dora Ann CANHOS, CRIA, Brazil and Member,
CODATA Archiving Task Group
9:00International Policy and Cooperation in Digital Earth
GUO Huadong, Associate Secretary General and Director,
Department of International Cooperation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences9:15The Present Status and Future Development Strategy of ChinaÕs
Sustainable Development Information Network
FU Xiaofeng, The Administrative Center for ChinaÕs Agenda 21
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108APPENDIX A
9:30Environmental Database Development in Mongolia
Khudulmur SODOV, Director, Information and Computer Center,
National Remote Sensing Center, Mongolia
9:45Data Archiving for Long-Term Preservation in the Satellite
Ground Station of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
LIU Dingsheng, Satellite Ground Station, Chinese Academy of

Sciences10:00Special Considerations for Archiving Data from Field
Observations
Raymond McCORD, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, United States
10:15The Information System for Earth Science Data Sharing of China
QU Jiansheng, Information Center for Natural Resources and
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences
10:30Towards a Balanced Performance Appraisal System in the Digital
Era for Data Archiving and Sharing in China
WANG Zhengxing, Global Change Information and Research Center,
Institute of Geography and Natural Resources, Chinese Academy of
Sciences10:45Break
11:00Uses of Seismic Data and the Importance of Open Access to
Major Data Centers in Seismology
Paul RICHARDS, Columbia University, United States
11:15Existing Infrastructure for International Exchange of Seismic Data
Raymond WILLEMANN, GEM Technologies, United States
11:30Seismic Data Sharing in China
YANG Dake, China Earthquake Administration
11:45Discussion
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
109Rapporteurs:
¥ZHU Xiaohua, Global Change Information and Research
Center, Institute of Geography and Natural Resources, Chinese
Academy of Sciences¥Roberta BALSTAD MILLER, Director, CIESIN,
Columbia University, United States and Chair, U.S. National
Committee for CODATA
12:10Adjourn
7-3:  Scientific Information, Journals and Digital Libraries
Location: Library of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Co-Chairs:¥ZHANG Xiaoling, Director, Library of Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences¥Steve ROSSOUW, Cape Technicon University, South Africa
9:05An Open-Access Future
Helen DOYLE, Director, Development & Strategic Alliances, Public
Library of Science, United States
9:25Developing an Open Digital Library: The Practice of the Chinese
National Science Digital Library (CSDL)
ZHANG Xiaolin, Director of Science Library, Chinese Academy of
Sciences9:45Are Economic Journals Becoming Obsolete?
Theodore Carl BERGSTROM, University of California at Santa
Barbara, United States
10:05Arguments on the Future of the Library and Economics of Open
AccessJohn WILLINSKY, University of British Columbia, Canada
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110APPENDIX A
10:25Information, Journals, and Digital Libraries:  Can Developing
Countries Become Key Players in the Information Society?
Lulama MAKHUBELA, Research & Development Directorate,
National Development Agency, South Africa
10:45Break
11:10Arguments on Open Access to Scientific Information
MENG Liansheng, Chinese Academy of Sciences
11:20The International Network for the Availability of Scientific
Publications (INASP)ÑOpportunities in a Changing Information
EnvironmentPippa SMART, Head of Publications, Publishing Initiatives and
Publishing Training, INASP, United Kingdom
11:40Discussion
Rapporteur:
¥Julie ESANU, Office of International S&T Information
Programs, U.S. National Academies
12:10End of Meeting
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111BBiographical Summaries of
Workshop Speakers and
Steering Committee Members
William L. Anderson is a co-founder of Praxis101, where his consulting
practice focuses on user-centered information systems architecture, partici-
patory design, software engineering practice innovation, and organizational

learning. Before founding Praxis101 he worked for Xerox Corporation in
distributed system architecture, technology strategy, and advanced product
development. He pioneered co-development and customer collaboration

on one of the first digital libraries, a joint project between Cornell Univer-
sity and Xerox. He has published papers on digital library product develop-
ment, participatory design of product prototypes, and software develop-

ment practices and tools. Prior to Xerox, Dr. Anderson worked in the
telecom, image management, and pharmaceutical industries. Dr. Anderson
holds a Ph.D. in Theoretical Chemistry from Rensselaer Polytechnic Insti-

tute. He is a member of the U.S. National Committee for the Committee
on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) and co-chair of the
CODATA Preservation of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in

Developing Countries.
Yasuyuki Aoshima is director and representative of UNESCO Office
Beijing. He has an academic background in engineering sciences with
a doctorate of engineering from the University of Tokyo in 1977. From
1970 to 1975 he worked as a teaching and research assistant at the Swiss

Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne. From January 1976 to Feb-
ruary 1982 he worked as an engineer at the Nippon Kokan (steel making,
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112APPENDIX B
ship-building, and construction company), Tokyo. He joined UNESCO
in February 1982 as senior purchasing officer until 1988 when he became
the chief of budgetary control and monitoring at the Section of Fellow-
ships and Equipment Division. In 1993 he became chief of the Fellowship

Section of UNESCO for a few months before being transferred to the
Natural Science Sector as senior programme specialist at the Engineering
and Technology Division responsible for the University-Industry-Science-

Partnership programme assisting also the World Solar Programme. From
October 1997 to September 2001 he worked as a senior programme spe-
cialist in the Science, Technology and Informatics division in the Jakarta

field office. In September 2001 he was transferred to the Beijing Office as
the director and representative of UNESCO to the PeopleÕs Republic of
China, Mongolia, the Republic of Korea, Japan, and the Democratic

PeopleÕs Republic of Korea.
Peter Arzberger
 is currently Director, Life Sciences Initiatives at the Uni-
versity of California, San Diego, and Director of the National Biomedical
Computation Resource. Dr. Arzberger received his Ph.D. in mathematics
from Purdue University. In 1988 he moved to the National Science Foun-

dation (NSF) and was Program Director for Statistics and Probability, and
later the first Program Director for the Computational Biology Activities
program. He also served as Deputy High Performance Computing and

Communications Coordinator at NSF. In 1995 he moved to the San Diego
Supercomputer Center as Executive Director, and helped lead the develop-
ment of the National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastruc-

ture and served as its first Executive Director. His interests focus on the
interface between computing, information technology, and mathematics
with the broad spectrum of biomedical research and biology from the mo-

lecular through to ecological to biodiversity scales. In addition he is inter-
ested in policy issues relating to international data sharing. He is the princi-
pal investigator on the NSF award to support the Pacific Rim Application

and Grid Middleware Assembly.
Roberta Balstad 
is senior research scientist at Columbia University and
director of the Center for International Earth Science Information Net-
work. Dr. Balstad has published extensively on science policy, information
technology and scientific research, remote sensing applications and policy,

and the role of the social sciences in understanding global environmental
change. Dr. Balstad received her Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
113in 1974. She was appointed senior fellow at Oxford University in 1991-
1992 and a guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars in 1994. She was previously the director of the Division of Social
and Economic Sciences at the NSF, the founder and first executive director of

the Consortium of Social Science Associations, and president/CEO of
CIESIN prior to its joining Columbia University. She has lectured widely,
both in the United States and abroad. From 1992 to 1994, she was vice

president of the International Social Science Council and has also served as
chair of the NRC Steering Committee on Space Applications and Commer-
cialization, the NATO Advisory Panel on Advanced Scientific Workshops/

Advanced Research Institutes, the AAAS Committee on Science, Engineer-
ing and Public Policy, and the Advisory Committee of the Luxembourg In-
come Study. She currently serves on the Board of Directors of the OpenGIS

Consortium and the Advisory Board of the Stellenbosch Institute of Ad-
vanced Studies (South Africa).
Ted Bergstrom
 holds the Raznick Chair in Economics at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). A native of Minnesota, he has an un-
dergraduate degree in mathematics from Carleton College, and a Ph.D. in

economics from Stanford University. His first employment was in the eco-
nomics department at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri. In
1975 he moved to the University of Michigan, where he was a professor of

economics until 1997, when he moved to UCSB. Professor BergstromÕs
interests within economics range widely over pure and applied microeco-
nomic theory. Topics which have been central to his recent research in-

clude biology and economics, theory of public economics, and the eco-
nomics of scholarly information.Dora Ann Lange Canhos
 is the Project Director of the Centro de
Referencia em Informacio Ambiental (CRIA; Reference Center on Envi-
ronmental Information, www.cria.org.br). She has been working with da-
tabases and online information systems since 1985. She has been involved
with biodiversity information networks since 1992, as a member of BIN21
(Biodiversity Information NetworkÑAgenda 21) and responsible for its

Web site, and serving as technical coordinator of the project BINbr
(Biodiversity Information NetworkÑBrazil) for the Ministry of the Envi-
ronment from May 1997 to April 2001. She is also member of the Clear-
ing-House Mechanism Informal Advisory Committee (http://www.
biodiv.org/) and of the Liaison Working Group of the Biosafety Clearing-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114APPENDIX B
House (http://bch.biodiv.org/), both of the Convention on Biological Di-
versity. Currently at CRIA, Dr. Canhos is a member of the developing
team of the speciesLink network (http://splink.cria.org.br/).
Vishwas Chavan
 works at the National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune,
India, in the field of Biodiversity Informatics developing tools and stan-
dards to improve infrastructure and capacity building in collection, colla-

tion, analysis, prediction, and dissemination of knowledge. Mr. Chavan
has been using information and communication technologies to create
collaboratory environment, for biologists and ecologists ensuring that rate

of exchange and sharing of information on biotic resources improves. One
significant and impact-making activity that Vishwas is leading is develop-
ment of the Electronic Catalogue of Known Indian Fauna (IndFauna),

which aims to collates baseline information about 90,000 known faunal
species in India. Prior to joining NCL, Vishwas was employed at the Cen-
tre for Cellular and Molecular Biology Hyderabad facilitating the activities

of the Bioinformatics Centre and preparing a master plan for bioinformatics
activities. He has published more than 60 research and review papers, and
developed a dozen databases and program packages that have been em-

ployed in the service of the scientific community. Vishwas received a
Fulbright Professional Fellowship in Information Sciences & Technology
(2000-2001), during which he was closely associated with the U.S. Na-

tional Biological Information Infrastructure. He is also a member of the
CODATA Preservation of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in
Developing Countries, and co-chair of the Information Management Com-

mittee of Global Invasive Species Program. Vishwas received a B.S. in zool-
ogy from N. Wadia College, after which he joined the School of Environ-
mental Sciences, University of Pune, and received an M.S. degree in

environmental sciences in June 1990.
Jun Chen is President of the National Geomatics Center of China
(NGCC). After obtaining his M.Sc. at Wuhan Technical University of Sur-
veying and Mapping (WTUSM) in 1983, he worked as a lecturer, associate
professor, and professor at WTUSM from 1983-1995. He was the execu-

tive director of the National Laboratory for Information Engineering in
Surveying and Mapping from 1990-1995. He joined NGCC in the end of
1995. From 1999 to 2003, he was President of the Chinese Association for

Geographical Information Systems, the corresponding member of the In-
ternational Eurasian Academy of Sciences.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
115Panqin Chen is Deputy Director of the Bureau of Resources and Environ-
mental Sciences and Technology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is
vice-chair of the Science Committee of the Chinese Ecosystem Research
Network.
Robert Chen
 is CIESINÕs Deputy Director and a Senior Research Scien-
tist. He manages the Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center, a data

center in NASAÕs Earth Observing System Data and Information System.
He is currently Secretary-General of CODATA of the International Coun-
cil for Science (ICSU). He is an ex officio member on both the U.S. Na-

tional Committee for CODATA of the U.S. National Research Council
and the Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impacts and Cli-
mate Analysis of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).

Dr. Chen serves as CIESINÕs Technical Representative to the Open
Geospatial Consortium and participates in the U.S. Federal Geographic
Data Committee Historical Data Committee. He is also a member of the

Scientific Advisory Council of the Meadowlands Environmental Research
Institute of the New Jersey Meadowlands Commission. Dr. Chen has also
coordinated CIESINÕs spatial analysis and mapping support to the Millen-

nium Development Project led by EI Director Jeffrey Sachs and oversees
other projects on poverty mapping, sustainability indicators, and public
health applications of Earth science data. He received his Ph.D. in geogra-

phy from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and holds Mas-
ters and Bachelors degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Jinpei Cheng is Vice Minister of the Ministry of Science and Technology
of China and vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the China ZhiGong Party. He attended Nankai University and Northwestern University

in the United States, where he obtained a doctorate. Cheng previously
served as an academician at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Third
World Academy of Science. He serves as vice-minister of the Ministry of
Science and Technology.
Michael T. Clegg
 received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in agricultural genet-
ics and genetics, respectively, at the University of California, Davis. In 1972
he joined the faculty of Brown University, moving from there to the Uni-
versity of Georgia in 1976. In 1984, he assumed his present position as
Professor of Genetics at the University of California, Riverside. He also served
as Dean of the College of Natural and Agricultural Sciences from 1994 to
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116APPENDIX B
2000 and he is founding Director of the Genomics Institute and at the Uni-
versity of California, Riverside. Professor CleggÕs research specialty is popula-
tion genetics and molecular evolution. His early work in population genetics
focused on the dynamical behavior of linked systems of genes in plant and
Drosophila 
populations. During this period, he also contributed to the theo-
retical study of multilocus systems employing computer simulations together
with the analysis of mathematical models. Later he helped pioneer the com-
parative analysis of cholorplast DNA variation as a tool for the reconstruction
of plant phylogenies. His current work is concerned with the comparative
genomics of plant gene families, the molecular evolution of genes in the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, the use of coalescent models to study crop
plant domestication, and the application of molecular markers to avocado
improvement. Professor Clegg was elected to membership in the U.S. Na-

tional Academy of Sciences in 1990 and he was elected a fellow of the Ameri-
can Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1992. He was elected foreign secretary
of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences in 2002. He has also served as

president of the American Genetic Association (1987) and the International
Society for Molecular Biology & Evolution (2002), and chair of the Section
on Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources of the American Association for

the Advancement of Science (2003).
Helen J. Doyle
 is the director of Development and Strategic Alliances for
the Public Library of Science. As former director of the Science Program at
the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, Helen J. Doyle developed and
managed grant-making programs in basic and interdisciplinary academic

research, higher education and diversity, science and technology for inter-
national development, and science education. Helen spent nearly ten years
in New York City, where she majored in biochemistry at Barnard College

and received her Ph.D. in biological sciences from Columbia University for
her work on Drosophila
 developmental genetics. She then spent two years
as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Developmental

Biology in Tubingen, Germany. Returning to her native California, Helen
continued her research on early development and cell communication with
J. Michael Bishop at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF).

While a postdoc at UCSF, Helen developed a strong interest in public un-
derstanding of science and science education reform issues. She joined
UCSFÕs Science & Health Education Partnership as an academic coordina-

tor, working with San Francisco public schools and the university to im-
prove science, math, and health education. She has also taught at various
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
117institutions, including UC Berkeley, Mills College, and the California Acad-
emy of Sciences.James Edwards
 is the executive secretary of the Global Biodiversity Infor-
mation Facility (GBIF), an intergovernmental organization devoted to mak-
ing biodiversity data freely and openly available via the Internet. He is also
the director of the GBIF Secretariat in Copenhagen, Denmark. He received

his B.S. (1967) and Ph.D. (1976) degrees from the University of California
at Berkeley. His research interests are the systematics and functional mor-
phology of amphibians and fishes, and biodiversity informatics. From 1974-

1976, Dr. Edwards was an instructor in the Biology Department at Queens
College of the City University of New York, and from 1976-1982 he was
an assistant and associate professor in the Zoology Department at Michi-

gan State University. In 1982, he took a position in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences at the NSF, which funds the vast majority of non-medi-
cal biological research at U.S. colleges and universities. While at the NSF,

he served successively as program director for several programs (Systematic
Biology, Biological Research Resources, Field Stations and Marine Labora-
tories, and Biotic Surveys and Inventories), as deputy division director for

Biotic Systems and Resources, and as deputy assistant director for Biologi-
cal Sciences. In the latter capacity, he was the second-in-command of a
yearly budget of approximately $500 million. Dr. Edwards served on sev-

eral federal task forces, and was the chair of an interagency steering com-
mittee on biological and ecological informatics. He also chaired a working
group on Biological Informatics of the Megascience Forum of the

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which in
1999 recommended the formation of the GBIF. Dr. Edwards then chaired
the Interim Steering Committee that developed the Memorandum of Un-

derstanding for the organization and recruited the requisite number of gov-
ernmental members and funding to allow it to come into existence in March
2001. Currently, he is on a five-year leave of absence from NSF in order to

serve as the executive secretary of GBIF.
Julie M. Esanu is a program officer for the Office of International Scien-
tific and Technical Information Programs (ISTIP) at the U.S. National
Academies. Her emphasis is policy and management issues related to digi-
tal scientific and technical data and information, primarily through the

support of the U.S. National Committee for CODATA. Julie is the co-
editor of two recent and related National Academies reports, including
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118APPENDIX B
Open Access and the Public Domain in Digital Data for Science: Proceedings
of a Symposium 
(National Academies Press [NAP], forthcoming) and 
TheRole of Scientific and Technical Data and Information in the Public Domain:
Proceedings of a Symposium 
(NAP, 2003). She has provided program and
research support to other National AcademiesÕ projects examining the role
of remote-sensing research and applications; reviewing C4I planning for
the Department of Defense; assessing the research programs at the Army

Research Laboratory; and examining the allocation of federal research and
development funds. Julie received her B.A. in political science and interna-
tional affairs from George Washington University.
Zukang Feng
 received a Ph.D. in biophysics at Shanghai Institute of Bio-
chemistry, Academia Sinica, China, in 1991. In 1994, he was awarded the

Lise Meitner Postdoctoral Research Fellowship from the Austrian Science
Foundation and completed postdoctoral research at the University of
Salzburg, Austria. In 1996, Dr. Feng joined the Nucleic Acid Database
(NDB) project at the laboratory of Professor Helen Berman of Rutgers
University. In this position he developed the first package of programs that
validate nucleic acid structural data and automate data processing systems.
In 1998 he joined the Protein Data Bank (PDB) project. Dr. Feng is pres-
ently the leader of software development for both PDB and NDB projects
and is responsible for the curation and annotation of the data that are

received and distributed worldwide.
Xiaofeng Fu
 is Professor and Director of the Information Division of the
Administrative Center for ChinaÕs Agenda 21, which is a part of the Minis-
try of Science and Technology. He also serves as Deputy Team Leader of the
National Science Data Sharing Project Workshop, Deputy Director of the
Science Data Sharing Project Office, and Member of the CODATA Preser-
vation of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in Developing Coun-
tries. Dr. Fu is also in charge of the construction and administration of the

China Sustainable Development Information Network. Previously, Dr. Fu
worked as Assistant Research Fellow for the Institute of Geographic Sci-
ences & Natural Resources Research of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

He received a Doctor of Science from Nanjing University in 1997 and also
holds a postdoctorate degree.
Huadong Guo is Deputy Secretary-General of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences. He graduated from Nanjing University in 1977, received a
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
119masterÕs degree from the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences in 1981, and studied at Oregon State University from 1984 to 1985.
Guo spent his formative research years with the Institute of Remote Sens-
ing Application at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He served as a re-

search fellow at the institute as well as an executive deputy director. In
1988, he ascended to the instituteÕs directorship. Guo later became director
of the key lab of remote-sensing information science at the academy. A

member of the National 863 Program Information Acquisition and Process
Technology Theme Expert Team, Guo has served as executive deputy edi-
tor-in-chief of the Remote Sensing Journal
 and is a member of the editorialboard of six Chinese and foreign magazines. He is the director-general of
the environment remote-sensing division of the China Geography Society.
Beginning in the late 1970s, Guo has studied remote-sensing information
science, notably radar-to-ground observations. He has supervised more than
20 domestic and international research projects and published more than
140 theses. Guo is the winner of numerous first, second, and third prizes of

scientific and technological progress from the academy as well as a promi-
nent contribution prize about the National 863 Program.
Jianguo Han
 is Director of the International Cooperation Bureau of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China.
Qiheng Hu 
graduated from the Moscow Institute for Chemistry Mechan-
ics with a specialization in Industrial Automation in 1959 and obtained a
Ph.D. in 1963. From 1980 to 1982, she visited Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity of the United States as a research professor. From 1983 to 1989 she
was Director of the Institute of Automation in the Chinese Academy of
Sciences; in 1986 she led the construction of the 1st National Laboratory

on Pattern Recognition in China. From 1988 to 1996 she served as Vice-
President of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. She is a past president of the
China Computer Federation and the China Association for Automation.

She was elected Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering in 1994.
She currently serves as Vice-President of the China Association for Science
and Technology, President of the Internet Society of China, and a member

of the Working Group for Ethics in Research Training of UNESCO. She is
enthusiastic in promoting international exchanges and collaborations for
the Chinese scientific community. Since 1994 she has devoted great efforts

for the introduction and development of the Internet into China. She is a
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120APPENDIX B
member of the State Advisory Committee on Information, and has been
active in ICSU activities on the Ethics for Science from 1996 to 2002.
Dingcheng Huang
 is a Professor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
President of the China Engineering Geology Commission, and Director of
the Expert Committee of the China Scientific Data Sharing Program.
Funan Huang
 graduated from The First Military Medical University in
1990 with a major in medicine, and obtained his DoctorÕs Degree from
Chinese PLA General Hospital and Graduate Medical School in 1998 with

a specialization in geriatric neurology and neurobiology. From 2000 to
2003, he worked at the Parkinson Research Unit in Thomas Jefferson Uni-
versity, Philadelphia. Dr. HuangÕs main clinic and research work was in the
fields of clinic neurodiagnostics and neurodegenerative diseases and cere-
bral vascular diseases. Dr. Huang has published 20 papers in nationwide
and international academic journals.Tieqing Huang 
works in the Department of Natural Resources and Envi-
ronment Management of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Shuichi Iwata
 is professor of data science and environmental engineering
at the University of Tokyo and president of CODATA, a term he holds

until 2006. Dr. Iwata received his doctorate in nuclear engineering from
the University of Tokyo in 1975. He has served in various capacities at the
University of Tokyo, including lecturer, associate professor, and head of the
Metallurgical Division (1978-1981) of the Engineering Research Institute;
associate professor of nuclear fuels and materials (1981-1991); professor of
materials design (1991-1992), Department of Nuclear Engineering; pro-

fessor of design science (1992-2002), director (1997-2000), and professor
of life cycle engineering (2002-2003) at the RACE (Research into Artifacts,
Center for Engineering) Center; and professor of Design Science of Mate-

rials (2003-2004), Quantum Engineering and Systems Science, School of
Engineering. He served as a guest researcher in FIZ-Karlsruhe, Germany,
from October 1985 to October 1986. His work includes researches on

design science of materials and engineering products, nuclear fuels and
materials and materials databases. He has also served as project leader and
coordinator in the fields of materials databases and materials design. Dr.

Iwata serves as chairman of JSPS 122 Committee and member of SCJ Liai-
son Committee. He is a member of the Academic Societies for the Japan
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
121Institute of Metals, the Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, Japan Society of
Energy and Resources, the Physical Society of Japan, Information Process-
ing Society of Japan, and the Atomic Energy Society of Japan. He received
the Promotion of Science and Technology Information Award from JST in

1998, a Paper Award from the Japan Institute of Metals in 1999, and the
GIW Best Paper Award in 2003.
Heather Joseph 
is President and Chief Operating Officer of BioOne, a
Web-based aggregation of research in the biological, ecological, and envi-
ronmental sciences. In this position, Ms. Joseph leads the nonprofit start-
up enterpriseÕs business, operational, administrative, and strategic develop-
ment. Ms. Joseph has worked on a variety of innovative electronic
publishing projects during the past decade. As Director of Publishing for

the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB), she managed the growth of
Molecular Biology of the Cell
, the first journal to partner with the National
Institutes of HealthÕs PubMed Central initiative. She also created a system
to peer review and publish multimedia content in the journal. Before
ASCB, Joseph held publishing positions with the Society for Neuroscience,
where she managed the transition of 
The Journal of Neuroscience
 from print
to Web publication, and at Elsevier Science. She began her work in scien-
tific publishing at the American Astronomical Society, where she collabo-
rated in the creation of one of the first fully electronic journals, 
The Elec-
tronic Astrophysical Journal Letters
, with funding from the NSF. Ms. Joseph
also participates in several professional societies, currently serving as a mem-
ber of the Board of Directors for the Society for Scholarly Publishing, and

as a member of the Program Committee for the upcoming meeting of the
Council of Science Editors.
Menas Kafatos
 is dean of the School of Computational Sciences at George
Mason University. The School is an interdisciplinary academic unit that
provides graduate, state-of-the-art education and training in the biological

and physical sciences, with an emphasis on the computational and dataanalysis techniques and methodologies. He also directs the Center for Earth
Observing and Space Research, a center that focuses on both Earth and
space sciences research and applications. Kafatos has broad interests in as-
trophysics, cosmology, Earth systems science, data systems, foundations of
quantum theory, and neuroscience. Author or editor of 12 books, and more

than 180 articles, he is the recipient of sizable grants in a variety of areas.
He is the principal investigator of the VAccess/Mid-Atlantic Geospatial In-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122APPENDIX B
formation Consortium funded by NASA, which provides access to remote-
sensing and other data and information products to a variety of state and
local agencies.Jun Li works for the Academy of Macroeconomic Research of the Chinese
National Development and Reform Commission, spending most of his
time working for the office for National Geospatial Information Coordina-

tion Committee, which focuses on an e-government basin database for
natural resources and geospatial basic information database. Li previously
worked for the resources and environment data center that is housed in the

Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 1998 to 2000, he designed and built
the Geographical Information System for Landslide Research for landslide

risk assessment and landslide information exchange. He received his Ph.D.
in cartography and geographical information sciences from the Institute of
Geography of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Shunbao Liao is an Associate Professor in the Global Change Information
and Research Center of the Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural

Resources Research of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Dr. Liao has a
Ph.D. in the application of remote sensing and GIS. Dr. LiaoÕs interests
include the analysis and design of information systems and the develop-

ment and sharing of geoscientific data.Anne M. Linn is a senior program officer with the Board on Earth Sciences
and Resources of the National Academies. She has been with the board
since 1993, directing the USA World Data Center Coordination Office
and staffing a wide variety of geophysical and data policy studies. In addi-

tion, she is the secretary of ICSUÕs Panel on World Data Centers, and a
member of the ICSU Ad Hoc Committee on Data. Prior to joining the
staff of the National Academies, Dr. Linn was a visiting scientist at the

Carnegie Institution of Washington and a postdoctoral geochemist at the
University of California, Berkeley. She received a Ph.D. in geology from
the University of California, Los Angeles.
Chuang Liu is Professor and Director of the Global Change Information
and Research Center in the Institute of Geography and Natural Resources

at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. She currently serves on the Chinese
CODATA as Co-Chair of the Task Group on Preservation of and Access to
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
123Scientific and Technical Data in Developing Countries and Committee of
Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) as the User Co-Chair of the Working
Group of Information Systems and Services. She is Chair of the Spatial
Data Committee of Chinese Associate of Geographical Information Sys-

tems and Secretariat General of the Working Group of Remote Sensing
and Data Information Systems, China National Committee for IGBP. Dr.
Liu is active in research on the broad issues regarding strategy, technology,

and capacity building of open access to environmental data. She is Chair of
the Expert Group on International Cooperation for the National Facilities
and Information Infrastructure for Science and Technology Program, Mem-

ber of the Working Group of China Scientific Data Sharing Program, and
ICSU Priority Area Assessment Panel on Scientific Data and Information.
Dr. Liu received her Ph.D. in geography from Peking University in 1989.
She was Visiting Professor at the  University of British Columbia, Canada,
from 1992-1993, Post-Doctor Fellow and then Information Scientist, as
well as the China Project Leader in CIESIN, USA from 1994-1998. She
also served UNDP/FAO and Asia Development Bank as the GIS Consult-
ant and Technical Assistant.
Depei Liu is Vice President of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, Presi-
dent of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and President of the
Peking Union Medical College. Dr. Liu holds a Ph.D. in molecular biology
and has studied at the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences of the Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, the Peking Union Medical College, and the
University of California, San Francisco. Dr. LiuÕs research interests include
medical molecular biology; gene regulation of expression, gene transfer,
and gene therapy; and transgenic animals and disease models. Dr. Liu has
published more than 100 academic papers. Dr. Liu is a member of the

Chinese Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the American So-
ciety of Hematology, the Society of Chinese Bio-scientists in America, the
Chinese Academy of Engineering, and the Chinese Medical Association.
Lulama Makhubela
 has more than 20 years of professional activism as ex-
professor in Information Science in various universities, including the Uni-

versity of the Western Cape, South Africa. She has consulted in library and
information services with a specific focus on collection development poli-
cies, information literacy and ICTs in teaching. She served as a board mem-

ber in several national bodies and is currently a member of national com-
mittees in research and development, information, and data-related matters.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124APPENDIX B
Dr. Makhubela is currently head of the Research and Development Direc-
torate at the National Development Agency (NDA) a position that she
took in October 2003. NDA is an agency of the South African Govern-
ment tasked with eradicating poverty in poor communities. She is tasked

with a challenge of developing the South African Poverty Data Center. Dr.
Makhubela is a member of the CODATA Preservation of and Access to
Scientific and Technical Data in Developing Countries.
Raymond A. McCord
 is an environmental information manager in the
Environmental Sciences Division at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL). Dr. McCord has been a staff member at ORNL for 18 years.
During this time, he managed the development and operation of three
major environmental information systems supporting environmental re-

search, restoration, compliance, and assessment. Dr. McCord was also re-
sponsible for establishing a geographic information system (GIS) centerwithin the Division. Currently, Dr. McCord is manager of the data archive

for the Atmospheric Radiation Measurements (ARM) Program. This
archive contains more than 6,000,000 data files (~30 TB of storage) of
information about meteorology, atmospheric physics, and cloud formation.

The ARM Program is a major component of the Department of EnergyÕs
global climate change research program. Prior to working at ORNL, Dr.
McCord was employed as an information analyst at Scinece Applications
International Corporation (SAIC) in Oak Ridge. Dr. McCord received his
Ph.D. in ecology from the University of Tennessee in 1980.
Dahe Qin is an internationally recognized scientist in Glacier (including
Antarctic ice sheet) and ice core studies relating to paleoclimate and
paleoenvironment. He has committed himself to cryosphere and climate

change research since 1970 and has done field work in Antarctica and Ti-
bet. He presently focuses on environmental and climatic variation; climatic
and environmental evaluation; and glacier change relating to global change.

Previously, he served as chief scientist of the projects supported by the Chi-
nese National Natural Sciences Foundation, the Basic Research Project of
the Ministry of Science and Technology, and the Key Innovation Projects

of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, as well as of related bilateral coopera-
tion programs between China and the United States, Australia, and France.
He also oversees the scientific Assessment on Climate, Ecology and Envi-
ronment of Western China. He was voted Academician of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences in 2003 for his research on the cryosphere. Dr. Qin is
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
125currently the administrator of the China Meteorological Administration as
well as Director of the China National Climate Committee, Permanent
Representative of China with WMO, Co-chair of the Working Group I of
IPCC, and Vice-Chair of the China National Committee of IGBP and

International Commission of Science and Snow and Ice.
Jerome Reichman
 is Bunyan S. Womble Professor of Law at Duke Law
School. He has written and lectured widely on diverse aspects of intellec-
tual property law, including comparative and international intellectual
property law and the connections between intellectual property and inter-

national trade law. His articles in this area have particularly addressed the
problems that developing countries face in implementing the World Trade
OrganizationÕs Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (TRIPS Agreement). Other recent writings have focused on
intellectual property rights in data; the appropriate contractual regime for
online delivery of computer programs and other information goods; and

on the use of liability rules to stimulate investment in innovation without
impoverishing the public domain. His most recent articles are ÒThe Glo-
balization of Private Knowledge Goods and the Privatization of Global Pub-

lic GoodsÓ (co-authored with Keith Maskus), 7 
Journal of International
Economic Law No. 2
 (forthcoming, 2004), and ÒA Contractually Recon-
structed Research Commons for Scientific Data in a Highly Protectionist

Intellectual Property EnvironmentÓ (co-authored with Paul Uhlir), 66 
Lawand Contemporary Problems
 315-462 (2003). Professor Reichman serves as
special advisor to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the National

Academy of Engineering, and ICSU on the subject of legal protection for
databases. He is an academic advisor to the American Committee for
Interoperable Systems (ACIS); a consultant to the Technology Program of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD);
and a member of the Board of Editors, 
Journal of International Economic
Law.
Paul G. Richards
 was born in the United Kingdom and obtained a
BachelorÕs degree in mathematics at the University of Cambridge before
coming to the United States in 1965, where he obtained his Ph.D. in seis-
mology at the California Institute of Technology. Richards has been a pro-
fessor at Columbia University since 1971, teaching and doing research in

all aspects of seismology. He has co-authored a major seismology textbook
(translated into Chinese), and for the last five years has specialized in prac-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126APPENDIX B
tical methods to obtain accurate locations for the thousands of earthquakes
that occur each year in East Asia. He has received fellowships from the
Sloan, Guggenheim, and MacArthur Foundations, and is a member of the
Council on Foreign Relations.
Steve Rossouw
 graduated from the Universities of Pretoria, Cape Town,
and Stellenbosch with a DPhil in Information Science. Professor Rossouw

was the executive director of the Information Center, Medical Research
Council from 1975-1992. He is presently a professor of Information Stud-
ies at Cape Technikon, a position he has held since 1992.
Peter Schrıder studied sociology (mental health and epidemiology as mi-nors) at the University of Amsterdam. He worked as a journalist and rock

critic before joining the Ministry of Education and Science as policy advi-
sor for educational support systems. After a stay at Utrecht University man-
aging the multidisciplinary Urban Networks research program, he rejoined

the MinistryÕs Directorate of Research and Science Policy as policy advisor
on social sciences and information policies. Focusing on issues of access to
data and information for research he acted as secretary of the Auditor

GeneralÕs committee advising on privacy protection in scientific research
that led to the establishment of the Scientific Statistical Agency in The
Netherlands. As coordinator for information policy he is involved in e-
science programs for cultural heritage and humanities. Peter Schrıder was
co-chair of the CSTP/OECD group that published the report 
PromotingAccess to Public Research Data for Scientific, Economic and Social Develop-
ment (March 2003, see http://dataaccess.ucsd.edu and see also 
Science, Vol.
303, 1777-1778, 19 March 2004) and secretary to the OECD group that
framed the draft Guidelines on Access to Research Data from Public Funding
in the Declaration
 endorsed by OECD science ministers at their meeting
on 30 January 2004 in Paris (see http://www.oecd.org/document/15/
0,2340,en_2649_34487_25998799_1_1_1_1,00.html ).Belinda Seto 
joined the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering (NIBIB) as its deputy director in December 2003. The
NIBIB, a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), improves
human health by leading the development and accelerating the application
of biomedical technologies. The Institute is committed to integrating the

physical and engineering sciences with the life sciences to advance basic
research and medical care. In her position, Dr. Seto oversees NIBIBÕs pro-
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
127grams, priorities, resources, policies, and research dissemination efforts.
Prior to joining the NIBIB, Dr. Seto served as the acting deputy director
for Extramural Research, NIH, as well as the director of the Office of Ex-
tramural Research (OER). OER serves as the focal point for policies and

guidelines for extramural research grants administration. Prior to joining
OER, Dr. Seto held positions in other components of the NIH, as well as
in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, Department of Health

and Human Services (DHHS). She earned her Ph.D. in biochemistry at
Purdue University in 1974. Following postdoctoral training in the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Dr. Seto joined the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration where she conducted research in virology for nearly 10 years.
She is the recipient of numerous awards for her research, including the
DHHS SecretaryÕs Award for Exceptional Achievement, InventorÕs Awards,

NIH DirectorÕs awards, and she is listed in the American Men and Women
of Science. Dr. Seto has served on numerous NIH and interagency com-
mittees, and is a member of several professional societies including the

American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
Pippa Smart
 has worked in academic publishing for over 17 years in both
the commercial and noncommercial sectors. She has experience in print
and electronic production, business and publishing development, and, in
her current role for INASP, works in an advisory role with publishers in less

developed countries. She is also the chair of the Professional Development
Committee of the Association of Learned, Professional and Society Pub-
lishers, and sits on its Council.Carthage Smith
 is deputy executive director of ICSU, which is an interna-
tional non-governmental organization, whose membership includes na-

tional science bodies and international scientific unions. ICSUÕs mission is
to strengthen international science for the benefit of society. It achieves this
by: (1) planning and coordinating international science programs and (2)
representing the science community in international policy fora. Carthage
has been at ICSU since 2001 and his activities have included leading ICSUÕs
representation at the World Summit on the Information Society (Geneva,
December 2003). Prior to joining ICSU, he was head of the International
Section at the Medical Research Council in the United Kingdom. Origi-
nally trained as a biochemist, his Ph.D. and research background are in

neuroscience.Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128APPENDIX B
Khudulmur Sodov 
is the Director of the Information and Computer Cen-
ter and Director of the National Remote Sensing Center of the Ministry of
Nature and Environment in Mongolia. KhudulmurÕs educational back-
ground is mathematics and computer science. He has participated in a

variety of projects on such topics as Mongolian biodiversity, natural re-
source management using GIS, land-cover mapping, grasslands, and GIS
in cadastral mapping.Chengquan Sun 
is director of the Scientific Information Center for Re-
sources and the Environment of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is

also a professor in the Department of Geography at Uni-Bonn as well as a
professor at Lanzhou University. Dr. Sun is engaged in the analysis and
management of information.Xiaowei Tang 
is a professor at Zhejiang University. His research interests
include nuclear and high-energy experiments, the application of nucleus
technology, and neuroinformatics. Tang is a member of the Chinese Acad-
emy of Sciences.Yiyuan Tang
 is a professor and director of the Institute of Neuroinformatics
and Director of the Laboratory for Brain and Mind at the Dalian Univer-
sity of Technology. Tang also serves as the government representative of the

OECD-GSF-NI Working Group, associate director of the National Com-
munication Group of Neuroinformatics, guest professor in the Laboratory
for Mental Health of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and senior visiting

professor at the Institute of Psychology & Institute of Biophysics. His re-
search interests include neuroimaging, Chinese cognition, psychosomatic
medicine, and body-mind interaction. He has published in the 
Journal ofIntegrative Neuroscience
, Neuroinformatics
, NeuroImage
, Neurocomputing
,Human Brain Mapping
, the Chinese Science Bulletin
, and the Chinese Medi-
cal Journal
.Paul F. Uhlir
, J.D., is director of the ISTIP Office at the U.S. National
Academies in Washington, D.C., where he has worked in various senior
professional capacities since 1984. PaulÕs area of emphasis is on issues at the
interface of science, technology, and law, with primary focus on digital
information policy and management. He is currently organizing a series of

projects on policy issues concerning open access to public scientific infor-mation at both the national and international levels, as well as a series of
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
129workshops on data management and policy issues in developing countries.
He also has been the National AcademiesÕ coordinator on intellectual prop-
erty-related activities. Paul has published 23 reports through the National
Academies, and over 50 articles. Prior to joining the National Academies,
he worked as a foreign affairs officer at the U.S. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration on international remote-sensing law and
policy issues. Additional information about PaulÕs activities may be found

at: http://www7.nationalacademies.org/biso/ISTIP.html.
Henda van der Berg is with the National Research Foundation in South
Africa where she is responsible for the Content Resources Function (Infor-
mation and Data) within the Information Strategy and Advice Unit. She
qualified with honours in library and information science in 1976 from the

University of South Africa. She has extensive experience in metadata de-
scriptions and international standards from 1971 until 1991. From 1993,
Ms. van der Berg worked in the field of database management and database

development. She is a developer of the Nexus Database System Portal and
databases. She is a member of the Steering Committee for the South Afri-
can Data Centre for Oceanography and of an expert advisory group that

served as a Reference Group for the Institutional Research Information
System tasked with the Data Specification Project of the Southern African
Research & Innovation Management Association. Her professional mem-
berships include the Library and Information Association for South Africa
and SA Online User Group. Ms. van der Berg has published a number of
publications in the field of current research information systems, especially

the analysis of data for the evaluation of user interfaces.Peter N. Weiss 
began work with the Strategic Planning and Policy Office
of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, National
Weather Service, in March 2000. His responsibilities include domestic and
international data policy issues, with a view towards fostering a healthy

public/private partnership. Mr. Weiss was a senior policy analyst/attorney
in the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Manage-
ment and Budget (OMB), since 1991. Mr. Weiss analyzed policy and legal

issues involving information resources and information technology man-
agement, with particular emphasis on Electronic Data Interchange and elec-
tronic commerce. He is primary author of the information policy sections

of OMB Circular No. A-130, ÒManagement of Federal Information Re-
sources,Ó and was a member of the AdministrationÕs Electronic Commerce
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130APPENDIX B
Working Group. (See ÒA Framework for Global Electronic Commerce.Ó)
From 1990-1991, Mr. Weiss was deputy associate administrator for Pro-
curement Law, Office Federal Procurement Policy. In this position, he ana-
lyzed legal and policy issues affecting the procurement process. Major

projects included examination of legal and regulatory issues involving pro-
curement automation, policies and FAR revisions to facilitate EDI, as well
as ADP procurement legal and policy issues. From 1985 to 1990, Mr. Weiss

was the assistant chief counsel for Procurement and Regulatory Policy, Of-
fice of Advocacy, U.S. Small Business Administration. From 1981 to 1985,
Mr. Weiss was in private practice in Washington, D.C. Mr. Weiss holds a

B.A. from Columbia University and a J.D. from the Catholic University of
America, Columbus School of Law. Recent publications include ÒInterna-
tional Information Policy in Conflict: Open and Unrestricted Access versus

Government Commercialization,Ó in Borders in Cyberspace
, Kahin andNesson, eds., MIT Press 1997; ÒBorders in Cyberspace: Conflicting Public
Sector Information Policies and their Economic Impacts,Ó in Georg
Aichholzer/Herbert Burkert (eds.); and ÒPublic Sector Information in the
Digital Age: Between Markets, Public Management and CitizensÕ Rights,Ó
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing (2004).
Raymond J. Willemann
 is a senior technical advisor for GEM Technology
in Washington, D.C. From 1998 to 2003, Dr. Willemann was director of

the International Seismological Centre (ISC), a nongovernmental organi-
zation that collects, reanalyzes, and redistributes parametric information
on earthquakes from more than 100 seismic networks around the world. At

the ISC, Dr. Willemann led a modernization effort that greatly increased
the volume of data collected, improved the timeliness of data distribution,
and offered new avenues for accessing data. Before joining the ISC, he was

a senior scientist with SAIC, where he played a key role at the International
Data Center for GSETT-3, an experiment in near-real-time international
exchange of seismic data. Dr. Willemann is a member of the International

Association for Seismoloyg and the Physics of the EarthÕs Interior (IASPEI)
Commission on Seismic Observation and Interpretation and the IASPEI
Resolutions Committee, which formulated a resolution on sharing infor-
mation on seismic station locations in 2003. He earned his Ph.D. in geo-
physics from Cornell University in 1986. He is a fellow of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society and a member of the American Geophysical Union and

the Seismological Society of America.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
131John Willinsky
 is currently the Pacific Press Professor of Literacy and Tech-
nology and Distinguished University Scholar in the Department of Lan-
guage and Literacy Education at the University of British Columbia (UBC).
He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and a member of the U.S.
National Academy of Education, as well as author of a number of books,
including Technologies of Knowing
 and If Only We Knew: Increasing the Pub-
lic Value of Social Science Research
. Examples of his recent work, including
open-source software developed to improve the access and quality of re-
search, are available at the Public Knowledge Project (http://pkp.ubc.ca),
which he directs at UBC.
Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Scientific Data in China: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.