DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11711Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research92 pages | 8.5 x 11 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38315-8 | DOI 10.17226/11711Robert W. Lucky and Jon Eisenberg, Editors; Committee on TelecommunicationsResearch and Development; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSiRobert W. Lucky and Jon Eisenberg, EditorsCommittee on Telecommunications Research and DevelopmentComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesRENEWINGU.S.TELECOMMUNICATIONS
RESEARCHRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the NationalResearch Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the NationalAcademy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report
were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.This study was supported by the National Science Foundation under award number CNS 0238609. Any opinions,findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the agency that provided support for the project.International Standard Book Number 0-309-10265-0This report is available in PDF format from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285,Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholarsengaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academyhas a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J.Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy ofSciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federalgovernment. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nationalneeds, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A.
Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services ofeminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broadcommunity of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council hasbecome the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone andDr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCOMMITTEE ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENTROBERT W. LUCKY, Telcordia Technologies (retired), ChairJAMES D. ADAMS, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
FREDERICK R. CHANG,1 University of Texas, AustinJOHN M. CIOFFI, Stanford UniversityRICHARD A. DeMILLO, Georgia Institute of Technology
REED HUNDT, McKinsey & CompanyJEFFREY M. JAFFE, NovellEDWARD KOZEL, Open Range Ventures
RAJIV LAROIA, Flarion TechnologiesDAVID MESSERSCHMITT, University of California, BerkeleyELI M. NOAM, Columbia University
DANIEL PIKE, GCI Cable and EntertainmentLAWRENCE RABINER, Rutgers UniversityTHEODORE S. RAPPAPORT, University of Texas, Austin
WILLIAM J. SPENCER, SEMATECH (Emeritus)DAVID TEECE, University of California, BerkeleyHEMANT THAPAR, Link-A-Media Devices
JACK K. WOLF, University of California, San DiegoStaffJON EISENBERG, Director and Study DirectorDAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Officer
CYNTHIA A. PATTERSON, Program Officer (through October 2004)PHIL HILLIARD, Research Associate (through June 2004)JENNIFER BISHOP, Senior Project Assistant1Fred Chang resigned from the committee in October 2005 when he became director of research at the NationalSecurity Agency.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDJOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLCWILLIAM DALLY, Stanford UniversityMARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research CenterDAVID J. DeWITT, University of Wisconsin, Madison
DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los AngelesJOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale UniversityKEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft CorporationMICHAEL KATZ, University of California, BerkeleyRANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon UniversityTERESA H. MENG, Stanford UniversityPRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell UniversityALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Independent Consultant, Pelham, New YorkWILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLCPETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityJON EISENBERG, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Associate Program Officer
JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program AssociateRADHIKA CHARI, Administrative CoordinatorRENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program AssistantHERBERT S. LIN, Senior ScientistLYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program OfficerJANICE SABUDA, Senior Program AssistantTED SCHMITT, Program Officer
GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program AssistantBRANDYE WILLIAMS, Staff AssistantJOAN WINSTON, Program OfficerFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to CSTB,National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605,or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiPreface
The Committee on Telecommunications Research and Development was convened by theNational Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board to conduct anassessment of U.S. telecommunications research and development (R&D). Sponsored by theNational Science Foundation, the study examines changes in the level of research support,
research focus, and research time horizon in industry; discusses the importance of support fortelecommunications research within universities; and addresses implications of the currentresearch landscape for the health of the U.S. telecommunications sector, as well as the U.S.
economy and society. The report comes at a time of increasing attention to the health of U.S.R&D across many sectors. Although some of the issues raised mirror those seen in othersectors, there are also marked differences with respect to research in telecommunications,
some owing to the support for R&D historically provided through the Bell System.The committeeÕs findings and recommendations are provided in Chapter 5. Chapters 1through 4 provide related supporting evidence and discussion.Robert W. Lucky, ChairCommittee on Telecommunications Research and DevelopmentRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse per-spectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NationalResearch CouncilÕs Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is toprovide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draftmanuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:William J. Brinkman, Princeton University,
David D. Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Stephen Dukes, Imaginary Universes, LLC,Judith Estrin, Packet Design,
James Flanagan, Rutgers University,David Goodman, Polytechnic University,Butler W. Lampson, Microsoft Corporation,
Frederick Leonberger, EOvation Technologies, LLC, andAndrew J. Viterbi, Viterbi Group, LLC.Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and sugges-tions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they seethe final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Elsa
Garmire of Dartmouth CollegeÕs Thayer School of Engineering. Appointed by the NationalResearch Council, she was responsible for making certain that an independent examination ofthis report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report restsentirely with the authoring committee and the institution.Acknowledgment of ReviewersRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANDTELECOMMUNICATIONS  RESEARCH4

TelecommunicationsÑAn Evolving Definition, 4The Telecommunications Industry, 6The Importance of Telecommunications, 8
The Importance of Continuing Investment in TelecommunicationsResearch: Summary Comments, 102THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY ANDEFFECTS ON RESEARCH13
Bell System Research and Consequences of the Bell SystemÕs Breakup, 14
The Emergence of New Telecommunications Players, 16Impacts of the Changing Landscape on Investment in Research, 20Government Support for Telecommunications Research, 26
Historical Challenges to Doing More Telecommunications Research in Academia, 29International Support for Telecommunications Research and Development, 303THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH32Why Research Matters, 32
Why Leadership Matters, 40Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xCONTENTS4MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWINGTELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH45
Best Practices for Long-Term Research Investments, 45The Importance of Collaboration Across Academia and Industry, 46
The Importance of Vision, 46Vision for the 21st Century, 47Roadmaps, 48
Mechanisms for Industry, Government, and University Collaboration on R&DFunding, 52Establishing an Advanced Telecommunications Research Activity, 53
Toward Increased Industry Support for Telecommunications Research, 555FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS57
Findings, 57Recommendations, 63APPENDIXESABiographies of Committee Members and Staff71
BList of Individuals Who Made Presentations to the Committee80
What Is CSTB?82Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11Executive SummaryThe modern telecommunications infrastructureÑmade possible by research performedover the last several decadesÑis an essential element of the U.S. economy and society. But theU.S. position as a leader in telecommunications technology is now at risk because of the recentdecline in domestic support for long-term, fundamental telecommunications research. To help
understand this challenge, the National Science Foundation (NSF) asked the National Re-search Council to assess the current state of telecommunications research in the United States.This report provides an examination of telecommunications research support, focus, and time
horizon in industry and academia and discusses the implications for the health of the sector.Finally, it presents recommendations for enhancing U.S. telecommunications research efforts.FINDINGSTelecommunications has expanded greatly over the past few decades from primarilylandline telephone service to the use of fiber optic, cable, and wireless connections offering awide range of voice, image, video, and data services. Yet it is not a mature industry, and majorinnovation and changeÑdriven by researchÑcan be expected for many years to come.Without an expanded investment in research, however, the nationÕs position as a leader isat risk. Strong competition is emerging from Asian and European countries that are makingsubstantial investments in telecommunications R&D.For many telecommunications products and services that are now commodities, the UnitedStates is at a competitive disadvantage compared with countries where the cost of doingbusiness is lower. Continued U.S. strength in telecommunications, therefore, will require a
focus on high-value innovation that is made possible only by a greater emphasis on research.Expansion of telecommunications research is also necessary to attract, train, and retain re-search talent.Telecommunications research has yielded major benefits such as the Internet, radio fre-quency wireless communications, optical networks, and voice over Internet Protocol. Promis-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHing opportunities for future research include enhanced Internet architectures, more trustwor-thy networks, and adaptive and cognitive wireless networks.Nevertheless, research support has fallen off in recent years. Prior to the restructuring ofthe telecommunications industry in 1984, the Bell SystemÕs research labs played a dominant
role in long-term, fundamental telecommunications research for the United States. Post-re-structuring, industrial support for such research has declined, become more short-term inscope, and become less stable. A diverse array of competing telecommunications firmsÑ
telephone, cable, Internet, and wirelessÑemerged, leaving most research to equipment ven-dors, which increasingly focused on short-term goals. Telecommunications research is in-creasingly being done at universities rather than by industry, and outside rather than inside
the United States. In addition, the diversity of players in todayÕs telecommunications industrymakes it difficult to design and deploy major, end-to-end innovations.Federal funding of long-term research has not increased to cover the decline in industrysupport. No systematic efforts, such as took place for the semiconductor industry withSEMATECH, have emerged. Because the benefits of much telecommunications research can-not be appropriated by individual firms, therefore, public funding of such research appears
necessary.The NSF and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) have been thetwo primary sources of federal telecommunications R&D support. NSF, long a supporter of
telecommunications R&D spanning a range of topics, has recently been increasing its attentionto telecommunications R&D, with an emerging emphasis on new approaches to networking.DARPA, which funded a number of important telecommunications advances in the past (in-
cluding elements of the Internet itself), has been shifting its emphasis toward more immediatemilitary needs and giving less attention to long-term telecommunications research.RECOMMENDATIONSA strong, effective telecommunications R&D program for the United States will require agreater role for government-sponsored and university research, and more funding of long-term research by industry. The committee recommends that the federal government establisha new research organizationÑthe Advanced Telecommunications Research Activity (ATRA)Ñ
to stimulate and coordinate research across industry, academia, and government. ATRA wouldbe a hybrid of activities of the sort historically associated with DARPA (which through theARPANET program managed a research portfolio, developed a vision, and convened indus-
try and academia to build what would become the Internet) and SEMATECH (which broughtthe semiconductor industry together, initially with some federal support to complement in-dustry dollars, to fund joint research, development, and roadmapping activities). There are a
number of options for where within the federal government such a program could fit, eachwith its own set of tradeoffs (see Chapter 4). For example, ATRAÕs proposed mission wouldalign with that of existing agencies within the Department of Commerce, and NSF has devel-
oped mechanisms for joint academic-industry engineering research, albeit more focused andon a smaller scale.The committee also recommends that all segments of the U.S. telecommunications indus-try increase their support for fundamental research, possibly taking advantage of the avenueprovided by participation in joint, cooperative research activities organized by ATRA. Indeed,industry should provide a significant fraction of total R&D funding for ATRA, which wouldRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3support researchers from academia and industry and provide industry with a way to poolfunds, spread risk, and share beneficial results.ATRAÕs mission would be to (1) identify, coordinate, and fund U.S. telecommunicationsR&D; (2) foster major architectural advances; and (3) strengthen the U.S. telecommunica-
tions research capability. Key suggested steps for implementing ATRA are (1) establishmentof mechanisms for carrying out project-based research; (2) establishment of advisory commit-tees with high-level industry participation; (3) exploration of the need for R&D centers; and
(4) establishment of a forum for key parties to discuss critical technology development issues.Effective expansion of federal support of telecommunications research through ATRA willrequire participation from both service providers and equipment vendors to help identify the
most critical research needs together with complementary industry investments in research.ATRA can play an important role in facilitating mechanisms to enable service providers topool research support.Even with ATRA, NSF and DARPA will remain important contributors to U.S. telecommu-nications research efforts. The committee recommends that NSF and DARPA assess theirinvestments in basic telecommunications research and consider increasing both their empha-
sis on and their level of investment in such research. Both should establish criteria for deter-mining the appropriate level of telecommunications research funding. NSF should continue tostrengthen its support for telecommunications research and should consider programs for
attracting and developing young research talent. To stay at the forefront, DARPA shouldcontinue support of telecommunications research for military applications, even if there is thechance of commercial development of those technologies. In formulating its research pro-
grams, DARPA should also consider the telecommunications capabilities of potential adver-saries and the risk of dependence on foreign suppliers for key technologies.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH41The Importance of Telecommunications and
Telecommunications Research
How important is telecommunications as an industry, and how important is telecommuni-cations research to the overall health of that industry? Underlying these questions are severalothers. How important is telecommunications to the U.S. economy and society? To whatextent are U.S. consumers likely to benefit directly from telecommunications research in terms
of new products and services that enhance their lives or improve their effectiveness or produc-tivity? How much scope for innovation is there left in telecommunications, or has telecommu-nications matured to the point that it is merely a commodity service or technology?The core findings of this studyÑwhich are supported throughout this reportÑare that thetelecommunications industry remains of crucial importance to the United States as a society,that a strong telecommunications research capability continues to be essential to the health
and competitiveness of this U.S. industry internationally, and that the health of this industrystrongly affects the U.S. economy in many ways.TELECOMMUNICATIONSÑAN EVOLVING DEFINITIONBefore the emergence of the Internet and other data networks, telecommunications had aclear meaning: the telephone (and earlier the telegraph) was an application of technology thatallowed people to communicate at a distance by voice (and earlier by encoded electronicsignals), and telephone service was provided by the public switched telephone network
(PSTN). Much of the U.S. network was owned and operated by American Telephone & Tele-graph (AT&T); the rest consisted of smaller independent companies, including some servedby GTE.Then in the 1960s, facsimile and data services were overlaid on the PSTN, adding theability to communicate documents and data at a distanceÑapplications still considered tele-communications because they enabled new kinds of communication at a distance that were
also carried over the PSTN. More recently, of course, communication at a distance has ex-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH5panded to include data transport, video conferencing, e-mail, instant messaging, Web brows-ing, and various forms of distributed collaboration, enabled by transmission media that havealso expanded (from traditional copper wires) to include microwave, terrestrial wireless, sat-ellite, hybrid fiber/coaxial cable, and broadband fiber transport.Today consumers think of telecommunications in terms of both products and services.Starting with the Carterphone decision by the Federal Communications Commission in 1968,1it has become permissible and increasingly common for consumers to buy telecommunica-tions applications or equipment as products as well as services. For example, a customer-owned and customer-installed WiFi local area network may be the first access link supportinga voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) service, and a consumer may purchase a VoIP software
package and install it on his or her personally owned and operated personal computer thatconnects to the Internet via an Internet service provider.The technologies used for telecommunications have changed greatly over the last 50 years.Empowered by research into semiconductors and digital electronics in the telecommunica-tions industry, analog representations of voice, images, and video have been supplanted bydigital representations. The biggest consequence has been that all types of media can be
represented in the same basic form (i.e., as a stream of bits) and therefore handled uniformlywithin a common infrastructure (most commonly as Internet Protocol, or IP, data streams).Subsequently, circuit switching was supplemented by, and will likely ultimately be supplanted

by, packet switching. For example, telephony is now routinely carried at various places in thenetwork by the Internet (using VoIP) and cable networks. Just as the PSTN is within the scopeof telecommunications, so also is an Internet or cable TV network carrying a direct substitute
telephony application.Perhaps the most fundamental change, both in terms of technology and its implications forindustry structure, has occurred in the architecture of telecommunications networks. Archi-
tecture in this context refers to the functional description of the general structure of the systemas a whole and how the different parts of the system relate to each other. Previously the PSTN,cable, and data networks coexisted as separately owned and operated networks carrying
different types of communications, although they often shared a common technology base(such as point-to-point digital communications) and some facilities (e.g., high-speed digitalpipes shared by different networks).How are the new networks different? First, they are integrated, meaning that all mediaÑbe they voice, audio, video, or dataÑare increasingly communicated over a single commonnetwork. This integration offers economies of scope and scale in both capital expenditures and
operational costs, and also allows different media to be mixed within common applications.As a result, both technology suppliers and service providers are increasingly in the business ofproviding telecommunications in all media simultaneously rather than specializing in a par-
ticular type such as voice, video, or data.Second, the networks are built in layers, from the physical layer, which is concerned withthe mechanical, electrical and optical, and functional and procedural means for managing
network connections to the data, network, and transport layers, which are concerned withtransferring data, routing data across networks between addresses, and ensuring end-to-end1See 13 F.C.C.2d 420 (1968).Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHconnections and reliability of data transfer to the application layer, which is concerned withproviding a particular functionality using the network and with the interface to the user.2Both technology (equipment and software) suppliers and service providers tend to special-ize in one or two of these layers, each of which seeks to serve all applications and all media. As
a consequence, creating a new application may require the participation and cooperation of aset of complementary layered capabilities. This structure results in a horizontal industry struc-ture, quite distinct from the vertically integrated industry structure of the Bell System era.All these changes suggest a new definition of telecommunications: Telecommunications isthe suite of technologies, devices, equipment, facilities, networks, and applications that support commu-nication at a distance.The range of telecommunications applications is broad and includes telephony and videoconferencing, facsimile, broadcast and interactive television, instant messaging, e-mail, dis-tributed collaboration, a host of Web- and Internet-based communication, and data transmis-
sion.3 Of course many if not most software applications communicate across the network insome fashion, even if it is for almost incidental purposes such as connecting to a license serveror downloading updates. Deciding what is and is not telecommunications is always a judg-
ment call. Applications of information technology range from those involving almost no com-munication at all (word processing) to simple voice communications (telephony in itspurest and simplest form), with many gradations in between.As supported by the horizontally homogeneous layered infrastructure, applications ofvarious sorts increasingly incorporate telecommunications as only one capability among many.For example telephony, as it evolves into the Internet world, is beginning to offer a host of new
data-based features and integrates other elements of collaboration (e.g., visual material ortools for collaborative authoring). Another important trend is machine-to-machine commu-nication at a distance, and so it cannot be assumed that telecommunications applications
exclusively involve people.THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRYLike telecommunications itself, the telecommunications industry is broader than it was inthe past. It encompasses multiple service providers, including telephone companies, cable
system operators, Internet service providers, wireless carriers, and satellite operators. Theindustry today includes software-based applications with a communications emphasis andintermediate layers of software incorporated into end-to-end communication services. It also
includes suppliers of telecommunications equipment and software products sold directly toconsumers and also to service providers, as well as the telecommunications service providers2The descriptions of layers were adapted from the Open Systems Interconnect Reference Model (ISO 7498-1),which provides a useful tool for conceptualizing network layersÑsee <http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/s020269_ISO_IEC_7498-1_1994(E).zip>.3The term ÒtelecommunicationsÓ takes on a particular significance with respect to the Telecommunications Actof 1996 and implementing regulations. The broad definition adopted here is intended solely to capture the scope ofrelevant research, not to make any statement about what technologies and services should or should not be
considered telecommunications for regulatory purposes.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH7themselves. It includes companies selling components or intellectual property predominatelyof a communication flavor, including integrated circuit chip sets for cell phones and cable anddigital subscriber line (DSL) modems.No longer a vertically integrated business, the telecommunications industry is enabled bya complex value chain that includes vendors, service providers, and users. The telecommuni-cations value chain begins with building blocks such as semiconductor chips and software.These components are, in turn, incorporated into equipment and facilities that are purchased
by service providers and users. The service providers then, in turn, build networks in order tosell telecommunications services to end users. The end users include individuals subscribingto services like telephony (landline and cellular) and broadband Internet access, companies
and organizations that contract for internal communications networks, and companies andorganizations that operate their own networks. Some major end-user organizations also by-pass service providers and buy, provision, and operate their own equipment and software,
like a corporate local area network (LAN) or a U.S. military battlefield information system.Software suppliers participate at multiple points in the value chain, selling directly not only toequipment vendors but also to service providers (e.g., operational support systems) and to
end users (e.g., various PC-based applications for communications using the Internet).An implication of defining telecommunications broadly is that every layer involved incommunication at a distance becomes, at least partially, part of the telecommunications indus-
try. The broad range and large number of companies that contribute to the telecommunica-tions industry are evident in the following list of examples:¥Networking service providers across the Internet and the PSTN, wireless carriers, and cableoperators. Examples include AT&T, Comcast, Verizon, and DirecTV.¥Communications equipment suppliers that are the primary suppliers to service providers.Examples include Cisco, Lucent, and Motorola.¥Networking equipment suppliers selling products to end-user organizations and individu-als. Examples include CiscoÕs Linksys division and Hewlett-Packard (local area networking
products).¥Semiconductor manufacturers, especially those supplying system-on-a-chip solutions forthe telecommunications industry. Examples include Texas Instruments, Qualcomm, Broadcom,
and STMicroelectronics.¥Suppliers of operating systems that include a networking stack. Microsoft is an example.¥Software suppliers, especially those selling infrastructure and applications incorporatingor based on real-time media. Examples include IBM, RealNetworks (streaming media), andBEA (application servers).¥Utility or on-demand service providers selling real-time communications-oriented appli-cations. Examples include AOL and Microsoft (instant messaging) and WebEx (onlinemeetings).¥Consumer electronics suppliers with communications-oriented customer-premises equip-ment and handheld appliances. Examples include Motorola and Nokia (cell phones), Researchin Motion (handheld e-mail appliances), Polycom (videoconferencing terminals), Microsoftand Sony (networked video games), and Panasonic (televisions).What is striking about this list is how broad and inclusive it is. Even though many of thesefirms do not specialize solely in telecommunications, it is now quite common for firms in theRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHlarger domain of information technology to offer telecommunications products or to incorpo-rate telecommunications capability into an increasing share of their products.THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONSTelecommunications and SocietyThe societal importance of telecommunications is well accepted and broadly understood,reflected in its near-ubiquitous penetration and use. Noted below are some of the key areas ofimpact:¥Telecommunications provides a technological foundation for societal communications. Commu-nication plays a central role in the fundamental operations of a societyÑfrom business to
government to families. In fact, communication among people is the essence of what distin-guishes an organization, community, or society from a collection of individuals. Communica-tionÑfrom Web browsing to cell phone calling to instant messagingÑhas become increas-
ingly integrated into how we work, play, and live.¥Telecommunications enables participation and development. Telecommunications plays anincreasingly vital role in enabling the participation and development of people in communi-
ties and nations disadvantaged by geography, whether in rural areas in the United States or indeveloping nations in the global society and economy.¥Telecommunications provides vital infrastructure for national security. From natural disasterrecovery, to homeland security, to communication of vital intelligence, to continued militarysuperiority, telecommunications plays a pivotal role. When the issue is countering an adver-sary, it is essential not only to preserve telecommunications capability, but also to have a
superior capability. There are potential risks associated with a reliance on overseas sources forinnovation, technologies, applications, and services.It is difficult to predict the future impact of telecommunications technologies, services, andapplications that have not yet been invented. For example, in the early days of research anddevelopment into the Internet in the late 1960s, who could have foreseen the full impact of the
InternetÕs widespread use today?Telecommunications and the U.S. EconomyThe telecommunications industry is a major direct contributor to U.S. economic activity.The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that just over 3 percent of the U.S. gross domestic income
(GDI) in 2003 was from communications services (2.6 percent) and communications hardware(0.4 percent)Ñcategories that are narrower than the broad definition of telecommunicationsoffered above. At 3 percent, telecommunications thus represented more than a third of the
total fraction of GDI spent on information technology (IT; 7.9 percent of GDI) in 2003. In fact,the fraction attributable to telecommunications is probably larger relative to that of IT thanthese figures suggest, given that much of the GDI from IT hardware (particularly semiconduc-
tors) could apply to any of several industries (computing, telecommunications, media, andelectronics, for example). If one assumes IT to be the sum of computers (calculating), comput-ers (wholesale), computers (retail), and software and services, the total GDI for IT isRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH9$440 billion, compared to the total for telecommunications (communications hardware pluscommunications services) of $335 billion, making telecommunicationsÕ contribution to GDIjust under 80 percent of ITÕs contribution to GDI.4The telecommunications-related industries are also a major employerÑcommunicationsservices employed 1 million U.S. workers in 2002, representing 1.1 percent of the total privateworkforce, and communications equipment companies employed nearly 250,000 people.5Moreover, telecommunications is a high-tech sector, with many highly skilled employees.Telecommunications is a growth business. Although markedly reduced investment insome parts of the sector (following the bubble years of the late 1990s) may have given animpression of low growth in the long run, a longer-term view taking into account the need for
humans and machines to communicate suggests that telecommunications will continue togrow apace, as evidenced by the ongoing expansion of wireless and broadband access servicesthroughout the world.Telecommunications is also a key enabler of productivity across the U.S. economy andsociety.6 Not only is telecommunications an industry in itself, but it also benefits nearly everyother industry. In the 1990s the U.S. GDP grew rapidly, and the U.S. economy was among the
strongest in the world. It is widely believed that the Internet economy played a significant rolein this success.Today, however, new wireless applications, low-cost manufacturing innovations,and handset design are some of the areas in which the Asian countries are outinvesting theUnited States in R&D and are seeing resulting bottom-line impacts to their economies. Forthe United States to compete in the global marketplaceÑacross industriesÑit needs the pro-
ductivity that comes from enhancements in telecommunications. If the telecommunicationsinfrastructure in the United States were to fall significantly behind that of the rest of theworld, the global competitiveness of all other U.S. industries would be affected. Conversely,
the growth in U.S. productivity has been based in part on a telecommunications infrastructurethat is the most advanced in the world.U.S. leadership in telecommunications did not come by accidentÑsuccess at the physical,network, and applications levels was made possible by the U.S. investment in decades ofresearch and the concomitant development of U.S. research leadership in communications-related areas. Telecommunications has been and likely will continue to be an important foun-
dation for innovative new industries arising in the United States that use telecommunicationsas a primary technological enabler and foundation. Recent examples of innovative new busi-nesses leveraging telecommunications include Yahoo!, Amazon, eBay, and Google. Telecom-4GDI estimates for 2003 from U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2004Ð2005 (124th Edi-tion), Washington, D.C., Table 1116, p. 715, 2004, available online at <http://www.census.gov/prod/2004pubs/04statab/infocomm.pdf>.5Data for 2002 from U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2004Ð2005 (124th Edition), Wash-ington, D.C., Table 1117, p. 715, 2004, available online at <http://www.census.gov/prod/2004pubs/04statab/infocomm.pdf>.6For more on the relationship between information and communications technologies and economic productiv-ity, see, for example, Dale W. Jorgenson and Kevin J. Stiroh, ÒRaising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth inthe Information Age,Ó Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000Ð1, pp. 125-235, 2000; and Erik Brynjolfsson andLorin M. Hitt, ÒBeyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and Business Per-
formance,Ó Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(4):45, Fall 2000.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHmunications is also specifically a key enabler for other industries in which the United Stateshas important competitive advantages and a positive balance of trade, such as financial ser-vices and entertainment (e.g., movies and music).Finally, telecommunications is an important component of the broader IT industry, whichis sometimes viewed as having three technology legs:7 processing (to transform or changeinformation), storage (to allow communication of information from one time to another), andcommunications (to transmit information from one place to another). The boundaries be-
tween these areas are not very distinct, but this decomposition helps illustrate the breadth ofIT and the role that telecommunications plays. Increasingly IT systems must incorporate allthree elements to different degrees,8 and it is increasingly common for companies in anysector of IT to offer products with a communications component, and often with a communi-cations emphasis. The IT industryÕs overall strength depends on strength across communica-tions, processing, and storage as well as strength in all layers of technologyÑfrom the physi-
cal layer (including communications hardware, microprocessors, and magnetic and opticalstorage), to the software infrastructure layers (operating systems and Web services), to soft-ware applications.Telecommunications and Global CompetitivenessIn this era of globalization, many companies are multinational, with operationsÑinclud-ing R&DÑconducted across the globe. For example, IBM, HP, Qualcomm, and Microsoft allhave research facilities in other countries, and many European and Asian companies have
research laboratories in the United States. Increasing numbers of businesses compete globally.Every company and every industry must assess the segments and niches in which it operatesto remain globally competitive.Both Asian and European nations are continuing to pursue strategies that exploit per-ceived U.S. weakness in telecommunications and telecommunications research as a way ofimproving their competitiveness in telecommunications, as well as in information technology
more broadly. Leapfrogging the United States in telecommunications has, in the opinion of thecommittee, been an explicit and stated strategy for a number of Asian (in broadband andwireless) and European (in wireless) nations for the past decade, with notable success. These
efforts have aimed to stimulate the rapid penetration of physical-layer technologies for resi-dential access (broadband access, especially in Asia) and wireless and mobile access (cellularnetworks, especially in Europe).THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTINUING INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH: SUMMARY COMMENTSTelecommunications research is best understood as a seed that germinates, developinginto lasting value for the U.S. economy. Figure 1.1 depicts the research ecosystem and the7D. Messerschmitt, ÒConvergence of Computing and Telecommunications: What Are the Implications Today?ÓProceedings of the IEEE, 84(8):1167-1186, 1996.8Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Making IT Better: ExpandingInformation Technology Research to Meet SocietyÕs Needs, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH11benefits it enables, many of which are built up recursively over time as a result of interactionsamong the various levels. The picture is, to be sure, simplifiedÑthe interactions between thedifferent elements are more complex than can be reasonably characterized by the diagramÑbut Figure 1.1 does provide a realistic view of the impacts of research.Shown at the top of Figure 1.1 is the research enabled by available funding. Level 1 showsthe direct results: Researchers conduct exploratory studies, achieving technical breakthroughsand developing their expertise and their basic understanding of the areas studied. Talent isthus nurtured that will be expressed in the future in industry and academia. None of theseresults of research can be characterized as end benefits. Rather, the development of talent andthe achievement of breakthroughs build a capability for later revolutionary advances.At Level 2 the benefits of research begin to become evident. Researchers collaborate, andindividual insights and results begin to fit together. The university talent generated in Level 1develops competenceÑnot simply low-level job skills that can be easily transported any-
where, but rather the next-generation expertise needed to ensure a skilled U.S. telecommuni-cations workforce. The United States has access to this skilled workforce first and can thusbenefit directly from the talent and knowledge base generated in Level 1 that are fundamental
to continuing technological advances and being able to perform in the best future jobs.Also at Level 2 comes the maturing of fundamental breakthroughs and their transition tousable, deployable technology for next-generation telecommunication systems and the devel-
opment of roadmaps to help guide research investments.FIGURE 1.1Impact of telecommunications research.
ResearchBreakthroughsL1: Results of  ResearchL2:  Benefits of ResearchL3:  Benefit to 
EconomyL4: Indirect Benefit to EconomyL5: Bottom LineCompetenceStrong TelecomEnd User BenefitNational DefenseUniversity TalentJobsInfrastructureCompetitive IndustryGDPRoadmapsTechnologyNew IndustriesNew CompaniesHomeland SecurityTimeRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHThe major benefits to the economy obtained at Level 3 are the coalescence of Level 1 and 2elements. Skilled workers, a competence to understand the new technology, the availability ofthe technology, and shared goals are the ingredients required to create a healthy telecommu-nications industry and, more broadly, a capable telecommunications infrastructure.Interestingly, not all of the research performed affects telecommunications alone. Becausetelecommunications touches multiple industries, the technology base it provides also oftenenables the creation of entirely new industries. The success of the iPod and other portable
digital music players, for example, rests in part on earlier telecommunications-inspired workon how to compress audio for efficient transmission over limited-bandwidth channels.At Level 4, an indirect benefit of research is a telecommunications infrastructure thatprovides advantages to all industries that use telecommunications. There are also end-user orconsumer benefits that accrue to having an outstanding infrastructure, such as enhancededucation, entertainment, and personal convenience. Finally, new companies also emerge
from these new industries.Level 5 aggregates the key benefits of research in broad areas of national concern. Concern-ing economic impact, the strong telecommunications industry, new spin-off industries, and
more competitive industries (across the board) result in a higher GDP for the country, as wellas job creation. Technological leadership and economic strength also help ensure strong lead-ership and capability in national defense and homeland security.The full benefits of the process depicted in Figure 1.1 develop over an extended period oftime, with a long-term buildup over several years between the seed investments in researchand realization of the ultimate bottom-line benefits. Each step takes time: from innovation to
mass deployment and impact. Investments by both government and industry in research byacademia and industry lead to both short- and long-term contributions.Over the years, CSTB studies have documented this phenomenon across multiple areas ofinformation technology and telecommunications research. In particular, its 1995 report Evolv-ing the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Informa-tion Infrastructure9 and a 2003 update10 illustrate how long-term investments in research acrossacademia and industry have led to the creation of many new, important U.S. industry seg-ments with revenues that came to exceed $1 billion.In closing, it is worth noting the perils of losing leadership in telecommunications. Becauseof the time lag, the nation may continue to exhibit leadership at Levels 4 and 5 (and possiblyLevel 3) even as it is failing to renew capability at Levels 1 and 2. Since Levels 3 through 5 aremost visible to policy makers and the public, there is a potential to perceive the situation as
less dire than it really is. If Levels 1 and 2 are left to atrophy, serious problems will occur atLevels 3 through 5. If that happens, then recovery will take a long timeÑor even proveimpossible.9Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Evolving the High PerformanceComputing and Communications Initiative to Support the NationÕs Information Infrastructure, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1995.10Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Innovation in Information Tech-nology, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH13132The Evolution of the U.S. Telecommunications
Industry and Effects on Research
The structure of the U.S. telecommunications industry has changed dramatically overrecent decades, with consequences for research. Major changes over the past several decadeshave included the breakup of the Bell System, especially the 1984 divestiture, the 1995 creationof Lucent Technologies, and the advent of long-haul competitors such as MCI and Sprint; the
transformation of cable system operators into telecommunications providers as they adoptedthe hybrid fiber/coaxial cable digital architecture, which supports digital, high-capacity, two-way communications; the development and mainstream adoption of the Internet, including
the rise of a whole new class of industry players (e.g., Cisco, Microsoft, Google, and so on); andthe creation and growth of a competitive wireless services market resulting in broad penetra-tion of cellular voice and data services.These changes have yielded many benefits, including a much broader array of telecommu-nications services, a more diversified and competitive market, and an environment in whichnew innovations move more quickly to the marketplace. But they have also led to decreased
industry support for long-term telecommunications research and a general shift in researchfocus from the long term to the short term. As has been observed by many others, there hasbeen an overall downturn in many areas of U.S. industry research.1 Along similar lines, areport released earlier this year by the National Academies concluded that the nationÕs com-mitment to basic research in science and engineering needs to be sustained and strengthened.2The full impact of these trends on long-term telecommunications research is probably notyet evident, as the industry continues to exploit fundamental knowledge gained over the past1This phenomenon is not new.  See, for example, Rosenbloom et al., 
Engines of Innovation, Harvard BusinessSchool Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1996.2See National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine of the NationalAcademies, Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future,prepublication, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, available online at <http://www.nap.edu/
catalog/11463.html>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHseveral decades. The concern is that without substantial renewed investment in fundamental,long-term telecommunications research, the United States will eventually consume its ownintellectual Òseed cornÓ and thus run out of new ideas within the next decade or perhaps evensooner. Chapter 3 examines further some of the implications of curtailed research investment.BELL SYSTEM RESEARCH AND CONSEQUENCES OF THEBELL SYSTEMÕS BREAKUPFor roughly a century, the U.S. telecommunications infrastructure was largely defined bythe Bell System, a telephony monopoly regulated under a series of consent decrees that gave it
the right to operate, maintain, and expand the U.S. telephone system. The chief research anddevelopment arm of the Bell System, Bell Laboratories, was created in 1925, following demon-stration in 1915 of the feasibility of coast-to-coast long-distance service and realization of the
importance of a viable research and development laboratory to effective deployment. Success-ful nationwide implementation of long-distance service required, for example, a device withsufficient gain to offset the signal losses in the 3000-mile stretch of the U.S. transcontinental
cable. The development of the vacuum tube amplifier for use in telephone circuits, whichstarted in the 1910s, took many years of fundamental research and required extremely closecooperation between the research community that had originally invented the vacuum tube
technology and the development community that introduced the vacuum tube amplifier intothe telephone network.Bell Laboratories relied heavily on managers who understood the benefits to the company(and society) of fundamental research and were able to provide a work environment thatfostered world-class research in virtually every aspect of telecommunications technology.Stable funding for research was provided via a tax levied on the service revenues of most of
the Bell operating companies, an approach approved by state regulators. The revenue from theservices tax was more than sufficient to fund unfettered investigations over almost 6 decadesinto almost every aspect of telecommunications, from basic materials (and the associated
physics and chemistry) to large-scale computing and networking platforms and systems. Overtime, Bell LaboratoriesÕ support for basic science and engineering led to major advances intelephony spanning terminals, switching, transmission, services, and operations. Out of the
Bell System research program also came many world-famous innovations, including the tran-sistor, information theory, the laser, the solar cell, communications satellites, and fiber-opticcommunications. Perhaps the most notable benefit of the research was the creation of the
semiconductor industry as a result of the mandatory public licensing of BellÕs patent for thetransistor. In addition, research in basic science at Bell Labs was recognized by six Nobelprizes for strides in quantum mechanics, solid-state physics, and radio astronomy.A number of other companies were also involved at the time in developing new telecom-munications technologies and equipment. The work of companies like GTE Automatic Elec-tric, TRW Vidar, and Northern Telecom, along with BellÕs own Western Electric, pushed
telephony forward through advances in handset design and digital switching, for example.Bell Labs also served as an important nucleus for the broader telecommunications researchcommunity: in the predivestiture era, university researchers and telecommunications re-
search leaders from around the world commonly spent summers or sabbaticals at Bell Labs,where they could conduct exploratory research that could not have been undertaken else-where.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH15Despite its many successes, there were many criticisms of the predivestiture regulatedmonopoly (and this report is certainly not calling for a return to the Bell System structure). Forinstance, until government actions forced a change, the Bell System prohibited the attachmentof third-party equipment on customer premises, which many viewed as stifling innovation.
Monopoly status also meant that there were few pressures on the Bell System for rapid inno-vation in its services, and a number of innovative technologies developed by Bell Labs eitherwere not adopted or were adopted very slowly.Divestiture and Its EffectsThe Bell System ended in 1983. Divestiture resulted in the separation of the local BellSystem operating companies (which provided local telephone service to large regions of theUnited States) from the long-distance parts of the network (known as long-lines communica-
tions) and ended the license fee arrangement through which the regional operating companiessupported Bell Labs. At the time of the separation, Western Electric (the equipment manufac-turing part of the Bell System) was assigned to the part of the company that would be called
AT&T), along with most of the research and development resources of Bell Labs. The regionalBell operating companies (RBOCs), the providers of local phone service, formed an R&Dconsortium called Bellcore (Bell Communications Research, later renamed Telcordia Tech-
nologies) and agreed to fund Bellcore to do the majority of the R&D needed to support themÑat least for an initial period on the order of 5 to 7 years. Subsequently the RBOCs sold Bellcoreto SAIC, causing the new lab to seek support outside the RBOCs and subsequently make
radical changes in the scope and direction of its research program.As a result of divestiture, the fundamental split in the Bell System propelled AT&T (and itsR&D arm Bell Labs) into a competitive landscape for the first time, with aggressive competi-
tors such as MCI and Sprint seeking to compete for long-distance servicesÑfor both residen-tial and business customers. Thus although a tax on telecommunications revenue remained asa source for funding R&D at Bell Labs, the prospects for increased competition, lower telecom-
munications prices, and decreasing telecommunications revenues for AT&T, as well as theregulatory pressures to lose market share to new competitors, led to the beginning of thereduction in the long-term, unfettered, fundamental research done at Bell Labs. Additionally,
divestiture marked the beginning of a process of transforming the telecommunications indus-try in the United States from a vertically organized structure (where one body, the Bell System,had control over every aspect of the telecommunications process, from components, to boards,
to systems, to services, to operations) to a horizontally organized structure (where multiplecompetitors existed at every level of the hierarchy and where no single entity had full respon-sibility for the network architecture, end-to-end network operations, or long-term fundamen-
tal research that would enable the creation of an evolutionary path into the future).Subsequent Splits and Spin-offs and Research CutbacksThe second stage of the breakup of the Bell System occurred at the end of 1995 when theexisting AT&T (which had acquired the computer services company NCR several years ear-
lier) made the decision to divest both the computer operations part of the business (selling itback to NCR) and the equipment manufacturing part of the business (with the creation ofLucent Technologies) in order to compete more actively in the areas of wireless and cableRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHservices. As part of this trivestiture a large percentage of the resources of Bell Labs (as well asthe rights to use of the Bell Labs name) went to Lucent Technologies for research and develop-ment in support of the creation of new products. About one-fourth of the research componentof Bell Labs (along with significant development resources) joined AT&T and formed AT&T
Labs, with the goal of conducting research and development that would be most appropriateto a services company that was venturing into the areas of wireless and broadband communi-cation services.Former Bell System entities continued to evolve. Over time Lucent Technologies spun offthe component manufacturing part of the company as Agere Labs and the enterprise businesssystems part of the company as Avaya Labs. Telcordia was acquired by SAIC and later pur-
chased by two private equity firms. AT&T spun off the wireless services part of the business(as AT&T Wireless, subsequently acquired by Cingular in 2004) and sold the cable servicespart to Comcast Communications. SBC and AT&T then merged in early 2005 under the AT&T
name. Early 2006 saw a proposed acquisition by AT&T of Bell South.It initially appeared as though research might continue to grow and prosper within theformer Bell family laboratoriesÑLucent Bell Labs, Bellcore research, the new AT&T Labs,
Agere Labs, and Avaya LabsÑas well as within new telecommunications firms. Indeed, fig-ures gathered by Michael Noll showed that the number of former Bell family company re-searchers grew from about 1000 in 1960 to 1200 in 1981 to about 1920 in 1997, but then fell off
to 1570 in 2001. Data reported by Noll on research and development expenditures by the Bellfamily companies showed significant growth from 1981 ($3.2 billion) to 2001 ($6 billion).3One of the Bell System offshoots, Lucent, continued to make a significant commitment toresearch, albeit one that decreased in total dollar terms as Lucent shrank. It has continued tofund Bell Laboratories at a rate of roughly 1 percent of revenue, further supplemented by somesupport from government research and development contracts. That allocation of 1 percent,
which might be viewed as a best practice for a large equipment vendor, funds a mix ofresearch in basic sciences, exploration of disruptive technologies, and more incremental workfor meeting current customer needs.THE EMERGENCE OF NEW TELECOMMUNICATIONS PLAYERSCable The cable industry began in the 1940s and 1950s as a way to get television signals intoremote areas. Antennas were placed in advantageous locations (e.g., the top of a mountain)and the signals were distributed along coaxial cable lines to local homes. As cable systemsgrew in size and number, and in the types of signals or services they provided, a full-fledged,
wide-reaching industry began to take shape. According to the National Cable and Telecom-munications Association (NCTA), by 1962 there were already nearly 800 cable systems withalmost 900,000 subscribers in the United States.43A. Michael Noll, ÒTelecommunication Basic Research: An Uncertain Future for the Bell Legacy,Ó  Prometheus,21(2):184-185, June 2003.4National Cable and Telecommunications Association, ÒHistory of Cable Television,Ó 2005, available online at<http://www.ncta.com/Docs/pagecontent.cfm?pageID=96>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH17A good deal of organized, focused research and development work has enabled the evolu-tion of cable as a telecommunications industry. In the late 1980s a group of cable companyexecutives formed CableLabs, a nonprofit consortium of cable system operators, to pursuenew cable telecommunications technologies, improve the business capabilities of cable opera-
tors, and help cable companies develop and take advantage of new technologies. For example,CableLabs was involved in the development and specification of cable modem technology(work initially funded by MCNS HoldingsÑcomposed of TCI, Time Warner Cable, Cox, and
Comcast), eventually administering the specifications and performing certification and quali-fication of products. In addition, the early 1990s saw CableLabs involved in developing fiber-optic trunking and work to develop fiber-optic regional rings to link individual municipal
cable systems. This work drew on earlier, more fundamental telecommunications research,such as work on fiber-optic communications, that had been developed at such places as BellLabs. CableLabs work cuts across the layers from device and equipment standards through
applications.CableLabsÑwhile not doing fundamental research itselfÑcontinues to play other impor-tant roles for the cable industry, such as helping to facilitate specification development, pro-
viding testing facilities to ensure quality equipment, and generally serving as a clearinghousefor information on current and prospective technological advances. More recently, CableLabshas been involved in the development of high-definition television systems, VoIP packet
networking, interoperable interface specifications for real-time multimedia, and standards tocreate a common platform for interactive services.5,6
The InternetIn the early 1960s, the vision for a research program aimed at networking computers tookshape at the Defense DepartmentÕs Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA, later DARPA).As early as 1965, ARPA was sponsoring research into cooperative time-sharing computers andpacket switching. Plans for the ARPANET began to take shape in 1966, and in 1968 DARPA
awarded a key contract to Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. (BBN) to produce a key componentin implementing the network, interface message processors (or IMPs). A year later, the firstnodes in the ARPANET became active, allowing research in host-to-host protocols and how
best to utilize network resources. By 1971, the ARPANET included 15 nodes, and work wasunderway on e-mail. As noted in an earlier CSTB report, however, the ARPANET was notDARPAÕs only networking research activityÑthe organization also supported related research
on terrestrial and satellite packet radio networks.75The committee received a briefing from CableLabsÕ David Reed at a meeting in Washington, D.C., on Nov. 3,2003.  For more information about CableLabs and its history, see Cable Television Laboratories Inc., ÒA Decade of
Innovation:  The History of CableLabs 1988-1998,Ó 1998, available online at <http://www.cablelabs.com/about/
overview/History.html>.6More general information regarding the development of the cable industry is available from the following tworesources:  Congressional Research Service, ÒCable Television: Background and Overview of Rates and Other
Issues for CongressÓ (RS21775), 2004, available online at <http://www.opencrs.com/rpts/RS21775_20040405.pdf>;
and FCC, ÒEvolution of Cable Television,Ó 2000, available online at <http://www.fcc. gov/mb/facts/csgen.html>.7Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Funding a Revolution: Govern-ment Support for Computing Research, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999, available online at<http://newton.nap.edu/html/far/>, p. 174.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHOther key DARPA-funded work concerned the protocols used for communicating over thenetwork. As work progressed on the ARPANET, it became clear that a replacement for theoriginal Network Control Protocol would be needed to address the vision of an open architec-ture enabling a network of networks, a concept that called for a different approach to dissemi-
nating information, ensuring interoperability, and dealing with errors and transmission qual-ity. The early 1980s saw the adoption of Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol(TCP/IP) as a Defense Department standard, and the cutover of the ARPANET to the new
protocol. DARPA not only funded and managed a research portfolio; it also facilitated thedevelopment of a vision and served as a convener for industry and academia, notably throughthe Internet Engineering Task Force.The InternetÕs development continued with the spin-off of MILNET to support DOD op-erations and new mission-focused computer networks developed by the Department of En-ergy, NASA, and NSF, together with broader networks such as USENET and BITNET. In 1986,
NSF launched its NSFNet program, an effort to link (among other things) a number of U.S.academic supercomputing centers.8 NSFNet was envisioned as a general high-speed networkthat could link many other academic or research networks (including the ARPANET) using
the research results and operational experience obtained from ARPANET. The NSFNet provedvery successful. Its upgrade to handle growing demand and other subsequent changes openedthe door for the participation of the private sector in the network.9The mid to late 1980s saw continuing DARPA-supported research and development inareas such as routers and their protocols. Meanwhile, the speed of the NSFNetÕs backbone sawgreat improvement, and the Domain Name System, a critical component facilitating Internet
growth and reliability, was introduced. NSF support was also critical to the development ofthe first widely used graphical Web browser, Mosaic, which was developed in 1993 by aresearcher at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications.The Internet was highly successful in meeting the original vision of enabling computers tocommunicate across diverse networks and in the face of heterogeneous underlying communi-cations technologies.10 Its successÑmeasured in terms of commercial investment, wide use,and large installed baseÑis also widely understood to have made innovation in the Internetmuch harder over time. (Innovation in the InternetÕs architecture proper should be distin-guished from innovative uses of the network, which have flourished as a direct consequence
of the InternetÕs flexible, general-purpose design.) CSTBÕs Looking Over the Fence at Networks: ANeighborÕs View of Networking Research11 characterized this problem in terms of three types ofpotential ossification: intellectual (pressures to be compatible with the current Internet risk
stifling innovative ideas), infrastructural (an inability to affect what is deployed in commercial8For more detailed information on NSFNet, see National Science Foundation, ÒThe Launch of NSFNet,Ó [un-dated], available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/about/history/nsf0050/internet/launch.htm>.9For more background on Internet commercialization, see Brian Kahin, ed., ÒCommercialization of the Internet:Summary ReportÓ (RFC 1192), 1990, available online at <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1192.txt>.10Additional information about the InternetÕs early years and development is available from the followingresources:  Leiner et al., ÒA Brief History of the Internet,Ó 2003, available online at <http://www.isoc.org/internet/
history/brief.shtml>; and Robert H. Zakon, ÒHobbesÕ Internet Timeline (v8.1),Ó 2005, available online at <http://
www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/>.11Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Looking Over the Fence at Net-works:  A NeighborÕs View of Networking Research
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001, available onlineat <http://books.nap.edu/html/looking_over_the_fence/report.pdf>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH19networks makes it hard for researchers to experiment with new capabilities), and system(problems tend to be addressed with short-term fixes that are easier to deploy than withsolutions that would be more desirable in the long run).Concerns of these sortsÑtogether with an appreciation that the InternetÕs design, thoughhighly successful, has a number of shortcomingsÑhave served as the inspiration for newnetworking research initiatives, such as the National LambdaRail initiative and new researchprograms at the National Science Foundation.Cellular and WirelessIn the early 1970s, following years of resistance to the idea, the Federal CommunicationsCommission (FCC) began setting aside a range of radio frequencies for radio telephony. Nearthe end of that decade, a trial of cellular phone technology had been conducted in Chicago,
and the worldÕs first commercial cellular phone service was introduced in Tokyo, Japan.By the early 1980s, the FCC was issuing wireless telephony licenses and setting up metro-politan and rural jurisdictions (so-called metropolitan statistical areas and rural service areas),
and, by the middle of the decade, first-generation wireless systems were being deployed in theUnited States. These systems were based on analog cellular technology using the advancedmobile phone system (or AMPS) technology that had been developed by Bell Labs. Cellular
technology was being deployed in other countries, as well, although the technology andstandards adopted internationally were very different from those used in the United States.Thus began one of todayÕs most vibrant and competitive industriesÑcompetition among wire-
less providers in todayÕs market is fierce, and new products and services emerge almost on adaily basis now.Growing consumer demand and the need to make better use of available spectrum re-sources fueled the development of a second generation of wireless technologies (also com-monly referred to as 2G technologies). This second generation marked the transition to a fullydigital technology, providing enhanced quality and enabling better use of spectrum resources.
While the European wireless industry settled on global system for mobile communications(GSM) for its 2G standard, two major wireless standards emerged in the United States: timedivision multiple access (TDMA), a technology standard adopted by the Telecommunications
Industry Association in 1989; and code division multiple access (CDMA), a newer, competingtechnology developed and championed by Qualcomm. 2G technology included many im-provements over first-generation technology; for example, 2G included such advanced digital
features as compression, network control techniques, bandwidth conservation measures, andfull support for voice mail.The next generation of wireless technology (so-called 3G technology) promises to addeven greater speed, capacity, and servicesÑindeed, one recent report describes 3G as Òbring-ing Internet capabilities to wireless mobile phones.Ó12 Along the way to 3G, there has alsobeen a good deal of work on 2.5G technologies (e.g., CDMA2000, 1xRTT, and GPRS) to help
bridge the fairly large gap between 2G and 3G, as well as to build out the networks andinfrastructure required by the newer technologies.12Linda K. Moore, Congressional Research Service, Wireless Technology and Spectrum Demand: Advanced WirelessServices (RS20993), 2006, available online at <http://opencrs.cdt.org/document/RS20993/>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHIMPACTS OF THE CHANGING LANDSCAPE ON INVESTMENT IN RESEARCHIncreased Competition and the Pressure on Research InvestmentOne result of the divestiture of the Bell System, subsequent splits and spin-offs, and theentry of new types of telecommunications services providers was a much more competitivetelecommunications industry. The costÑand retail priceÑof long-distance calls fell rapidly
between 1984 (the initial divestiture) and 2004 (when carriers began offering voice over IPservice broadly to consumers). Wireless telephony grew rapidly, reaching nearly 208 millionaccounts in the United States by the end of 2005.13 Broadband access to the Internet becamewidely available. Cable system operators started introducing their own local telephone ser-vices over their new digital, two-way infrastructure. Business data service prices fell steadilyas well.A consequence of increased competition at every level of the telecommunications valuechain was that the industry players found themselves operating with tighter margins andlower revenues.The 1996 Telecommunications Act and subsequent FCC decisions led to a further evolu-tion of the regulatory environment. The impact of these developments on innovation andR&DÑand on the industry more broadlyÑhas been the subject of much debate. Some caution,
for example, that such policies as unbundling and the use of total element long-run incremen-tal costs in the regulation of incumbent local exchange carriers had the effect of dampeninginvestment by the local exchange carriers because competitors could appropriate some of the
investment made by the carriers. Others cite significant benefits of these policies to the con-sumer (reduced prices) and the market (lower barriers to market entry).From about 1990 to 2000, the period of high growth in the telecommunications industrymeant that there were sufficient revenues to attract many new entrants into the telecommuni-cations market, each of which invested heavily in creating new network facilities. This timeperiod also saw venture capital play a more prominent role in the telecommunications indus-
try (Box 2.1). Capital expenditures by these new carriers provided significant revenue streamsto equipment vendors, and it appeared that research in telecommunications was continuing ata pace comparable to that of the Bell System prior to divestiture. But once this large build-out
had been completed, and as the Internet bubble popped, investment declined significantly.Reductions with the Bursting of the Internet BubbleWhen the so-called Internet bubble burst at the end of the 20th century, much of thetelecommunications industry was faced with a glut of infrastructure investments as the de-
mand for these facilities slowed, leading to wholesale failures of major companies throughoutthe industry. During the boom years, companies had accumulated debt on the order of severaltrillion dollars across all players in the industry and suddenly had to service the debt with
rapidly decreasing revenues. A result was wide-scale layoffs of workers, failures of severalmajor telecommunications players, and drastic reductions in capital spending by carriers,13CTIA, Wireless Quick Facts, April 2006, available online at <http://files.ctia.org/pdf/Wireless_Quick_Facts_April_06.pdf>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH21along with associated significant reductions in the funding for existing research programs atplaces like Lucent Bell Labs, AT&T LabsÐResearch, Telcordia, and other major telecommuni-cations players.Shifts from the High-Margin Public Telephone Network to New,Lower-Margin Services as a Source of RevenueAnother major change in the telecommunications industry has been a major shift frombasic, high-margin, wireline telephony services provided by the public switched telephonenetwork (PSTN) to wireless and broadband services that both complement and compete with
the traditional services and are associated with lower margins.14 As a result, revenue is shiftingBOX 2.1  The Role of Venture Capital in Innovation and Research
Although it is sometimes argued that the venture capital invested in industry is supplantingtraditional mechanisms for achieving innovation, venture capital represents development fund-
ing, not research funding.  Leading-edge developers that have a profit requirement will quickly

curtail their research directions in favor of achieving corporate financial goals.  Moreover, the

surge in funding that peaked in 2000 has fallen off almost as quickly as it appeared.  Total

telecommunications venture funding peaked at nearly $5 billion in the second quarter of 2000
before dropping back down to roughly $560 million per quarter just 2 years laterÑa level that has
remained fairly constant into 2006.1Despite venture capitalÕs important role in the U.S. innovation system and its many contribu-tions to U.S. leadership in high technology, including telecommunications, its role is not to supply
the basic and applied R&D that has fueled many of the major telecommunications advances
mentioned in this report and elsewhere.  Instead, it seeks to fund specific product innovation that

can deliver short-term returns.  Venture capital funds typically have a lifetime of 5 to 7 years, and

investors seek significant commercial returns in that time frame.  In contrast, major telecommu-
nication advances can require longer-term efforts often continuing for a decade or more and
requiring risk-taking, broad-based, interdisciplinary, multifaceted supportÑsuch as that histori-
cally provided by the Bell System or provided today when federal agencies fund long-term aca-
demic research.  Over the long term, the venture capital model itself depends heavily on being

able to select promising areas for investment from a stream of results from long-term research.1According to data available from PriceWaterhouseCoopers.  See <http://www.pwcmoneytree.com/
exhibits/NationalAggregateData95Q1-06Q1_FINAL.xls>.14TIAÕs 2004 Telecommunications Market Review and Forecast (Telecommunications Industry Association, Ar-lington, Va., 2004) observes that (p. 33) Ò[t]he local exchange market is declining for the first time since the Great
Depression.  Consumers are beginning to cancel wireline services and rely on wireless, while DSL [digital sub-
scriber line] and cable modem services are eliminating the need for second lines for Internet connectivity.  In-
creased use of email and other messaging is cutting into call volumes.Ó  It goes on to say (p. 45) that Òlandline toll

service, like the local services market, is facing a long-term decline in overall usage.ÓRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHfrom the local exchange carriers (e.g., Verizon, SBC (now called AT&T), and Bell South) andinterexchange carriers (e.g., AT&T, MCI, and Sprint) to wireless and broadband access serviceproviders (e.g., Comcast, Time-Warner, AOL, Cingular, Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile, and SprintPCS). Unfortunately almost none of the wireless or broadband service providers have been
funding long-term research, nor are there indications at present that any will undertake to doso in the foreseeable future.Increased Emphasis on VendorsÕ Role in Supporting ResearchAll of the participants in the telecommunications value chain could, in principle, invest inresearch, but the nature of those investments would likely differ because of varying motiva-tions and incentives. Traditionally, investments in research by end users (the demand side)15seeking to improve the technologies available from providers and vendors (the supply side)have been the primary source of fundamental and long-time-horizon results that are muchmore likely to enter the public domain, making them available to all and increasing theirimpact. Open access to such results is particularly important for telecommunications, given
that the value of a communications network grows with the number of its users, with morewidely adopted and standardized technologies bringing greater benefits to all users.As a result of the structural changes in the telecommunications industry, the source offunds for investing in research has shifted from the demand sideÑtelephone customers whopaid for Bell System research via a tax on telephony usageÑto the vendors of equipment,software, and chips, although the U.S. military (through DARPA, the Army, the Navy, and the
Air Force) continues to be a major source of investment in telecommunications research.Currently, end-user organizations and commercial intermediaries are investing very little inresearch (an exception is AT&T, which has maintained a vestige of Bell Labs but has cut that
back substantially, due to dramatic reductions in traditional telecommunications revenuesover the past 3 years, from a support level of close to $140 million in 2001 to a support level ofbelow $60 million in 2004).Today, for commercial technologies, most of the investment is made by supply-side equip-ment vendors and semiconductor and software companies. Service providers and equipmentvendors primarily support research leading to near-term incremental additions to their own
products and services, and are likely to keep the results of their short-term research programsproprietary in the interest of gaining competitive advantage.Although demand-side entities are generally more likely to direct their research invest-ments toward more fundamental and long-time-horizon opportunities, a major economic im-pediment to doing so is so-called free-riding. Since the goal of a demand-side entity is typicallynot to gain proprietary advantage, but to make innovative solutions available through the
totality of its suppliers, demand-side investments in research usually benefit everybody, thatis, all suppliers and other demand-side entities. Thus, companies or entities failing to invest inresearch can still benefit from the investments of others, and there is a temptation to gain a free
ride on those investmentsÑand a disincentive to invest in results that become largely a publicgood.15For more perspective on user-centered innovation, see Eric Von Hippel, Democratizing Innovation, MIT Press,Cambridge, Mass., 2005, available online at <http://web.mit.edu/evhippel/www/democ.htm>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH23The problem of free-riding is not new. Predivestiture, non-Bell telephone companies likeMCI and WorldcomÑbut with the notable exception of GTEÑinvested little in research.Other areas of telecommunications such as cable television, which was able to exploit opticaltransmission technologies for its new hybrid fiber-coaxial cable deployments in the 1990s,
similarly depended on and benefited from new technologies arising from Bell Labs and fromgovernment-sponsored research. Today this trend has been accentuated as the fragments ofthe divested Bell System have greatly curtailed or eliminated research investments, especially
those targeted at advancing the general telecommunications technologies available throughtheir suppliers.Another increasingly used mechanism or trend involves larger companies acquiringsmaller innovative start-ups (perhaps in lieu of funding or otherwise supporting in-houseresearch and development work) to stimulate their own growth and innovation. While thistrend does seem more oriented toward short-term goals, it underscores the importance of
early support or funding for the often high-risk research and development that contribute tothe creation of these smaller spin-off companies.Moving responsibility for research to suppliers increases the volatility of funding. Thecapital expenditures of service providers are dependent on the rate of change of their rev-enues, which can fluctuate rapidly, often owing to cyclical technology changes. For example,recent years have seen a sharp downturn in traditional wireline telephony revenues and
purchases of new equipment by carriers. Sustaining a high-quality research organization re-quires stable funding, and volatility and uncertainty can have significant consequences. Forexample, in recent years, a number of prominent researchers have moved from industry
research laboratories to universities as they seek a more stable environment in which to con-duct their research.The Decreasing Time Horizon of ResearchThe decline in attention to long-term research is quite evident when looking at the historyof Bell Labs, the institution that for decades was most closely associated with long-term tele-communications research. Long-term research supported advances in areas such as switching,transmission, and services, and shorter-term research was aimed at operating and improving
existing technologies and systems. Although most of the system building and systems engi-neering and integration were done by developers and system architects, researchers weretraditionally heavily involved in the process since they were the ones who had created the
fundamental technology on which the new systems were based.It has become clear that even as the number of researchers was growing in the late 1990s,the former Bell family research enterprise was undergoing significant changes. Because inter-
nal corporate management decisions about research and development are proprietary anddetailed historical data were not maintained, quantifying this shift is very difficult. However,testimony to the committee and comments received from a number of researchers clearly
indicate a qualitative shift in the time horizon for research. Long-term, fundamental researchaimed at breakthroughs has declined in favor of shorter-term, incremental and evolutionaryprojects whose purpose is to enable improvements in existing products and services. This
evolutionary work is aimed at generating returns within a couple of years to a couple ofmonths and not at addressing the needs of the telecommunications industry as a whole infuture decades. Insiders and outsiders have observed in comments to the committee that theRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHfocus of 80 to 90 percent of research at the Bell family labs is now concentrated on short-terminnovation rather than long-term fundamental research. Although a closer alignment of theinterests of research laboratories and companies benefits U.S. industry, the often associatedreduction in fundamental, long-term research hurts the telecommunications industry in the
long run.Decline in Industry Participation in Publishing ResearchAdditional evidence for the decline in research spending and the shift from longer- toshorter-term research in the U.S. telecommunications industry is seen in the number of techni-
cal papers authored by industry researchers. At two recent major international conferencesheld annually in the field of communications (which represent at least part of the telecommu-nications landscape), there was a dramatic decrease in the number of conference papers
authored by industry researchers. Table 2.1 lists the sources of the 1352 papers presented at the2005 International Conference on Communications (ICC) and the 2005 IEEE Global Telecom-munications Conference (Globecom). Only a handful of U.S. industry research labs were rep-
resented by more than one paper at the two conferences (see Table 2.2).Although it could be the case that U.S. telecommunications companies have decided torestrict presentations of work by their researchers (and developers) at such conferences, the
committee considers it much more likely that the statistics on publication by author affiliationshown in Tables 2.1 and 2.2 do reflect a dramatic decline in industry efforts in long-termresearch.16A decline in publication by industry authors is also suggested by the decreasing fraction ofindustry-researcher-authored papers in the IEEE Transactions on Communications (Figure 2.1),TABLE 2.1  Sources of Papers Presented at the 2005 International
Conference on Communications and the 2005 IEEE GlobalTelecommunications Conference (Globecom)NumberSourceof PapersPercentage
U.S. universities47034.8
U.S. industry503.7
Asia33224.6

Europe27820.6
Other (majority from Canada)22216.4
TOTAL1,352100
16A reviewer of this report in draft form noted another possible factorÑthat companies increasingly Òdocu-mentÓ their research through patents and participation in standards-setting activities rather than publications.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH25TABLE 2.2  Number of Papers Presented by U.S. Industry
Research Laboratories (for companies with more than one paper)at the 2005 International Conference on Communications and the2005 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (Globecom)U.S. IndustrialNumber
Research Laboratoryof Papers
Qualcomm9
Lucent6
Telcordia4

IBM4
Marvell Semiconductor3
Mitsubishi Research U.S.3

Motorola2
Conextant2
FIGURE 2.1  Percent authorship of papers in the 
IEEE Transactions on Communications, 1970 to 2005.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHarguably the most prestigious journal in the communications area. In 1970 approximately 70percent of the papers in the transactions were authored by industry; in 2003 that percentagehad fallen by an order of magnitude to about 7 percent. The reduced contributions fromindustry have been partially offset by an increase in the number of academic papersÑboth
from U.S. and foreign universities.U.S. Participation in Publishing ResearchIt can also be seen that publications from universities outside the United States are greaterin number than publications from universities within the United StatesÑalbeit by a small
amount. In addition, the level of publication from industry outside the United States is nowroughly the same as the level from U.S. industry.Within U.S. universities, there are multiple indications that much U.S. academic researchin telecommunications is being carried out by foreign national graduate students. In the pa-pers published in Globecom 2005, 459 of the 675 authors from U.S. universities (68 percent)have apparently Asian surnames. This observation is consistent with data showing that
roughly 60 percent of the Ph.D.s in engineering and 50 percent of the Ph.D.s in computerscience awarded in the United States are being awarded to non-U.S. citizens.17GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHOverall InvestmentGovernment support for telecommunications research has been small compared with sup-port for other areas of IT, arguably because of the spending on research by the Bell System
(until divestiture) and by its progeny. Precise figures are, unfortunately, difficult to come by.Perhaps because telecommunications has not been considered a strategic area for investment,telecommunications research activities do not fall neatly into programs labeled as Òtelecom-
municationsÓ nor is telecommunications research funding across the U.S. government trackedas a separate category by NSFÕs Division of Science Resources Statistics.However, a top-down indication of the level of investment can be obtained from Network-ing and Information Technology Research and Development: Supplement to the PresidentÕs Budget forFY2006,18 a report of the National Coordination Office for Networking and Information Tech-nology Research and Development. It describes the networking and information technology
research spending by its 11 participating agenciesÑNSF, NIH, DOE (Office of Science), NASA,DARPA, the National Security Agency, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,17Based on data compiled by the Computing Research Association; see <http://www.cra.org/info/education/us/phd.citizenship.html>.18Subcommittee on Networking and Information Technology Research and Development, Committee on Tech-nology, National Science and Technology Council, Networking and Information Technology Research and Development:Supplement to the PresidentÕs Budget for FY2006, National Coordination Office for Networking and InformationTechnology Research and Development, Arlington, Va., February 2005, available online at <http://www.nitrd.
gov/pubs/2006supplement/>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH27NIST, NOAA, EPA, and DOE/National Nuclear Security AgencyÑthat provide the bulk offederal research in these areas. The report divides federal research spending into seven catego-riesÑhigh-end computing infrastructure and applications, high-end computing R&D, humancomputer interaction and information management, large-scale networking (LSN), software
design and productivity, high-confidence software and systems, and social, economic, andworkforce). The total research spending across these agencies and areas for FY 2006 is$2.1 billion, whereas for LSNÑthe area likely to contain the most telecommunications-related
researchÑit is $328 million, or 16 percent of the total.The numbers are not definitive: there might, for example, be some physical sciences workthat supports telecommunications, and (similarly uncounted) physical sciences work that
supports IT as well. Also, not all of the LSN budget supports networking research per se. Forexample, the biggest contributor to support for LSN is NIH, at least some of which appears tobe for networks for health sciences research rather than for networking research itself. Con-
sidering funding for all agencies except for NIH funding, the FY 2006 spending on LSN is$230 million out of $1.7 billion, or 14 percent. Also, the second largest supporter of LSNresearch is NSF ($95 million); some of NSFÕs LSN budget also supports research infrastructure
rather than networking research, making the percentage for research itself even lower.National Science FoundationThere are elements of programs in NSFÕs Computer and Information Science and Engi-neering (CISE) and Engineering (ENG) directorates that address aspects of telecommunica-
tions research. The CISE directorate has, for example, long been an important supporter ofnetworking research (as noted in ÒThe Internet,Ó the section above on the development of theearly Internet). Over the years the ENG directorate has made investments in various
areas including wireless and optical communications, and it has established several engineer-ing research centers related to telecommunications. In the view of the committee, however,these efforts as a whole have not represented a major programmatic emphasis by NSF
on telecommunications nor reflected a comprehensive, coordinated research strategy intelecommunications.Today, as outlined above, telecommunications programs in total see only a modest level offunding. In addition, testimony provided to the committee indicated that overall proposalacceptance rates for most NSF programs related to telecommunications (in the CISE and ENGdirectorates) have been 10 percent or less for the past several years.19In 2004, NSF announced a new $40 million per year program called Network Technologyand Systems (NeTS), which represents a significant new investment in telecommunicationsresearch and education projects and will focus on the following four areas: programmable
wireless networks, networking of sensor systems, networking broadly defined, and futureInternet design.20 The program has latitude for interdisciplinary work that could also involvephysical devices and could suggest a wide range of research topics in the control, deployment,19In his May 2004 testimony to this committee, Guru Parulkar of NSF indicated that proposal acceptance ratesÒin the single digitsÓ were typical for CISE networking research programs.20For more information on NeTS and its four focus areas, see <http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2006/nsf06516/nsf06516.htm>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHand management of future networks. However, although the NeTS program is a welcomesource of additional support and programmatic emphasis on telecommunications research, itsrelatively modest size is likely to have little overall impact on low proposal acceptance rates.In 2005, NSF announced the Global Environment for Networking Investigations (GENI)initiative, a program still in the planning stage that will focus on new concepts for networkingand distributed system architectures and on experimental facilities to investigate them at largescale. Envisioned as encompassing a broad community effort that engages other agencies and
countries, as well as corporate entities, the GENI initiative will emphasize the creation of newnetworking and distributed system architectures that, for example:¥Build in security and robustness;¥Enable the vision of pervasive computing and bridge the gap between the physical andvirtual worlds by including mobile, wireless, and sensor networks;¥Enable control and management of other critical infrastructures;¥Include ease of operation and usability; and¥Enable new classes of societal-level services and applications.21Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency SupportLong a source of support for research on large-scale problems, DARPA has led in com-puter networking (via the ARPANET and its derivatives) and in the creation of the Internet
(via its support of TCP/IP protocols and related computer networking services such as e-mail,
ftp, gopher, and others) and remains committed today to advances in telecommunications-focused research. In the early 1990s, DARPA was involved in the research on and adoption ofasynchronous transfer mode (ATM) technology, as well as research into packet technologies
for voice and video. Along with nearly 40 other organizations, DARPA also completed workon the Gigabit Testbed Initiative, an effort by a host of universities, telecommunication carri-ers, industry, national laboratories, and computer companies to create a number of very-high-
speed network testbeds and explore their use for scientific research and other applications.22In the late 1990s, DARPA also funded the All Optical Networking Consortium, which was
formed by the cooperation of Bell Laboratories, Digital Equipment Corporation, and the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology to examine the unique properties of fiber optics for ad-vanced broadband networking. DARPA has also been a long-standing, significant funder ofwireless research.Currently, telecommunications research programs in support of battlefield communica-tions continue to be a focus of DARPAÕs work. Examples include the Information ProcessingTechnology OfficeÕs (IPTOÕs) Situation Aware Protocols in Edge Network Technologies
(SAPIENT) program,23 and the Advanced Technology OfficeÕs (ATOÕs) Information Theory21National Science Foundation, Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, The GENIInitiative, 2005, available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/cise/geni/>.22The final results of this initiative were captured in the following report:  Corporation for National Research
Initiatives, The Gigabit Testbed Initiative: Final Report, 1996, available online at <http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/gigafr/>.23More information about IPTOÕs work can be found online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ipto/>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH29for Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks, Mobile Network MIMO, Rescue Transponder, Networking inExtreme Environments, and NeXt-Generation Communications programs.24DARPA has had a long and illustrious history of funding high-risk, high-reward projects,many of which have changed the face of military systems, computing environments, network-
ing, other military technologies, and ultimately technologies in private industry.25Other Federally Funded Telecommunications ResearchThe previous sections highlight several of the more prominent federal funding programsrelated to telecommunications. But there have been many other important areas of investment
over the years. Within DOD itself, the service laboratories (Office of Naval Research, Air ForceOffice of Scientific Research, and the Army Research Office) as well as other military R&Dcenters (such as MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Rome Air Development Center, Army Satellite R&D
at Ft. Monmouth, and so on) have made significant investments in a wide array of telecommu-nications technologies. Another mission-driven investment was made by NASA in support ofsatellite and space missions. Finally, programs at the National Telecommunications and Infor-
mation AdministrationÕs Boulder laboratory have helped advance the field of wireless propa-gation.HISTORICAL CHALLENGES TO DOING MORE TELECOMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH IN ACADEMIAAn indirect consequence of the traditionally high levels of funding for research by the BellSystem and by its progeny has been modest attention to telecommunications in academiacompared to many other areas of information and communications technology. Since almost
every aspect of telecommunications was provided by monopoly carriers (both in the UnitedStates and abroad), it was difficult to create viable telecommunications courses in academiaand to attract professors who were knowledgeable about the changing telecommunications
environment.More recently, corporate investment in academic work has been quite modest and con-fined largely to a few successful consortium research programs that have attracted industry
support and have also, in some cases, been funded by state initiatives. Several state programs,notably in California and Georgia,26 support academic telecommunications research and in-teractions with industry.Another challenge in teaching telecommunications or carrying out a relevant researchprogram in universities is that the facilities and resources at academic institutions are notadequate to address the architectural and operational issues of large-scale telecommunications
networks. Since there has never been any pressure or financial incentive to create the resources24Likewise, more information about ATOÕs work can be found online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ato/>.25For a history describing the transition of DARPA research into the military, other government organizations,and private industry, see DARPA, ÒTechnology Transition,Ó [undated], available online at <http://www.darpa.mil/body/pdf/transition.pdf>.26For more information on these programs, see <http://www.calit2.net> and <http://www.gcatt.org>,respectively.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHand infrastructure for such research (since these have traditionally and historically been thedomain of the monopoly carriers), most university researchers have opted instead to focus oncore technologies like semiconductors, computing, signal processing, and communicationtheory, where meaningful research can be done at a much smaller scale with fewer resources,
and where both industry and government have been more willing to provide the supportneeded to create long-range academic programs.INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENTIn the course of its work the committee developed a keen sense of the increasing competi-tion from international telecommunications industries (in terms of both technology and price).However, it is very difficult to collect comprehensive information on international R&D in-
vestment related to telecommunications or to assess how such investments affect a givenindustry. Still, there is ample evidence that a number of other nations place considerableemphasis on R&D in this sector. Three member countries of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, for example, have legal or regulatory mandates for suchresearch:27¥JapanÕs NTT law requires NTT to conduct research relating to telecommunications tech-nologies and makes NTT (including the regional companies NTT East and NTT West) respon-sible for promoting and disseminating the results of telecommunications research.¥KoreaÕs telecommunications basic law allows the Ministry for Information and Commu-nications (MIC) to recommend that service providers contribute a percentage of total annualrevenues to telecommunications research. R&D investments by carriers may be internal or
external; external contributions are made to an MIC-administered fund that is then distributedto Korean research institutes.¥In 2003, FranceÕs telecommunications regulations required France Telecom to spend4 percent of its unconsolidated revenues on research and development.In addition, several nations and regions conduct major research programs with significantgovernment investment. It is, of course, difficult to compare research programs in detail be-cause of differences in program structure, definitions of telecommunications, and so forth.However, several examples of investments made outside the United States provide a compel-
ling illustration of the high priority being placed on telecommunications R&D outside theUnited States. Major initiatives include the following:¥The European Union Sixth Framework Programme includes nearly $300 million in fund-ing for telecommunications research under the Information Society Technologies program:138 million for mobile and wireless systems and Òplatforms beyond 3G,Ó 65 million forÒbroadband for all,Ó 63 million for Ònetworked audiovisual systems and home platforms,Óand 18 million for research networking testbeds.2827OECD, OECD Communications Outlook 2005, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2005, p. 75.28Budgets for 2004-2005 annual calls for proposals; see <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/activities/activities.htm>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY AND EFFECTS ON RESEARCH31¥JapanÕs National Institute of Information and Communications Technology has an al-most entirely government-funded budget of over $500 million that supports nearly 500 em-ployees, 60 percent of whom are researchers.29 Another government-supported institution, theResearch Institute of Telecommunications and Economics, carries out economics and policy
research related to telecommunications.Another development is that some U.S. academic telecommunications researchers haveturned to foreign corporations for funding and have, according to information available tomembers of the committee, received funding from companies such as Toshiba (Japan), Huawei(China), and Samsung (Korea)Ñwhich have become formidable competitors of U.S. firms. To
gain such support, academic institutions have sometimes been asked to surrender ownershipor agree to co-ownership of intellectual property stemming from the research.Finally, beyond research programs, many nations have signaled their commitment to tele-communications as a critical societal and economic element. In particular, China has fostereda strong and growing telecommunications industry. Briefers to the committee and reviewersof this report noted the increasing technical sophistication and competitiveness in pricing of
Chinese equipment vendors.30 Countries such as Japan (e-Japan), Korea (e-Korea Vision 2006),and Taiwan (e-Taiwan) have launched national programs that aim to broadly promote thedeployment, adoption, and use of information and telecommunications technologies. They
feature a variety of elements ranging from research funding to policy reforms to incentives forbroadband deployment to national standards and standards-development processes that (ifonly indirectly) aim to strengthen domestic industries.29See <http://www.nict.go.jp/overview/> or overview pamphlet at <http://www.nict.go.jp/overview/news/pdf-box/NICT-e.pdf>.30A 2004 Business Week article profiled one such prominent Chinese company, Huawei, noting that the companywas spending 10 percent of its revenues on R&D.  See Bruce Einhorn, ÒHuawei: More Than a Local Hero,Ó

BusinessWeek Online, 2004, available online at <http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/04_41/b3903454.htm>.  Also, for more insight into Chinese competitiveness and its implications for U.S. entrepreneurs,
see Reed Hundt, In ChinaÕs Shadow:  The Crisis of American Entrepreneurship
, Yale University Press, New Haven,Conn., 2006.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH323The Case for Renewed Investment inTelecommunications Research
Discussing the importance of ongoing improvements in telecommunications and the keyingredients in sustaining a healthy telecommunications ecosystem, this chapter considers whyresearch and leadership in telecommunications matter.WHY RESEARCH MATTERSThe Role of Research Advances in Creating Modern TelecommunicationsResearch over the past several decades has led to advances ranging from incrementalimprovements to real breakthroughs (so-called disruptive changes1). Major advances haveoccurred, for example, in the underlying Òphysical layerÓ communications technologies forwireless, optical fiber, and wireline transmission. These include:¥Local area networking technology, notably Ethernet and successively faster generations ofEthernet standards, which have made it possible to connect many millions of computers bothwithin organizations and to the wider world through the Internet;¥Radio-frequency communications technologies for cellular systems and wireless local areanetworks, which have enabled modern mobile voice and data communications and havefueled the growth of the entire mobile phone industry;¥Optical networks, which have revolutionized communications by providing extraordi-nary amounts of communications bandwidth over very long distances at very low unit cost,1Disruptive technological change often presents significant challenges to incumbents who are using existingtechnologies, but it also leads to dramatically better capabilities for users and to the spawning of entire new
industries.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH33and whose tremendous communications capacity has enabled significant transformations ofthe public switched telephone network, cable systems, and the Internet; and¥Broadband local access communication, enabled by technological innovations such as digi-tal subscriber line and cable modems, which has made high-speed Internet access widely
available to homes and small businesses.Disruptive technological change has occurred at the protocol and network levels as well.Two notable examples include:¥The InternetÑthe realization of a revolutionary communications paradigmÑwhich in-troduced a new, highly flexible network architecture and protocols, and ultimately enabledmyriad new applications and services; and¥Packetization of voice and video, such as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), which providesvoice communications with greater flexibility and efficiency and has opened up opportunitiesfor application innovation beyond the boundaries of the public switched network.At the level of applications, the Internet in turn has provided a unique laboratory for thecreation of innovative applicationsÑe-mail, instant messaging, collaboration, World WideWeb (WWW) browsers and servers, electronic auctions, and business to business (B2B) and
business to consumer (B2C) electronic commerceÑthat have changed consumer behavior andbusiness interaction. Audio and video have expanded as well, from traditional cable broadcastnetworks to digital cable systems to switched video on the Internet, file sharing, and pay-per-
view.Traditional telephony has also been transformed over time. Out-of-band signaling proto-cols for the public switched telephone network, such as the current global standard Common
Channel Signaling System No. 7 (SS7), have made possible the modern worldwide publictelephone network by supporting such features as worldwide direct dialing, wireless roam-ing, local number portability, and toll-free calling. Telephony has also branched out into new
application areas: voice over packet, wireless telephony, and integrated voice/data applica-tions are industry-shaping developments.Developments in optical communications provide a good illustration of how multiplethreads of research in electronics, photonics, signal processing, and coding theory have allcontributed to the remarkable growth in optical transport capacity. These developments weredriven first by the advantage of displacing the copper transport plant with optical fiber (early
1980s); the emergence of pervasive global connectedness (1980s and 1990s); widespreadInternet use (starting in the mid-1990s); and broadband data and video access (starting circa2000). High-speed electronic and optical devices have kept a steady pace with this demand to
enable the growth in optical capacity with gigabits-per-second (Gbps) silicon and GaAs cir-cuits appearing in 1985, leading to todayÕs commercial InP circuits working in 40-Gbps opticalchannels. Recent laboratory results have shown that 100-Gbps electronic circuits are possible.
The first reports between 1986 and 1988 of erbium-doped amplifiers led to wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM), which made it practical to carry multiple optical channels on asingle fiber. Today more than 100 channels can be carried in a single fiber, with aggregate
capacity exceeding 6 terabits per second. After the introduction of WDM, new optical fibertypes that balance between chromatic dispersion and optical nonlinearities were introduced inthe early 1990s, successfully extending the capacity and range of optical transport systems.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHComplementing the fiber evolution has been the evolution in signal modulation formats,resulting in more compact signal spectra and more robust channels. Finally, new codingmethods, in particular forward-error correction schemes, have greatly increased the designmargins possible for optical transport and have figured significantly in the enhancement of
capacity and range over the past 5 or 6 years. Further technological advances in all-opticalsignal regeneration, modulation formats, and channel filtering are expected to continue toenable improvements in fiber-optic communications.The Potential for Research Spin-offsIt is also worth reflecting on the many notable spin-offs of past telecommunications re-search. Examples include:¥Transistors, which spawned the entire semiconductor and computer industry, and anenormous range of applications in communications, computing, media, and entertainment;¥Lasers, which have seen widespread application in medicine (surgery), consumer elec-tronics (CD and DVD players), manufacturing, and even toys and games;¥KarmarkarÕs algorithm for linear programming, which solved a long-standing problem incomputer science and is an example of the kind of widely applicable solutions to mathematical
problems that arise in telecommunications;¥UNIX, created as a result of work aimed at constructing a simple operating system thatfacilitated the construction of widely reusable software tools; the telecommunication industryÕs
requirements for high performance helped push forefront research in simple yet powerfulsoftware systems, and today, various flavors of UNIX are the dominant open standard inoperating systems;¥Reduced instruction set computing, the first prototype system for which (the 801 Minicom-puter at IBM Research) had as its application objective a telephone switching system;¥Satellite communications and the entertainment industry spawned by Telstar, which to-day are much broader in scope than the point-to-point communications Telstar was built forand were made possible by the initial investment in a single application;¥Coding and information theory, developed for data compression and error-correction,which has also found application in diverse areas such as cryptography, probability theory,biology, and investment theory.Of course, that such spin-offs occurred reflects in no small part the significant investmentin long-term research that was made in the Bell system era. These and other spin-offs alsodemonstrate that making major advances in telecommunications requires the solution of tech-
nical problems across the spectrum from theory to device physics to software, yielding resultsthat can have broad utility.Research for National Defense and Homeland SecurityResearch in commercial and defense applications of telecommunications has contributedsignificantly to U.S. military strength. Captured in the phrase Ònetwork-centric warfare,Ó thecentral and growing importance of communications systems to national defense and home-land security makes these key areas that rely on having a strong U.S. research and skill base.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH35The intensity of the communications demands that can arise in defense applications isevident in the concept of the future battlefield as being totally dependent on communications:from the fiber-optic cores of military networks to the satellite systems that provide long-reachcommunications to the tactical radios carried by soldiers on the battlefield. Some of these
requirements are fulfilled via commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) products. Use of COTS prod-ucts is often highly desirable as a means of reducing the cost of infrastructure, yet suchproducts bring concerns as well (see the discussion below in the section ÒLeadership for
National Defense and Homeland SecurityÓ). For example, military requirements can exceedwhat COTS products alone can deliver, perhaps because the demands (e.g., the need formultilevel security) are higher or the application environment is different, because of the
presence of an adversary, for instance.In addition to emphasizing the impact of U.S. communications research on C4I (i.e., com-mand, control, communications, computers, and intelligence2), it is also important to brieflynote the relevance to C4I of the engineering disciplines. Much of the basic mathematics thatunderlies telecommunications engineering is also relevant to command and control systems.Almost any computing device depends heavily on communications technology, both inter-
nally to communicate between subelements of the computer and externally to communicatewith other devices. And the field of intelligence is replete with examples of reliance on tele-communications. Hence, telecommunications research is significant for and integral to the
capability and capacity of many aspects of the overall defense system.A strong U.S. telecommunications research capability is also important for several indirectreasons related to defense and homeland security:¥Skill base of engineering talent: education and training. To solve the specialized communica-tions issues in C4I requires that the United States have the best telecommunications engineers
in the world, which in turn requires that a vibrant commercial industry be maintained. Other-wise, the best engineers will migrate to countries that have protected or low-cost businesses,and ultimately U.S. security will be put at risk.¥Delivery capability of government suppliers. Because meeting military requirements de-pends on fundamental understanding of very-high-speed optical networks, satellite commu-nications, and support of mobility in the battlefield, it is not sufficient to have a cadre of
educated and trained individuals. Corporate environments must also be available in whichsuch individuals are trained to work together in teams on system-level designs, and to take aninterdisciplinary approach.¥Interconnectedness of defense systems. As more defense- and homeland security-relatedsystems are interconnected, the pressure will increase on the United States to develop newtechnologies here at home, because relying on foreign suppliers for critical network compo-
nents like firewalls and communications software might open the door to serious compro-mises of security and availability across a wide range of defense capabilities.¥Military superiority. In a military context, the goal is superiority over the adversary,which requires having the best research and engineering capability in the world.2For more information about C4I, see Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National ResearchCouncil, Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999,available online at <http://fermat.nap.edu/html/C4I/>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHPotential Impacts of Future ResearchTelecommunications continues to be a dynamic sector in which significant innovation ispossible provided proper research investments are made. Some examples of potential payoffs
from telecommunications research include the following:¥A significantly enhanced Internet architecture that goes beyond incremental improve-ments to the existing network architecture to provide enhancements such as greater trustwor-thiness in the network core and customer networks, improved addressing and routing, andend-to-end quality of service provisioning;3¥New network architectures that take advantage of ever-greater storage densities, pro-cessing speeds, and communications bandwidths;¥More trustworthy telecommunications networks better able to address such challengesas maintaining the security of the voice network even in the face of a rising frequency, sophis-tication, and severity of attacks and the complexities and interdependencies that come withthe convergence of voice and data networks;¥Ubiquitous, higher-performance, more-affordable broadband access that enables richer,more interactive applications, including applications in such important areas as health careand education;¥Telepresence and telecollaboration environments that reproduce a local space at a dis-tance and enable spatially separated individuals or teams to work more readily in concert;¥Public safety networks that offer higher mobility, better adaptation to harsh and chang-ing conditions, and increased resiliency to damage;¥Adaptive/cognitive wireless networks that enable higher-performance communications,make more efficient use of radio spectrum, and complement or supplant todayÕs chiefly wired
networks;¥Location-based wireless networks that provide information and services tailored to thelocal environment;¥Self-organizing sensor networks that have large numbers of nodes, are energy efficient,and have self-organizing capabilities, which would enable ubiquitous, cheap monitoring ofthe environment and weather, sensing of biological or chemical agents, and monitoring
of facilities; and¥New semiconductor devices that enable higher performance and new forms of commu-nications and computing.The section that follows discusses several broad research areas in more detail.Some Important Areas of Emphasis for Future Telecommunications ResearchDefining Future Architectures in an Era with More DiffuseResponsibility for End-to-End IssuesMajor innovation in telecommunications has always depended on the industryÕs ability tomake major architectural shifts. Telecommunications networks are large, complex systems3For a recent overview, see David Talbot, ÒThe Internet Is Broken,Ó Technology Review, 108(11):62-69, December2005-January 2006, available online at <http://www.technologyreview.com/infotech/wtr_16051,258,p1.html>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH37whose reliability, security, and evolvability are dependent on the development of coherentand well-conceived architectural concepts. Historical examples within the public telephonenetwork of such major architectural shifts include direct-distance dialing, digital transmissionand switching, and the incorporation of cellular telephony into the public telephone network.
The Internet is another example of a major architectural advance, one made possible by amultiyear research effort funded by the federal government for the first couple of decades(largely on behalf of military and internal research applications).Will future advances of this magnitude be more difficult to achieve in todayÕs environ-ment, particularly in the United States? The situation now is more dynamic than in the BellSystem days, involving more competition and more opportunities for creative new ideas.
Today, however, multiple vendorsÕ products are used to configure U.S. telecommunicationsinfrastructure and deliver services, and multiple service providers (and thus even more ven-dors) are involved in delivering services that cross provider boundaries. As a result of the
industryÕs shift to a horizontal structure and its fragmentation into a large number of firms,neither vendors nor service providers are prepared to take responsibility for end-to-end sys-tems design.No single vendor can now drive architectural change in the same way that AT&T was ableto do in the past. Telecommunications vendors are able to make incremental improvementswithin existing frameworks, but major advances in system architecture or services may be
more difficult, and innovation in services and applications may become constrained by contin-ued reliance on obsolete network architectures. Also, what solutions are developed and de-ployed may be unnecessarily complex, fragile, and vulnerable because of too little investment
in architectural work.Cable televisionÕs recent architectural transformation shows how an industry can create anew entity (in this case, CableLabs) to help drive change at least within a particular sector of
the telecommunications industry. Cable systems were transformed from one-way, broadcast-only systems into two-way, multilayer systems that migrated fiber much further into theinfrastructure while retaining coaxial cable as the final link to the customer. This new archi-
tecture positioned the cable industry to deliver video, voice, and data services. The nonprofitCableLabs consortium (described in greater detail in Chapter 2) was established to addressend-to-end issues for the cable industry through activities to identify and develop new tech-
nologies, write specifications, certify products, and disseminate information to the cable in-dustry. Its activities are supported by subscription and testing fees paid by its members.CableLabs helped foster the introduction of digital transmission and the hybrid fiber co-
axial cable architecture found in modern cable systems and developed a series of specifica-tions for cable modems known as the Data Over Cable System Interface Specification.Infrastructure EnhancementPhysical connectivity is the foundation for telecommunications networks. Imagine that theUnited States had never deployed copper wires and coaxial cable to connect its homes andbusinesses and now wanted to design the best possible telecommunications infrastructure.There is little doubt about the best design choiceÑoptical fiber for high bandwidth comple-
mented by wireless for mobility and flexibility. Optical communications would give everyonethe greatest possible amount of bandwidth, would be useful for essentially all applicationsthat have been imagined, and would be future proofÑit is known how to continually get moreRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHand more bandwidth out of each fiber. The cost of installing the fiber would be no greater thanthe cost of a new installation of any other medium.Today U.S. telecommunications infrastructure has little fiber to the premises, althoughfiber makes up most long-haul and metropolitan area networks. Realizing the goal of fiber
everywhere involves a number of problems requiring research. For example, while the cost ofoptical components is not a significant problem in core networks because the cost is spreadacross many users, the components represent a nontrivial expense for local access networks,
which serve only one user or a handful of users. How can the cost of optical components bereduced sufficiently to make fiber to the home affordable? What architectural approaches offerthe best mix of affordability, performance, and evolvability? What are the future applications
that will drive the need for increasing bandwidth?4Metropolitan area networks are currently receiving much commercial attention. WithtodayÕs abundance of fiber in the core, and with access networks creating larger demands, an
important focus of research is to develop architectures that effectively handle ever-greatervolumes of optical transmission in metropolitan areas. Core networks themselves will requireadvances, and as more capability is introduced into the access networks, the need will grow to
continue to improve the bandwidth-times-distance product, as will demands to increase theperformance of national networks.Wireless networks provide an even more fertile area for exploration. Access to higherbandwidth, which has spurred growing use of the wired Internet and is now becoming avail-able to wireless LAN users (via WiFi and WiMAX) and fully mobile users (via 3G technology),is basic to the creation of the so-called mobile Internet. There are many opportunities for
further progress. At the physical level fundamental data rate limits for most environments arestill very far from being achieved, and there are practical impediments, such as topographyand the costs of certain components such as filters, to enhanced performance. Further develop-
ment of multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) antenna technology, for example, offersopportunities to drive even greater capacity of wireless networks.Infrastructure TrustworthinessAlthough an area of great, growing, and shared concern is the trustworthiness (i.e., secu-rity and reliability) of U.S. telecommunications, related research does not seem to be keepingpace with these concerns.5The voice network was designed, engineered, and refined to continue to operate in all butthe most severe disasters and has generally performed well as a result. Over the past century,it has evolved from a largely mechanical system into a sophisticated electronic switchingnetwork with a signaling network overlay and a rich set of vertical services provided by4An earlier CSTB committee examined many of these and other related issues. See, for example, Chapter 4 inComputer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Broadband: Bringing Homethe Bits, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2002, available online at <http://fermat.nap.edu/html/broadband/>.5See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council (NRC),Critical Information Infrastructure Protection and the Law, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003,p. 66; and CSTB, NRC, Trust in Cyberspace, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH39attached processors and databases. This evolution was clearly necessary to support the ubiq-uity of interconnections, increases in call volume, and provision of new services. The resultingnetwork has proven generally reliable and secure. But like all networks, it is potentially vul-nerable to electronic attack.6Data networks, and the Internet in particular, evolved in a very different way. The Internetbegan as an open collaboration among trusted peers. The protocols were developed to opti-mize interconnection, simplicity, and accessÑcharacteristics that have proven to be some of
the InternetÕs greatest strengths, adding to its reliability and scalability. But while redundancyand distribution were contemplated, security and quality of service were not prominent con-cerns early on. Despite the demonstrated advantages of the current architecture, every device
connected to the Internet can become a source of or a target for malicious activity. And suchmalicious activity has flourished, most publicly in the form of hackers/crackers, viruses,worms, Trojan horses, or denial-of-service attacks. Today both the network and every net-
worked device requires some form of protection, but the protection is neither uniform noruniversal.Trustworthiness issues also arise at the intersection of the public telephone network andthe Internet. Initially, voice and data network interaction was limited to common transportsystems and the use of the voice network to carry data between dial-up modems. Today,digital subscriber line (DSL) services carry data over the same lines that formerly carried only
voice conversations. The volume of data traffic now surpasses the volume for voice traffic, adevelopment that forces consideration of the eventual migration of voice traffic to the datanetwork. In fact, this migration has begunÑalbeit more slowly than initially projectedÑwith
voice over IP (VoIP), IP Centrex, and softswitch technology. Over time voice traffic will in-creasingly be carried by packet transport and routing. In the interim, interworking betweenthe traditional public switched telephone network and the data networks must be provided.
Convergence of the voice and data networks, although compelling in features and potentialcost savings, also requires research into the reliability and security of existing voice servicesand the overall converged network.In addition to convergence, new technologies are also enabling new network capabilitiesand services that will in turn pose new challenges to trustworthiness. Dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM), optical switching, a migration of Ethernet into metropolitan
networks, virtual private networking, multiprotocol label switching (MPLS), video, unifiedmessaging, and various forms of wireless data all require intelligent network components ordevices. Devices and services for personal computing, mobile Internet use, and a plethora of
other applications that will leverage these emerging capabilities will also bring more complex-ity into the core and edges of the networkÑand thus new challenges to ensuring security andreliability. Public data networks have been built and the number of network providersÑincluding30 major Internet backbone providers and thousands of Internet service providersÑhas in-creased at an unprecedented rate. As a result of all these rapid changes, public networks now
have many more interfaces to competing networks and therefore many more points of vulner-6Reflecting the networkÕs national importance, additional measures (e.g., planning, coordination, and informa-tion sharing via creation of entities such as the National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee andthe National Coordinating Center for Telecommunications) have been taken to help avert attacks and remediate
their consequences.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHability. The number of new network equipment manufacturers has grown as well. In anenvironment of fierce competition, manufacturers tend to concentrate on improving rawperformance and introducing complex features, sometimes at the expense of building incapability for survivability and security or performing robust testing and quality assurance
before products enter the network. In addition, todayÕs business and regulatory environmentdoes not necessarily provide sufficient incentives for building in redundancy and securitycommensurate with societal needs. Clearly, the need to focus research efforts on such critical
issues as the reliability and security of the telecommunications infrastructure is now moreimportant than ever.WHY LEADERSHIP MATTERSLeadership is especially important in light of such issues as competing effectively in todayÕsglobal marketplace; ensuring U.S. national defense and homeland security; maintaining atelecommunications infrastructure supportive of sustained innovation in telecommunications,which in turn enables innovations in many other industrial sectors; and maintaining the ca-
pacity to create new industries.Historically, the United States has been able to translate a number of key research ad-vances into leadership positions in telecommunications, as illustrated by the following
examples:¥CDMA technology, which was originally invented and championed by U.S. firms, hasnow been accepted as the worldwide standard for third-generation (3G) mobile networks;¥DSL technology, cable modems, and hybrid fiber coaxial cable technology, all U.S.-invented, are used to deliver broadband services throughout the world.¥The Internet and its TCP/IP protocols, pioneered in the United States with DARPAfunding, have come to dominate data networking.The majority of the research and innovation that drove the development of related newbusinesses was done in the United States, positioning U.S. industries to have first-moveradvantage. Not only has the United States been the leader in the core telecommunications
technologies and information technology more generally (including processing, storage, com-munications, and software), but the new businesses and applications built around these tech-nologies are also core areas of U.S. leadership. Ownership of intellectual property is also a
benefit that often accrues to the country that can lead in innovation, with broad worldwidepatents granted to those companies and universities creating fundamental new advances. Thispatent position also benefits these organizations economically.Advantage oftenÑbut not alwaysÑgoes to the home country. On the supply side, it hasbeen beneficial for U.S. trade and commerce that U.S. innovators and first-movers have beenable to export their products and solutions to other countries. With the United States in the
lead for Internet innovation, for example, U.S. companies such as Cisco and Wellfleet Commu-nications had a natural market to address, created the initial products, and positioned them-selves well for the future. Other companies such as RSA and Qualcomm developed and
patented key technologies and created strong businesses based on that intellectual property.Companies such as AOL and Yahoo! were naturally positioned to succeed in markets for newservices, and new applications markets were developed by companies like Amazon and eBay.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH41These examples illustrate notable instances of research breakthroughs having enabled atechnology capability that has, in turn, led to U.S. intellectual leadership in that area. Thereare, to be sure, counter-examples. For technologies like television, high-definition television(more recently), and mobile phone hardware, for example, much of the early work or break-
throughs occurred in the United States, but much of the commercial advantage and manufac-turing success has been reaped elsewhere (e.g., Japan, China, Scandinavia, and so on).Although the WWW was created in Europe, the focus quickly shifted to the United States,where a crucial WWW tool, the graphical browser, was developedÑanother example of thepower of strong research leadership and of the importance of the Internet research and devel-opment ecosystem in the United States, which went on to play a leading role in further
innovations such as graphical Web browsers, e-business, and Internet search. The lesson isthat future technology leadership will likely follow the paradigm of advantage to the homeinnovator.The Global Telecommunications MarketMany firms today operate and compete on a global scale, and various forces are at work toincrease the competitiveness of other nations in high-tech sectors such as telecommunications.Among the many contributing factors are increased investment by other countries in their
own domestic research and training, other forms of government investment in and support fordomestic industries, growing domestic markets, and lower labor costs. In the large economiesof the Pacific Rim, for example, considerable investment is being made in developing the
workforce. Since open standards define much of the telecommunications system, foreign sup-pliers have an opportunity to bring to market the same products that U.S. competitors offer,but much more cheaply due to lower prevailing wages, less need to invest in basic research,
and often a return on their investment guaranteed by home country purchase policies.Although almost all telecommunications markets are now global, the degree of opennessand true competitiveness varies. The United States has an open market, with virtually no
pressures to buy from local manufacturers. Although the U.S. model is most likely to providethe lowest cost and most innovative services to consumers, it does lead to a situation in whichU.S. manufacturers do not have a leg up in their home market and are also substantially
handicapped in foreign markets.The typical response to such competitive pressures would be to invest in research thatleads to new products that other manufacturers lack, as a way of reestablishishing preemi-
nence. However, there are several obstacles to following this path in telecommunications.TodayÕs horizontal industry structure makes many kinds of investment by an individual firmspeculative. In addition, in telecommunications there is a general expectation for compatibility
with prevailing standards, which makes it difficult for a firm to position itself many yearsahead of its competitors. Research advances that lead to major innovative breakthroughs, newarchitectural approaches, and the like are thus especially valuable in responding to global
competition.Leadership for National Defense and Homeland SecurityTwo areas where U.S. interest in ensuring telecommunications leadership is clear arenational defense and homeland security. Historically, U.S. technical leadership in commercialRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHcommunications has extended to the military space, and at the same time a host of fundamen-tal telecommunications technologies were developed to meet military needs. Examples ofsuch DARPA-funded telecommunications advances are the Internet (from ARPANET), opticalnetworking (from MONET), and ad hoc wireless networks.In theory, the United States could deploy state-of-the-art networks using foreign-origintechnology and supporting research. In practice, however, research, development, and de-ployment of the most advanced technologies tend to go hand-in-hand.Without a continuing focus on telecommunications R&D, the United States will increas-ingly be forced to purchase technology and services from foreign sources. Several risks areevident: (1) U.S. dependence on foreign sources to meet critical defense needs; (2) loss of
exclusive or early access to state-of-the-art communications technology; (3) loss of know-howto employ state-of-the-art technology; (4) opportunities for other nations to introduce securityholes into equipment and networks; and (5) loss of technical capability for cyberdefense, such
as cybersecurity, network assurance, and cryptography. Network trustworthiness is an espe-cially important subject for public investment, given that it is a public good7 in which indi-vidual firms tend to underinvest.In a future conflict, an overseas telecommunications equipment supplier to the U.S. mili-tary could become an adversary, making a reliable supply of COTS products less likely.Another substantial concern with foreign COTS products involves vulnerabilities that might
be designed into highly complex and sensitive communications systems that could be used orcompromised later or in a time of war. The situation is far more complicated when it comes tospecialized devices. Clearly, for the U.S. military to have an edge against an adversary re-
quires systems that are better than what is available as COTS products.Protection of critical infrastructureÑwhich includes telecommunications networksÑis animportant element of homeland security. Today, U.S. telecommunications companies, in addi-
tion to providing voice and data communication services to customers via public and privatenetworks, are also responsible for providing a large fraction of the telecommunications infra-structure used by government and the military. The requirement for greater sophistication in
the protection of critical infrastructure is an immense and growing concern. The challengesinclude:¥Maintaining the security of todayÕs voice network;¥Maintaining and improving network robustness in the face of the technical and opera-tional convergence of the voice and data networks, an expanded number of competing net-
work operators, the increasing size and importance of the Internet, the burgeoning rise in useof voice over IP applications, and widespread deployment of Òalways-onÓ broadband accesstechnologies;¥Addressing a rising frequency, sophistication, and severity of cyber-attacks;¥Maintaining greater awareness of possible risks associated with using foreign-producedcommunications infrastructure or COTS products (as mentioned above); and¥Recognizing that the commercial market is motivated more by the quest for perfor-mance and features than by understanding of the need to ensure security and reliability.7This general issue is discussed in more detail in an earlier CSTB report. See Computer Science and Telecommu-nications Board, National Research Council, Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age, NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991, p. 17, available online at <http://www.nap.edu/catalog/1581.html>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR RENEWED INVESTMENT IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH43Ensuring a Critical Mass of Talented ResearchersThe early 21st century is a time of major change with respect to telecommunicationsÑaslegacy networks are being phased out and new networks are being phased in, and as pressures
from overseas competition mount. Now more than ever, research will play a critical role indetermining the future health of the entire U.S. telecommunications ecosystem. In the past,research support has contributed to the production of many talented technical leaders, and
one essential component of any strong research system is the cohort of talented researchersinvolved. A healthy level of research support is vital for developing this talent pool and formaintaining and enhancing expertise in telecommunications.Talent development in telecommunications generally is heavily supported by researchfunds as graduate students assist seasoned professors in research efforts. Inadequate researchfunding at this stage can complicate the ability of universities to attract or develop graduate
students and their professors. Graduates have historically taken positions as postdoctoralresearchers, often at major industrial research laboratories. At this stage, too, there is a needfor research funding.During the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, many new, talented Ph.D.s left major universities withdetailed knowledge of a specific discipline and began work for industrial research laborato-ries, where they refined their skills, studied applications of forward-looking ideas, constructed
prototypes, published papers, attended conferences, met the other experts in the area, andgenerally progressed toward being leaders in their field.Assessment of the true impact of this model is very difficult to measure, but there is littledoubt that it has been large. For example, many major telecommunications firms have histo-ries that can be traced to individuals who worked at Bell Laboratories, Bellcore, BNR, IBMResearch, Xerox PARC, Motorola, and others. Although the committee is unaware of system-
atically collected data on this point, anecdotal evidence suggests that the number of telecom-munications industry leaders developed in this way is quite large.With fewer research opportunities available in industry today, it is more difficult for newgraduates to find opportunities to mature as researchers. The implications of this trend forsustaining a healthy pool of talent and expertise are significant. In todayÕs start-up companies,former students are almost immediately thrust into product development. The opportunity
for a period of exploration and intellectual growth is thus diminished and, as a result, youngPh.D.s may develop less insight into a technological area (while arguably gaining a bettervision of the whole development process and increasing their chances of turning almost any
decent strategy, technological or otherwise, into profitability).Several universities have over the years introduced interdisciplinary programs in telecom-munications that focus more on telecommunications as an industry rather than just basic
communications technology (e.g., basic communications courses and research in modulation,coding, protocols, signal processing, and queuing theory) and also address attendant finan-cial, structural, legal, regulatory, and technological issues. Those programs usually span such
disciplines as electrical engineering, computer science, business administration, public policy,and law.8 They generally offer masterÕs or other professional degrees rather than doctoral8The International Telecommunications Education and Research Association, which seeks to advance telecom-munications science through excellence in research and education, has a dozen institutional members located atuniversities and colleges across the United States. See <http://www.itera.org/membership.htm>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHdegrees and, in the experience of the committee, infrequently serve as a pathway into a careerin telecommunications research.As noted in other sections of this report, discussion of telecommunications issues mustnow be framed within the current context of global competition among numerous multina-
tional organizationsÑand this is certainly the case with respect to producing and retainingtalented researchers. As the developing worldÕs educational institutions grow stronger, thereis an increased capacity for leading-edge research and development work abroad. This grow-
ing educational capacity combined with improving worldwide telecommunications capabili-ties and lower wages in developing countries creates pressure for U.S. and other firms to movemore of their research and development and other high-skill jobs outside the United States. In
addition, as academic and industry research opportunities in the United States begin to lagthose in other countries, foreign students who are studying in the United States will be morelikely to return to their home countries and participate in the creation of telecommunication
networks and services of the future there rather than in the United States.The solution is for the United States to continue to innovate and ensure adequate researchsupport and research opportunities, especially for younger researchers. Leadership in re-
search and education is crucial for the maintenance of a technically literate workforce capableof filling all of the positions across the telecommunications ecosystemÑincluding reliablesoftware developers, application writers, engineers, systems engineers, researchers, teachers,
and so on. If U.S. research remains at the forefront, U.S. students will be exposed to the nextgeneration of technologies earlier than the rest of the world. However, the necessary leader-ship and an adequate level of talent for telecommunications research can be sustained only if
a healthy U.S. university research system exists. Renewed investment and resulting opportu-nities will make it possible to attract, train, and retain the research talent required for theUnited States to maintain a strong position in telecommunications.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH45454Mechanisms and Best Practices forRenewing Telecommunications Research
BEST PRACTICES FOR LONG-TERM RESEARCH INVESTMENTSSeveral factors are cited by former Bell Laboratories researchers as having contributed tothat labÕs success with fundamental research. The context for telecommunications research has
changed significantly since that time, but these fundamental lessons nonetheless have applica-tion today:¥Stable research funding. The concept of no major growth in boom times and no majorcutbacks in bad times for the industry translated to consistent support for fundamental re-search. The result was a stability of funding and of growth that allowed long-term goals to be
pursued.¥Research that was limited only by ideas, rather than by resources. This ideal was achieved byenabling highly talented individuals to pursue ideas until either success was achieved or it
became obvious that the ideas would not work.¥Research that was problem-driven. Research was managed in the Bell System in accordwith a clear and consistent mission informed by constant exposure to real technology (and
business) problems and close coupling to the Bell operating companies. People working infundamental research were made aware of the most pressing technical problems requiringrevolutionary solutions. Such close coupling between research and operations enabled the
transfer of new technology to practice.¥Support for interdisciplinary research. At Bell Laboratories, researchers spanned abroad range of disciplines from physics to economics and thus were able to tackle the cross-
disciplinary problems that often arise in designing, deploying, and operating telecommunica-tions systems.It is, of course, extremely unlikely that this full set of conditions can be replicated in anindustry research laboratory today. However, they can be seen as characteristics of the idealRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHacademic environment for telecommunications research that can be factored into the designand management of both government- and industry-supported research programs.THE IMPORTANCE OF COLLABORATION ACROSSACADEMIA AND INDUSTRYResearchers outside industry can be disadvantaged for some types of research by a lack ofspecifically necessary information or access to facilities that are crucial to a quality and rel-evant outcome. An example is a researcher leveraging network traffic statistics to define asuperior protocol (what are realistic traffic models?), or a researcher defining superior mecha-
nisms to manage network recovery from disaster (what are realistic assumptions about thescope of damage to the network?). In fact, as research becomes more immediately relevant itinevitably becomes more dependent on ÒinsideÓ information and facilities. It is thus essential
that industry seek to inform the research sponsors and performers as to their more criticallong-term issues and opportunities that are amenable to research. Concerns about intellectualproperty in such collaboration can be addressed by having faculty researchers sign non-
disclosure agreements that let them work with and understand the industrial context in depthbut that also protect a companyÕs intellectual property unless permission is granted by thecompany.1Researchers themselves are also motivated to make an impact, and in most cases welcomeand appreciate visibility into what the ultimate customers of the researchÑboth industry andend usersÑsee as their greatest need. Armed with that understanding, they can pursue their
own ideas, some with more near-term and direct application and others more radical andspeculative. This is not to imply that industry should define and direct both the researchprojects and the approaches that are pursued. Nor does it imply that all telecommunications-
related research should tackle issues defined by industry. Researchers are more enthusiasticand ultimately more effective if they pursue their own ideas, and industry itself often fails toencourage or even recognize radical new innovations.THE IMPORTANCE OF VISIONPast U.S. leadership in telecommunications has benefited from the creation and pursuit ofa well-defined vision for managing investments. However, in todayÕs telecommunicationsenvironment, which includes a broad array of service providers and equipment vendors, such
a clearly defined and broad vision is much more difficult to achieve.In the predivestiture Bell System, the development of a vision and associated roadmappingactivities for the telephone system were carried out largely by AT&T (together with a small
number of overseas telephone companies that were also vertically integrated monopoly pro-viders). AT&T and its peers were successful in developing and realizing a series of major newvisionsÑsuch as direct long-distance dialing, electronic switching, digital transmission and
switching, and out-of-band signaling and intelligent network services (which separated ser-vice logic from switching equipment).1There are also other ideas emerging regarding new means for collaboration; see, for example, Raymond E.Miles, Grant Miles, and Charles C. Snow, Collaborative Entrepreneurship: How Communities of Networked Firms UseContinuous Innovation to Create Economic Wealth, Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif., 2005.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH47Significant vision-setting and associated design work have also been carried out in particu-lar sectors of the telecommunications industry. The cable industry developed a new architec-tureÑhybrid fiber coaxial cableÑthat allowed delivery of digital, two-way services over itsnetworks. The wireless industry is now well into the deployment of a third generation of
cellular services (which exist in several different flavors), each of which has supported greatercapacity in terms of users and bandwidth per user, and has involved broad thinking aboutdesired capabilities and the technological advances required to achieve them. Such efforts are
generally considered to have been successful within the confines of individual industry sec-tors, but they have not addressed major architectural issues across these sectors.Although individual segments of the industry have successfully pursued the rollout ofnew services, such as second-generation cellular or hybrid fiber coaxial cable television, theUnited States today does not have processes or forums for defining or implementing broader(cross-sector) visions or for establishing how much and what types of research are needed.The situation stands in contrast to that in some other regions of the world where institu-tions and processes are in place to define and implement telecommunications visions (see thesection ÒInternational Support for Telecommunications Research and DevelopmentÓ in Chap-
ter 2). There are, to be sure, strong arguments on both sides of the debate over the benefits ofplanned and structured technological programs versus unstructured ones in which manyindividual firms can attempt to develop their ideas. Nonetheless, it is worth exploring further
the role that vision-setting activities could play in fostering future telecommunicationsadvances.VISION FOR THE 21st CENTURY
A major shift occurred in telecommunications toward the end of the 20th century. Agrowing realization emerged that the PSTN was not an efficient and cost-effective way ofmoving large amounts of data over a network. The basic insight was that packet-based net-works could statistically multiplex data (including real-time voice and video) over a best-
effort data network and still achieve high performance, universal connectivity, and reliabledata transport. The Internet, which is really just an interconnection of hundreds of thousandsof such packet networks, has proved this idea on a wide scale and has become the model for
telecommunications in the 21st century. This breakthrough arose in an environment in whichDARPA leadership, vision setting, and funding allowed research, development, and earlydeployment and operation to be performed by a diverse yet small and tightly knit community
in an environment relatively free of commercial concerns.The promise of the Internet is the ability to bring unlimited bandwidth and computationalpower to every home, office, and even to individuals who are highly mobile, thereby enabling
people to remain in constant contact with other people and with information of virtually anyform. Hence one formulation of a big-vision problem for the 21st century would be somethinglike ÒUniversal Broadband ConnectivityÑAnywhere, Anytime.Ó But who will espouse this
(or an appropriate alternative) vision, who will champion it through the regulatory and stan-dardization bodies, who will invest in the necessary array of technologies, and who will workthrough the details associated with designing, implementing, and deploying products and
services? In contrast to some other regions of the world (most notably Korea and Japan in Asiaand various European nations), neither U.S. industry nor the U.S. government has a clearlydefined, forward-looking vision for telecommunications, and more importantly, no process inRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHplace to define and implement such a vision. The consequence of this lack of vision is that thenecessary complementary investments that should be made by the semiconductor houses, theequipment vendors, and the service providersÑall in support of a vision held in commonÑmay not be made because of the risk of investing in areas that are not supported across the
telecommunications industry.The most successful visions will originate not only from new technological capabilities, butalso from commercial and societal need. Execution of a vision requires not only the design and
implementation of technology but also coordinated activities by regulators and governmentand industries such as those that finance the ventures. Thus it is important that not onlyindustry, but also the brightest minds in academia and government and regulatory agencies
be active participants. Also, although a U.S. vision would focus on the future of U.S. telecom-munications applications and supporting infrastructure and services, the global range of bothnetworks and technology supply chains means that coordination with global vision-setting
efforts is essential.Without a clear vision in place, the risk is that the U.S. telecommunications industry willtake a Òwait and seeÓ approach and make as few risky investments as possible until a de facto
vision is defined externally, either in the global telecommunications community by the fewcountries that take leadership roles, or by the international standards bodies (which in theabsence of other leadership provide the de facto roadmaps for the introduction of new tech-
nology). Either path could have negative long-term effects on the U.S. economy if leadershipin telecommunications moves to Asia and Europe and the United States has to play the role ofa fast followerÑa role to which we are generally unaccustomed.ROADMAPSThe path through which new technologies are introduced varies considerably across dif-ferent industries. Sometimes, an innovation can be made based on a small, local, granularinvestment. But more often, an advance requires complementary work to be done in a variety
of areas by a variety of actors.In the semiconductor industry, for example, the effort to bring ever-faster processors tomarket requires an entire industry to move together. Fabricators must make enormous invest-
ments in new manufacturing facilities, tooling companies must move to a next generation offabrication processes, and microprocessor manufacturers must be convinced that a more pow-erful system will sufficiently expand the market to justify the investment.Roadmapping is a process to address these complementarities. The semiconductor indus-try, for example, is guided by two fundamental elements. First, there is the semiconductorindustryÕs International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS),2 a mechanism thatallows all players to move to the next generation of technologies and practices smoothly andsimultaneously.3 The ITRS identifies the short- and long-term technological challenges andneeds facing the semiconductor industry. It is sponsored by the U.S.-based Semiconductor2See <http://public.itrs.net/>.3For another overview of the semiconductor roadmap, see Bill Spencer, Linda Wilson, and Robert Doering, ÒTheSemiconductor Technology Roadmap,Ó Future Fab Intl., 18, January 2005, available online at <http://www.future-fab.com/documents.asp?d_ID=3004>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH49Industry Association (SIA), the European Semiconductor Industry Association, the Japan Elec-tronics and Information Technology Industries Association, the Korean Semiconductor Indus-try Association, and the Taiwan Semiconductor Industry Association. In addition, SEMATECH(described in more detail below) acts as the global communication center for the ITRS, and the
ITRS team at SEMATECH coordinates events in the U.S. region. Second, the industry benefitsfrom the insight provided by more than 20 yearsÕ experience with the successful introductionof new technologies and productsÑinsight that assures manufacturers that each expansion in
capability will result in an expansion of market.An industry roadmap is, in essence, a strategic plan for an entire industry, undertaken asa precompetitive industry collaborative activity, that informs the need for specific research
directions, identifies necessary complementary investments across the horizontal industrythat spans semiconductors to applications and content, and identifies related policy issues. Itrecognizes that the industry is characterized not only by competition of like companies (like
service providers in the same geographical region), but also by non-competitive complements(like semiconductor manufacturing equipment and fabrication facilities, or telecommunica-tions transmission facilities and the applications making use of them) where some level of
precompetitive coordination can greatly reduce investment risks for all participants withoutinterfering with competition or negating its benefits. A good roadmap is not overly prescrip-tive, however, and only does what is necessary to ensure success of the industry as a whole
and no more, and leaving as much as possible to market choice.Roadmaps are already used in segments of the telecommunications industry. For example,the Optoelectronics Industry Development Association produces a roadmap covering optical
components and, to some extent, optical communication systems. Also, various segments ofthe industry and individual firms have carried out efforts to define and develop new architec-tures, including the cable industry (which has deployed hybrid fiber coaxial cable and which
is pursuing voice over IP) and both the cable and telephone companies (which are pursuing avariety of strategies for deploying fiber to the home and the Òtriple playÓ of video, Internet,and phone services).Broader roadmapping activities for telecommunications would be somewhat differentfrom those for the semiconductor industryÑthe issues are more complex and involve moreinterdependencies. There are a large number of potential actors. Delivering a new set of
services on a new telecommunications infrastructure may require the cooperation of manycomponent providers, system vendors, application developers, and service providers. Theservice providers themselvesÑincluding incumbent local exchange carriers, competitive local
exchange carriers, cable multiple system operators, cellular carriers, and wireless service pro-vidersÑcover a wide range of interests, regulatory status, and geographical coverage. More-over, with telecommunications spanning all layers from physical infrastructure to applica-
tions and content, investment decisions may involve content providers in addition to serviceproviders. However, the basic idea is still relevant that processes and forums get peoplethinking about the longer term, and in a more coordinated way.Roadmapping should not be mistaken for a definitive path that a technology or industrymust follow. A roadmap certainly does identify certain technologies and applications that areimportant or even necessary for growth of an industry as a whole, and it identifies the comple-
mentary investments (and staging of those investments) necessary for industry progress. How-ever, a roadmap often incorporates alternative scenarios that might ultimately be successful,and does not try to pick which might finally be accepted. Roadmaps often explicitly attempt toRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHleave as much freedom as possible for individual companies to differentiate themselves at thecompetitive stageÑonly doing what is necessary to ensure success of the industry as a wholeand no more, and leaving as much as possible to the discretion of market choices.Roadmapping requires broad participation and sustained, significant investment. Under-taking an industry-wide roadmap is likely to be a costly and time-consuming task if it is donewell and has broad support and participation. Roadmaps are also living documents that mustbe updated as circumstances change.The environment for telecommunications investment is also shaped by legislative andregulatory decisions. The overall framework for the telecommunications industry as a partlyregulated industry has long been the subject of specific legislation. Implementation of this
legislation is carried out through ongoing regulatory proceedings. Both factors contribute tothe uncertainty surrounding new, long-term infrastructure investments.Another piece of the roadmapping puzzle is the set of standards organizations. Equipmentvendors move directly from the standards organization to implement the ideas into products,often even concurrently with the standards negotiations. Here U.S. companies have beenleaders recently in setting the standards in some organizations such as the Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force. Standards are also developed through organizations such as the Institute ofElectrical and Electronics Engineers and the International Telecommunication Union. Todaythere are new standards organizations (e.g., Chinese efforts to establish unique versions of
CDMA; 4G standards coming out of Japan) in which the United States has not been playing asstrong a role.A more vertical structure to the telecommunications industry, greater government in-volvement, or a history of collaboration have made roadmapping a more central part oftelecommunications programs outside the United States, accompanying the broader involve-ment of governments in directing technical developments and infrastructure deployment.
Policies in Korea have long emphasized the deployment of broadband infrastructure. In theEuropean Union, collaboration that begins at the research level through the framework pro-grams establishes an early set of partnerships among countries, service providers, manufac-
turers, and other participants in the value chain. In Europe, these efforts have extended muchfurtherÑto later standardization of the actual new architectures, as was the case with the GSMwireless system.In contrast, the United States tends to rely heavily on market forces and has a philosophythat lack of central control spurs innovationÑand these arguments certainly carry consider-able weight. Yet, it may well be possible to make use of roadmapping without unduly inhibit-
ing innovation, nor does roadmapping necessarily imply the heavy hand of government.Certainly the semiconductor industry is widely viewed as having benefited from followingthat path.Roadmapping and ResearchThere are several ways in which roadmaps can help focus and enhance the impacts ofresearch.First, roadmaps can add predictability to infrastructure deployments. An invention in onepart of a value chain has impact only if an industry consensus across many different types ofcompanies motivates each to do its share. The absence of any roadmap makes this conse-quence doubtful. The result: no motivation to invest in research.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH51Second, roadmaps can enhance the impact of short- to medium-term research. A compo-nent maker might create a much better device, but unless the vendor incorporates the newdevice in its products, the service provider uses it to improve service, and the customer likesthe feature, there is no guarantee that it will be used.Third, roadmaps can help enable disruptive system-level research. Disruptive change intechnology often requires upsetting the role that each company plays in a value chain. Tosuccessfully develop such architectures requires an interdisciplinary approach, namely di-
verse participants that bring different perspectives to the table. To get system-level insightsfrequently requires cross-company cooperation, which is difficult.An interesting example is the DARPA-funded MONET program of the mid-1990s. In thiscross-company and university consortium, the teams used the opportunity to invent much ofthe advanced optical technology that had an impact on the industry in the late 1990s. Here theU.S. government played an important convening role, aside from providing the funding.Although opinions vary as to the ultimate effectiveness of the program, the EuropeanUnion Sixth Framework Programme for telecommunications research provides an example ofhow research and roadmapping interrelate. The structure of the research projects anticipates
the ultimate creation of an infrastructure. Each program involves a variety of players, includ-ing component manufacturers, system vendors, software firms, universities, and service pro-viders. As a result, companies can better evaluate the impact of their technology, and several
players in the industry can plan new beneficial roadmaps together.Advantages and Disadvantages of Telecommunications RoadmappingTo summarize, roadmapping processes could help the telecommunications industry ad-dress several critical issues:¥Ensuring complementary progress in the underlying core technologies. Such a roadmap, whichwould address physical-layer communications, computing, and storage technologies, has strik-
ing similarities to the semiconductor industryÕs roadmap.¥Enhancing intermodal and end-to-end interoperability. Issues include architecture and func-tional interoperability across vendors, equipment types, and geographic regions.¥Identifying and exploring complementary elements required for realizing a vision. For example,interactive broadband multimedia applications depend on complementary investments bydistinct industry segments including applications (software industry), compelling content (the
video game, music, and movie industries), the network and access to broadband connectivity(the telecommunications service provider industry), and customer premises equipment (com-puter and consumer electronics industry).¥Identifying knowledge gaps. Obvious gaps include technology or manufacturing processes.Other knowledge gaps include economic viability (e.g., building ubiquitous broadband accessfacilities) and the viability of the market opportunity (e.g., how much customers would be
willing to pay).¥Identifying complementary policy, legal, and regulatory considerations. Roadmapping canalso be used to identify needed changes in the legal or policy framework (e.g., telecommunica-
tions policy or intellectual property rights) and needed regulatory initiatives and their viabil-ity (e.g., policies relating to spectrum use or broadband deployment).Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHOn the other hand, roadmapping is not a panacea and brings with it a number of tradeoffsand possible limitations. For example, the roadmapping process could hinder the adoption ofnew, disruptive technologies (e.g., incumbents may be unwilling to try radical innovations). Italso should be recognized that there is quite a leap from agreement on an element of a roadmap

to a commitment to purchase a product.MECHANISMS FOR INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT, AND UNIVERSITYCOLLABORATION ON R&D FUNDINGA variety of interesting models for mobilizing research and development support havedeveloped to answer particular R&D needs. CableLabs, described in Chapter 2, provides anexample of a telecommunications sector organizing itself to address the focused needs of aparticular set of stakeholders.Experiences from the electric power and semiconductor industries provide additionalexamples of how industry or industry in combination with the federal government can cometogether to address critical research needs:¥Electric Power Research Institute. In 1971, U.S. public and private utilities created anorganization to conduct electricity-related R&D. Under pressure from Congress (which had
signaled in hearings that it might call on a federal agency to play this role), the Electric PowerResearch Institute (EPRI) began work in 1973 as a private, nonprofit organization to provideclear, credible scientific and technical research. Today, EPRIÕs members represent over
90 percent of the U.S. electricity research community, and the organization maintains a mem-ber-driven annual budget of around $272 million. The majority of EPRIÕs members are inves-tor owned, but the organizationÕs membership also includes international organizations, and
it classifies roughly 7 percent of its members as Òfederal/stateÓ (e.g., the Tennessee ValleyAuthority, California Energy Commission, and so on).¥Semiconductor Research Corporation. The Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) wascreated in 1981 with the help of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) to stimulatecooperative research into semiconductor technology by industry and U.S. universities. SRCwas funded by member companies through fees based on their semiconductor sales and other
factors. Early 1982 saw the newly incorporated SRC lining up a number of industry anduniversity partners, and by 1983 SRC could count as members nearly 30 universities and suchindustry heavyweights as, among others, AMD, DEC, Honeywell, Intel, IBM, Motorola, GE,
Harris Corp., and HP. SRCÕs 1983 budget was approximately $11 millionÑprimarily industryfundingÑand since it was established SRC has funded more than $500 million in long-termsemiconductor research. SRC has also established partner relationships with other institutions
such as NSF and SEMATECH.¥SEMATECH. In 1987, 14 U.S. semiconductor companies joined forces to create a non-profit research and development organization called SEMATECH to improve domestic semi-
conductor manufacturing. A year later, CongressÑworried about the increasing U.S. depen-dence on foreign suppliers for semiconductor technologyÑappropriated $100 million per yearfor 5 years to match SEMATECHÕs industrial funding. The federal funding for SEMATECH
was channeled through DARPA because semiconductor manufacturing was seen as vital tothe nationÕs defense technology base. DARPA continued its investment in SEMATECH be-yond the original deadline, but in 1995 SEMATECH announced that it would wean itself fromRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH53public assistance and seek an end to matching federal funding after 1996 as a result of therenewed health of the U.S. industry. A critical element of SEMATECHÕs program over theyears has been the development and refinement of a technology roadmap for the semiconduc-tor industry. Reflecting the value of its work, SEMATECH has since grown and expanded to
include significant international participation.4The National Science Foundation has also established programs for collaborative engi-neering research among academia and industry. Chief among these is the Engineering Re-search Centers program5 that was established in 1985 to support cross-disciplinary, systems-oriented research between academia and industry, education and outreach, and technology
transfer. The engineering research centers (ERCs) have supported research on a range ofsubjects from bioengineering to earthquake engineering to microelectronic systems and infor-mation technology. Fiscal year 2004 total annual funding from all sources provided directly to
each ERC ranged from $3.1 million to $11.3 million, with NSFÕs contribution ranging from$2.5 million to $4.0 million per year.6NSF also administers the Industry University Cooperative Research Centers program,7which aims to use limited NSF investments to stimulate industry-academic research partner-
ships with the bulk of the support coming from industry center members. Focus areas forcenters in this program include advanced electronics, advanced manufacturing, civil infra-
structure systems, information and communications, and system design and simulation,among others. In the past, some work coming out of this program has been very telecommu-nications specific. For example, in 1997 a professor at a communications-related center founded

a company to design a new switch capable of applying his algorithms for maximizing qualityof service. After 3 years of work, this company was acquired for nearly half a billion dollars.8ESTABLISHING AN ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONSRESEARCH ACTIVITYThe committee believes that a hybrid approach is best suited to the challenges facing thetelecommunications industry. Such a hybrid, dubbed the Advanced TelecommunicationsResearch Activity (ATRA) in this report, would (1) draw in part on the strengths of the
DARPA model in enabling creative, often risk-taking research under the direction of a lean,agile, and independent cadre of program managers that would include researchers from bothindustry and academia; (2) draw on the strengths of the industry-driven models represented
by SEMATECH, SRC, and EPRI to ensure significant industry participation and buy-in; and(3) reflect the collaborative, multidisciplinary research model in the NSF Engineering Re-search Centers program. Most research would be performed externally at universities and
other research institutions; in-house research might be appropriate in specific areas.4A more detailed history of SEMATECH is available in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board,National Research Council, Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C., 1999, available online at <http://newton.nap.edu/html/far/>, p. 129.5See <http://www.erc-assoc.org/> for complete information.6As reported at <http://www.erc-assoc.org/factsheets/overview.html>.7See <http://www.nsf.gov/eng/iucrc/>.8As reported at <http://www.nsf.gov/eng/iucrc/directory/overview.jsp>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHIndustry funding would represent a significant fraction of total funding, and industryresearchers would be deeply involved in research activities. Further, to ensure that ATRA isresponsive to industry needs, one or more advisory committees would be established withrepresentatives from equipment suppliers and service providers. Additional advisory com-
mittees might be established to address individual major technology areas (e.g., optical andwireless communications or network security) or the interplay between technology and regu-latory developments.The new research organizationÕs multifaceted mission would include the following:¥Identifying, coordinating, and funding telecommunications research for the nation. The focuswould be critical telecommunications research in which the nation is currently underinvesting,including (1) long-time-horizon speculative research that seeks to explore transformative newideas; (2) precompetitive research that seeks to turn both incremental and transformative
ideas into practice, suitable for others to exploit commercially; (3) long-term and precompeti-tive research on network trustworthiness, when commercial incentives are insufficient tomotivate research to make the nationÕs critical infrastructure more robust; and (4) interdisci-
plinary research at the intersection of technology, economics, and policy, including work thatstudies the technical, economic, and sociological issues underlying regulatory decisions.¥Fostering the conception, development, and implementation of major architectural advances.Major advances in telecommunications capabilityÑsuch as direct long-distance dialing, hy-brid fiber coaxial cable systems, or the InternetÑhave all required the conception, develop-ment, and deployment of novel network architectures. Similar advances in the future depend
on carrying out sustained research and development activities.¥Strengthening the nationÕs telecommunications research capacity by building up researchgroups, centers, and other institutions with sufficient scale and breadth of expertise to tackle
real-world problems and by strengthening connections between the industrial and academiccommunities and among the telecommunications, semiconductor, and computer segments ofthe IT industry. To provide major experimental facilities useful to but beyond the capabilities
of individual university research groups or firms, an infrastructure for fabrication, prototyping,and testing would be supported as needed. To facilitate research and development on large-scale problems, such as end-to-end interoperability testing or network security and reliability,
major facilities for experimentation would be supported as needed.Options for Locating the New Telecommunications Research Activityin the Federal GovernmentATRA could be established simply by supplementing the mission of NSF or DARPA, butit might be preferable to create it as a standalone activity. NSF is largely focused on enablingfundamental breakthroughs and stimulating a wide diversity of activities rather than address-ing problems with an explicitly industry focus, although its Engineering Research Centers
program is a possible model. DARPA today focuses more on military applications and ap-pears unlikely to sponsor a major activity aimed at challenges and opportunities of a predomi-nantly commercial nature.Another possible home for such an activity is the Department of Commerce, which alreadyconducts research and standards activities through the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST) and which supports some telecommunications research through the Na-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS AND BEST PRACTICES FOR RENEWING TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH55tional Telecommunications and Information AdministrationÕs (NTIAÕs) research and engi-neering branch, the Institute for Telecommunications Sciences, which is noted, for example,for its work on radio propagation. NIST has a long track record of working with industry onproblems of interest to industry and a long tradition of research on IT and telecommunications
problems. NTIAÕs mission centers around telecommunications, and it has a research program,albeit much smaller and narrower than the activities recommended here.TOWARD INCREASED INDUSTRY SUPPORT FORTELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHResearch that seeks fundamental breakthroughs in communications services and applica-tions or seeks to define new service architectures and transition strategies may not necessarilybenefit any one company exclusively, but companies that have made more strategic or rapid
research investments stand to benefit as new capabilities are developed and deployed in theindustry. The committee believes that the U.S. telecommunications industry should certainlyincrease its support for more fundamental, cooperative, breakthrough researchÑalthough the
committee also understands that the issues involved in doing so are complex. For example, aprimary obstacle to overcome is Òfree-ridingÓ (a concept described in more detail in Chapter2), whereby any one company can benefit from the freely available results of research even
while failing to contribute to it. A solution might be the use of mechanisms for sharing re-sources and responsibility for research across the industry, as an alternative to conductingproprietary research within each carrier. Another way to encourage service provider partici-
pation is for government to provide matching funds or other incentives such as R&D taxcredits.One avenue for increasing industry support for fundamental research would be participa-tion in joint, cooperative research activities organized by ATRA and funded jointly by indus-try and government whereby industry could pool funds, spread risk, and share beneficialresults through cooperative efforts between industry and academia. Another option is coop-
erative resource sharing. An example is a shared-responsibility research program conductednot long ago by the regional Bell operating companies through Bellcore, which they ownedjointly. However, as the companies began to compete with one another, they divested Bellcore.
In contrast, the proposed ATRA would not be subject to the same pressures because it wouldbe led by the federal government rather than a board made up of competing firms.An organization such as Bellcore can provide a forum for research and development workthat spans multiple service providers and addresses issues offering little potential for compa-nies to distinguish themselves individually and thus little incentive to invest; for certainactivities, significant savings from centralization and economies of scale and scope; and op-
portunities for conducting end-to-end interoperability testing across equipment manufac-tured by different vendors that otherwise would entail an investment in equipment too ex-pensive for individual research groups.Examples from other industries of creative cooperation show that, provided care is takenin the type of research conducted (e.g., keeping the time horizons long and focusing on majorarchitectural advances), the outcomes can be mutually beneficial to the industry as a whole
while not harming the chance to compete vigorously in current or nearer-term business oppor-tunities. Examples of simultaneous cooperation and competition (Òco-opetitionÓ) can be foundRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHin such diverse organizations as SRC, SEMATECH,9 and EPRI and in standards developmentgroups organized by the Internet Engineering Task Force, the Institute of Electrical and Elec-tronics Engineers, and the Telecommunications Industry Association.9William J. Spencer and Peter Grindley, ÒSEMATECH After Five Years: High-Technology Consortia and U.S.Competitiveness,Ó California Management Review, 35(4):9-32, Summer 1993.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS57575Findings and RecommendationsProviding a capability for overcoming barriers of distance and time, telecommunications isan essential element of the infrastructure for operation of the U.S. economy and society. ManyU.S. companiesÑindeed whole new industriesÑhave benefited from and even developed as aresult of U.S. strength in telecommunications. Notably, the modern Internet and Internet-
based businesses ranging from Cisco to Yahoo! would not have been possible without pasttelecommunications research leading to such advances as high-speed optical communicationsand packet-switched networks.Today, however, the position of the United States as a leading producer of telecommunica-tions technology, basic knowledge, and necessary human talent (a critical componentÑasdescribed in Chapter 3) is at risk. The risk is magnified by the long period of timeÑas much as
a decade or even longerÑthat it can take to translate a fundamental discovery or big new ideainto a commercial product or service or to educate and train a new researcher.The committeeÕs findings below outline challenges to the telecommunications sectorÕscontinuing capacity for innovation. The recommendations that follow identify actions that theU.S. telecommunications industry, research community, and government should take togetherto strengthen the nationÕs telecommunications research institutions and programs.FINDINGSFinding 1. The scope of telecommunications technology and of the industry itself has growndramatically over the past few decades, driven primarily by the success of the Internet andits applications, by the digitization of all types of media and forms of communication, and
by the rising importance of communications as a key enabling technology.The telecommunications industry, which once consisted mainly of the telephone compa-nies and their equipment vendors, has expanded greatly. It now includes a broad set of service
providers, including telephone companies, cable operators, Internet service providers, andRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHwireless carriers, as well as equipment vendors offering fiber-optic, cable, and wireless con-nections. Telecommunications comprises all the hardware and software for the telecommuni-cations infrastructure and the applications that run over that infrastructure. It involves com-munication of information in a wide array of media including voice, images, animation, video,
documents, and data.Finding 2. Without a renewed and sustained investment in telecommunications research,the United States risks losing global leadership in telecommunications and related indus-
tries, with significant consequences for the U.S. economy and society.Should the United States be concerned if leadership in telecommunications moves off-shore, as has occurred for many other entire industries? The recent fast pace of innovation, the
array of new ideas to be pursued, and the substantial investment in telecommunications byother nations are all indications that telecommunications remains a high-value sector in whichrapid innovation and fundamental change will continue well into the future. Far from a
mature industry, telecommunications is thus one in which the United States should strive forcontinuing leadership. The importance of maintaining U.S. leadership is underscored by tele-communicationsÕ critical contribution to U.S. leadership in information technology in general,
its important contribution to improving productivity in nearly all industries, and its role innational security and homeland defense.Finding 2.1. The United States faces strong and growing competitive pressures from nations that aremaking significant investments in telecommunications R&D.Nations such as China, Japan, Korea, and member states of the European Union haveidentified telecommunications as a strategic area for economic development and have launched
a variety of initiatives to enhance academic, industry, and joint industry-academic research inaccord with vigorously promulgated national visions. Equipment vendors in a number ofcountries (such as China) now compete strongly with U.S. firms and have been very successful
in emerging markets. Some nationsÕ active support for their domestic industries has extendedbeyond investment in research to include measures for protection of domestic telecommunica-tions industries, thus placing further stress on the U.S. telecommunications industry.Finding 2.2. The health of the U.S. telecommunications sector depends on maintaining leadership ininnovation.Telecommunications products and services generally become commoditized over time asmultiple firms acquire the know-how to supply similar, competing products, and such compe-tition has benefits in terms of lower prices for goods and services. To maintain leadershipÑoreven a strong positionÑin telecommunications in the face of pressures from lower costs over-
seas for labor and other essentials thus requires that U.S. firms constantly focus on achievinghigh-value innovation as a foundation for developing non-commodity products and services.Research leadership in telecommunications by U.S. academic research institutions and gov-
ernment and industry labs has historically given the nation an advantage in terms of access tonew technologies and the highest-caliber engineering talent.Notable benefits have accrued to the United States as a result of its leadership in definingthe InternetÕs design, for example. HoweverÑby virtue of its very successÑthe existingInternet architecture has become difficult to change. Despite many potential avenues for sig-nificant improvements in areas ranging from security to real-time audio and video transmis-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS59sion, research and development has become largely incremental in nature. Moreover, thecurrent architecture is largely commoditized, and firms from other nations will become in-creasingly able to deliver competitive products and services. Research aimed at defining fu-ture architectures promises particular benefits because U.S. firms will be positioned to offer
new kinds of services and not just incremental improvements to existing ones.Finding 2.3. Without renewed investment and resulting opportunities to do research, it will be verydifficult to attract, train, and retain the research talent required for the United States to maintain a
strong position in telecommunications.Sustaining a base of researchers and research institutions is critical to the long-term healthof a research discipline. Without adequate research funding, it will be hard to attract new
students to the field, retain foreign students in the United States, provide critically neededsupport for postdoctoral researchers, or attract and develop new faculty and industrial re-searchers.Finding 2.4. U.S. critical infrastructure, national defense, and homeland security, which depend onhaving uninterrupted access to leading-edge telecommunications technology, are potentially threatenedby the loss of a domestic telecommunications industry.Without a continuing focus on telecommunications R&D, the United States will increas-ingly be forced to purchase telecommunications technology and services from foreign sources.Risks include (1) U.S. dependence on foreign sources of technology to meet critical defense
needs; (2) loss of exclusive or early access to state-of-the-art communications technology;(3) loss of know-how to employ state-of-the-art technology; (4) opportunities for other nationsto introduce security holes into equipment and networks; and (5) loss of technical capability
for cyberdefense in such areas as cybersecurity, network assurance, and cryptography.Finding 3. Investment in telecommunications research yields major direct and indirectbenefits.Finding 3.1. U.S. telecommunications research has yielded tremendous direct and indirect returns.Notable payoffs from U.S. investment in telecommunications research and related areas inrecent decades include the following:¥The Internet, which realized a new communications paradigm, introduced a new, highlyflexible network architecture and protocols, and ultimately enabled myriad new applications
and services;¥Radio-frequency communications technologies for cellular systems and wireless local areanetworks, which have enabled modern mobile voice and data communications;¥Optical networks, which have revolutionized communications by providing extraordi-nary communications bandwidths at very low unit cost; and¥Voice over IP (VoIP), which provides voice communications with enhanced flexibilityand efficiency and has provided opportunities for innovation in applications beyond thoseprovided by the public switched network.Additional examples are provided in Chapter 3.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHFinding 3.2. There are many promising avenues for telecommunications research, and renewed U.S.investment would yield major dividends, as indicated by the following possible results:¥An enhanced Internet architecture that goes beyond incremental improvements to de-liver capabilities such as greater trustworthiness in the network core and in customer net-
works, improved addressing and routing, and end-to-end quality-of-service provisioning;1¥More trustworthy networks that can better cope with the rising frequency, sophistica-tion, and severity of attacks and the complexities and interdependencies associated with the
convergence of voice and data networks;¥Telepresence and telecollaboration environments that reproduce at a distance a localspace with the fidelity needed to allow people to work in concert;¥Public safety networks that offer greater mobility, interoperability, adaptability to harshand changing conditions, and increased resiliency to damage; and¥Adaptive and cognitive wireless networks that enable higher-performance communica-tions and more efficient use of radio spectrum, allowing them to provide capabilities that rivaland complement those associated with wired networks.Additional examples are provided in Chapter 3. As in the past, the biggest payoffs may wellcome from unanticipated breakthroughs achieved in the course of pursuing such challengingproblems.Finding 3.3. Telecommunications research carried out on behalf of the telecommunications industry canhave a powerful payoff for all members of the industry.Because the value of a network grows with the number of its users, network operators willseek to make their networks interoperable with those of other operators. Interoperation re-quires some degree of common technology, which means that many network innovationscannot be appropriated by a single player.Finding 4. Over the past two decades, U.S. telecommunications research has been adverselyaffected by the level of research investment and the decreasing time horizon of research.The erosion of telecommunications research in industry mirrors, to a certain extent, broadcutbacks in U.S. industry R&D in general. The impact has been significant, underscoring thehistorical importance of industry research and mirroring the rapidity of the telecommunica-tions sectorÕs restructuring following divestiture in 1984. The problems were obscured during
the time of the Internet bubble, which saw a surge of telecommunications-related investment,but became quite apparent when the bubbleÕs bursting led to a dramatic decrease in telecom-munications research investments in 2001 and beyond.Finding 4.1. Historically, the Bell System played a leading role in long-term, fundamental telecommu-nications research in the United States.The Bell System maintained a large research program and talent pool and ensured a flowof ideas and innovation across disciplines and among the research, business, and operationaldivisions of AT&T. It supported an infrastructure that nurtured successive advances in the1For a recent overview, see David Talbot, ÒThe Internet Is Broken,Ó Technology Review, 108(11):62-69, December2005-January 2006, available online at <http://www.technologyreview.com/infotech/wtr_16051,258,p1.html>.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS61development chain from device fabrication to systems design to implementation and opera-tion. It also provided a nucleus for the telecommunications research community. Because ofthe Bell SystemÕs historical ability to conduct so much research in-house, however, the federalgovernment did not emphasize support for academic research in telecommunications or oth-
erwise encourage academia to address problems important to the telecommunications indus-try. University researchers themselves tended to concentrate on research areas more amenableto work by individual investigators or small research groups, such as semiconductors, com-
munications theory, and signal processing, leaving to industry research related to the designand operation of large-scale communications networks. Notable exceptions, such as computernetworking research supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
and NSF (which led to the Internet), illustrate the enormous potential payoff from govern-ment-supported and university-based research on new architectural ideas.Finding 4.2. In the wake of divestiture in 1984 and industry restructuring that followed, industrysupport for telecommunications research has declined and has also become less stable and more incre-mental and short-term in outlook.The U.S. telecommunications industryÕs transformation reflects both the series of breakupsof the Bell System (divestiture and subsequent reorganization and spin-offs) and the entry ofnew, non-vertically-integrated telecommunications firms such as cable system operators,Internet service providers, and wireless carriers.2 At the same time, new, often Internet-fo-cused companies have also introduced products and services that help account for the broad-ening scope of telecommunications referred to in Finding 1.Some had hoped that the former Bell constituents (Lucent Bell Labs, Bellcore, and AT&TResearch) could sustain a high level of long-term, fundamental research investments, but thisproved impossible given the profound changes occurring in the industry. The telephone com-panies, facing growing competition, all but eliminated long-term, fundamental research pro-
grams, leaving responsibility for technological innovation to their equipment vendors. Newtelecommunications operators in cable, wireless, and digital subscriber line (DSL) services,lacking dominance and a high-margin foundation, generally adopted the same approach. The
cable industry launched its own cooperative research and development activity, CableLabs,which focuses on such matters as standards development and conformance testing and doesnot support a broad, long-term research program.An important drawback of the vendor-based research paradigm is that it is much moresusceptible to economic cycles than is carrier-based research support, because vendor rev-enues are linked to the rate of carrier capital expenditure, which has tended to fluctuate and
then fell sharply in recent years, rather than to subscriber fees, which tend to be more stable.It is notoriously difficult to compile definitive data on support for industry research anddevelopment, but the situation described in testimony to the committee is clearÑindustry
support for telecommunications research has decreased (as measured in dollars, numbers ofresearchers, and publications), and the work that is funded now has become increasingly2Recently, there have been several mergers between what were historically local exchange carriers andinterexchange carriers, leading to greater vertical integrationÑbut not integration between service providers and
equipment vendors.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHshort-term in focusÑevolutionary rather than revolutionaryÑat a time when global competi-tors of the United States have placed a priority on long-term research in this area. Anecdotalreports indicate that basic research scientists in industry are being shifted to developmentwork and that publication by industry researchers in telecommunications journals has
decreased.Finding 4.3. In many critical technology areas, industry can look to the federal government to helpsupport fundamental long-term research. Despite the decline in funding for research following the
restructuring of the Bell System, however, the federal government did not assume this traditionalfunding role for telecommunications, thus contributing to the current gap in support for long-termtelecommunications research.With industry having played such a large role in U.S. telecommunications research beforedivestiture in 1984, the federal governmentÕs research investment in telecommunications wasunderstandably small compared with its investment in other areas of information technology
or in other industrial sectors. Long-term concerns similar to those now faced in the telecom-munications sector prompted the establishment of research organizations for the semiconduc-tor and power industries, with the implicit or explicit participation of government. Indeed, the
current situation in telecommunications is somewhat analogous to the crisis faced by the U.S.semiconductor industry in the 1980s, when international competition and decreased R&Dfunding threatened that industryÕs long-term viability. In response, the Semiconductor Re-
search Corporation and SEMATECH were formed. Their work is widely credited with havingplayed an important role in the recovery, renewed leadership, and long-term viability of theU.S. semiconductor industry (more information on SEMATECH and related efforts can be
found in Chapter 2). Notably, there have been no parallel systematic effortsÑeither govern-ment- or industry-ledÑfor telecommunications.Finding 5. In todayÕs telecommunications landscape, major architectural innovation is diffi-cult to achieve.The greater difficulty today in achieving architectural innovation involves several factors.Multiple visions are now being pursued by various segments of the telecommunications in-
dustry, and although an increased diversity of players provides more fertile ground for newideas, it also makes widespread deployment of good ideas more difficult. Moreover, no singleentity is able to appropriate the results of long-term, fundamental research or to comprehen-
sively address the engineering and standardization issues associated with end-to-end solu-tions that must span multiple service providers and multiple sectors of the industry. Theresearch that can be conducted by a single vendor or sector is less well positioned to tackle
end-to-end issues, and the need to coordinate decisions among a multitude of players greatlycomplicates achieving major new architectural advances. As a result, vendors tend to favorincremental improvements to todayÕs networks over more fundamental and high-risk re-
search that seeks major advances in new or enhanced end-to-end applications and servicesand the architectural innovation that supports them.Finding 6. The roles of NSF (the largest overall federal sponsor of information and commu-nications technology research) and DARPA (a traditionally important sponsor of telecom-munications research) have been evolving, with implications for telecommunicationsresearch.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS63Finding 6.1. Long a supporter of networking research and network deployment, NSF is moving towarda more strategic emphasis on telecommunications research.Although NSFÕs Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) directoratehas long supported a networking research program, its Engineering (ENG) directorate sup-
ports research in such areas as wireless communications, and several of its engineering re-search centers have addressed telecommunications, these efforts have not reflected a compre-hensive, coordinated research strategy. Modest funding for telecommunications programs has
also been accompanied by a reportedly small and shrinking proposal acceptance rate.The creation in 2004 of CISEÕs Network Technology and Systems (NeTS) program, how-ever, represents an increased emphasis on telecommunications research at NSF. The new
program spans a wide range of research topics in the control, deployment, and management offuture networks and provides a framework for interdisciplinary work. Still in development asof this writing, the new Global Environment for Networking Investigations (GENI)Ñaimed at
the exploration of new architectural ideas in experimental facilities that allow investigation atlarge scaleÑwould represent a major initiative in this area.Finding 6.2. DARPAÕs support for telecommunications research is now focused more on meetingspecialized military needs than on stimulating broader technology advances of use for both commercialand military purposes.DARPA-sponsored research has led to many significant telecommunications advances insuch areas as packet-switched networking, development of ARPANET and the Internet, opti-cal communications, and ad hoc radio networks, as well as to the establishment of successfulU.S. telecommunications companies that are now global leaders, including Broadcom, Rambus,
and Aetheros. In addition, DARPA has historically played an important role in promulgatingvisions that stimulated commercial development and adoption of new technologies, as well asin building communities of researchers. In recent years, the focus of DARPA research has
shifted toward more immediate or specialized military needs. Putting aside the debate aboutthe extent to which the militaryÕs research portfolio should concentrate on the short termversus the long term, a consequence is the loss of an important source of support for longer-
term telecommunications research.RECOMMENDATIONSThe recommendations below lay out steps that the United States should take to developand sustain a multifaceted, reinvigorated telecommunications research program. The recom-
mendations envision a greater role for government-sponsored and university research in tele-communications than has been evident in the past and also envision additional investment byindustry in more work of a fundamentally high-risk character with more attention to overall
architectural issues. The recommendations are all aimed at so-called precompetitive activities;when the time arrives for development, implementation, and deployment, it will be up toequipment and software suppliers to create and manufacture the products and to service
providers to deploy the necessary facilities and services.Determining how much funding to provide for such a telecommunications research initia-tive involves, of course, a complex set of budgetary tradeoffs among research programs and
between research and non-research activities. The committee does not make a recommenda-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHtion for a specific funding level but notes that funding should be consistent with the vital roleplayed by telecommunications in the U.S. economy and society and with the direct contribu-tions made by the U.S. telecommunications industry to the nationÕs economy and security.Funding should also be consistent with telecommunicationsÕ role as a critical element of infor-
mation technology (some 16 percent of the total federal networking and information technol-ogy research and development budget today goes to telecommunications; see Chapter 2).Finally, the investment should be large enough to support a critical mass of researchers and
research; one estimate can be drawn from the predivestiture Bell Labs, whose budget of over$500 million (in todayÕs dollars) for basic research was sized to provide the breadth and depthto comprehensively address telecommunications research issues.Recommendation 1. The federal government should establish a new research organiza-tionÑthe Advanced Telecommunications Research ActivityÑto rejuvenate fundamentaland applied telecommunications research in the United States and to stimulate and coordi-
nate activities across industry, academia, and government that can translate research resultsinto deployments of significant new telecommunications capabilities.In light of the findings presented above, the committee believes that a new national re-search organization, which it dubs the Advanced Telecommunications Research Activity(ATRA), should be established by the federal government. This recommendation is inspired inlarge part by the enormous leaps in telecommunications technology historically attributable to
DARPA and Bell Labs and the success of broad industry consortia such as SEMATECH.Recommendation 1 and Recommendation 2 below both contemplate significant federalsupport for telecommunications research. However, their full effects will come only with the
participation of both service providers and equipment vendors. ATRA would provide (1) aforum for convening federal research sponsors, academic researchers, and industry to identifyresearch that is relevant to industryÕs most critical needs and (2) a mechanism for the telecom-
munications industry to pool funds to conduct precompetitive research. Government match-ing funds would provide an additional incentive for industry participation.In terms of structure, the committee considered the pros and cons of different models(described in Chapter 4) and decided that a hybrid approach is best suited to the challengesfacing the telecommunications industry. The committee envisions ATRA as a hybrid of activi-ties of the sort historically associated with DARPA (which through the ARPANET program
managed a research portfolio, developed a vision, and convened industry and academia) andSEMATECH (which brought a struggling high-tech sector together, initially with some federalsupport to complement industry dollars, to fund joint research, development, and
roadmapping activities). ATRA would be staffed by program managers who would includeresearchers from both academia and industry. Industry funding would represent a significantfraction of total ATRA funding, and industry as well as academic researchers would be deeply
involved in research activities.There are a number of options for where within the federal government such a programcould fit, each with its own set of tradeoffs (see Chapter 4). The committee does not make a
specific recommendation for locating such a program but notes that ATRAÕs proposed mis-sion would align with that of existing agencies within the Department of Commerce and thatNSF has developed mechanisms for joint academic-industry engineering research, albeit more
focused and on a smaller scale.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS65ATRAÕs multifaceted mission would include the following (see Chapter 4 for more discus-sion of the items below):¥Identifying, coordinating, and funding telecommunications research for the nation. ATRAÕsfocus would be on critical telecommunications research in which the nation is currentlyunderinvesting.¥Fostering the conception, development, and implementation of major architectural advances.ATRA would place a priority on research that aims to make possible major architecturaladvances that result in the development of dramatically new telecommunications capabilities(such as the Internet was when it was developed) rather than incremental improvements to
existing capabilities.¥Strengthening the nationÕs telecommunications research capacity by building up researchgroups, centers, and institutions with sufficient scale and breadth of expertise to tackle real-
world problems and by strengthening connections between the industry and academic com-munities and among the telecommunications, semiconductor, and computer segments of theIT industry. To provide major experimental facilities useful to but beyond the capabilities of
individual university research groups or firms, ATRA would consider establishing and sup-porting an experimental infrastructure for such activities as fabrication, prototyping, andtesting.Roadmapping (see Chapter 4) would be a useful tool for (1) establishing research priori-ties, (2) identifying complementary investments and actions required to realize major ad-
vances, and (3) examining the interplay between technical, business, and policy consider-ations. ATRA could serve as both a neutral convener and a partial source of funding for suchactivities, perhaps learning from the role played by SEMATECH with respect to the Interna-
tional Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS)Ñsee Chapter 4 for a discussion ofboth SEMATECH and ITRS.Long-term investments are required to realize the sorts of innovation contemplated inconnection with ATRA. It would likely take at least 5 years to develop a major advance (suchas a superior replacement architecture for the Internet) and several more years to see thatdesign reflected in products and services in the market. But history shows that a well-con-
ceived research program yields numerous payoffs, including shorter-term advances and un-foreseen long-term benefits.The following are suggestions for specific steps to be considered in implementing thecommitteeÕs first recommendation.1. Establish mechanisms for carrying out project-based research involving academia and industryand build up a core technical staff to manage research projects and coordinate activities. Mechanismssuch as broad agency announcements would allow ATRA to solicit promising ideas fromacademia and industry. These ideas would be used to jump-start a research program, help
establish a critical mass of researchers, and garner sufficient industry matching funding toallow the establishment of research centers that can attract significant industry participationÑorganizations along the lines of the NSF-supported engineering research centers that are de-
scribed in Chapter 4.ATRA would provide leadership by setting overall goals and objectives but should fosterRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHa diversity of ideas and a robust competition in ideas among rival research groups. Universi-ties should receive a significant portion of funding to conduct unfettered research while edu-cating future generations of U.S. researchers. However, ATRA should also address industryinterests by providing support for industry to collaborate with universities. By allocating
funding to both universities and corporations, ATRA would help achieve the critical goal ofconnecting the key components for future success.2. Establish advisory committees that include significant, high-level industry participation. Advi-sory committees with representatives from equipment suppliers and service providers wouldhelp ensure that ATRA is responsive to industry needs. The participation of high-level execu-tives is critical to both ensuring ATRAÕs relevance and sustaining industry buy-in and sup-
port for ATRA activities. This requirement suggests the wisdom of creating an executivecouncil that includes chief executives of equipment and software suppliers and service pro-viders along with representatives from federal agencies concerned with telecommunications
and telecommunications research (e.g., DARPA, the National Institute of Standards and Tech-nology (NIST), the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA),NSF, and the Federal Communications Commission). Additional advisory committees might
be established to address individual major technology areas (e.g., optical and wirelesscommunications or network security) or the interplay between technology and regulatorydevelopments.3. Explore future needs for R&D centers and shared facilities to complement distributed, project-based research. There are a number of research problems whose investigation might ultimatelyrequire centers or shared facilities. For example, characterizing and improving the security
and reliability of a large-scale communications network, especially when it comprises mul-tiple interconnected service providers that use diverse technologies, requires a much broaderperspective than can be brought by any individual or group of individuals. Centers may also
be a way to more efficiently provide certain experimental facilitiesÑsuch as for fabrication,prototyping, and testing. For example, research that depends on fabrication of integratedcircuits or other devices may require access to facilities that are beyond the reach of a univer-
sity-based research group. Finally, centers provide a nucleus for academic-industry collabora-tion and for interdisciplinary research.There are several plausible options for establishing R&D centers: establishing university-based centers in which industry participates, extending the mission and size of a governmentlaboratory such as those at NIST, or establishing a federally funded research and developmentcenter for telecommunications research. Selecting the appropriate types and mix of institu-
tions would be an important task for ATRA and would depend on industry interests andinstitutional capabilities. Research priorities that emerge from vision-setting and roadmappingactivities would also help inform the design of such centers.4. Establish a forum in which lawmakers, regulators, research funding agencies, and industry canshare knowledge about technological developments, visions and roadmaps, and policy and regulation.To maximize the leverage of establishing ATRA and increasing industry participation in R&D,
it is essential that lawmakers and regulators understand the impact of legislation and rule-making on the R&D enterprise, and that both they and researchers consider and reflect in theirthinking the interplay between the policy environment, business opportunities, and techno-
logical directions.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS67Recommendation 2. The National Science Foundation and DARPA should assess theirinvestment in basic telecommunications research and consider increasing both their em-phasis on and their level of investment in such research.Even with the creation of ATRA, both NSF and DARPA will retain important roles instrengthening U.S. telecommunication research. Both have successful research managementcultures that complement each other and the activities envisioned for ATRA. In particular,both have been very effective at identifying, building up, and supporting research communi-
ties in areas of national interest.As a starting point and as a periodic activity, both NSF and DARPA should look acrosstheir programs to determine how much funding is actually being directed to telecommunica-
tions research and should then develop criteria for establishing the appropriate level of fund-ing going forward. Relevant criteria include (1) the size of the telecommunications researchcommunity and the number of highly rated proposals that can be funded, (2) the size of the
telecommunications industryÕs R&D budget, and (3) provision of support for telecommunica-tions research within the broader IT research budget in proportion to the size of the telecom-munications segment compared with the size of the IT industry as a whole.Recommendation 2.1. The National Science Foundation should continue to strengthen its support fortelecommunications research.NSF has significant strengths in supporting basic research, training researchers, and build-ing research communities that can play an important role in strengthening the U.S. researchbase in telecommunications. CISEÕs growing commitment to supporting research in this areais evident, and the committee encourages NSF to sustain such attention.In addition, and reflecting the greater emphasis being placed in this program area, NSFshould also consider establishing programs aimed specifically at attracting and developingyoung research talent in telecommunications. Options would include supporting graduate
and postdoctoral fellowships in telecommunications or establishing a young-investigator pro-gram that would provide start-up support for promising research talent, targeted at telecom-munications.Finally, existing mechanisms such as the CISE Advisory Committee or new ones, such asformal or informal consultations with the director of the proposed ATRA, should be used tokeep abreast of new ideas, major challenges, and promising research directions emerging from
academia and industry.Recommendation 2.2. DARPA should continue to invest in telecommunications research for militaryapplications even if there is some chance that the commercial sector will develop such technologies.In light of the importance of maintaining a cutting-edge telecommunications capability ina network-centric military, DARPA should periodically reexamine its investments in telecom-munications. Factors to consider include (1) the telecommunications capabilities attainable by
potential U.S. adversaries by virtue of the burgeoning commercial telecommunications sectoroverseas and (2) the risks associated with having to rely on components and systems that areincreasingly being developed overseas. DARPAÕs role would be complementary to that of
NSF and the proposed ATRA. Compared to NSF, for example, DARPA has a culture of fo-cused programs with more active management and significant industry participation.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHRecommendation 3. All segments of the U.S. telecommunications industry should increasetheir support for additional fundamental research. One avenue would be through participa-tion in joint, cooperative research activities organized by the proposed ATRA.As described above, the emphasis of industry research in recent years has shifted towardshort-term product opportunities within the context of existing overall network architecturesand away from the more fundamental and high-risk opportunities and major advances incross-cutting end-to-end applications and services and supporting architectures that are es-
sential to the long-term health of the U.S. telecommunications sector. Both equipment vendorsand service providers (including providers of wireline telephony, wireless, broadband,Internet, satellite, and cable) should consider identifying and using mechanisms through which
they could provide more support for fundamental research. ATRA, proposed in Recommen-dation 1, is intended to provide a way for the telecommunications industry to pool funds,spread risk, and share beneficial results through cooperative efforts between industry and
academia that are jointly funded by industry and government.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A7171Appendix ABiographies of Committee Members and Staff
Robert W. Lucky, Chair, retired in 2003 as corporate vice president of Applied Research atTelcordia Technologies, which he joined in 1992. He began his telecommunications career atAT&T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J., where he was initially involved in studying ways ofsending digital information over telephone lines. The best-known outcome of this work was
his invention of the adaptive equalizerÑa technique for correcting distortion in telephonesignals that is used in all high-speed data transmission today. The textbook on data communi-cations that he co-authored became the most-cited reference in the communications field over
the period of a decade. At Bell Labs he moved through a number of levels to become executivedirector of the Communications Sciences Research Division in 1982, where he was responsiblefor research on the methods and technologies for future communication systems. He has been
active in professional activities and has served as president of the Communications Society ofthe IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), and as vice president and executivevice president of the parent IEEE. He has been editor of several technical journals, including
the Proceedings of the IEEE, and since 1982 he has written the bimonthly ÒReflectionsÓ columnof personalized observations about the engineering profession in Spectrum magazine. In 1993these ÒReflectionsÓ columns were collected in the IEEE Press book Lucky Strikes . . . Again. Heis a fellow of the IEEE and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He is also aconsulting editor for a series of books on communications through Plenum Press. He has beenon the advisory boards or committees of many universities and government organizations and
was chair of the Scientific Advisory Board of the United States Air Force from 1986 to 1989. Hewas the 1987 recipient of the prestigious Marconi Prize for his contributions to data communi-cations, and he has been awarded honorary doctorates from Purdue University and the New
Jersey Institute of Technology. He has also been awarded the Edison Medal of the IEEE andthe Exceptional Civilian Contributions Medal of the U.S. Air Force. Lucky is a frequent speakerbefore both scientific and general audiences. He has been an invited lecturer at about 100
different universities and has been a guest on a number of network television shows, includ-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHing Bill MoyersÕ ÒA World of Ideas,Ó where he discussed the impacts of future technologicaladvances. He is the author of the popular book Silicon Dreams, a semi-technical and philo-sophical discussion of the ways in which both humans and computers deal with information.A native of Pittsburgh, he attended Purdue University, where he received a bachelor of science
degree in electrical engineering in 1957 and master of science and doctoral degrees in 1959 and1961.James D. Adams is a professor of economics at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In addition heis a research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, Massachu-setts. Prior to joining Rensselaer he was a professor of economics at the University of Florida.
He has also held visiting appointments at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the U.S. Bureauof the Census, and the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State atthe University of Chicago. He received a B.A. in economics from the University of New
Mexico in 1967 and a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Chicago in 1976. Adams haspublished numerous articles on the economics of technical change, with an emphasis on thecauses and consequences of industrial and academic research and development, as well as
numerous articles in the fields of labor and public economics. His current research focuses onthe limits of the firm in research and development, the measurement of scientific influence, theidentification of alternative channels of knowledge externalities in the economy, the structure
and meaning of scientific teams and collaborations, the speed of diffusion of scientific re-search, the interaction between investment in industrial research and development and invest-ment in physical capital, and the determinants of research and teaching productivity in
academia.John M. Cioffi is a professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University. He worked atBell Laboratories from 1978 to 1984 and at International Business Machines Research from1984 to 1986. Cioffi founded Amati Com. Corp. in 1991 (purchased by TI in 1997) and wasofficer/director from 1991 to 1997. He currently is on the board of directors of ASSIA (chair),
Teranetics, ClariPhy, and Vector Inc. and is on the advisory boards of Portview Ventures,Wavion, MySource, and Amicus. CioffiÕs specific interests are in the area of high-performancedigital transmission. His various awards include Marconi fellow (2006); holder of Hitachi
America Professorship in Electrical Engineering at Stanford (2002); member, National Acad-emy of Engineering (2001); IEEE Kobayashi Medal (2001); IEEE Millennium Medal (2000);IEEE fellow (1996); IEEE J.J. Thomson Medal (2000); University of Illinois Outstanding Alum-
nus (1999); IEEE Communications Magazine best paper (1991); ANSI T1 Outstanding Achieve-ment Award (1995); NSF Presidential Investigator (1987-1992); and ISSLS Outstanding Paperaward (2004). Cioffi has published over 250 papers and holds over 80 patents. He has a B.S.E.E.
degree from the University of Illinois and a Ph.D.E.E. from Stanford University.Richard A. DeMillo is the John P. Imlay Dean and Distinguished Professor of Computing atthe Georgia Institute of Technology. He is also a member of the board of directors for RSASecurity. He returned to academia after a career as an executive in industry and government.He was chief technology officer for Hewlett-Packard, where he had worldwide responsibility
for technology and technology strategy. Prior to joining HP, he was in charge of Informationand Computer Sciences Research at Telcordia Technologies (formerly Bellcore) in Morristown,New Jersey, where he oversaw the development of many Internet and Web-based innova-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A73tions. He has also directed the Computer and Computation Research Division of the NationalScience Foundation. Before joining industry during the Internet boom, he held several aca-demic positions. He was professor of computer sciences and director of the Software Engineer-ing Research Center at Purdue University. He also held major faculty positions at Georgia
Tech, where he was the founding director of the Software Research Center, and had a visitingprofessorship at the University of Padua in Padua, Italy. As dean of the College of Computinghe is the chief academic officer for one of the largest programs at Georgia Tech. He is deeply
immersed in the problem of creating a high-tech workforce that will be competitive in the newÒflat worldÓ created by the convergence of enabling technology and geopolitical forces. Theauthor of over 100 articles, books, and patents, DeMillo has conducted research that spans
computer science and includes innovation in computer networking, computer security, soft-ware engineering, and mathematics. His present research interests are focused on informationsecurity. He is developing hardware-based architectures for trusted computing platforms and
investigating methods for securing wireless communication services. He is a fellow of theAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science and the Association for ComputingMachinery (ACM).Reed Hundt served as chair of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) from 1993 to1997. Prior to heading the FCC, he was a partner in the Washington, D.C., office of Latham &
Watkins. Mr. Hundt currently serves on the board of directors of Intel, Pronto Networks,Tropos Networks, Polyserve, Entrisphere, and Access Spectrum, and he is an advisor to theBlackstone Group and to McKinsey & Company. He is a member of the advisory committee at
the Yale School of Management and co-chair of the Forum on Communications and Society atthe Aspen Institute. Mr. Hundt is the author of You Say You Want a Revolution: A Story ofInformation Age Politics (Yale University Press, 2000) and In ChinaÕs Shadow: The Crisis of Ameri-can Entrepreneurship (Yale University Press, 2006). He graduated magna cum laude from YaleCollege (1969) with exceptional distinction in history. He is also a graduate of Yale Law School(1974) and is a member of the District of Columbia, Maryland, and California bars.Jeffrey M. Jaffe is executive vice president and chief technical officer of Novell. He is respon-sible for NovellÕs technology direction, as well as leading NovellÕs product business units.
Jaffe serves as a member of NovellÕs Worldwide Management Committee. After receiving aPh.D. in computer science from MIT in 1979, Jaffe joined IBMÕs Thomas J. Watson ResearchCenter. During his tenure at IBM, he held a wide variety of technical and management posi-
tions, including vice president, Systems and Software Research, corporate vice president oftechnology, and general manager of IBMÕs SecureWay business unit, where he was respon-sible for IBMÕs security, directory, and networking software business. Jaffe most recently
served as president of Bell Labs Research and Advanced Technologies, where he establishednew facilities in Ireland and India, and he served as chair of the board of the New JerseyNanotechnology Consortium. Jaffe was also appointed by President Bill Clinton to serve on
the Advisory Committee for the Presidential Commission for Critical Infrastructure Protec-tion. He has also chaired the Chief Technology Officer group of the Computer Systems PolicyProject and has served on the National Research CouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommu-
nications Board. He is a fellow of ACM and the IEEE. Jaffe holds a B.S. in mathematics and anM.S. in electrical engineering in addition to his doctorate from the Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHEdward Kozel has been the managing member of Open Range Ventures, a venture capitalfirm, since January 2000. Until 2002 he was a member of the board of directors of CiscoSystems, Inc., where he worked for 11 years in a variety of roles, including chief technologyofficer and senior vice president of business development. During his tenure at Cisco, he
founded the business development group, which, under his direction, was responsible formore than 22 technology acquisitions and 25 minority investments. Kozel is an industry inno-vator who previously worked at Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and SRI International, where he
participated in the early design and development of the Internetwork Protocol (IP) model andTCP/IP, packet radio networks, and highly distributed information systems. In addition toYahoo!, Kozel serves on the boards of Reuters PLC and Symbol Technologies. He graduated
from the University of California, Davis with a degree in electrical engineering.Rajiv Laroia is the chief technology officer (CTO) of Qualcomm Flarion Technologies. He wasthe founder and CTO of Flarion Technologies, a company that specialized in wireless broad-band technology. Flarion was acquired by Qualcomm in January 2006. Prior to launchingFlarion, Dr. Laroia was with Lucent TechnologiesÕ Bell LaboratoriesÕ Mathematical Sciences
Research Center. In 1997, he became head of Bell LabsÕ Digital Communications ResearchDepartment in the Wireless Research Center, where he and his team started to develop a flash-OFDM technology-based wireless data system. His years at Bell Labs have generated numer-
ous publications and patents with total patent licensing revenue in excess of $25 million. Hereceived his Ph.D. and M.S. degrees from the University of Maryland, College Park in 1992and 1989 and a B.Tech. degree in 1985 from the Indian Institute of Technology, DelhiÑall in
electrical engineering. He is an expert in CDMA, TDMA, and other cellular multiple-accesstechnologies and is intimately familiar with current and next-generation wireless standards.David Messerschmitt is Roger A. Strauch Professor Emeritus of Electrical Engineering andComputer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley. His current research interests fallat the overlap between technology, business, and economics. More specifically, he considers
how technology should be different than it is currently in order to meet the needs of end usersand end-user organizations and to be more successful in the marketplace. Messerschmittholds several patents and has authored several books on networked applications. He is a
member of the Advisory Committee of NSFÕs Division of Computer Science and Engineering,the NSF Blue Ribbon Panel on Cyberinfrastructure, and the National Academy of Engineering.He served on the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. He is also an IEEE and
International Engineering Consortium fellow. He received his M.S. (1968) and Ph.D. (1971) incomputer information and control engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.Eli M. Noam has been a professor of economics and finance at the Columbia Business Schoolsince 1976. He served for 3 years as a commissioner for public services of New York state; wasdirector of the Columbia Institute for Tele-Information, a university-based research center
focusing on strategy, management, and policy issues in telecommunications, computing, andelectronic mass media; and was chair of the M.B.A. concentration in media management andof the Virtual Institute of Information. He has also taught at Columbia Law School, Princeton
UniversityÕs Economics Department and Woodrow Wilson School, and the University of St.Gallen, and he is active in the development of electronic distance education. An author oreditor of 24 books and over 300 articles in economics journals, law reviews, and interdiscipli-Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A75nary journals, he is a former member of the PresidentÕs Information Technology AdvisoryCommittee (PITAC). Noam was also a member of the boards or advisory boards for the federalgovernmentÕs FTS-2000 telecommunications network, the IRSÕs computer system reorganiza-tion, the National Computer Systems Laboratory, the National Commission on the Status of
Women in Computing, the Intek Corporation, and Jones International University, the firstaccredited e-university. He served on the National Research Council study committee thatproduced Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits (2002). He is a fellow of the World EconomicForum, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, a commercially rated pilot, and anactive search and rescue mission pilot with the Civil Air Patrol (1st Lt.). He received thedegrees of A.B. (Phi Beta Kappa), M.A., Ph.D. (economics), and J.D. from Harvard University.Daniel Pike is chief technology officer of GCI Cable and Entertainment. He entered the cableindustry in 1973 (LVO/United) and recently served as CTO of Classic Communications (2000-
2003). Prior to that he was senior vice president of science and technology for Prime Cable andits related entities (1977-2000). He has served on the board of directors of CableLabs since itsinception, received the NCTA Vanguard Award for Science and Technology in 1991 and the
Texas Telecommunications 2000 Johnny Mankin Award, was elected to the SCTE Hall ofFame, is a former director of COM21 (a cable modem manufacturer), and advises other tech-nology-related organizations. He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers and the Society of Cable Telecommunications Engineers, is a member of the Society ofMotion Pictures and Television Engineers, and speaks frequently and publishes on broadbandand telecommunications issues. He served on the Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board. Pike earned bachelor of science and master of science degrees from Oklahoma StateUniversity.Lawrence Rabiner is the associate director, Center for Advanced Information Processing atRutgers University. He retired as the vice president of research at AT&T Laboratories in 2002after a career at AT&T that spanned almost 40 years in Research. He has co-authored four
major books in the signal-processing field: Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing(1975), Digital Processing of Speech Signals (1978), Multirate Digital Signal Processing (1983), andFundamentals of Speech Recognition (1993). He has written or co-authored over 300 articles,including many on speech recognition and speech synthesis, and has been the recipient of 25patents. He is a fellow of the IEEE (1976) and the Acoustical Society of America, served aseditor of the ASSP Transactions, and is a former member of the Proceedings of the IEEE editorialboard. He has also been active in the Signal Processing Society and its predecessors, acting asits vice president (1973) and president (1974-1975). He is a member of the National Academyof Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering. Rabiner received his B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering simultaneously in 1964, and his Ph.D. in 1967, all from MIT.His Ph.D. thesis and some of his early work at Bell Laboratories were in the field of speechsynthesis, and since 1967 he has worked on a range of topics in the areas of digital signal
processing and machine recognition of speech, including digital filter design, implementationof digital systems, spectrum analysis systems, pattern recognition clustering methods, and thehidden Markov model method.Theodore S. Rappaport is the William and Bettye Nowlin Professor in Engineering at theUniversity of Texas and is director of the Wireless Networking and Communications GroupRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH(WNCG) at the universityÕs Austin campus, a center he founded in 2002. From 1988 to 2002, hewas on the electrical and computer engineering faculty of Virginia Tech, where he founded theMobile & Portable Radio Research Group (MPRG), one of the worldÕs first university researchand teaching centers dedicated to the wireless communications field. In 1989, he founded TSR
Technologies Inc., a cellular radio/PCS software radio manufacturer that was sold in 1993. In1995, he founded Wireless Valley Communications Inc., a pioneering creator of site-specificradio propagation software for network design and management. Wireless Valley was ac-
quired by Motorola Inc. in 2005. Rappaport received the Marconi Young Scientist Award in1990, an NSF Presidential Faculty Fellowship in 1992, the Sarnoff Citation from the Radio Clubof America in 2000, the Fredrick S. Terman Outstanding Electrical Engineering Faculty Award
from the American Society of Engineering Education in 2002, and the Stuart F. Meyer Awardfrom the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society in 2005. Rappaport has over 100 U.S. or interna-tional patents issued or pending and has authored, co-authored, and co-edited 18 books in the
wireless field. In 1999, his work on site-specific propagation received the IEEE Communica-tions Society Stephen O. Rice Prize Paper Award. He serves on the editorial boards of severalacademic and technical journals, is a fellow of the IEEE, and is active in the IEEE Communica-
tions and Vehicular Technology societies. He has consulted for over 25 multinational corpora-tions and has served the International Telecommunication Union as a consultant for emergingnations. He received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Purdue Uni-
versity in 1982, 1984, and 1987, respectively.William J. Spencer advises the Washington Advisory Group on corporate R&D strategy,technology management, and corporate-academic partnerships. Dr. Spencer is ChairmanEmeritus of International SEMATECH, a research and development consortium of interna-tional corporations involved in semiconductor manufacturing. He served as CEO and presi-
dent of SEMATECH from 1990 to 1997, during which time the U.S. semiconductor industryregained its global market position and SEMATECH evolved from a government industrycooperative to an international R&D activity. Prior to 1990, Dr. Spencer managed worldwide
research and technology for Xerox Corporation as group vice president and senior technicalofficer at XeroxÕs headquarters in Stamford, Connecticut, and as vice president and managerof the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. He was director of microelectronics and then director
of weapon systems development at Sandia National Laboratories from 1973 to 1981. He beganhis career at Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1959. Dr. Spencer is a research professor of medi-cine at the University of New Mexico as a result of work he did at Sandia National Laborato-
ries on the first implantable electronic drug delivery systems. As a member of the NationalAcademy of Engineering, he has contributed to several National Research Council studies onhigh-technology industries; technology strategies for the future; and international cooperation
and competitiveness. He is vice chair of the National Research CouncilÕs Board on Science,Technology, and Economic Policy. Spencer received his Ph.D. and M.S. degrees from KansasState University, and an A.B. from William Jewell College in Missouri.David Teece is Mitsubishi Bank Professor of International Business and Finance at the HaasSchool of Business, University of California, Berkeley. He is director of BerkeleyÕs Institute of
Management, Innovation and Organization (IMIO). He has been at Haas since 1982. He previ-ously served as assistant professor of business economics at Stanford University. His researchinterests include the competitive performance of firms in the global marketplace, innovationRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A77and the organization of industry, and technology policy, telecommunications policy, antitrustpolicy, and energy policy at the national and international levels. He holds M.A. and Ph.D.degrees in economics from the University of Pennsylvania, and B.A. and M.Comm. degreesfrom the University of Canterbury.Hemant Thapar is chair and CEO of Link-A-Media Devices, a fabless semiconductor companyspecializing in the development of system-on-chip connectivity solutions for storage media.
After receiving his Ph.D. degree from Purdue University in 1979, Thapar held various techni-cal and management positions in advanced technology development at Bell Telephone Labo-ratories, Holmdel (1979-1984) and at IBM Corporation, San Jose (1984-1994). He co-founded
DataPath Systems Inc. in 1994 and was its CEO until July 2000 when it merged with LSI LogicCorporation, where he was a senior vice-president until 2004. He has also served on thefaculty of Santa Clara University since 1984 where he regularly teaches graduate-level courses
in digital communications and signal processing. He is also on the advisory committee ofAmbala College of Engineering and Applied Research, a newly formed engineering school inIndia. ThaparÕs interests are in the areas of communication signal processing, system engineer-
ing, and VLSI development. He has authored many publications and patents in the areas ofdata communications, networking, and data storage. He is co-recipient of three best-paperawards for his work on high-speed data transmission and high-density data storage. Thapar
has served as guest editor of two issues of the IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communicationsdevoted to signal processing and coding for data storage. Thapar is a fellow of the IEEE.Jack K. Wolf is the Stephen O. Rice Professor of Magnetics in the Electrical and ComputerEngineering Department at the University of California, San Diego. Prior to joining UCSD,Wolf held full-time faculty appointments at New York University, the Polytechnic Institute of
Brooklyn, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. His research interests are signalprocessing for recording, information theory, coding theory, and communications. His indus-trial experience includes working at RCA Laboratories, Bell Laboratories, and Qualcomm Inc.
At Qualcomm Inc. he was concerned with the design and development of wireless communi-cation systems. He was a Guggenheim fellow and a former president of the IEEE InformationTheory Group. He received the 2001 Claude E. Shannon Award from the IEEE Information
Theory Society and the 1998 Koji Kobayashi Computer and Communications Award from theIEEE. In 1975 he received the IEEE Information Theory Group Prize Paper Award for thepaper ÒNoiseless Coding for Correlated Information Sources,Ó which he co-authored with
David Slepian. He is editor of the book series ÒInformation Technology: Transmission Pro-cessing and StorageÓ published by Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publications. He is a memberof the National Academy of Engineering. He received his B.S.E.E. degree from the University
of Pennsylvania and M.S.E., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees from Princeton University.StaffJon Eisenberg is director of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of theNational Research Council. At CSTB, he has been the study director for a diverse body of
work, including a series of studies exploring Internet and broadband policy and networkingand communications technologies. Current studies include an examination of emerging wire-less technologies and spectrum policy and a study of how to use information technologies toRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCHenhance disaster management. In 1995-1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering, and Diplo-macy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he worked on environ-mental management, technology transfer, and information and telecommunications policyissues. He received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Washington in 1996 and a B.S.
in physics with honors from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988.David Padgham rejoined CSTB as an associate program officer in the spring of 2006 followingnearly 2 years as a policy analyst in the Association for Computing MachineryÕs (ACMÕs)Washington, D.C., Office of Public Policy, where he worked closely with that organizationÕspublic policy committee, USACM. Previously, he spent nearly 6 years with CSTB, working
onÑamong other thingsÑthe studies that produced Trust in Cyberspace, Funding a Revolution,Broadband: Bringing Home the Bits, LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress, and TheInternetÕs Coming of Age. Currently, he is focused on the CSTB projects related to telecommuni-cations R&D, software dependability, and privacy in the information age. He holds a masterÕsdegree in library and information science (2001) from the Catholic University of America inWashington, D.C., and a bachelor of arts degree (1996) in English from Warren Wilson College
in Asheville, N.C.Cynthia A. Patterson (study director through June 2004) was a study director and programofficer with the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. She worked on a diverseset of CSTB projects, including a project on critical information infrastructure protection and
the law, a study on the future of supercomputing, and a study on telecommunications re-
search and development. She was also involved with the congressionally mandated study on
Internet searching and the Domain Name System. Prior to joining CSTB,  Patterson completed
an M.Sc. from the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs at the Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology. Her graduate work was supported by the Department of Defense and SAIC. She wasalso employed by IBM as an IT consultant for both federal government and private industryclients; her work included application development, database administration, network ad-
ministration, and project management. She received a B.Sc. in computer science from theUniversity of Missouri-Rolla.Jennifer M. Bishop, program associate, has been with the Computer Science and Telecommu-nications Board since 2001. She is currently involved in studies on policy consequences andlegal/ethical implications of offensive information warfare and assessing the information tech-
nology research and development ecosystem. She also maintains CSTBÕs contact database,handles updates to the CSTB Web site, coordinates the layout and design of Update, the CSTBnewsletter, and designs book covers and promotional materials. Prior to her move to Wash-
ington, Bishop worked for the city of Ithaca, New York, coordinating the Police DepartmentÕstransition to a new SQL-based time accrual and scheduling application. Her other work expe-rience includes designing customized hospitality industry performance reports for RealTime
Hotel Reports, LLC, maintaining the police records database for the city of Ithaca, and freelancepublication design. She is a visual artist working in oil and mixed media. She holds a B.F.A.from Cornell University.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A79Phil Hilliard (research associate through June 2004) was a research associate on the profes-sional staff of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board who worked on projectsfocusing on telecommunications research, supercomputing, and dependable systems. Beforejoining the National Academies, he worked at BellSouth in Atlanta, Georgia, as a competitive
intelligence analyst and at NCR as a technical writer and trainer. He earned an M.B.A. fromGeorgia State University (2000) in Atlanta and a B.S. in computer and information technologyfrom Georgia Institute of Technology (1986) in Atlanta. He is currently working on a masterÕs
of library and information science in Florida State UniversityÕs online program.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80RENEWING U.S. TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH80Appendix BList of Individuals Who MadePresentations to the Committee
Although the briefers listed below provided much useful information of various kinds tothe committee, they were not asked to endorse this studyÕs conclusions or recommendations,nor did they see the final draft of this report before its release.APRIL 28-29, 2003WASHINGTON, D.C.Robert Leheny, Defense Advanced Research Projects AgencyMari Maeda, National Science FoundationEd Thomas, Federal Communications CommissionJULY 17-18, 2003NEWPORT BEACH, CALIFORNIAHenry Samueli, BroadcomDon Shaver, Texas Instruments
Raj Yavatkar, IntelNOVEMBER 3-4, 2003WASHINGTON, D.C.Hassan Ahmed, Sonus NetworksFred Baker, Cisco SystemsJames McGroddy, IBM (retired)Note: Affiliations shown were curent at the time the briefings were given.Renewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B81Craig Partridge, BBNJohn Pinkston, University of Maryland, Baltimore CountyKrish Prabhu, MorgenthalerDavid Reed, CableLabs
William Semancik, National Security AgencyFEBRUARY 12-13, 2004SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIARichard Newton, University of California, BerkeleyMAY 3-4, 2004WASHINGTON, D.C.Sandy Fraser, Fraser ResearchSteve Papermaster, PresidentÕs Science and Technology Advisory Committee
Guru Parulkar, National Science FoundationRenewing U.S. Telecommunications ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.What Is CSTB?As a part of the National Research Council, the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board (CSTB) was established in 1986 to provide independent advice to the federal
government on technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications.Composed of leaders from industry and academia, CSTB conducts studies of critical nationalissues and makes recommendations to government, industry, and academia. CSTB also pro-
vides a neutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution andaction may be premature. It convenes discussions that bring together principals from thepublic and private sectors, ensuring consideration of key perspectives. The majority of CSTBÕs
work is requested by federal agencies and Congress, consistent with its National AcademiesÕcontext.A pioneer in framing and analyzing Internet policy issues, CSTB is unique in its compre-hensive scope and its effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, andpolicy issues. Beginning with early work in computer and communications security, cyber-assurance and information systems trustworthiness have been cross-cutting themes in CSTBÕs
work. CSTB has produced several reports that have become classics in the field, and it contin-ues to address these topics as they grow in importance.To do its work, CSTB draws on some of the best minds in the country and from around theworld, inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service. Studies are conductedby balanced committees without direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing.Those committees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through their deliberations.
Additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of review and critique, further enhancingthe quality of CSTB reports. By engaging groups of principals, CSTB obtains the facts andinsights critical to assessing key issues.The mission of CSTB is to¥Respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations, and private industryfor advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for advice oncomputer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization.¥Monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and telecommunica-tions, with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societalimpacts.¥Initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology, and telecommuni-cations as critical resources.¥Foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunica-tions technologies and other fields, at large and within the National Academies.CSTB projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of informationtechnology. For further information about CSTB reports and active projects, see <http://
cstb.org>.82