DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11738Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency DataSharing: Summary of a Workshop156 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38242-7 | DOI 10.17226/11738Caryn Kuebler and Christopher Mackie, Rapporteurs; Steering Committee for theWorkshop on the Benefits of Interagency Business Data Sharing; Committee onNational Statistics; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education;National Research CouncilImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Caryn Kuebler and Christopher Mackie, RapporteursSteering Committee for the Workshop on the Benefits ofInteragency Business Data SharingCommittee on National StatisticsDivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationIMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH 
INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING
SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for ap-propriate balance.This study is supported by a contract between the National Academy of Sciencesand the National Science Foundation (Number SBR-0112521). The work of theCommittee on National Statistics is also provided by a consortium of federal agen-
cies through the same grant from the National Science Foundation. Any opinions,findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are thoseof the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or
agencies that provided support for the project.Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataImproving business statistics through interagency data sharing : summary of aworkshop / Caryn Kuebler and Christopher Mackie, rapporteurs.
       p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references.  ISBN 0-309-10261-8 (pbk.) Ñ ISBN 0-309-66282-6 (pdfs)  1. United StatesÑ
Statistical servicesÑCongresses.  2. United StatesÑCommerceÑStatisticsÑ
Congresses.  3. Commercial statisticsÑUnited StatesÑCongresses.  I. Kuebler,
Caryn.  II. Mackie, Christopher D.  III. National Research Council (U.S.).

Committee on National Statistics.HA37.U55I47 2006650.072Õ7Ñdc22
                                                            2006023359International Standard Book Number-13978-0-309-10261-2

Additional copies of this report are available from The National Academies Press,500 Fifth Street, NW, Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202)
334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.eduPrinted in the United States of America
Copyright 2006 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Suggested citation: National Research Council. (2006). Improving Business StatisticsThrough Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a Workshop. Caryn Kuebler and Chris-topher Mackie, Rapporteurs. Steering Committee for the Workshop on the Ben-
efits of Interagency Business Data Sharing. Committee on National Statistics, Di-vision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulfis president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti-
tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.
Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-ernment. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Acad-emy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing ser-vices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communi-ties. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE WORKSHOP ON THEBENEFITS OF INTERAGENCY BUSINESS DATA SHARINGCHARLES L. SCHULTZE (Chair), The Brookings Institution,Washington, DCDANIEL R. FEENBERG, National Bureau of Economic Research,Cambridge, MAJOHN HALTIWANGER, Department of Economics, University ofMarylandRALPH A. RECTOR, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, DCCHRISTOPHER MACKIE, Study DirectorCARYN KUEBLER, Research AssociateMICHAEL SIRI, Senior Program AssistantvImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS2005-2006WILLIAM F. EDDY (Chair), Department of Statistics, Carnegie MellonUniversityKATHARINE ABRAHAM, Department of Economics, University ofMaryland, and Joint Program in Survey MethodologyROBERT BELL, AT&T Research Laboratories, Florham Park, NJ
ROBERT M. GROVES, Survey Research Center, Institute for SocialResearch, University of Michigan, and Joint Program in Survey
MethodologyJOHN HALTIWANGER, Department of Economics, University ofMarylandPAUL W. HOLLAND, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ
JOEL L. HOROWITZ, Department of Economics, NorthwesternUniversityDOUGLAS MASSEY, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
VIJAY NAIR, Department of Statistics and Department of Industrial andOperations Engineering, University of MichiganDARYL PREGIBON, Google, Inc., New York
SAMUEL H. PRESTON, Department of Sociology, University ofPennsylvaniaKENNETH PREWITT, School of International and Public Affairs,Columbia UniversityLOUISE RYAN, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University
NORA CATE SCHAEFFER, Department of Sociology, University ofWisconsin-MadisonCONSTANCE F. CITRO, DirectorviImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The workshop summarized in this report was convened by the Com-mittee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) on behalf of the Bureau of Eco-
nomic Analysis (BEA) to discuss interagency business data sharing. Re-
cent legislation, particularly the 2002 Confidential Information Protection
and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), has created new opportunities for
sharing among BEA, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics (BLS) and has also stirred debate on data sharing, access, and confi-
dentiality issues. The purpose of this workshop was to present strategies
for enhancing the ability of statistical agencies to efficiently share admin-
istrative and statistical data on businesses, while still protecting respon-
dent confidentiality. More effective interagency data sharing is essential if
the statistical agencies are to have access to the most accurate information
available and, in turn, continue to improve the quality of data and statis-
tics in a cost-effective and minimally burdensome manner.The workshop focused on the benefits of data sharing to two groupsof stakeholdersÑthe statistical agencies themselves and downstream data
users, such as researchers and policy makers. Presenters represented four
key agencies involved in business data sharingÑBEA, the Census Bureau,
BLS, and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)Ñas well as the Federal Re-
serve Board, the Congressional Budget Office, and academia. This report
provides a summary of the presentations and the discussions that took
place. The workshop was not designed to produce recommendations;
however, participants persuasively presented arguments in favor of ex-
panding data sharingÑemphasizing increased efficiency, reduced respon-
dent burden, and more accurate information for policy makersÑand sug-Preface
viiImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEgestions on ways to work within (and to change, if necessary) currentcodes and regulation to make it happen. Workshop presenters and par-
ticipants also recognized the importance of maintaining high standards
for protecting data confidentiality. Steven Landefeld, director of BEA, sug-
gested implementing incremental changes to data-sharing arrangements,
including streamlining administrative procedures under CIPSEA; expe-
diting access to research data centers; and modifying IRS procedures,
through legislative or regulatory changes, to promote effective use of ad-
ministrative data for statistical uses.On behalf of CNSTAT, I thank all of the workshop participants, par-ticularly those who prepared detailed presentations, which provided for
engaging and productive discussion. We also thank the workshop partici-
pants for their insightful comments and fruitful exchange of ideas, as well
as for their input as staff drafted this report. We especially thank mem-
bers of the workshop steering committeeÑDaniel Feenberg of the Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research, John Haltiwanger of the University
of Maryland, and Ralph Rector of the Heritage FoundationÑfor their
helpful guidance and leadership in planning and moderating the work-
shop. Robert Parker provided important consultation to the staff and the
committee. We thank him, along with Dennis Fixler, Steven Landefeld,
Nick Greenia, Mark Mazur, and George Plesko, for contributing impor-
tant background papers for the workshop and this volume.We are grateful for BEAÕs sponsorship of the workshop and thankSteven Landefeld and Dennis Fixler, in particular, for offering guidance
to staff and the workshop steering committee in development of the

agenda and in identifying the workshop goals. We would also like to
thank the Kauffman Foundation, which is sponsoring a CNSTAT study
on improving business data and statistics, whose members provided ad-
ditional guidance for the development of the workshop program.
Christopher Mackie, the staff study director for the workshop, was in-
strumental in every aspect of the workshop process. He stewarded the
planning of the workshop, worked closely with the steering committee
and participants, and, in collaboration with Caryn Kuebler, research as-
sociate, prepared and revised the report on the basis of comments from
reviewers and workshop participants. We thank Michael Siri for expertly
managing all the administrative details and workshop arrangements and
for his work on the report itself. Christine McShaneÕs technical editing
substantially improved the reportÕs readability. Connie Citro, director of
CNSTAT, provided guidance and support throughout the project. Kirsten

Sampson Snyder guided this report through the review process.This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro-
cedures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National Re-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixsearch Council. The purpose of this independent review is to provide can-did and critical comments that assist the institution in making the pub-
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confi-
dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.We wish to thank the following individuals for their participation inthe review of this report: Katharine G. Abraham, Joint Program in Survey
Methodology, University of Maryland; Daniel R. Feenberg, Information
and Research Systems, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge, MA; and Sanders Korenman, School of Public Affairs, Baruch Col-
lege of the City University of New York.
The review of this report was overseen by Julia Lane, National Opin-ion Research Center and the University of Chicago. Although the indi-
viduals listed above have provided constructive comments and sugges-
tions, responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with
the National Academies.Charles Schultze, ChairSteering Committee for the Workshop on the
Benefits of Interagency Business Data SharingImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART IWORKSHOP SUMMARY1Introduction3
2The Benefits of Data Sharing to the Statistical Agencies13
3Research and Policy Perspectives on the Benefits of BusinessData Sharing27
4Key Points from the Presentations: Directions for the Future39
References43

Appendixes
AWorkshop Agenda and Attendees45
BRecent Legislation Governing Data Sharing andAccess to Federal Tax Data50
ContentsxiImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART IIBACKGROUND PAPERS5Data-Sharing History and Legislation: Background Notes55
Robert P. Parker6IRS Data, Data Users, and Data Sharing79
Nick Greenia and Mark Mazur7The Importance of Data Sharing to Consistent MacroeconomicStatistics91
Dennis Fixler and J. Steven Landefeld8Using Tax Return Data to Improve Estimates ofCorporate Profits133
George A. PleskoxiiCONTENTSImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Part IWorkshop SummaryImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31Introduction
BACKGROUNDU.S. business data are used broadly, providing the building blocks forkey nationalÑas well as regional and localÑstatistics measuring aggre-
gate income and output, employment, investment, prices, and productiv-
ity. Beyond aggregate statistics, individual- and firm-level data are used
for a wide range of microanalyses by academic researchers and by policy
makers. In the United States, data collection and production efforts are
conducted by a decentralized system of statistical agencies.1 This appara-tus yields an extensive array of data that, particularly when made avail-
able in the form of microdata, provides an unparalleled resource for policy
analysis and research on social issues and for the production of economic
statistics. However, the decentralized nature of the statistical system also
creates challenges to efficient data collection, to containment of respon-
dent burden, and to maintaining consistency of terms and units of mea-
surement. It is these challenges that raise to paramount importance the
practice of effective data sharing among the statistical agencies.During the workshopÕs introductory session, Steven LandefeldÑdirector of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), the workshopÕs spon-
soring agencyÑprovided an overview of the goals motivating the event.
He reflected on issues that arise in a decentralized statistical system, not-
ing that its data products excel in detail, timeliness, and relevance but1See Norwood (1995) for an account of this historical development.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGoften lag behind in consistency. These inconsistencies create problemsfor BEA in producing the national income and product accounts, as they
must draw from numerous data sources and make adjustments for dif-
ferences in collection timing, as well as in concepts and definitions. The
quality of data produced by the statistical agencies, in turn, affects the
work of users, including other agencies, such as those responsible for
budget projections and planning, the allocation of funds, and state and
local decision making. Landefeld pointed out that, while data sharing
has already improved and facilitated the work of BEA, current arrange-
ments are limited in key ways. For example, the codes and regulations of
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) allow the Census Bureau to share data
on large multiestablishment businesses but, for reasons discussed below,
not on smaller and single-establishment businesses, which account for
about 40 percent of receipts nationwide. As a result, critical data omis-
sions persist as BEA and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) go about the
business of producing statistical information on various dimensions of
the U.S. economy.The stated purpose of the workshop, described in this summary re-port, was to present ideas for easing constraints limiting the ability of
statistical agencies to efficiently share administrative and statistical data
on businesses. In order to produce the highest quality data sets and statis-
tics at the lowest possible costÑand with minimal respondent burdenÑ
statistical agencies must be able to access the best information available,
system-wide.With this as the backdrop, BEA asked the Committee on NationalStatistics of the National Academies to convene a workshop to discuss
interagency business data sharing. The workshop was held October 21,
2005. Recent legislation, most notably the 2002 Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), has served to revive
debate on data-sharing, access, and confidentiality issues. Although U.S.
statistical agencies have a long history of data sharing and of efforts to
improve those arrangements, CIPSEA has created new opportunities to
expand interagency sharing of business data among BEA, the Census Bu-
reau, and BLS.2The CIPSEA legislation embodies two core goals: to establish uniformcross-agency confidentiality protections and to promote efficiency in the
production of the nationÕs statistics by authorizing limited sharing of busi-2Chapter 5 provides a detailed description of the history of data sharing and data-sharinglegislation. In addition, Appendix B provides brief summaries of relevant data-sharinglegislation.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION5ness data for statistical purposes. The objectives behind the data-sharingcomponent of the legislation are threefold. First, it was hoped that permit-
ting the three agencies to share information would improve the compara-
bility and accuracy of federal statistics by allowing more timely updating
of sample frames, development of consistent classifications of establish-
ments and industries, and exploitation of administrative data. Second,
more integrated use of data should reduce the paperwork burden for sur-
veyed businesses. Finally, through these mechanisms, it was hoped that
the sharing of data would lead to improved understanding of the U.S.
economy, especially for key industry and regional statistics.One example of CIPSEAÕs potential is reflected in the recently autho-rized ability of the Census Bureau and BEA to link survey data to pro-
duce new statistics on domestic and international U.S. research and de-
velopment activity. As Katherine Wallman, the chief statistician of the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB),  pointed out, input from the

Census Bureau, BEA, and BLS is essential if CIPSEA implementation and
guidance are to successfully build on experiences from earlier data shar-
ing to make future arrangements more effective. Wallman noted that at
least some additional access to tax information will be needed in order to
realize the full benefit of the umbrella legislation for data sharing among
the three statistical agencies.Tax data have always been an essential, but highly restricted, sourceof information for measuring aspects of the economy in general and for
construction of the national income and product accounts in particular.
Since long before CIPSEA, BEA has been able to utilize, in a limited man-
ner, valuable business tax and revenue data from the IRS. For example,
provisions in Section 6103 of the IRS code authorize BEA to access corpo-
rate income tax return information so that published IRS corporate profits
data can be converted to accounting concepts appropriate for use in mea-
suring gross domestic product. For its regional economic accounts pro-
gram, BEA has been authorized under other provisions of Section 6103 to
review individual tax return records in order to produce tabulations of
nonfarm proprietorsÕ income (which are reviewed by the IRS to ensure
taxpayer confidentiality); these estimates are used, in turn, to distribute
BEAÕs national totals by state and county.3The above uses notwithstanding, BEA access to federal tax informa-tion is still extremely limited relative to that afforded to the Census Bu-
reau. The current tax code allows the IRS to supply enough information
(e.g., names and addresses) from businessesÕ tax returns so that the Cen-3For more examples of data sharing, see Chapter 5.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGsus Bureau can construct its business register and sampling frames; how-ever, ÒcommingledÓ Census Bureau-IRS data cannot be shared with ei-
ther BEA or BLS. Because of the lack of specific legislative authority, Title
13 and IRS code (Title 26) guidelines vary with regard to whether or not
the data collected by the Census Bureau directly from taxpayers (using
the IRS-based sampling frame) are fully under their authority or whether
the IRS should maintain some control. Tax data issues received consider-
able attention at the workshop and are reported on more fully below.Before moving on to describe the workshop proceedings, it is usefulto clarify a few terms that are used throughout this summary:4¥Data sharing is the exchange of information collected from busi-nesses and individuals or reported to the IRS in identifiable form for sta-
tistical purposes.¥Business data include operating, financial, and related informationabout businesses, tax exempt organizations, and government entities
(CIPSEA).¥Identifiable form means information that permits the identity of therespondent to whom the information applies to be reasonably inferred by
either direct or indirect means.¥Statistical purposes involve the description, estimation, or analysisof the characteristics of groups, without identifying the individuals or or-
ganizations that comprise such groups. The designation also includes
methods and procedures related to the collection, compilation, process-
ing, or analysis of data about these groups and the development of related
measurement methods, models, statistical classifications, or sampling
frames.Box 1-1 lists acronyms and abbreviations related to interagency busi-ness data sharing.WORKSHOP CONTENTThe workshop focused on the benefits of data sharing to two groupsof stakeholders: the statistical agencies themselves and downstream data
users. Presenters were asked to highlight untapped opportunities for pro-
ductive data sharing that cannot yet be exploited because of regulatory
or legislative constraints. The most prominently discussed example was
that of tax data needed to reconcile the two primary business lists used4These definitions are expanded upon in Chapter 5.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION7BOX 1-1Abbreviations and Acronyms Related toInteragency Business Data SharingBEABureau of Economic AnalysisBLSBureau of Labor StatisticsBRBusiness RegisterCBOCongressional Budget OfficeCBPCounty Business PatternsCESCurrent Employment StatisticsCIPSEAConfidential Information Protection and StatisticalEfficiency Act (2002)COSCompany Organization SurveyCPSCurrent Population SurveyEINEmployer Identification NumberFASBFinancial Accounting Standards BoardFRBFederal Reserve BoardFTIFederal Tax InformationGAAPGenerally Accepted Accounting PrinciplesGAOGovernment Accountability OfficeGDIGross Domestic IncomeGDPGross Domestic ProductIRCInternal Revenue CodeIRSInternal Revenue ServiceJCTJoint Committee on TaxationMWRMultiple Worksite ReportNAICSNorth American Industry Classification SystemNABENational Association for Business EconomicsOMBOffice of Management and BudgetPEOProfessional Employer OrganizationQCEWQuarterly Census of Employment and WagesRDCResearch Data CenterSBOSurvey of Business OwnershipSICStandard Industrial ClassificationSIRDSurvey of Industrial Research and DevelopmentSOIStatistics of IncomeSSASocial Security AdministrationSSNSocial Security NumberSSSSpecial Sworn StatusTINTaxpayer Identification NumberUSDA-NASSU.S. Department of Agriculture-National AgriculturalStatistics ServiceImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGBOX 1-2Why Should BLS and the Census Bureau Work Toward aReconciled Sampling Frame?The argument for the business list case goes beyond simply reducingredundancy and, possibly, administrative expenses. As noted by several of
the workshopÕs presenters, some widely used macro statistics are derivedfrom combinations of the Census Bureau and BLS data. For example, pro-ductivity is calculated as the ratio of a Census Bureau figure (output) and a
BLS figure (labor input). If output and input measures were estimated fromthe same survey, then the presence or absence of any particular firm fromthe sample would likely have a very small effect on the ratio, because both
the numerator and the denominator would change in the same direction.With separate samples, however, even a relatively common occurrence,such as a discrepancy in the industry code of a firm, could have visible
effects on aggregate industry productivity growth in two industries. This isbecause the change in output of the firm is attributed to one industry whilethe change in inputs is attributed to another. There are important research
and policy incentives for moving toward the use of a common samplingframe.by the statistical agencies. Both BLS and the Census Bureau compile busi-ness establishment listsÑthe Business Establishment List and the
Business Register, respectivelyÑmainly from administrative data, but
also with supplemental survey data. Each covers about 8 million busi-
ness establishments with employees, and they are used for similar pur-
poses: to create sampling frames for a wide variety of surveys by the
Census Bureau and by other statistical agencies, for benchmarking sur-
vey data, for publishing employment and wage data, and for generating
aggregates used by other agencies, most notably many of the inputs to
the national income and product accounts (Box 1-2).In addition to leading to discrepancies of coverage, the redundancy ofeffort creates inefficiencies in maintaining up-to-date frames and samples,
and it may contribute to difficulties in achieving adequate response rates
to various surveys. Combining information from both sources could gen-
erate a more accurate, consistent business list that, for BEA, could im-
prove its estimates in a number of areas (e.g., trade in services, corporate
profits and industry employment, and wages by location). Inconsisten-
cies, particularly in the assignment of establishments to industries and the
range of entities covered, carry direct implications for the reliability of
key statisticsÑfrom gross domestic product, to employment, to produc-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION9tivity and industrial productionÑderived from business lists or subse-quent survey-based data. Streamlining the business registers and survey
programs is also likely to reduce respondent burden for businesses. In its
presentation, BEA cited these and other improvements that could be
achieved through more extensive integration of data across statistical
agencies. However, it is important to note that there are advantages to
having separate lists, as it allows each agency to tailor the characteristics
of its list specifically to the purpose it serves.Jim Spletzer and Paul Hanczaryk (presenting for BLS and the CensusBureau, respectively) noted that interagency data sharing is an obvious
and low-cost prerequisite for improving the business lists. While list com-
parison work is well under way, the idea of a business list reconciliation
project is still very much at the discussion stage. The legalities and proce-
dures necessary to begin this kind of work (specifically, the restrictions
resulting from the federal tax information that the Census Bureau re-
ceives from the IRS) are not trivial. If sharing among the three CIPSEA-
designated agencies is to be fully exploited, either IRS regulations or code
(or both) must be changed. It was known at the time of its passage that,
in order for the Census Business Register to be shared, companion legis-
lation to CIPSEA would be needed to modify Section 6103 of the IRS tax
code or to change interpretation of that code. The Joint Committee on
Taxation has not yet taken action to address this specific data-sharing
need. The 2004 Statistical Programs of the United States Government report(Office of Management and Budget, 2004) indicated that the proposal for
companion legislation, which would make complementary changes to
the provisions in the Òstatistical useÓ section of the IRS code, was en-
dorsed by the Treasury Department and submitted to Congress; how-
ever, it expired with the 107th Congress.During the workshopÕs morning session, representatives from BLS,the Census Bureau, the IRS, and BEA addressed current data-sharing ar-
rangements and the role that data sharing plays in producing federal
statistics. The Census Bureau and BLS provided information on their on-
going business list comparison project, which is intended to comprehen-
sively document the comparability of the lists. Mark Mazur and Nick
Greenia of the IRS Research, Analysis, and Statistics Division provided
an overview of current data-sharing arrangements and interpretation of
relevant regulations and legislation. They expressed a clear understand-
ing of the importance of data sharing for purposes of improving business
lists and indicated a willingness to work carefully and incrementally to-
ward this goal within the legal guidelines. They further suggested that, if
companion legislation to CIPSEA is to have a real chance of moving for-
ward, the expansion of tax data sharing should be narrow in scope and
clearly tied to purpose. For example, for the purpose of reconciling busi-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGness lists, perhaps only a few basic variablesÑe.g., name, address(or geocode), employer identification number, employment, payroll,
industryÑwould need to be shared.During the afternoon session, which highlighted the perspectives ofdownstream data users, presenters from the Federal Reserve Board (FRB),
the Congressional Budget Office, and academia discussed the benefits of
business data sharing as it relates to productivity and real output mea-
surement, informing monetary policy, estimating business profits, and
budget forecasting. Federal Reserve policy models incorporate produc-
tivity statistics that are derived from industry-level output and employ-
ment data. Dennis Fixler of BEA and Carol Corrado of FRB described how
the maintenance of two establishment lists creates time-consuming com-
plications. For example, for calculating industry productivity statistics,
inconsistencies arise because source data are drawn using different meth-
ods and from nonidentical sets of business entities. Output figures (the
numerator) originate from the Census Bureau data, while input figures
(the denominator) are derived from BLS data.Several participants touched on the distinction between informativedata discrepancies and those leading to statistical inconsistencies that arecostly in terms of user communitiesÕ time and resources. For example,
although household and payroll-based estimates of employment differ
significantly at times, the two sources can illuminate slightly different as-
pects of the labor market picture. And, although BEA would certainly like
to minimize the statistical discrepancy between income- and expenditure-
side measures of gross domestic product (particularly for a few problem-
atic industries), employer and household surveys each generate valuable
information, both independently and in combination. In contrast, recon-
ciliation of the two business lists involves mainly definitional and classifi-
cation issues which, workshop presenters seemed to agree, should be as
consistent as possible.Carol Corrado, chief of the Industrial Output Section in the FRB Di-vision of Research and Statistics, noted that discrepancies between the
Census Bureau and BLS employment by industry figures lessen her con-
fidence in BEAÕs industry accounts and, in turn, the accuracy of produc-
tivity change measures. She added that it is likely that the sectors of the
economy experiencing large changes in productivity may also be those
associated with problematic data inconsistencies. Corrado argued fur-
ther that the statistical agencies could use resources more efficiently if
they did not have to maintain two business lists. Steering committee
member John Haltiwanger noted that, given the different uses of the busi-
ness lists, it would not make sense to choose one over another; instead
the weaknesses and strengths of each should be recognized and ex-
ploited. Corrado expressed the hope that, in the very near future, a sys-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION11tem would be in place that is capable of reconciling differences in em-ployment by industry.Dale Jorgenson of Harvard University touched on similar themes inhis presentation, observing that policy makers are hamstrung by the fact
that the data system exhibits inconsistencies that arise because of the ab-
sence of statutory authority to share data among agencies. He expressed
the view that resolving these uncertainties is essential and suggested be-
ginning at the most fundamental level. One goal of JorgensonÕs work on a
Ònew architectureÓ for the national income and product accounts is to
have common registers of firms, establishments, families, and individuals
and to collect the data in a way that is internally consistent at the micro
level (Jorgenson, Landefeld, and Nordhaus, 2006).Several presenters suggested that an effective approach to advancingthe dialogue between policy makers and statistical agencies is to begin by
recognizing the potential, not just for increased efficiency and more accu-
rate information for policy, but also for reducing respondent burden. The
logic behind the change must include compelling data-driven cases for
which the payoff is clear across data-sharing agencies and between re-
spondents and the agencies. In that spirit, workshop participants cited
numerous examples in which more effective sharing would improve data,
and for which the associated benefits more than warrant action to build
on the successful data sharing authorized by CIPSEA.Finally, the confidentiality side of CIPSEA was not neglected. Par-ticipants from the agencies stated the need to continue to take this re-
sponsibility very seriously as a matter of principle and as a means to
buttress public confidence in the agencies. As outlined in the summary
that follows, many presenters argued that the uniform confidentiality
provisions created under CIPSEA provide sufficient coverage to expand
data-sharing arrangements while still ensuring that the privacy and con-
fidentiality of records will be maintained. At the time of the workshop,
however, the confidentiality provisions under CIPSEA did not have OMB
guidelines, and agencies continued to interpret the requirements differ-
ently. The point was made that, given the confidentiality requirements
enacted through CIPSEA, the agencies are now in a better position than
ever before to protect the data collected for statistical purposes under a
pledge of confidentiality. Landefeld noted the importance of continuing
to do a good job of protecting the confidentiality of data, while suggest-
ing incremental changes in data-sharing arrangements, including:¥streamlining administrative procedures under CIPSEA;¥expediting access to research data centers (keeping statistical usesas top priority); andImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING¥modifying IRS procedures to promote effective use of administra-tive data for statistical uses, either through legislation or changes
in the regulations.Landefeld expressed a hope that participants at the workshop wouldemerge with a renewed sense of the importance of moving forward to
responsibly expand interagency data-sharing arrangements.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132The Benefits of Data Sharing to theStatistical AgenciesRepresentatives from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the CensusBureau, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) gave presentations on the benefits of data sharing to sta-
tistical agencies and on the prospects of enhancing current arrangements.
Throughout the session, discussion about the data underlying the BLS
and Census Bureau business lists was prominent. BLS and the Census
Bureau are currently jointly engaged in a business list comparison project;
Jim Spletzer and Paul Hanczaryk presented preliminary results and rec-
ommended next steps. Mark Mazur and Nick Greenia provided an expla-
nation of current data-sharing arrangements and legal constraints from
the IRS perspective. They also commented on the value of tax information
to the statistical agencies and discussed the viability of various strategies
for dealing with current data-sharing restrictions. Dennis Fixler delivered
the morningÕs final presentation, an overview of the current role and fu-
ture potential of data sharing to serve BEAÕs national income and product
accounts work.BUSINESS LIST COMPARISON AND RECONCILIATIONBoth BLS and the Census Bureau compile business establishmentlistsÑthe Business Establishment List (BEL) and the Business Register
(BR), respectivelyÑmainly from administrative records, but also supple-
mented with survey data. Each ÒregisterÓ covers about 8 million business
employer establishments, and they are used for similar purposes: to cre-
ate sampling frames, to benchmark survey data, to publish employmentImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGand wage data, and to provide aggregate measures to other agencies.Products of the BEL and the BR include the Quarterly Census of Employ-
ment and Wages (QCEW) and the County Business Patterns (CBP), re-
spectively. Within each agencyÕs business list programs, there are numer-
ous tasks for which data sharing could be helpful. For example, both the
Census Bureau and BLS require establishment-level data for multiunit
firms. The Census Bureau requests that these firms break out employ-
ment and payroll numbers by establishment in its Company Organiza-
tion Survey (COS); for BLS, the Unemployment Insurance programÕs
Multiple Worksite Report (MWR) is used. Because the timeliness and com-
prehensiveness of the COS and the MWR are not the same, combining
results could enhance the measurement of employment, payroll, and es-
tablishment birth and death trends for multiunit firms.Spletzer described the collaborative project ongoing at BLS and theCensus Bureau to compare, improve, and (perhaps eventually) reconcile
the two lists. The goals of the comparison project are twofold: to under-
stand the differences in the lists and to identify the strengths and weak-
nesses of each. Contributors to the project at BLS and the Census Bureau
are ultimately motivated by the prospect of identifying opportunities to
improve the value of the lists in the context of the uses that they serve.
Improving the comparability and accuracy of the Census Bureau and BLS
business lists not only would provide benefits to the statistical agencies
and to downstream users, but also could reduce reporting burden on the
business community and possibly reduce costs to the agencies in the long
run. Preliminary comparisons have found that heterogeneity between
lists increases at finer levels of industry and geography detail; thus
Spletzer and Hanczaryk suggest the need for greater sharing of micro-
level data. Additionally, they noted the work the agencies plan to do to
resolve the different methods used to determine single versus multi-
establishment status.One of the purposes of the Confidential Information Protection andStatistical Efficiency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA) is Òto improve the comparabil-
ity and accuracy of Federal economic statistics by allowing the Bureau of
the Census, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and the Bureau of Labor
Statistics to update sample frames, develop consistent classifications of
establishments and companies into industries, improve coverage, and rec-
oncile significant differences in data produced by the three agenciesÓ
(Public Law 107Ð347, Subtitle BÑStatistical Efficiency, Sec. 521, Findings
and Purposes). The main hurdle to business list coordination work that
arises involves the statutory restrictions on federal tax information. The
bulk of the data underlying the Census Bureau register originates from
IRS tax records and is shared under Title 26; however, Title 26 does not
authorize BLS or BEA to access these records or, for that matter, the Cen-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF DATA SHARING TO THE STATISTICAL AGENCIES15sus Bureau data commingled with them. Therefore, change in the tax codeis required before microdata from IRS sources can be shared for program-
matic purposes.To inform the business list comparison project, BLS and Census Bu-reau analysts first evaluated and compared the published aggregate sta-
tistics. In order to make a comparison, adjustments were made to take
into account differences in the scope and coverage of the BR and the
QCEW, most notably to account for the fact that the former includes large
segments of the self-employed business population that the latter does
not.1 BLS private-sector data needed filtering to remove certain indus-tries that the Census Bureau does not cover, such as crop and animal pro-
duction, rail transportation, postal services, and private households. Sev-
eral other industries, such as employment in government hospitals and
employment in government liquor stores, had to be added.One of the most striking discoveries of the business list comparisonproject relates to the aggregate employment numbers. As shown in Table
2-1, the overall employment count in 2001 is 5.5 percent higher for the
CBP than it is for the QCEW. These findings were reported in Foster et al.
(2005), which also concluded that industry and geographic coverage mat-
ter a good deal and that the heterogeneity of results increases at finer
levels of industry and geography. One purpose in cataloging the differ-
ences in published statistics was to help guide the micro-level analysis,
which, given the 8 million establishment records, needed to focus first on
the industries and states showing the greatest discrepancies.Different methods were used to compare data from single-establishment units and multiestablishment units. Single-establishment
businesses were examined on an exact match basis; that is, for a given
establishment, the lists had to show the same number of employees to1A full explanation of the methods used in this comparison project can be found in Fosteret al. (2005).TABLE 2-1Comparison of Published Statistics
CountyQuarterly Census
Businessof Employment
2001 DataPatternsand Wages% Difference
Establishments7,095,3027,213,611Ð1.7
Employment115,061,184108,916,7105.5

Payroll (millions)3,989,0863,972,6050.4
NOTE: Figures are adjusted for differences in industry coverage.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGcount as a match. For multiestablishment businesses, the analysts used aÒnear matchÓ band of 5 percent (± 2.5 percent). The percentage of cases inwhich the BLS and Census Bureau lists disagreed on single versus multi-
unit status was not available at the time of the October presentation.In Table 2-2, the first row of figures shows the difference in aggregateemployment for single-establishment businesses. The employment num-
bers are reasonably similar, but analysis of the microdata reveals impor-
tant differences. About 30 percent of the employment and payroll esti-
mates for the matched single-establishment businesses do not match
exactly. Considering that the majority of Employer Identification Num-
bers (EINs) are for single-establishment businesses, these differences, both
in number of establishments and the employment counts, are noteworthy
and should be further explored.In the case of multiestablishment businesses, using the near-matchconcept, the employment and payroll estimates match only 39 and 51 per-
cent of the time, respectively. Again, this shows that significant micro-
level heterogeneity underlies the comparatively similar macro-level sta-
tistics. The comparison project will document and further explore these
similarities and micro-level disparities. In addition, the project will exam-
ine inconsistencies between the Census Bureau and BLS classifications of
single versus multiestablishment businesses. As Table 2-2 indicates, there
are approximately 309,000 cases (found by summing 197,000 and 112, 000,
the bottom two rows of column two) in which the Census Bureau and BLS
disagree over single versus multiunit status, and these businesses account
for about 21-22 million employees. The project will examine a number of
other topicsÑthe role of nonemployers, the data quality for professional
employer organizations and help-supply services, overlap and duplica-
tion in the COS and the MWR, and the role of firm identifiersÑthat factor
into the inconsistencies found in the two business lists.Ascertaining the sources of the nonmatched data will take time, asnonmatches are complicated with technical issues of scope and coverage
and the cooperation of the states. Only 47 states authorized BLS to share
their data for this project, and the relationship between the states that
opted out and the nonmatches is still being explored.Hanczaryk acknowledged that sharing between BLS and the CensusBureau would likely lead to improvements in both lists. BLS industry cod-
ing, physical location addresses, multiunit data from the MWR, and em-
ployment data for single units are recognized as being very thorough,
and this detail would benefit the Census Bureau. The Census Bureau is
particularly interested in the data for multiunit companies within states,
as well as in BLS data for the client businesses of professional employer
organizations (PEOs). PEOs (or employee leasing) firms typically supply
human resource management services (e.g., payroll accounting or ben-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17TABLE 2-2 Business List Comparison
BLSCensus Bureau
2001 MicrodataEINEmploymentEmploymentMatch onMatch on
for 47 States(in millions)(in millions)(in millions)PayrollEmployment
Matched single-establishment EINs4.1353871% (exact)69% (exact)
Matchedmultiestablishment EINs.112494851 (near
a)39 (neara)Matched EINs,BLS multiestablishment,Census Bureau single-.1971515
establishmentMatched EINs,BLS single-establishment,
Census Bureau.11267
multiestablishmentNOTES: EIN = employer identification number, BLS = Bureau of Labor Statistics.aNear match within ± 2.5%.SOURCE: Workshop presentations by Jim Spletzer (BLS) and Paul Hanczaryk (Census Bureau).Based on Microdata ComparisonImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGefits administration) to their clients. The Census BureauÕs tax record-baseddata do not accurately indicate the geographic location and industry of
leased employees working at client sites; rather, they indicate the indus-
try and location of the PEO itself.BLS will benefit from an evaluation of firm information that is col-lected as part of the Census BureauÕs COS. Access to the Census Bureau
data could potentially add consistency to BLS industry codes, giving the
agency the ability to analyze microdata on nonemployer businesses (18.6
million on which the Census Bureau publishes data).Hanczaryk provided an overview of the current limited data sharingbetween the agencies. The Census Bureau provides BLS with approxi-
mately 1.2 million EINs every quarter, which BLS then matches to their
files to provide industry codes and physical location addresses. From this
process, for 2004, 3.4 million BLS industry codes were returned to the
Census Bureau. Sharing these EINs and codes reduced costs and respon-
dent burden and provided greater uniformity of the two agenciesÕ eco-
nomic data and, in the process, produced evidence that this type of data
sharing works.The comparison project currently under way will provide some indi-cation to the agencies of what areas will provide the biggest payoff from
more extensive sharing. Since, under the current agreement, the data can
be shared for research purposes onlyÑbut not to update either of the
registriesÑan important aspect of the project is to guide programmatic
opportunities. The comparison would provide key input for any future
reconciliation of data, should that become an option. For example, the
COS and the MWR are now overlapping mail-out surveys to multiunit
companies. By combining these two surveys, the agencies could reduce
response burden on businesses, one of the twin goals outlined in CIPSEA.In order to move forward on business list improvement and data shar-ing, the agencies must overcome important analytical and legal hurdles.
First, the agencies need to better understand the magnitude of the differ-
ences and the reasons for them. However, comparing multiunit compa-
nies is complicated by the fact that there are no numerical identifiers that
provide a one-to-one comparison of establishments. Second, without com-
panion legislation, BLS is not authorized, under Title 26, to receive the
Census Bureau microdata that include federal tax information. Finally,
BLS, which has an explicit relationship with state unemployment insur-
ance programs, would like to increase consistency in survey processes
and economic data development, but this goal is hampered by the fact
that the states cannot access key Census Bureau microdata.Hanczaryk concluded that the potential of data sharing to improvebusiness lists and other programs in the U.S. statistical system that would
benefit users should provide BLS, the Census Bureau, and BEA with
ample motivation to move forward.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF DATA SHARING TO THE STATISTICAL AGENCIES19AN OVERVIEW OF TAX DATA ANDIRS DATA-SHARING ARRANGEMENTSThe availability of federal tax information, especially confidentialmicrodata, was a recurring theme of the workshop. The IRS houses data
on tax returns from a variety of entities, including individuals, estates and
gifts, tax-exempt organizations, and businesses and corporations (tracked
by EIN, not establishment). The IRS presentersÑMark Mazur and Nick
Greenia from the Office of Research, Analysis, and StatisticsÑidentified
constraints to using data processed from these returns, most notably the
need for an authorized purpose as defined by the Internal Revenue Code
(IRC). Their paper (see Chapter 6) discusses the legislative history and
lays out limitations, lessons learned, possible means to expand data shar-
ing under current constraints, and steps that might be taken to change the
legislation. Their presentation touched on three specific topics related to
expanded accessÑthe need for statutory change, regulatory change, and
policy agreements; the importance of linking any expanded access to a
specific research or statistical purpose; and the need to make the benefits
to the Treasury Department and other agencies clear to policy makers.There are three major authorized uses of federal tax information: taxadministration (which is the concern that overrides all others from the
IRS perspective), tax policy analysis, and research and statistical uses.
Tax data are subject to strong presumptions of confidentiality, and Sec-
tion 6103(j) of the statute authorizing access for outside statistical use
permits recipients to access only the minimum amount of data necessary
to accomplish a stated purpose. The penalties for unauthorized disclo-
sure or inspection of tax data are strong and clearly defined in the stat-
ute. In addition, data recipients are subject to regular safeguard reviews
of physical and computer security, need and use, and other factors in
order to ensure that they are in compliance with IRS requirements to
protect taxpayer confidentiality.An increasingly difficult problem in releasing data is to ensure thatthey remain anonymous. Ever-advancing technologyÑimproving data

linkage programs, faster and cheaper computer processing, and increas-
ing amounts of administrative data available on the InternetÑhas made it
easier to match an individual or company to a specific record. For ex-
ample, if a record includes an industry code, address, and revenue figure
that could identify a particular business, anonymity would be breached
and the law broken. In turn, protecting the confidentiality of tax data be-
comes increasingly more difficult.The IRS considers all tax data sensitive, meaning that no distinction ismade between information that is publicly available elsewhere, such as
an address found in a phone book, and information that may not be, such
as a firmÕs income and profit entries. In addition, no statute of limitationsImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGexists for tax data, which means that they must be protected in perpetuity.Various levels of security have been implemented to protect data from
unauthorized use. The IRS maintains an audit trail for those who have
access to the data, conducts background checks on users, and requires
users of tax data to have a computer system that is separated from other
types of data uses. These safeguards and constraints increase the cost of
providing data and ultimately limit access.Both IRS presenters emphasized the point that voluntary complianceis a cornerstone for accomplishing the central IRS mission of administer-
ing tax collection, and it is dependent on the protection, both real and
perceived, of taxpayer confidentiality. Due to the sensitive nature of the
information reported by taxpayers, ensuring and demonstrating the pro-
tection of confidentiality in the IRS process are vital aspects of promoting
compliance. An ongoing concern at the IRS is that expansion of data ac-
cess could increase the risk of a confidentiality breach and, along with it,
a public perception that tax information is shared carelessly throughout
the federal government. This in turn could weaken the voluntary self-
assessment system. Mazur noted that a 1-percentage point change in the
overall voluntary compliance rate translates into tens of billions of dol-
lars in tax revenues collected. Thus, there are two important goals in
managing tax data: protecting them to maintain as high a compliance
rate as possible, and exploiting them effectively and efficiently for other
authorized purposes, including statistical uses.The characteristics of tax data are unique. The size of the populationcovered (over 20 million organizations and over 125 million individual
taxpayers) and the scope of return data (covering information on every-
thing from mortgage interest deductions to corporate net profits) create a
complex respondent universe and a wealth of detailed data. Because of
disincentives dissuading false or late reporting, nonresponse is thought to
be low relative to most survey alternatives. However, the IRS captures
neither all data for all types of returns nor data on taxpayers who fail to
file; as such, there are well-known and systematic inaccuracies in the data
reported to tax authorities. Nonetheless, given that the data are used for
tax administration purposes, including enforcement and internal research
and analysis at the IRS, there is reason to believe that many components
of the data are accurate (again, relative to survey-sourced data).The federal executive and legislative branches conduct tax policyanalysis with the data, while four agencies covered in Section 6103(j) of
the IRCÑBEA, the Census Bureau, the Department of AgricultureÕs Na-
tional Agricultural Statistics Service, and the Congressional Budget Of-
fice (CBO)Ñcan use the data for statistical purposes, although the extent
of access for specific purposes varies widely by agency. Data in
nonidentifiable form, including public use files, have been used moreImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF DATA SHARING TO THE STATISTICAL AGENCIES21broadly by decision makers in the federal government, businesses, policythink tanks, academic researchers, and state governments.Statistical agencies are charged with using existing data systems, suchas administrative records, to the maximum extent possible to reduce costs
and counter concerns about respondent burden. The IRS, by contrast, must
protect federal tax information by providing it only for authorized pur-
poses and to the minimum extent required for each purpose. These two
directives create tensions, some of which have been partially relieved by
agreements that stipulate clearly delineated uses of tax data and the con-
ditions under which they may be used. Generally speaking, however, the
IRS does not view either burden or cost reduction alone as reason enough
to grant access. Recognizing the great demand for access to federal tax
information, Greenia and Mazur offered guidance about what kinds of
sharing arrangements were most feasible.As outlined in the Greenia-Mazur paper (see Chapter 6), three meth-ods are available to expand access to data: statutory change, regulatory
change, and policy agreement. Greenia clarified the differences between
statutory and regulatory change: the former requires the passage of a law
through Congress and the signature of the president, while the latter re-
quires Treasury Department approval.In order to add new statistical users, or to expand the access of thosecurrently authorized to access federal tax information, Section 6103(j)
must be amended. This statute stipulates who may use the data and for
what purpose, as well as what data fields may be accessedÑfor example
corporate tax items. The presenters suggested that limiting the specific
data items to those actually needed for a specific purpose (e.g., basic in-
formation needed to construct a business list sampling frame), clearly
tying requests to intended use, and specifying them in an amended stat-
ute might improve the chances of passing a proposed legislative change.
The idea is to conform to the Òminimum needÓ requirement by bounding
the item content in the statute. Data sharing among authorized recipientsis enabled elsewhere in statuteÑby Section 6103(p)(2) and the associated
regulation (B).On the regulatory side, the Treasury Department requires a compel-ling, data-driven business case in order to grant access to additional data
items. Regulatory changes have been used in the past to both add and
remove data field access. A change in regulation can supplement statutes
and adjust for changes in user needs. For example, if the Census Bureau
needed to access additional corporate tax data fields to accomplish a man-
date under Title 13, Chapter 5, a change in regulation would be required
to enable such an expansion in access. For purposes of business list com-
parison and reconciliation projects, Greenia discussed freezing item con-
tent in the statute to basic sampling frame informationÑagain to be re-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGsponsive to the minimum need requirement. He suggested, further, thatlimiting requests in this way would ease potential concerns by legislators
and their staffs that additional items might be added in the future with
only the approval of TreasuryÕs assistant secretary of tax policy.The third mechanism for expanding access is a policy agreement,which is intended to supplement the statutes and regulations. The Census
Bureau-IRS Criteria Agreement, which emerged in response to concerns
over access to tax data facilitated by the development of the Census Bu-
reau Research Data Centers (RDCs), is an example. The crux of this agree-
ment is that the work must have a predominant Title 13, Chapter 5, pur-
pose, which essentially means it must improve Census Bureau programs.
The Census Bureau is responsible for evaluating proposals based on sci-
entific merit and predominant purpose, and the IRS documents the re-
quest and either authorizes or denies it after determining whether it com-
plies with their regulations. External researchers apply for Special Sworn
Status (SSS), go through an FBI clearance, swear to an oath to abide by
Title 13, and then, after clearing these hurdles, are certified to access Title
13 and Title 26 data in the same manner as Census Bureau employees.The Joint Committee on Taxation publishes an annual report that liststhe volume of tax data records disclosed by the IRS, classified by statute
and including statistical purposes. Disclosures under Section 6103(n), such
as contract work with BEA or the Federal Reserve Board, are not included
in this report. This report shows that the number of disclosures for federal
statistical uses, most of which involve demographic data requested by the
Census Bureau, is second only to those needed for state tax administra-
tion. Greenia noted that policy-oriented research and statistical analyses
are important considerations for tax data administration. When asked
about the effect that outside researcher access has on public perceptions
of confidentiality and privacy, Mazur suggested that it is likely minimal,
as long as the number of analysts is small, access is at armÕs length, and
researchers are subject to the same enforcement rules as others with data
access.During the open discussion, steering committee member JohnHaltiwanger inquired about possible models for new data sharing. One
suggestion was to allow a third party, such as the Office of Tax Analysis
in the Treasury Department, to access the data specifically for tax policy
use and, second, to generate simulated synthetic data as public use data.
Under this scenario, researchers from the Office of Tax Analysis would
access data as SSS agents and follow the same rules as other external re-
searchers working under the Census Bureau-IRS Criteria Agreement. The
presenters recognized the potential importance of synthetic data as a tool
for expanding access to microdata, citing several projects already under
way at the Census Bureau. While the IRS is supportive of the Census Bu-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF DATA SHARING TO THE STATISTICAL AGENCIES23reau work developing synthetic data, the quality and utility of the datasets are still largely unknown. Mazur noted that, while further develop-
ment of synthetic data is necessary, past efforts have not generated data
sets known to provide inference-valid results, especially for complex mod-
eling applications.In the context of moving forward on data sharing, the presenters of-fered a list of lessons learned (see Chapter 6 for a full discussion of these
lessons). First, strong leadership and support from the highest levels of
government are needed. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
the Council of Economic Advisers, and congressional staff are good places
to enlist support for a companion bill to CIPSEA. The effort needs activecongressional support, from both staff of tax-writing committees and from
members of the House and the Senate. It also requires clear communica-
tion to policy makers and the public of the potential benefits from inter-
agency data sharing, such as increased efficiency, more accurate statistics,
and reduced respondent burden.Second, Mazur suggested that the myth of a zero-sum game, in whichexpanding access in one area requires reduced access elsewhere, must be
addressed. In addition, he argued,  discrete and incremental steps may be

better than bold leaps as statutory or regulatory changes are pursued.
Finally, there should be some interagency coordination of confidentiality
protection procedures, and the benefits of proposed changes to the Trea-
sury Department need to be clear. (In 2002, staffers from the Ways and
Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee asked what was in
the companion bill for Treasury.) By leading the Treasury Department
effort to advocate for CIPSEA in Congress, the IRS demonstrated that it
can play a major role in the development and passage of data-sharing
legislation. The more agencies that are behind the legislation, and the
stronger the argument for widely distributed benefits, the more likely it is
to receive congressional support.DATA SHARING AND BEA PRODUCTIONOF ECONOMIC STATISTICSThe extent to which agencies are able to share data for statistical pur-poses carries direct ramifications for national income accounting. As back-
ground for their presentation, Dennis Fixler and Steven Landefeld of the
BEA contributed a paper on this topic, which appears as Chapter 7 of this
volume.In his presentation, Fixler specifically outlined how disparate sourcesof data can lead to inconsistencies in the construction of economic statis-
tics. A prominent example is the fact that gross domestic income (GDI),
gross domestic product (GDP), and state personal income have all, atImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGtimes,  displayed different rates of growthÑdifferences that can present
problems for policy makers. For example, GDP estimates are used for

OMB and CBO budget forecasts, and the Federal Reserve incorporates the
output growth information in monetary policy decisions. Chapter 7 pro-
vides details and further examples of why understanding these statistical
discrepancies matters.GDI and GDP are the two aggregate measures of domestic output.The product or expenditure side (GDP) is calculated primarily from the
Census Bureau data, while the income side (GDI) is calculated mostly
from BLS data. Conceptually, the two series should be equal, but because
the data come from different sources, typically there is a statistical dis-
crepancy. Historically, more weight has been given to GDP; however, as
the statistical discrepancy increased during the latter half of the 1990s,
analysts (e.g., those studying productivity trends or forecasting tax rev-
enues) began paying more attention to the income side. Wage and salary
growth for the period 1995-2001, as measured using the Census Bureau
data, has been greater than that shown by BLS data.Fixler and Landefeld suggest that one possible source of the GDP-GDI discrepancy may be tied to the way that stock options, bonuses, and
fringe benefits are recorded in the BLS and Census Bureau payroll fig-
ures. Table 7-8 (see Chapter 7) breaks down differences in payroll growth
to an annual basis, revealing that the Census Bureau figures are frequently
but not always greater than those of BLS. To gain a clearer picture of mea-
sured wage trend differences, it is helpful to explore the data at the indus-
try level. For example, between 1998 and 2002, the Census Bureau data
show a faster growth rate than BLS data for the information sector; the
opposite is true for construction. Calculating real value-added growth in
a few selected sectors using Census Bureau rather than BLS data shows
that the absolute differences can be substantial. The growth rate for com-
puter and electronic products in 2002 illustrates this difference, as the
Census Bureau measure of current-dollar value-added is roughly double
the BLS count. The higher Census Bureau number supports an altered
view of that sector, and of trends in manufacturing generally, suggesting
a different recovery story for the period. More complete data sharing

among the agencies would allow researchers to investigate these data dis-
crepancies in a systematic manner.Data sources used by BEA to compute gross output per workerÑindicators of productivityÑalso show substantial differences. Two ex-
amples, shown in Table 2-3, are oil and gas extraction and petroleum and
coal products, in which the percentage differences are 13.9 and 12.8, re-
spectively, between the CBP and QCEW measures of gross output per
worker. These differences are linked to those discussed in the presenta-
tion by Spletzer and Hanczaryk on the BLS and Census Bureau businessImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF DATA SHARING TO THE STATISTICAL AGENCIES25list comparisons, and they show exactly why BEA has an interest in thisproject.Another area for further exploration relates to Title 26 data. BEA, theNational Science Foundation, and the Census Bureau worked together on
a project begun in 2003 looking at research and development expendi-
tures. The project was designed to use Title 13 and BEA data, avoiding
federal tax information. As Table 7-10 reveals (see Chapter 7), in some
cases the expenditures of U.S. parent companies, a subset of all U.S. firms,
exceeded all U.S. expenditures. This inconsistency between expenditure
measures could potentially be solved by using Title 26 data. Estimation of
state income taxes provides another example of how multiple sources of
data can lead to inconsistencies in accounting. Chapter 7 includes esti-
mates of the extent to which the difference between the BLS and Census
Bureau payroll figures can affect projected state and local income taxes.The benefits of data sharing can be viewed from either a system-wideperspective or, more narrowly, from the perspective of specific agencies.
The system-wide benefits include improved sampling frames, more con-
sistent industry and region classifications, and an increased capacity to
resolve anomalies in responsesÑall without increased respondent bur-
den. Finally, there are important analytical policy questions that can be
addressed at the micro level through data matching. Prime examples are
policies involving foreign direct investment and offshoring.From the national accounts perspective, Fixler argued that data shar-ing offers a number of benefits. Data sharing would aid in resolving the
statistical discrepancies underlying source data, such as those underlyingTABLE 2-3Gross Output per Worker (in dollars)
2002NAICSCensusPercent
CodeSelected IndustriesBureauBLSDifference
211Oil and gas extraction991,595853,547Ð13.9
324Petroleum and coal products2,062,6171,798,598Ð12.8
486Pipeline transportation761,076660,673Ð13.2
515-517Broadcasting and telecommunications296,694342,73915.5
52-535Finance, insurance, real estate,392,955434,75310.6
rental, and leasingNAICS: North American Industry Classification System.2002 Output per EmployeeImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGthe income and product sides of the national accounts and the payroll andemployment estimates. Preliminary employment figures, indicators, and
extrapolators, which are used in BEAÕs early estimates, as well as its mod-
els and projections, may be improved through data sharing and fuller
access to data that capture accounting and other business changes. The
extent to which sharing would help overcome problems of data disrup-
tions, such as from natural disasters like Hurricane Katrina, is unclear,
but allowing agencies to compare notes could help fill the gaps.During open discussion, Carol Corrado noted that some discrepan-cies are informative. She pointed out that analysts at the Federal Reserve
Board look at differences across data series to piece together analytical
insights. Identifying sources of discrepancies requires access to data to
determine if there is a difference in exporting between the Census Bureau
and the BLS forms, a difference in the interpretation of language, or some-
thing else. Fixler noted that, under current constraints, this capability is
limited, as restrictions on federal tax information typically do not allow
for adequate analysis below the aggregate levels. Fixler stressed that data
sharing cannot solve all discrepancies, but it will allow analysts to better
understand the source of the differences and provide policy makers with
a clearer picture of what is happening in the economy.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.273Research and Policy Perspectives on the
Benefits of Business Data SharingBusiness data from the U.S. statistical system and various private-sector sources form the countryÕs economic informational infrastructure,
on which millions of policy and business decisions, including cost-of-
living adjustments, monetary policy, and wage and investing decisions,
are based. Shortcomings or inconsistencies in measures of economic ac-
tivity can hinder decision making in a multitude of ways. Steering com-
mittee chair Charles Schultze introduced the afternoon session by taking
up this topic, noting that a lack of data sharing and coordination can con-
tribute to problems of discrepant data. One notable example is the aggre-
gate employment statistics, specifically, the (perhaps cyclical) pattern of
differences in employment changes as measured by the Current Employ-
ment Statistics (CES) and the Current Population Survey (CPS). Schultze
cited the widely held view that, in the short to medium run, the CES pay-
roll series is the best measure for judging cyclical strength or weakness of
the economy, but he suggested that policy makers and analysts should
pay attention to the employment estimates in the CPS household survey
as well and support efforts to reconcile the two series.The discrepancy in employment data has recently received a gooddeal of attention. Schultze cited a paper by George Perry (2005) evaluat-
ing the CES and the CPS (adjusted for conceptual comparability) in terms
of their usefulness for measuring the short-run employment behavior of
the overall economy. He also cited the work of John Schmitt and Dean
Baker (2006), economists at the Center for Economic and Policy Research,
which found that the CPS may be overstating the share of working Ameri-
cans by 1.4 percentage points (roughly 3 million people).Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGThe choice of how much reliance to place on either of the two em-ployment series affects measured growth of unit labor costs and produc-
tivity, which carries important policy implications. For example, the
higher unit labor costs derived from the CPS (relative to the CES) would
support a stronger case for increasing interest rates. Schultze agreed with
the position that both data series contribute relevant information, but he
added that the reasons underlying the inconsistencies need to be more
fully understood. If it were possible to integrate Census Bureau data on
the self-employed and nonemployers with employment statistics from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), one element of the discrepancy in
establishment- and household-based employment statistics could be
studied more carefully.The afternoon session featured the perspectives of data users outsidethe statistical agencies. Carol Corrado opened the discussion of user needs
and concerns related to data sharing with a presentation on monetary
policy and research at the Federal Reserve Board (FRB). Dale Jorgenson
and George Plesko provided additional researcher perspectives with pre-
sentations on productivity and real output measurement and on tax data
needs for estimating corporate profits, respectively. The session concluded
with a presentation on the use of data and the potential value of data
sharing for budget forecasting by Douglas Holtz-Eakin, former director of
the Congressional Budget Office (CBO).MONETARY POLICY AND RESEARCHAT THE FEDERAL RESERVECarol Corrado spoke from the perspective of the FRBÑperhaps themost important policy consumer of economic statisticsÑabout the value
of accurate data and how improved coordination among the statistical
agencies might enhance that value. Her comments focused on how busi-
ness list reconciliation would provide a more consistent source of data
for use in the analysis and forecasting of productivityÑparticularly mul-
tifactor productivity. Real-time economic statistics, imperfect by nature,
play an important role in the Federal ReserveÕs assessment of underlying
trends in gross domestic product (GDP) and gross domestic income
(GDI), payroll and household-based estimates of employment, industry
productivity, and business inventories. Corrado cited these and several
other examples as cases in which alternative data sources do not typi-
cally align. Sometimes one source is more revealing than another; for
example, data from the income side of the national accounts captured the
1990s acceleration in productivity considerably sooner than did data from
the product side.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES29In some cases, alternative measurement instruments reveal differentelements of a phenomenon, thereby allowing richer analyses; in other
cases, they do not. Payroll and household employment statistics, which
frequently diverge, are useful in revealing different aspects of the labor
picture. However, Corrado argued, maintaining two business establish-
ment lists is not a good example of complementary data sources. She em-
phasized the point that there is a distinction between data consistency
and data integration and the way each relates to statistical discrepancies.
Consistency has to do with definitions and classification, which is what
the reconciliation of the two lists should aim to achieve. She suggested
that the methods by which the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) recon-
ciles its industry accounts with the expenditure side of GDP is an example
of integration eliminating informative discrepancies. Fixler noted that,
from a national income accounting perspective, BEA analysts need to be
able to draw as much information from one account toward the other as
possible. If the differences were fully understood between the inputs, the
decision to integrate or distribute discrepancies between accounts would
be unnecessary, as the differences would be small and relatively manage-
able. Corrado suggested there may be problems with the way discrepan-
cies get redistributed in the national income and product accounts, and
that noise in the data needs to be eliminated before they can be used to
detect changes in productivity at the industry level.Corrado used the striking productivity measurement case to illustrateproblems that arise from maintaining two business lists. At the FRB, ag-
gregate productivity is directly linked to monetary policy decisions be-
cause productivity affects inflation trends. Conventional industry-based
productivity studies rely on output data from the Census Bureau and in-
put measures from the BLS. Corrado pointed out that a calculation in
which the numerator and the denominator are derived from the same
survey or survey frame would have obvious statistical advantages.One example of the importance of industry-level information for as-sessing prospects for aggregate productivity surfaced during the late
1990s. Initially, in late 1996, the FRBÕs view of productivity was based on
analyses of sectoral and industry trends captured using BEAÕs data on
GDP by industry. These analyses, along with other academic and agency
research, suggested that prices in some industries were mismeasured. As
the role of changes occurring in the high-technology industries became
clear, a strong case emerged for improving industry-level data. Still later,
evidence grew that the step-up in multifactor productivity was fairly
broadly based by industry. Although these developments are now appar-
ent in retrospect, at the time these new trends were emerging, when the
FRB needed to examine what was happening in productivity in real time,Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGmuch of the available evidence of the changes in multifactor productivitywas anecdotal.When measuring productivity, most macroeconomists do not spenda lot of time with the Census Bureau employment data, mainly because
those figures are not comprehensive (even in Census years). Macro-
economists more typically rely on BLS industry-level employment mea-
sures, which at times diverge significantly from Census Bureau-based
measures. For example, in 1997, 2.6 million persons were categorized as
working in the management of companies (North American Industry
Classification System, or NAICS, Code 55) according to the Census Bu-
reau, but only 1.7 million persons worked in the occupation according to
BLS. A reconciliation of the Census Bureau and BLS business lists has the
potential to create more uniform and comparable measures of output, em-
ployment, and, in turn, productivity. Although anecdotal information will
always be used to some extent, Corrado argued that a system that in-
cludes a consistent historical time series is vital to research and policy at
the FRB.Corrado commented on additional data hurdles that inhibit analysisat the Federal Reserve, citing lags in data, the impact of the switch to
NAICS on productivity analysis (particularly for the services industries),
and BEA changes in its industry accounting methods. She noted that the
FRB is engaged in a project to review disaggregate productivity measure-
ment using industry data from BEA, as well as aggregate measures for six
sectors believed to illuminate key trends. Inconsistencies in employment
by NAICS-defined industries have limited what the project is able to do in
terms of studying trends in multifactor productivity. Project researchers
built a Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)-to-NAICS concordance in
an effort to bridge some gaps and, in CorradoÕs view, fully reconciling the
business lists would advance the goal of creating time series of consistent
historical industry productivity data. Once current employment data dis-
crepancies are addressed, she would like to see a historical revision of
industry output and productivity data.Corrado concluded her presentation by stating that the statisticalagencies should reorient their programs to avoid duplicative effort re-
quired to maintain two systems, which ultimately makes detecting trends
in the economy more difficult. During the open discussion, John
Haltiwanger noted that it would be difficult to choose (or to get BLS and
the Census Bureau to agree) on one list over another, and he urged that
the strengths and weaknesses of each would need to be captured to con-
struct an ideal downstream reconciliation of the two. Historical estimates
could continue to rely on the Census Bureau employment data because
they conform to the Census Bureau output data but, looking ahead, the
list would benefit from the timeliness of BLS data. Agreeing that thisImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES31would be an appropriate strategy, Corrado expressed the hope that, in thenear future, there would be a system going forward that has reconciled
the differences in employment by industry.PRODUCTIVITY AND REAL OUTPUT MEASUREMENTDale Jorgenson presented his views on the role of data sharing in themeasurement of productivity and real output and on data integration is-
sues related to the Ònew architectureÓ he helped design for the U.S. na-
tional accounts. A goal of the new architecture is to provide an internally
consistent and comprehensive set of national accounts to measure the
large, complex U.S. economy with a statistical system that is highly de-
centralized. He argued that an accurate set of accounts depends on a con-
sistent set of data. One goal of the new architecture program is to have a
unified register of firms and establishments, collecting data in a way that
reflects the common records that are maintained for these units; some of
this can be accomplished through more effective data sharing by the sta-
tistical agencies. Such a system would work to achieve greater internal
consistency of data at the micro level, helping to identify the sources of
discrepancies.The new architecture framework has seven main accounts: produc-tion, domestic receipts and expenditures, foreign transaction current ac-
count, domestic capital account, foreign transaction capital account, do-
mestic balance sheet, and U.S. international position (see Figure 3-1 for1. PRODUCTIONGross Domestic Product EqualsGross Domestic Factor Outlay2. DOMESTIC RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURESDomestic Receipts Equal
Domestic Expenditure3. FOREIGN TRANSACTION CURRENT ACCOUNTReceipts from Rest of World EqualPayments to Rest of World and
Balance on Current Account4. DOMESTIC CAPITAL ACCOUNTGross Domestic Capital Formation EqualsGross Domestic Savings5. FOREIGN TRANSACTION CAPITAL ACCOUNTBalance on Current Account EqualsPayments to Rest of the World and 
Net Lending or Borrowing6. DOMESTIC BALANCE SHEETDomestic Wealth EqualsDomestic Tangible Assets and
U.S. Net International Position7. U.S. INTERNATIONAL POSITIONU.S.-Owned Assets Abroad EqualForeign-Owned Assets in U.S. and U.S. Net International PositionFIGURE 3-1Blueprint for an expanded and integrated set of accounts for the
United States.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGdetail on components of each account). The majority of JorgensonÕs pre-sentation focused on the production account, which sets GDP equal to
Gross Domestic Factor Outlay or Income (GDI).The production account consists of output, input, and productivity,in which output and input shares add up to one (1.0) in the GDP. Con-
sumption and investment outputs make up the output shares, and when
one rises, the other falls. GDI reveals how individuals divide their money
among resources for consumption (which includes immediate consump-
tion goods) and savings (which includes housing and financial assets).
GDP and GDI should agree, but in order for those to match, the source
data must be internally consistent. When these are consistent, they can be
used to measure the effects of events like Hurricane Katrina on the
economy. However, when the components of the accounts do not agree,
errors within the accounts and among the seven accounts occur. For ex-
ample, consumption expenditures show up as part of the national prod-
uct. An error in the product account leads to an error in expenditures and
income, which in turn creates an error in production. In addition, dis-
crepancies in the measurement of the savings rate cause problems in the
capital formation and wealth area. Thus, error propagates error.BEA is responsible for the production accounts at both aggregate andindustry levels. Input shares to productivity include capital and labor in-
puts. The estimates of labor inputs are based on BLS data from the Quar-
terly Census of Employment and Wages and have remained fairly con-
stant. If the Census Bureau figures were used rather than BLS numbers,
the result would be a share of labor about 5 percent lower and the share of
capital would increase. This would affect the estimate of economic growth

on the input side and, in turn, the productivity number. In terms of contri-
butions to growth, capital investments are primary sources of economic
growth, because labor growth has been slow relative to capital and in-
vestment growth since 1995 (see Figure 3-2). If adjusted to Census Bureau
data, where the labor share is even smaller and the capital share larger,
over time productivity estimates would decrease. Jorgenson provided
these examples to illustrate how data choice (in this case, the Census Bu-
reau versus BLS data on shares of labor and growth measures) affects the
internal consistency of the accounts and the ability to obtain accurate mac-
roeconomic measures.Additionally, the output data produced from different data sourcesby BLS and BEA are not comparable, and it is important to be able to
reconcile these differences. One way to do that is to go to the registers of
individual firms and establishments and make sure the data are collected
from common sources. Jorgenson reiterated that accurate measurement
of output, productivity, and saving requires extending data-sharing ar-
rangements. He argued that it is necessary to work toward a unified reg-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES33ister so that the national accounts can rest on a firm foundation of a com-mon set of data sources. He added that having a centralized statistical
system, such as Statistics Canada, is not necessary, if the problem of inter-
nal consistency is addressed. In order to have a common register that is
used across the government and to share data among agencies, the statu-
tory authority to do so must exist.Jorgenson stated that data sharing is not an academic problem or anissue for the statistical agencies alone. It is a problem for the policy mak-
ers and the politicians who rely on the agencies for information. He specu-
lated that policy makers are hamstrung by the fact that the data system
involves inconsistencies that arise through the lack of data sharing and
through the absence of statutory authority to share data among the statis-
tical agencies. Jorgenson stated that it is absolutely essential that these
uncertainties be resolved, and he suggested starting at the most funda-
mental levels.For monetary and economic policy purposes, understanding the cur-rent state and future outlook for the American economy depends on get-
ting the numbers right. One of the most important factors in determining
the economic outlook is the contribution of information technology and
other industries to pastÑand futureÑgrowth and productivity. To illus-
trate, Jorgenson calculated differences in productivity growth implied by
the Census Bureau and BLS data. Differences at the industry level are
typically much higher than the 5 percent that he found in the aggregate0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.51948-19731973-19891989-19951995-2004
LaborCapitalTFPShare of ContributioinLabor, Capital, and Total Factor Productivity Contributions to Total Economic GrowthFIGURE 3-2The production accountÑoutput, input, and productivity.
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGestimate. For manufacturing as a whole, the share of labor calculated us-ing the Census Bureau data is 15 percent lower than the statistic calcu-
lated using BLS data. For some industries, such as oil and gas extraction,
the Census Bureau figure is 50 percent lower than the BLS figure.At the industry level, one of the most dramatic differences betweenvalue-added growth, as estimated using the Census Bureau data rather
than BLS data on wages and salaries, is for the computer and office equip-
ment industry. Estimates provided by Landefeld and Fixler indicate sig-
nificant differences in the growth rate and level of activity in this industry
and the broader information technology industry, depending on whether
the BLS or Census Bureau data are used (see Table 7-2 in Chapter 7).During the open discussion, Haltiwanger made the point that thereseems to be a clear distinction between informative discrepancies and in-
herent, nonmeaningful inconsistencies that are costly in terms of time and
resources. He suggested that the sectors of the economy experiencing large
amounts of change might also be the most problematic. In considering
whether the agencies are performing their statutory duty to provide the
most accurate statistics possible, JorgensonÕs two biggest concerns are
with measuring output at the industry level and measuring the income
side. He concluded with a clarification of an important discrepancy: if the
macro number and the number calculated by adding up the industries do
not match, that is an important indicator of discrepancies in the industry-
level data across sources. In order to understand the future of the
economy, he argued, the macro picture will not suffice, and the industry
data from the FRB, BLS, and BEA are vital. Finally, he noted that, while
not all of the issues can be solved by data sharing, such arrangements are
essential to improving economic data and statistics.TAX DATA NEEDS FOR IMPROVING ESTIMATES OFCORPORATE PROFITSGeorge Plesko of the University of Connecticut discussed the avail-ability and role of various kinds of corporate profit information for re-
search and analysis. He focused on discrepancies and measurement dif-
ferences between financial reporting profits and cash reported profits, as
well as how each relates to the other. His paper (Chapter 8) discusses how
tax return data can be used to improve estimates of corporate profits. Cor-
porate income can be measured in two ways, through financial (more
commonly called ÒbookÓ) reporting and through tax reporting. Book re-
porting provides income measures and other information for investors,
creditors, and other users; however, such information is available only for
publicly traded companies. Tax reporting provides a measure of income
for tax collection, and it is generally characterized as providing less dis-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES35cretion to management regarding the choice and application of account-ing rules. Fuller data sharing might allow researchers to examine the rela-
tionship between tax and book data and the viability of using the latter in
tax-estimate modeling.Tax-based and book-based calculations of corporate income are dif-ferent for two primary reasonsÑone causing a temporary difference and
one a permanent difference. Tax depreciation is typically faster than book
depreciation, leading to less income in the short term, but more in later
periodsÑthus creating a temporary difference in the measurement con-
cepts. Second, tax-exempt interest is not included as part of taxable in-
come but is considered income for financial reporting purposes, which
creates a permanent difference in measurement. These differences are
important to outside investors, creditors, and policy analysts for under-
standing the operations of a firm. Recent research (U.S. Department of the
Treasury, 1999) has also identified large and increasing differences in book
versus tax income as supporting evidence of increased tax sheltering ac-
tivities (see Table 8-1). The book and tax reports attempt to measure the
same thing but the methods are conceptually different, and each adds
something to what outside analysts can learn about a firm.Financial statements provide an opportunity for analysts to augmentinformation about a firmÕs operation that is not required to be disclosed
through tax reporting. The information from each is useful to investors,
and ideally these two sources would be complementary. However, the
information is not useful for inferring income and payments. When exam-
ining pretax book income and the amount of income subject to tax from
the two sources, Plesko found that, over time, the two diverge. In terms of
nonpublicly traded firms, tax return information may be the only source
of financial information.The timeliness of book reporting is important to note, as informationprovided through this type of financial reporting is filed publicly by
March 30 for the preceding year. Tax return information from Statistics
of Income (SOI) tabulations lags behind by nearly three years when tak-
ing into consideration extensions and audits. Given the earlier access to
book statements, if the relationship between a firmÕs tax returns and
the book financial statements is clear, then the latter should enable ana-
lysts to begin modeling a year or two ahead of the release of SOI figures.
A problem arising from using financial statements is that more than one,
and possibly several hundred, matching tax returns may exist. The new
IRS Schedule M-3, which replaced Schedule M-1, allows fuller reconcilia-
tion of book income with tax net income. The form delineates differences
between book and tax income as temporary or permanent, allowing ev-
ery tax return to be identified with the appropriate accounting parent.When combined, financial and tax return information provides a moreImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGcomplete picture of a businessÕs operations. Access to multiple datasources also allows for more timely estimation of economic events be-
cause various sources become available on different schedules. The ablity
to reconcile book and tax income at the back end creates benefits as well.
For example, financial statement data are useful in augmenting tax filings
by providing information on firmsÕ operations that are not captured in the
tax reporting system.The new IRS schedule, the M-3 (see http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/2005f1120sm3.pdf), is coming online beginning with tax year 2004
for firms that have assets of $10 million and more. Benefits of the Sched-
ule M-3 include reconciliation of income from the worldwide consoli-
dated financial statement and from the income statement of includible
corporations; reconciliation of book income of includible corporations
with tax net income; and delineation of differences between book and tax
income as temporary or permanent. The new form should help the IRS,
Treasury, and BEA better understand how financial reporting can inform
tax administration.Plesko cited the national accounts as an example of how the new datathat incorporates both financial and tax return information will be useful.
The detail captured by the M-3 will provide more data on the contempo-
raneous finances and the operations and organization of firms, including
specific decisions related to tax planning. Plesko argued that the improved
financial data that can be generated from the M-3 will be helpful in mea-
suring the effects of tax policy, as well as for constructing preliminary
national income estimates of corporate profit (see Chapter 8 for further
examples). During the open discussion, steering group member Daniel
Feenberg suggested that BEA and the Census Bureau think about cooper-
ating on a reconciled form that would allow BEA to ask respondents to
reconcile their answers with those provided to the Census Bureau.THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURATE DATA AND DATA SHARINGFOR BUDGET FORECASTINGThe CBO is charged with providing Congress with the information itneeds to address budgetary and economic policies. CBO produces ap-
proximately 900 cost estimates per year, on tight time schedules and for
difficult and disparate questions. CBO gathers data from agencies, includ-
ing administrative data, and it relies on confidentially supplied private-
sector data. It is often difficult to reconcile the different pictures of a
programÕs performance portrayed by administrative data from the agen-
cies and by data based on the Current Population Survey or other sur-
veys. CBO has indirectly experimented with data sharing in the sense thatImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES37it has made attempts to reconcile confidential private-sector data withdata from other agency sources.CBO uses data in a number of ways: for monitoring the state of theeconomy at both the macro and micro levels; for near-term forecasting (18
to 24 months) of overall movement and composition of output and in-
come; and for medium-term forecasting for the economy over the next 10
years. CBO also engages in long-term modeling to produce estimates of
the future path of various programs, such as Social Security and Medi-
care, analyzing changes in program finances and their impact on the fed-
eral unified budget deficit and the path of the U.S. economy.In his presentation, Douglas Holtz-Eakin began by asserting that, ofcourse, CBO would be better served if it had more accurate and timely
data, and he suggested that an important consideration in evaluating the
strength and accuracy of data is the underlying expertise in its produc-
tion. To the extent that it is possible to enlarge the effective sample sizes
through sharing of existing resources, budget analysts might be able to
anticipate and answer questions before they arise. Holtz-Eakin suggested
that timeliness of input data improves budget forecasting in an important
way: when budget forecasts can be based on timely data, fewer revisions
are required, leading to more consistent histories.Revisions of historical information impede forecasting efforts. To theextent that revisions can be minimized through better accumulation of
data, Holtz-Eakin suggested that the entire process will be improved, be-
cause attention will focus on the judgments that were actually made in
doing the forecasts rather than the accuracy of the information going into
them. If the data are revised less often, CBO and others will have more
confidence in the forecast estimates they pass on to Congress.The question for the workshop concerns the extent to which data inte-gration permits better forecasting. Of course, there is a trade-off at some
level between getting things quickly and getting them reliably. The issue
is how much CBO can move away from human intelligence and heavy
dependence on anecdotal evidence, particularly in the policy world, to
data that are more reliably gathered. Landefeld noted that BEA strives to
produce better early estimates that hold up over time. The question then
shifts from more timely data to producing more accurate early estimates
in order to make the trade-off between timeliness and accuracy less stark.Holtz-Eakin noted that, recently, federal fiscal policy has been reac-tive. If better data were provided for monitoring the economy in real time,
some activities in the federal government would see tremendous benefits.
This might allow analysts to sharpen near- and medium-term economic
forecasts. For example, real-time economic data would help to better elu-
cidate shifts in productivity, inflation, core consumer prices, income and
receipts, corporate profitability, bonuses and options, the composition ofImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGemployee compensation, and labor force participation. Simply knowing,on a timely basis, when money comes into the TreasuryÑand whether it
is income tax or payroll taxÑwould allow for better understanding of
wage and salary movements.Holtz-Eakin noted the importance of providing access to data used byCBO in order to improve the transparency of the processes, since the abil-
ity to explain how forecasting is done is just as important as doing it. For
example, allowing outside analysts to produce a parallel set of estimates
facilitates two important kinds of comparisons: comparisons that are
Òprickly and uncomfortableÓ but that provide information from the mis-
takes, and ones that provide transparency to the policy process. More
important than the numbers themselves is the need to inspire confidence
that they are constructed fairly, distributed in a timely fashion, and used
in a manner that allows the policy process to evolve smoothly.In Holtz-EakinÕs view, it is not enough to give the people makingeconomic and budget estimates carte blanche access. No one would know
how to assess the relative merit of competing estimates unless the process
of constructing those estimates is transparent. He suggested the need to
push hard for the private sector to have access to data, not only for their
own use, but also as a way to support work of the government.In response to a comment that extending data sharing is not politi-cally popular, a participant asked if members of Congress had an interest
in this topic. Holtz-Eakin responded that a number of members of Con-
gress do have an understanding of the sources of difficulty in making
budget projections, and that they, in fact, were sympathetic. He added
that there was political interest in improving data but conceded that con-
fidentiality is a major concern. He suggested that the argument for access
should be framed so that the benefits (such as improving the ability to
accurately decompose sources of economic activity) are clear and ex-

pressed in a practical way.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.394Key Points from the Presentations:
Directions for the Future
The workshop concluded with a summary presentation by RobertParker, former chief statistician at the Government Accountability Office
and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), in which he highlighted
some of the key points made during the workshop. He also posed a few
questions and offered suggestions to the agencies for going forward.
Kathleen Utgoff, commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),
Howard Hogan, associate director for demographic programs at the Cen-
sus Bureau, and Rosemary Marcuss, deputy director of BEA, provided
concluding remarks.In a paper written for this workshop (see Chapter 5), Parker summa-rized the history of data-sharing legislation and various reports on the
topic. Among his points were the following (the first three are from his
paper and the last two from his presentation):1.Prior to the 2002 Confidential Information Protection and Statisti-
cal Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), there was a significant amount of inter-
agency business data sharing. MostCensus Bureau and BEA access to

tax return data was granted under Internal Revenue Code Title 26, Sec-
tion 6103; more modest data sharing among BEA, the Census Bureau,
and BLS was authorized by the International Investment and Trade in
Services Act of 1990. For data sharing related to use in the economic cen-
suses, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) facilitated the success of this
program by adding questions to selected tax returns solely for the pur-
pose of the censuses.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING2.Since the passage of CIPSEA, additional data-sharing programs
have been undertaken and, based on the agency presentations at the work-
shop, others are in the planning stages.3.The administration has not actually submitted its version of the
“companion legislation.” According to agency representatives, the JointCommittee on Taxation has attempted to develop its own version, but it
has not met agency needs (there also seem to be different opinions as to
whether the Treasury Department supports the legislation).4.To expand the use of data sharing in the absence of passage of com-
panion legislation, there should be a comprehensive review of IRS Publi-
cation 1075, which sets the rules that determine the extent of data sharing
under Section 6103 by the IRS and the CIPSEA-designated agencies. This
review could result in changes in the rules that might further facilitate
data sharing within the provisions of Section 6103 (current rules were not
developed in conjunction with the agencies, and there is no public record
of the underlying legal interpretations).5.Discussions have taken place between the Census Bureau and BLS
about developing a single business register for employer firms (for whichboth agencies have data), perhaps in time for the 2007 economic censuses.
Although the current business comparison project will yield a substantial
amount of information about current differences, BLS and the Census
Bureau presented no plans on how this information might be used to de-
velop a unified business register (because of problems with various state
laws, it may be necessary for BLS to maintain a separate national register
as the sample frame for its establishment surveys).Following up on the fourth point, Parker suggested that IRS and thestatistical agencies could work to clarify the rules governing what the
Census Bureau is permitted to do with data, such as those indicating busi-
ness names and addresses, which, at the time they are received, are con-
sidered federal tax information. The Census Bureau must reenter the in-
formation on another form and send it to businesses for verification to
become sharable data under CIPSEA. Because the IRS has never published
legal interpretations explaining how they went from Section 6103 to these
regulations, Parker suggested that the agencies and the IRS might col-
laborate to see whether or not current regulations are appropriate or nec-
essary and provide input on what can be done to make it easier to convert
tax information into Title 13 information.Parker also reflected on Carol Corrado
’s presentation, particularly herpoint that maintaining two different establishment lists is unnecessary
and counterproductive. Parker noted that the comparison project has a
seemingly infinite research agenda, but that nothing concrete was pre-
sented by the BLS and Census Bureau presenters about producing a singleImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY POINTS FROM THE PRESENTATIONS: DIRECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE41list. He argued that users would ultimately gain little from that particulardata-sharing opportunity unless there were plans for some implementa-
tion of a single list.Kathleen Utgoff, Howard Hogan, and Rosemary Marcuss respondedto Parker’s remarks as well as to the workshop presentations in general.Utgoff and Hogan both discussed the various data-sharing projects and
agreements that are planned or already taking place and the players in
data sharing outside the IRS. They specified the various programs that
would benefit from data sharing, reiterating the advantages of a single
business list, and discussing the short- and long-term effects of CIPSEA
on resources and on the work of the agencies. Marcuss suggested that the
agencies seek advice on best practices from important data users and work
toward increased access in the long term.Utgoff responded to the call for a single business establishment list,acknowledging the potential value, but also noting that this is just one
reason for extending data sharing. She discussed other aspects of BLS
work that may be enhanced by data sharing, including improved unem-
ployment and income measurement and development of better survey
sample frames. She also noted the potential of data sharing to improve the
capacity of state governments to forecast revenues and for underpinning
economic development plans.Utgoff reported that both BEA and BLS are motivated to improvedata sharing and highlighted other data-sharing projects among BLS,
BEA, and the Census Bureau. Two such agreements exist between BLS
and BEA—one to share consumer price index data and another to sharecompany and revenue data (collected under the International Investment
Trade and Services Survey Act). Sharing the price index data will allow
BEA to determine the feasibility of developing interarea price indexes,
which could be used to adjust personal income estimates for price differ-
ences across geographic areas. New price indexes to measure royalties
and license fees in international transactions could also be created from
revenue data shared by BEA. The agreements between BLS and the Cen-
sus Bureau authorize sharing of the BLS Quarterly Census of Employ-
ment and Wages data for use by the Census Bureau Longitudinal Em-
ployer-Household Dynamics program, as well as use of the Census
Bureau Business Register by the BLS producer price index program to
facilitate more efficient sampling.In order to fully realize the benefits of CIPSEA, these interagencyprojects require a dedicated commitment of resources and support from
the data-user and policy-making communities. One aspect of the overall
benefit of these projects is the opportunity to reduce costs and respondent
burden. Workshop participants paid particular attention to the data-
sharing component of the CIPSEA legislation, but Utgoff acknowledgedImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGthe importance of Subpart A, establishing uniform statutory confidential-ity protections, which BLS has long needed as part of their effort to main-
tain survey response rates.Hogan began his remarks with the point that conducting the researchand development on data sharing marked the first real use of CIPSEA, as
people learned about such things as the documentation required, the ap-
provals needed, and the mechanics of applying it. Beyond IRS data, Hogan
noted opportunities for data sharing in diverse areas, such as product line
and price index information.On the business list topic, Hogan stated that short-term goals can beaccomplished while proceeding with long-range plans. For example, re-
search can begin on the differences in the lists at the aggregate level. The
Census Bureau has already seen benefits from list comparison work—forexample, 10 percent more firms have been added to the research and
development sampling frame, and costs and respondent burden have
been reduced. Before a single list is possible, Hogan observed, tax data
sharing and the role of the states (which provide and share data with BLS
but not with the Census Bureau) must be addressed. Overall, there are a
number of benefits to the Census Bureau made possible by data sharing,
and he expressed excitement on behalf of the agency over the coopera-
tive opportunities.Adding to the comments of Fixler and Landefeld, Marcuss reiteratedthe BEA goal of bringing analytical energy to the task of demystifying
data inconsistencies and making data from diverse sources fit. BEA will
continue to adjust its methods and pursue new approaches to more fully
exploit the currently sharable and available data. In addition, BEA seeks
advice from the agencies and the IRS on the best, least intrusive, proce-
dural changes in data-sharing practices that can improve estimates of
gross domestic product. She added that the agency would quickly utilize
information on the sources of differences between the Census Bureau and
BLS data from any comparison work—for example, from a partial com-parison of the business registers, even short of movement to a single list. Marcuss added that advice from important data users—particularlypolicy makers in the administration and Congress, and businesses—onwhere the greatest weaknesses exist would continue to serve as valuable
input. As a long-term goal, she hoped for increased data access for statis-
tical purposes, confirming that BEA has already taken steps forward and
is ready to participate in and use the information gained from the data-
sharing projects. Her comments echoed those of the workshop in general.
Overall, the agency representatives, workshop presenters, and other par-
ticipants were supportive of extending data sharing to the extent that such

arrangements can be safely implemented to increase the efficiency, accu-
racy, and consistency of the nation’s economic statistics.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43References
Foster, L., J. Elvery, R. Becker, C. Krizan, S. Nguyen, and D. Talan2005A Comparison for the Business Registers Used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and theU.S. Census Bureau. Paper presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings, August 7,Minneapolis, MN.Jorgenson, D., S. Landefeld, and W. Nordhaus2006A New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress.Norwood, J.L.1995Organizing to Count: Change in the Federal Statistical System. Washington, DC: Ur-ban Institute Press.Office of Management and Budget2004Statistical Programs of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2004. Available:http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/04statprog.pdf [accessed May 2006].Perry, G.L.2005Gauging employment: Is the professional wisdom wrong? 
Brookings Papers on Eco-nomic Activity 2:285-321.Schmitt, J., and D. Baker2006Missing Inaction: Evidence of Undercounting of Non-Workers in the Current PopulationSurvey. Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research.U.S. Census Bureau2002North American Industry Classification SystemÑUnited States 2002. Washington, DC:U.S. Department of Commerce.U.S. Congress2002Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002. (HR 4528).Available: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oss/CIPSEA.pdf [accessed May 2006].U.S. Department of the Treasury1999T
he Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters. Discussion, Analysis, and Legislative Proposals.(White paper, July.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45Appendix AWorkshop Agenda and Attendees
Workshop on the Benefits of Interagency Business Data SharingOctober 21, 2005The Keck Center of the National AcademiesRoom 100500 Fifth Street, NWWashington, DCWelcome and Introductory Comments9:00 amBackground, Workshop Goals, and Agenda
Charles Schultze, workshop chair (Brookings Institution)9:10Welcome from the Sponsor
Steven Landefeld, Dennis Fixler (BEA)Benefits of Data Sharing to the Statistical Agencies9:15Improving Business Lists: The Business Register Comparison
and Reconciliation ProjectsJim Spletzer (BLS); Paul Hanczaryk(Census Bureau)
9:45Open Discussion

10:15An Overview of IRS Data: Data-Sharing Arrangements, and
Data Needs of Primary Customers and ResearchersMark Mazur, Nick Greenia (IRS)10:45Open Discussion
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46APPENDIX A11:15An Overview of the Role of Data Sharing in the Production of
Federal StatisticsSteven Landefeld, Dennis Fixler (BEA)11:45Open Discussion
12:00 pmLunch and Discussion
Recent Developments in Data-Sharing Regulations andLegislationKatherine Wallman (OMB)Research and Policy Perspectives on the Benefits of Data Sharing1:00Introduction to the Session
Charles Shultze1:15Monetary Policy and Research at the Federal Reserve
Carol Corrado (Federal Reserve Board)1:45Open Discussion
2:00Productivity and Real Output Measurement
Dale Jorgenson (Harvard University)2:30Open Discussion

2:45Break

3:00Tax Data Needs for Improving Estimates of Corporate Profits
George Plesko (University of Connecticut)3:30Open Discussion

3:45The Importance of Accurate Data and Data Sharing for Budget
ForecastingDouglas Holtz-Eakin (CBO)4:15Open Discussion
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A47Conclusions: Data Sharing, Data Quality, and Informed Policy4:30Key Points from the Presentations: Directions for the Future
Robert Parker (federal statistics consultant)Concluding Remarks from the Statistical AgenciesKathleen Utgoff (BLS); Howard Hogan (Census Bureau);
Rosemary Marcuss (BEA)5:30Adjourn
ATTENDEES(* indicates a presenter)Thomas Anderson, Bureau of Economic AnalysisStephen Andrews, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Anthony Apostolides, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Lisa Blumerman, Census Bureau
Ruth Bramblett, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Stephanie Brown, Census Bureau
Carolyn Carroll, STAT TECH, Inc.
Chris Chapman, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Constance Citro, National Research Council
Carol Corrado, Federal Reserve Board*
Ruth Detlefsen, Census Bureau
Chris Ellis, RTI International
Joel Elvery, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Vincent Fang, MacroSys Research and Technology
Daniel Feenberg, NBER (steering committee member)
Jason J. Fichtner, Joint Economic Committee
Dennis Fixler, Bureau of Economic Analysis*
Lucia Foster, Census Bureau
Charles Funk, Census Bureau
John Galvin, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Gerald Gates, Census Bureau
John Golmant , Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
Nancy M. Gordon, Census Bureau
Nick Greenia, Internal Revenue Service*
Keith Hall, Department of Commerce
John Haltiwanger, University of Maryland (steering committee member)
Charlie Han, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Paul Hanczaryk, Census Bureau*Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48APPENDIX ABrian A. Harris-Kojetin, Office of Management and BudgetMaurine Haver, Haver Analytics
Brian Higginbotham, Joint Economic Committee
Tina Highfill, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Paul L. Hsen, Census Bureau
Howard Hogan, Census Bureau*
Brian Holly, Census Bureau
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Congressional Budget Office*
Ned Howenstine, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Ron Jarmin, Census Bureau
Dale Jorgenson, Harvard University*
Arthur Kennickell, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Sanders Korenman, Baruch College, CUNY
Meredith Krug, Federal Reserve Board
Caryn Kuebler, National Research Council
Herbert Lacayo Jr., Environmental Protection Agency
Steven Landefeld, Bureau of Economic Analysis*
Timothy (Bogong) Li, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Juanita Tamayo Lott, Census Bureau
Christopher Mackie, National Research Council
Rosemary Marcuss, Bureau of Economic Analysis*
Sandra Mathieson, Census Bureau
Mark Mazur, Internal Revenue Service*
Thomas Mesenbourg, Census Bureau
Harry Meyers, National Academy of Public Administration
Kimberly Moore, Census Bureau
Brent Moulton, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Patrick Mullen, Government Accountability Office
Sue Okubo, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Robert Parker, federal statistics consultant*
Thomas Petska, Statistics of Income, Internal Revenue Service
George Plesko, University of Connecticut*
Thomas Plewes, National Research Council
Dylan Rassier, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Ralph Rector, The Heritage Foundation (steering committee member)
Brooks Robinson, Bureau of Economic Analysis
Ruth Runyan, Census Bureau
Ken Ryder, National Academy of Public Administration
Hossain Sanjani, Bureau of Transportation Statistics
Charles Schultze, Brookings Institution (steering committee member)
Molly Shannon, Bureau of Labor Statistics
Gerald Silverstein, Treasury Department
Michael Siri, National Research CouncilImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A49Timothy Slaper, Joint Economic CommitteeJim Spletzer, Bureau of Labor Statistics*
Bryce Stephens, National Academy of Public Administration
Miron Straf, National Research Council
Ovuokerie Ubogu, Temple University
Kathleen Utgoff, Bureau of Labor Statistics*
Katherine Wallman, Office of Management and Budget*
Diane Willimack, Census Bureau
Ewen Wilson, Census Bureau
Henry Wulf, Census Bureau
Qingshu Xie, MacroSys Research and TechnologyImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50Appendix BRecent Legislation Governing DataSharing and Access to Federal Tax Data
The Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act(CIPSEA) was passed as Title V of the E-Government Act of 2002 (P.L.
107-347). Enactment of CIPSEA culminated more than 30 years of efforts
to standardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for sta-
tistical purposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing of
individually identifiable business information among three statistical
agencies for efficiency and quality improvement.1Title V has two subtitles. Subtitle A, Confidential Information Protec-tion, strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statistical
data collections of the U.S. government. For all data furnished by indi-
viduals or organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentiality
for exclusively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be used
for statistical purposes only and will not be disclosed in identifiable form
to anyone not authorized by the title. It makes knowing and willful dis-
closure of confidential statistical data a class E felony with fines up to
$250,000 and imprisonment for up to five years.Subtitle A pertains not only to surveys, but also to collections by afederal agency for statistical purposes from administrative records (e.g.,
state government agency records). Data covered under subtitle A are not
subject to release under a Freedom of Information Act request. Guidance
from the Office of Management and Budget, which is charged to oversee1This overview of CIPSEA is reproduced from National Research Council (2005).Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B51and coordinate the implementation of CIPSEA, is under development. Itis intended to cover such topics as the steps that agencies must take to
protect confidential information; wording of confidentiality pledges in
materials that are provided to respondents; steps that agencies must take
to distinguish any data or information they collect for nonstatistical pur-
poses and to provide proper notice to the public of such data; and ways in
which agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) may be designated to use in-
dividually identifiable information for analysis and other statistical pur-
poses and be held legally responsible for protecting the confidentiality of
that information.Subtitle B of CIPSEA, Statistical Efficiency, permits the Bureau of Eco-nomic Analysis (BEA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the Cen-
sus Bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statistical
purposes. The intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden on
businesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economic
statistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differences among
sampling frames, business classifications, and business reporting; and in-
crease understanding of the U.S. economy and improve the accuracy of
key national indicators, such as the national income and product accounts.A key limitation of CIPSEA is that data in the Census BureauÕs Busi-ness Register, which is constructed in large part out of Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) tax data, cannot be shared. New legislation would be re-
quired to amend Title 26, which governs access to IRS tax data by BLS,
BEA, and other agencies. All access to federal tax information, even
within IRS, must be authorized by statute, meaning that legislation has
been codified as part of Title 26 of the Internal Revenue Code. Title 26,
Section 6103, is the primary law articulating IRSÕs data-sharing con-
straints. Section 6103 provides that tax returns and return information
are confidential and may not be disclosed by the IRS to other govern-
ment agencies or employees except as provided in the code. It further
specifies non-IRS access, indicating which agencies (or other entities) may
have access to tax return information. Congress must enact legislation to
add users. Accompanying regulations clarify the purposes for which ac-
cess may be granted, detailing specific items that can be shared and un-
der what conditions the information will be received. The assistant secre-
tary for tax policy of the Treasury Department is responsible for setting
regulations. As with all users, BEA access to IRS tax data is codified in
Section 6103. For example, Section 6103(j) specifies (in the accompanying
regulations) BEA access to Statistics of Income sample files of corpora-
tions; Section 6103(n) grants access to some extracts for partnerships and
sole proprietorships. In some cases, policy agreements (such as the Cen-
sus Bureau-IRS Criteria Agreement) may supplement statute and regula-
tions. Because the confidentiality of tax data is considered crucial to vol-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52APPENDIX Buntary compliance, if agencies want to establish new efforts to use tax-payer information, executive branch policy calls for a business case to
support sharing tax data.The papers by Nick Greenia and Mark Mazur and by Robert Parker inthis volume provide further details of statistical agency access to IRS data.
The full text of the CIPSEA legislation can be found at <http://

www.eia.doe.gov/oss/CIPSEA.pdf>.REFERENCESNational Research Council2005Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, Third Edition. Committee onNational Statistics, M.E. Martin, M.L. Straf, and C.F. Citro, eds. Division of Behav-ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Acad-emies Press.U.S. Congress2002Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002. (HR4528).Available: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oss/CIPSEA.pdf [accessed May 2006].Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Part IIBackground Papers
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.555Data-Sharing History and Legislation:Background Notes
Robert P. ParkerConsultant on Federal StatisticsDuring the past 20 years, the National Research Council of the Na-tional Academies has prepared several reports on data sharing and re-
lated issues, such as privacy and confidentiality. However, as noted in the
discussion here of each of these reports, the topics covered by the Work-
shop on the Benefits of Interagency Business Data Sharing differ from
those in the previous reports. The workshop focused on data and infor-
mation on businesses, not on individuals, and their use for statistical, not
research, purposes. In addition, the workshop focused on sharing by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
and the Census Bureau; these three statistical agencies are authorized to
share data under provision of Subpart B of the Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA) as enacted in December
2002.This chapter reviews the history of CIPSEA and of efforts by the Of-fice of Management and Budget (OMB) for related legislation that would
expand data sharing by changing the provisions of the Tax Reform Act of
1976, which allow the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to share tax informa-
tion with selected statistical agencies. CIPSEA provides statutory confi-
dentiality protection for data collected by statistical agencies for statistical
purposes (Subpart A), and it permits identifiable business records to be
shared for statistical purposes by BLS, BEA, and the Census Bureau (Sub-
part B). CIPSEA, however, did not change the provisions of Internal Rev-
enue Code Section 6103, which precludes these agencies from sharing tax
return information for statistical purposes. Such additional sharing would
allow the agencies to develop a single business register for all of theirImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGeconomic surveys and programs and to use information from the registerto improve the quality of their surveys. It would also create additional
opportunities to create new statistical programs from existing data.There have been efforts by several administrations to change Section6103 to allow the sharing of basic identifying information from IRS records
for statistical purposes. This chapter also reviews the positions on this
change by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), the Depart-
ment of the Treasury, the IRS, and the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT),
as well as the positions of businesses.Some of the major ongoing data-sharing efforts by the three agenciesare reviewed in this chapter, which covers efforts allowed under Section
6103, the International Investment and Trade in Services Act of 1990, and
BEA, BLS, and the Census Bureau confidentiality restrictions.In this chapter, Òdata sharingÓ is defined as the exchange of informa-tion collected from businesses and individuals or reported to the IRS in
identifiable form for statistical purposes. For other key terms, the chapter
follows the definitions in CIPSEA. Business data are Òoperating informa-
tion and financial data and related information about businesses, tax ex-
empt organizations, and government entities.Ó Identifiable form means
information Òthat permits the identity of the respondent to whom the in-
formation applies to be reasonably inferred by either direct or indirect
means.Ó Statistical purposes are Òthe description, estimation, or analysis
of the characteristics of groups, without identifying the individuals or or-
ganizations that comprise such groups.Ó They also include methods and
procedures related to the Òcollection, compilation, processing, or analy-
sisÓ of data about these groups and the development of related Òmeasure-
ment methods, models, statistical classifications, or sampling frames.Ó
Using definitions from the report of the Privacy Protection Study Com-
mission (1977), the term ÒresearchÓ is used to refer to Òany systematic,
objective process designed to obtain new knowledge, regardless of
whether it is ÔpureÕ (aimed at deriving general principles) or ÔappliedÕ
(aimed at solving a specific problem or at determining policy).Ó The term
ÒstatisticsÓ in this chapter refers Òboth to the data obtained through enu-
meration and measurement and to the use of mathematical methods for
dealing with data so obtained.ÓPREVIOUS REPORTS ON DATA SHARINGMost of the previous reports of the National Research Council on datasharing and related topics touched on issues important to the discussion
of changing Section 6103, such as the trade-off between greater access and
reduced confidentiality. In general, the findings and recommendations of
these reports did not focus on sharing of data and information on busi-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES57nesses or on data sharing for statistical purposes. Although the most re-cent of these reports was completed after the enactment of CIPSEA, there
was little discussion of the data-sharing part of the act, largely because
CIPSEA was limited to the data sharing of business data for statistical
purposes, not individual data and not for research purposes. In this sec-
tion, each of these reports is reviewed in terms of its relevance to business
data sharing.In Sharing Research Data (National Research Council, 1985), the focusis mostly on what researchers should do. It thus has little relevance to
sharing of business data for statistical purposes. The report does include a
section that identifies several benefits related to sharing business data.
These benefits are the verification of results, improvements in measure-
ment and data collection methods, and the development of theoretical
knowledge. In addition, one of the papers prepared for the conference
that led to the report notes the creation of new data sets as a benefit of
data sharing. However, there is no mention of the benefits of data sharing
to statistical agencies, such as the ability to develop common business
registers.Sharing Research Data cites three earlier reports related to data shar-ing: (1) Sharing of Social Science Research Data: An Exploratory ConferenceConvened by the Committee on National Statistics (National Research Coun-cil, 1980); (2) Setting Statistical Priorities (National Research Council, 1976);and (3) Personal Privacy in an Information Society (Privacy Protection StudyCommission, 1977). The first report deals primarily with health data, and
the second does not deal at all with data sharing. The Privacy Protection
Study Commission report is discussed later in this chapter.Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Gov-ernment Statistics was published in 1993 (National Research Council, 1993).The Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, jointly formed by the Com-
mittee on National Statistics and the Social Science Research Council, de-
veloped recommendations to assist statistical agencies in their steward-
ship of data for policy decisions and research. The panel met between
November 1989 and January 1992 and used the results of related work-
shops: the Longitudinal Retirement Workshop (September 1987), Confi-
dentiality of and Access to Doctorate Records (November 1988), and Con-
fidentiality and Access to National Center for Education Statistics (January
1991).The panel sought to take into account the trade-offs between data pro-tection and data access and made recommendations to Òenhance data ac-
cess without decreasing data protection and increase data protection with-
out reducing data accessÓ (p. 19). The panel decided to focus primarily on
major federal statistical programs and to cover Òorganizational,Ó or busi-
ness, data as well as individual data. This expansion reflected input fromImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGstatistical agencies, the experience of panel members, and current events.As a result, the report covers major issues of data protection and access to
business data; it includes a chapter on a framework for the treatment of
these data (Chapter 7) and covers businesses in other chapters that deal
with legislation (especially Chapter 5).With regard to business data, the panel presents several relevant find-ings and recommendations. The Executive Summary includes a section
on ÒBarriers to Data Sharing Within Government,Ó in which the panel
reported (p. 6):Some of the laws that govern the confidentiality of statistical data pro-hibit or severely limit interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes.
Laws that control access to administrative records, such as reports ofearnings covered by Social Security, restrict their use for statistical pur-poses. These barriers to data sharing for statistical purposes have led to
costly duplication of effort and excessive burden on individuals and or-ganizations who are asked to supply information. They have also madeit difficult or impossible to develop data sets needed for policy analysis
on topics of major interest to the public.The panel recommends that barriers to sharing data for both personsand businesses for statistical purposes should be removed subject to strict
controls to protect confidentiality. Recommendation 4.1 includes a state-
ment that Òadditional data sharing should only be undertaken in those
instances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the
panelÕs recommendations for informed consent or notificationÓ (p. 6). Rec-

ommendation 5.1(f) states that ÔÕa provision that permits data sharing for
statistical purposes under controlled conditions be included in the consis-
tent set of statutes and regulations governing the maintenance of federal
statistical recordsÓ (p. 6). Recommendation 7.4 reflects the panelÕs pro-
posal that interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes should in-
clude the sharing of lists of businesses by federal and state agencies. Rec-
ommendation 7.5 asks for new legislation to expand confidentiality to
records collected by all statistical agencies (p. 226); some of this recom-
mendation was subsequently accomplished by CIPSEA.Although this report cites several examples of reduced sharing as aresult of the provisions of Section 6103, there is no explicit recommenda-
tion to amend this act. Nevertheless, the panel clearly expresses its views
in the following section title in Chapter 7: ÒInability to Share Business
Lists: An Embarrassment to the Federal Statistical System.ÓIn addition, the report includes several important discussions relat-ing to sharing business data that appear to conflict with the current IRS
interpretation of Section 6103. In a discussion on the Census Bureau use of
tax data, it states (p. 192):Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES59For a particular establishment or employer whose identity was originallysupplied by the IRS, the Internal Revenue Code allows the Census Bu-reau to contact the taxpayer, and any response returned to the Census
Bureau is considered to be data collected under the authority of the Cen-sus Bureau (Title 13 U.S.C.) rather than tax return information.The report also notes that there is little or no sharing of business datacollected by the Census Bureau (p. 192):Exceptions are the occasional correction or updating of SIC [StandardIndustrial Classification] codes on lists provided by other agencies, un-
der the authority of a 1953 opinion issued by Attorney GeneralMcGranery (41 Op. A.G. 120), and the release of certain SSEL [StandardStatistical Establish List] information to BEA, which has become possible
as a result of legislation passed by the 101st Congress (Foreign DirectInvestment and International Financial Data Improvements Act of 1990,P.L. 101-533). As part of the same legislation, BEA is required to share
with BLS and the Census Bureau selected data on foreign direct invest-ment that it collects from business enterprises.Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of aWorkshop was published in 2000 (National Research Council, 2000).This workshop report does not discuss sharing business data. The re-
port states that a central objective of the workshop was to review the
benefits and risks associated with public-use research data files and
to explore alternative procedures for restricting access to sensitive
data, especially longitudinal survey data that have been linked to ad-
ministrative records. It focuses on microdata records for research pur-
poses. The workshop did not produce recommendations or specific
findings.Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, Third Edition, waspublished in 2005 (National Research Council, 2005a). Although the re-
port deals with a wide range of activities by statistical agencies, it lists the
sharing of microdata records as a Òway to improve data quality and de-
velop new kinds of information . . . for statistical agencies that collect
similar informationÓ (p. 26). It notes that the sharing of business data
would Òmake it possible to evaluate reporting errors and the complete-
ness of coverage of business firms in different surveys,Ó and that Òsuch
sharing would also make it possible to develop more useful and accurate
statistics on the nationÕs economy while decreasing the reporting burden
on business data providersÓ (p. 26).The report discusses the enactment of CIPSEA, noting that the firstformal proposal for data sharing under CIPSEA, which involved match-
ing data from BEAÕs international investment surveys with data from the
Census BureauÕs Survey of Industrial Research and Development con-
ducted for the National Science Foundation, was announced in June 2003.
(Additional details on this match are discussed later in this chapter.)Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and Opportunitieswas published in 2005 by the Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes,
which was convened at the request of the National Institute on Aging
(National Research Council, 2005b). The panel report, which is built
largely on the earlier efforts discussed above, primarily focuses on data
for research purposes. The Introduction states: ÒThus, there are questions
about how to provide researchersÑinside and outside governmentÑ
access to data that can both inform public policy and protect the privacy
of respondents and the confidential nature of the information they pro-
videÓ (p. 8). Consequently, the report is almost exclusively research ori-
ented although it does cover some research using business records. It fo-
cuses on microdata research and notes the policy and cost benefits for
data linking and sharing. Although not an explicit recommendation, the
report does note the need to revise Section 6103, stating (p. 35):[It] offers recommendations that, if implemented, will continue the pastrecord of simultaneous improvement along both dimensions. Such im-
provement will require strong partnership between the research com-munity and statistical and research agencies in the design of innovativeresearch on disclosure avoidance techniques and data access modalities
and in the implementation of the advances that result from such research.The final chapter of the report makes 19 recommendations coveringsuch areas as documentation, planning for and expanding access to
public-use files and research data centers, informed consent, and safe-
guarding confidentiality. None of the recommendations in these areas is
directly relevant to the sharing of business records.In a section on the legal environment, a discussion of CIPSEA pointsto the need for changing Section 6103. The report notes (p. 23):A key element in the Census BureauÕs data is its business register, whichis constructed with data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). How-ever, without new legislation (to amend Title 26 of the U.S. Code, which
governs access to IRS tax data), the business register and associated datacannot be shared with BEA and BLS.The report discusses policy research but limits the discussion to theuse of microdata. It states: ÒDetailed microdata permit in-depth analyses
of socioeconomic trends and their antecedents and consequencesÓ (p. 40)
and continues with ÒDetailed microdata are also needed for modeling
economic decisions and other kinds of social behaviorÓ (p. 41). Examples
of such research noted in the report include research to model savings
behavior and firm behavior on pollution abatement. It also includes a
section on linking survey and administrative record data, but examples
are limited and omit any discussion of BEAÕs foreign direct investment
data. It reports on the 1973 Current Population SurveyÐSocial SecurityImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES61AdministrationÐIRS (CPSÐSSAÐIRS) Òexact-match fileÓ that was the ba-sis for a major dynamic microsimulation model of social welfare policies
and retirement income and for an analysis of the quality of income re-
porting in the March CPS. The report does not cite the continuing use by
the Census Bureau of linkages of survey data and administrative records
to assess and improve data quality. It also does not report that BEA and
IRS have used the aggregate results of this match program to estimate
the extent of nonfiling by unincorporated enterprises. In fact, BEA con-
tinues to fund an updated version of this match, but without the SSA
records.Among the papers prepared for this panel, ÒPrivacy, Confidentiality,and Data SharingÓ by David McMillen is the most relevant to sharing of
business data. It provides an excellent history of CIPSEA, tracing its most
recent roots to the Clinton administrationÕs efforts to enact confidentiality
and data-sharing legislation in 1995. (See additional details in the next
section.) McMillen also identifies several examples of sharing both busi-
ness and individual records. For matching of information collected under
a mandatory authority, he strongly sees the need to notify respondents
when the data they report are to be linked to IRS records or made avail-
able to another agency. The report indicates some discomfort with this
part of McMillenÕs views and does not incorporate them into the panelÕs
recommendations.TAX REFORM ACT OF 1976To provide an understanding of the changes incorporated in 1976 intoSection 6103, it is important to first review the developments that led to
these changes. (Most of the following discussion is based on a 1983 paper
by Wilson and Smith and various editions of the Census Bureau series on
the history of the economic censuses.) The most important change was
that, prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1976, the president had the authority
to issue executive orders permitting access to tax records. The revised
Section 6103 limited access to tax records to specific federal and state and
local government agencies and only for specific types of tax information.
Under the previously issued executive orders, access for statistical pur-
poses had been granted to the Commerce Department, covering both the
Census Bureau and the predecessor agencies to BEA (1944 E.O. 9499 and
1961 E.O. 10911), the Securities and Exchange Commission and Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) (1959 E.O. 10814 and 1961 E.O. 10908), and the
Department of Agriculture (1973 E.O. 11697 and 11709). Under the Tax
Reform Act of 1976, access by the Commerce Department was continued,
but BEAÕs access was limited to selected records of corporations, and ac-
cess by the FTC to conduct the Quarterly Financial Report was continued.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGAccess by the Department of Agriculture was not continued, although itwas restored in the 1990s, when the Census of Agriculture was transferred

from the Census Bureau to the Department of Agriculture. In addition to
changes in access, the 1976 version of Section 6103 included stricter dis-
closure rules.According to Personal Privacy in an Information Society, a report by thePrivacy Protection Study Commission, a commission mandated by
the Privacy Act of 1974, the changes resulted from an increase in disclo-
sure by the IRS during the first half of the 20th century (Privacy Protec-
tion Study Commission, 1977). Most of these new uses were authorized
without any significant public discussion and, when made public, were
justified by the federal and state agency recipients of the data as essential
to an essential government function. The commission stated (p. 27 of Ap-
pendix 2):The abuses that inevitably resulted were from time to time brought to theattention of the Congress and the public, sometimes dramatically. The
Nixon Administration allegedly used tax returns to harass its politicaladversaries, and an announcement early in the 1970Õs that informationabout individual taxpayers would be made available to the Department
of Agriculture to aid in statistical analysis aroused intense controversy.Allegations that special powers of the Internal Revenue Service were be-ing misused to collect information for purposes well beyond tax admin-
istration eventually led to a series of Congressional hearings on the pro-priety of various uses of tax administration.This report had been limited in scope to individually identifiable in-formation about individuals, so the commission did not study issues re-
garding disclosure of information about business entities. Nevertheless,
the commission generally agreed with the limited access to tax return in-
formation included in Section 6103 in the Tax Reform Act of 1976. (The
final report was published in 1977, but the commission had provided its
recommendations to Congress in June 1976.)EFFORTS TO EXPAND DATA SHARINGBefore 1976In a 1979 study, GAO reported on the status of efforts of the CensusBureau to create a centralized business listing, or business register, that
would be used by the Census Bureau and other statistical agencies to se-
lect samples for various surveys (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1979).
By selecting samples from the same register, the list would improve the
comparability of the data collected in these surveys regardless of the col-
lecting agency and would reduce duplication in the construction of theseImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES63lists. The development of such a list had been recommended by variouscommittees and commissions dating back to 1937. In 1968, OMB desig-
nated the Census Bureau as the focal agency to develop and maintain the
list data. From 1972 to 1978, Congress provided the Census Bureau almost
$16 million to develop the list. In 1975, the list became operational and
was used by the Census Bureau for the 1977 economic census and current
economic survey programs. However, the list could not be shared with
other agencies, because the Census Bureau had yet to propose specific
legislation to change Title 13 of the U.S. Code to allow it to share the list
with other statistical agencies.The enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1976 and replacement of pre-vious executive orders with Section 6103 had a major impact on this effort
for the centralized business register. Prior to the act, it had been thought
that only Title 13 needed to be changed to allow for sharing of the list.
However, the act made it clear that because of the extensive use of tax
return information by the Census Bureau (as discussed below), it also
would be necessary to change Section 6103. In December 1978, the secre-
tary of the treasury informed the secretary of commerce that the Treasury
Department would not support legislation to change Section 6103. The
secretary stated the reasons for this opposition as follows (p. 56):We would, however, have significant concerns with any proposal toamend Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code to authorize disclosure
of tax return information to be used for SSEL purposes. . . . The consider-ations which underlie the strict limitations imposed by Congress uponthe disclosure of tax return information are the taxpayerÕs expectation of
and right to privacy, and the potential impact of disclosure upon thecontinuation of compliance with our voluntary tax assessment system.1983 to 1994After the unsuccessful effort by the Census Bureau to change Title 13and Section 6103 to allow it to share its business register with other statis-
tical agencies, OMB sought legislation to allow more extensive data shar-
ing, including the sharing of data on individuals. The new effort would
include allowing for sharing by more statistical agencies, but it also would

provide statutory protection for data collected by all statistical agencies
similar to the protection afforded to the Census Bureau by Title 13. Some
agencies had no such supporting legislation, while others, under certain
circumstances, were to turn over data collected for statistical purposes to
other agencies for nonstatistical purposes. Thus, the proposed legislation
would protect data collected by all statistical agencies for statistical pur-
poses and allow these agencies to share these data with other statistical
agencies.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGThe renewed effort to change Section 6103 began in 1983 when theadministration sought to have the Congress enact so-called statistical en-
clave legislation, which would provide a single set of confidentiality poli-
cies for all federal agencies and their components that collect data for sta-
tistical purposes. This legislation, unlike CIPSEA, would have allowed
access to tax records by all statistical agencies and included records of
both individuals and businesses. As described by Wilson and Smith
(1983), this legislation was to provide Ò(a) a statutory basis for the tradi-
tional promise of confidentiality long given respondents to statistical col-
lections, and (b) restricted sharing of individually identifiable records
(Ôprotected statistical filesÕ) for exclusively statistical agencies (Ôprotected
statistical centersÕ) whose confidential records are provided statutory pro-
tection under this legislationÓ (p. 601). The authors express their personal
agreement with the portion of the bill that would ensure that data col-
lected for statistical purposes will be used only for statistical purposes.
They also report on the objections of the Treasury Department to increas-
ing access to individually identifiable data for statistical purposes. The
authors report that Òthis aspect of the draft Bill is unacceptable in the
opinion of the Department of Treasury because, among other things, it
might greatly expand the dissemination of tax return information, attenu-
ate the ability to control such dissemination, and provide insufficient safe-
guards to prevent further disclosure and erosion of confidentiality.Ó In-
terestingly, the authors also report that Òthere also appears to be no
provision in the Bill that would aid the research work needed to manage
tax policy or tax administration situations. In particular, no data-sharing
arrangements for IRS statistical purposes are proposed. All the ÔsharingÕ
is in the other direction.Ó It is not clear whether this is the authorÕs objec-
tion, the departmentÕs, or both.The authors also make it appear that the basis for the TreasuryDepartmentÕs opposition was that Òeven though controls may be provided
as to redisclosure of information, if the perception is created that tax re-
turn information is widely available to others, that perception alone could
be very destructive of public confidence in the security and privacy of
information provided under the tax administration system, and ultimately
destructive of voluntary complianceÓ (p. 600).1995 to CIPSEAThe next, and most recent, effort by OMB to increase data sharing andchange Section 6103 began in 1995, when the Clinton administration sent
to Congress a new set of legislation proposals. This legislation was intro-
duced on a bipartisan basis in the House of Representatives in early 1996.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES65Under the legislation, eight federal agencies were designated as statisticaldata centers: BEA, the Census Bureau, BLS, the National Agricultural Sta-
tistics Service, the National Center for Education Statistics, the National
Center for Health Statistics, the Energy Consumption Division of the En-
ergy Information Administration, and the Science Resources Statistics Di-
vision of the National Science Foundation. Enactment of this legislation
would have improved the efficiency of the federal statistical system, re-
duced reporting burden on the public, and improved the quality and use-
fulness of the federal statistics for economic and social policy decisions.A key feature of the proposed legislation required that data or infor-mation acquired by an agency for purely statistical purposes could be
used only for statistical purposes and could not be shared in identifiable
form for any other purpose without the informed consent of the respon-
dent. This proposal, now the Statistical Efficiency Act of 1999 (H.R. 2885),
was passed by the House in October 1999. It increased statutory protec-
tions for the confidentiality of statistical data and permitted sharing of
data for statistical purposes among designated agencies. The proposal also
called for companion legislation to make complementary changes to pro-
visions set forth in the Statistical Use section of the Internal Revenue Code.
According to OMB, the complementary proposal was endorsed by the
Treasury Department.To meet congressional concerns about the types of data to be ex-changed under this proposed complementary legislation, the administra-
tion proposed a revised version of the bill. Under this version, data shar-
ing would be restricted to BEA, BLS, and the Census Bureau, and only
data on businesses would be shared. Finally, at the end of 2002, Congress
passed the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency
Act (CIPSEA) of 2002 as Title V of the E-Government Act (Public Law
107Ð347). This legislation established a uniform set of safeguards to pro-
tect the confidentiality of individually identifiable information acquired
from the public for statistical purposes, as well as consistently strong

criminal penalties for inappropriate disclosure of such information. The
legislation reaffirmed that pledges of confidentiality would be honored
and gave additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agencies
have pursued for decades, assuring respondents who provide statistical
information that their responses will be held in confidence and will not be
used against them in any government action. CIPSEA also authorizes the
sharing of business data among the BEA, BLS, and the Census Bureau.
The companion legislative proposal, which would make complementary
changes on access to tax return data by these agencies, has been endorsed
by the Treasury Department and submitted to Congress; the proposal has
not been enacted.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGCIPSEAIn 2002, Congress passed CIPSEA. The following is the summary ofthe legislation from Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency,Third Edition (National Research Council, 2005a, pp. 62-63):Enactment of CIPSEA culminated more than 30 years of efforts to stan-dardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for statistical
purposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing of indi-vidually identifiable business information among three statistical agen-cies for efficiency and quality improvement.Title V has two subtitles. Subtitle A, Confidential Information Protection,strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statistical data
collections of the U.S. government. For all data furnished by individualsor organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentiality for exclu-sively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be used only for
statistical purposes and will not be disclosed in identifiable form to any-
one not authorized by the title. It makes knowing and willful disclosureof confidential statistical data a class E felony with fines up to $250,000
and imprisonment for up to 5 years. Subtitle A pertains not only to sur-veys, but also to collections by a federal agency for statistical purposesfrom administrative records (e.g., state government agency records). Data
covered under Subtitle A are not subject to release under a Freedom ofInformation Act request. Guidance from OMB, which is charged to over-see and coordinate the implementation of CIPSEA, is under develop-
ment. It is intended to cover such topics as the steps that agencies musttake to protect confidential information; wording of confidentialitypledges in materials that are provided to respondents; steps that agen-
cies must take to distinguish any data or information they collect fornonstatistical purposes and to provide proper notice to the public of suchdata; and ways in which agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) may be
designated to use individually identifiable information for analysis andother statistical purposes and be held legally responsible for protectingthe confidentiality of that information.Subtitle B of CIPSEA, Statistical Efficiency, permits the Bureau of Eco-nomic Analysis (BEA), the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the Cen-
sus Bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statisticalpurposes. The intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden onbusinesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economic
statistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differencesamong sampling frames, business classifications, and business report-ing; and increase understanding of the U.S. economy and improve the
accuracy of key national indicators, such as the national income andproduct accounts.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES67Post-CIPSEASince the enactment of CIPSEA, OMB has been working again to getthe companion legislation to change Section 6103 enacted by Congress. In
Statistical Programs of the U.S. Government: Fiscal Year 2005, OMB reportedon the latest developments in the effort to change Section 6103. In a sec-
tion on ÒStatistical Confidentiality and Data Sharing,Ó OMB reported the
following (p. 44):A companion legislative proposal would make complementary changesto provisions set forth in the ÒStatistical UseÓ section of the Internal Rev-
enue Code. These changes would represent the first major revision ofthese policies in more than 20 years, reducing the amount of sensitive taxinformation that will change hands to support statistical programs while
substantially increasing the effectiveness of that support. This objectivewould be achieved by carefully defining statistical needs and taking ad-vantage of the efficiencies that can be achieved by modern sampling
methods. The complementary proposal has been endorsed by the Trea-sury Department and submitted to the Congress.Positions on Changing Section 6103This section describes the public positions of various organizationswith an interest in data sharing, particularly  with tax return records. (This

section excludes OMB, which as discussed above, has consistently sup-
ported changing the tax laws to permit more data sharing.) The views of
GAO, the Council of Economic Advisers, the Department of the Treasury
and the Joint Committee on Taxation are presented. It also includes the
views of a special study commissioned by the Administrative Conference
of the United States.Administrative ConferenceIn response to a congressional request, the administrative conferencein 1975 commissioned a team of tax experts headed by Charles Davenport
to study the operations of the IRS. The result was the Report on Administra-tive Procedures of the Internal Revenue Service, October 1975, to the Adminis-
trative Conference of the United States, (Davenport, 1976) which included asection on tax return confidentiality. This section reviewed the history
and rationale for tax return access for statistical purposes. The report con-
cluded that Òit appears that the use of tax data by Census, though not
consistent with revenue administration, is a use which can be considered
beneficial and is one which does not appear have any undesirable side
effectsÓ (p. 880). The study came to a similar a conclusion for BEA but not
for the Statistical Research Service (SRS) of the Department of Agricul-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGture. The key distinguishing factor for the commission was that Censusand BEA were strictly statistical agencies and did not engage in activities
related to other functions of the department. In contrast, the commission
determined that the statistics collected by SRS were Òfor policy making by
the agency of which it is a partÓ (p. 886).Government Accountability OfficeIn 1979, GAO issued a report on recent developments in the CensusBureauÕs efforts to create a centralized business register for use by other
statistical agencies (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1979). GAO, which
supports changing Section 6103, summarized its findings as follows (title
page):The Bureau of the Census has developed the Standard Statistical Estab-lishment List, a comprehensive list of businesses in the United States.
Many Federal agencies could use such information. But confidentialitylaws prevent the Census Bureau from sharing List information with otheragencies.Amendments to these laws would help improve the quality and compa-rability of economic statistics and reduce business response burden from
numerous Federal statistical surveys.Because some of the List data comes from the Internal Revenue Service,the Treasury Department has reservations about using tax informationfor statistical purposes. However, the Commerce Department plans tointroduce proposals for changes to the confidentiality laws and GAO
recommends favorable congressional consideration.In 1998, GAO testified before Congress on Statistical Agencies: ProposedConsolidation and Data- Sharing Legislation (U.S. General Accounting Of-fice, 1998). The testimony was about the data-sharing legislation submit-
ted in 1996 and 1997 that would permit limited sharing of data among
designated statistical agencies for statistical purposes, subject to proce-
dural safeguards. The testimony included the following statement of
GAOÕs position (pp. 5-6):For the past 2 decades, we and others have urged legislative changes thatwould allow greater sharing of data and information on data sourcesamong agencies, but so far these efforts have met with little success. ThePaperwork Reduction Act of 1980 gave the Director of OMB the author-
ity to direct a statistical agency to share information it had collected withanother statistical agency. However, this authority was limited since itdid not apply to information that was covered by laws prohibiting dis-
closure outside the collecting agency. In the early 1980s, the statisticalagencies, under OMBÕs leadership, tried to further enable federal statisti-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES69cal agencies to share data. They attempted to synthesize, in a single bill,a set of confidentiality policies that could be applied consistently to allfederal agencies or their components that collected data for statistical
purposes. This effort, which was known as the Òstatistical enclaveÓ bill,would have allowed statistical agencies to exchange information underspecific controls intended to preserve the confidentiality of the data pro-
viders. A bill was introduced in Congress but was not enacted.More recent proposals concerning data sharing have called for enact-ment of legislation that would allow statistical agencies to share data andinformation with appropriate safeguards to protect against breaches ofconfidentiality. These proposals were not adopted, in part because of gen-

eral concerns that greater data sharing might endanger the privacy ofindividuals. Both the Economic Statistics Initiative under President[George H.W.] Bush and the National Performance Review (NPR) under
President Clinton have recommended such actions. NPR recommendedthe elimination of legislative barriers to the exchange of business dataamong federal statistical agencies, and we agreed with this recommen-
dation. The NPR recommendation did not address the sharing of infor-mation on individuals. Some officials of statistical agencies and Mem-bers of Congress, however, have argued that a distinction should be
made between the sharing of business data and the sharing of personaldata about individuals. They noted that breaches of confidentiality pro-tection when personal information is involved may be more serious. The
National Academy of Sciences has made recommendations regarding the
need for appropriate legislative provisions on data sharing that the Sub-committee may wish to consider in its deliberations on S. 1404.In 2001, GAO issued Record Linkage and Privacy: Issues in Creating NewFederal Research and Statistical Information (U.S. General Accounting Office,2001). This report reviews the background of the key issues related todata sharing. However, the focus on the report was Òon linkage projects
that involve person-specific data, are conducted under federal auspices
(or with federal funding), and produce new research or statistical infor-
mationÓ (p. 10). The report did not cover business data sharing.Council of Economic AdvisersIn the 2002 Economic Report of the President, the Council of EconomicAdvisers noted the critical need for reliable data and that data sharing
would increase their quality. This excerpt notes the submission of propos-als in 1999 and that the Administration would continue to work for their
passage (p. 25):Recent economic events have emphasized the importance of timely eco-nomic information. Thus one area deserving considerable attention is theneed for readily accessible real-time data. Investment in sources of theseImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGdata could yield handsome dividends, especially at key junctures in thebusiness cycle. . . .Moreover, the quality of existing statistics is far from perfect and couldbe enhanced with further investment. Even real GDP, generally thoughtof as a reliable measure of overall activity in the U.S. economy, is suscep-
tible to considerable revisions. . . . Such revisions lead to uncertainty forboth government and private decisionmakers, which can cause costlydelays. . . .A number of steps can be taken to improve the accuracy and timelinessof economic statistics. In particular, targeted improvements to the source
data for the national accounts would go a long way toward illuminatingthe causes of the growing statistical discrepancy. Another cost-effectivemeasure would be to ease the current restrictions on the sharing of con-
fidential statistical data among Federal statistical agencies. Such data
sharing, which would be done solely for statistical purposes, is currentlyhindered by lack of a uniform confidentiality policy. Confidentiality is of
key importance to all agencies and to the individuals and businesses whoparticipate in Federal surveys, but a uniform confidentiality policy wouldallow agencies such as the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, and the Bureau of the Census to cost-effectively com-pare and improve the quality of their published statistics while preserv-ing confidentiality. In the past, attempts have been made to pass legisla-
tion, together with a conforming bill to modify the Internal RevenueCode, allowing such data sharing under carefully crafted agreementsbetween or among statistical agencies. In 1999 such legislation passed
the House but stalled in the Senate. The Administration will continue toseek passage of data-sharing legislation to improve the quality and effec-tiveness of Federal statistical programs.Treasury Department and the Joint Committee on Taxation, 2000Section 3802 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Re-form Act of 1998 requires the secretary of the treasury and the JCT to
conduct separate studies of the scope and use of provisions regarding
taxpayer confidentiality and to report the findings of such a study, to-
gether with any recommendations deemed appropriate to Congress. The
JCT published its report on January 28, 2000; the Office of Tax Policy of
the Department of the Treasury submitted its report on October 2, 2000.The JCT and the Treasury Department disagree on changing Section6103 to permit expanded data sharing. The JCT recommended that Ònew
access to returns and return information should not be provided unless
the requesting agency can establish a compelling need for the disclosure
that clearly outweighs the privacy interests of the taxpayerÓ (p. 196). (See
below for information on business taxpayer views.) The JCT report didImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES71not explain how to determine both the pros and cons of such a decision,nor did it appear to fully accept the need for the existing access. (Both the
JCT and the Treasury Department recommended dropping the Federal
Trade Commission from access under Section 6103.)The Treasury Department recommended Òthe disclosure authority ofSection 6103(j) should be expanded to additional specified statistical agen-
cies, and such agencies should be permitted, upon prior Treasury ap-
proval, to share IRS data with each other.Ó It also specified the agencies to
include and that the change to Section 6103 should cover both individual
and business records.Treasury Department, 2001 to PresentIn the 2001-2005 Statistical Programs of the United States Government,OMB reports support for the companion legislation that would change
Section 6103.Business TaxpayersAs noted above, the JCT identified the key issues in determiningwhether to change Section 6103 when it wrote Ònew access to returns
and return information should not be provided unless the requesting
agency can establish a compelling need for the disclosure that clearly out-
weighs the privacy interests of the taxpayerÓ (p. 196). Although there is a
substantial amount of research on individualsÕ views on confidentiality
and data sharing, much of it conducted for the decennial censuses,
there is limited information on the views of businesses. The information
that is available seems to indicate that business taxpayers are willing
to allow more access to statistical agencies for some types of tax return
information.Private business economists have actively supported data sharing. In1996, Maurine Haver, president of Haver Analytics and chair of the Statis-
tics Committee of the National Association for Business Economics
(NABE), testified before the House Subcommittee on Government Man-
agement, Information and Technology. In her testimony on consolidating
the three major economic statistical agencies (H.R. 2521), she expressed
support for the inclusion in that bill of provisions to provide for data shar-
ing among these agencies, as it would allow for the creation of a single
business register. In 2001, Richard Berner, the president of NABE and
managing director and chief U.S. economist, Morgan Stanley, Inc., testi-
fied before the House Subcommittee on the Census Committee on Gov-
ernment Reform on the Statistical Efficiency Act of 1999. In his testimony,
Berner reported on NABEÕs support for the reintroduction of this act,Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGwhich had been passed unanimously by the House in the previous Con-gress. He testified ÒNABE believes that our national data collection efforts
should be as efficient as possible. To that end, we believe that Congress
should mandate Ôdata sharingÕ among the agencies, solely for statistical
purposes.Ó He noted that existing confidentiality statutes are barriers to
such data sharing because Òthey virtually guarantee duplication of effort
and inconsistencies among related data sets collected by the affected agen-
cies. Moreover, they prevent agencies from undertaking new analyses that
could improve the information available to policy makers. This is not a
cost-effective way to run any businessÑeither public or private.ÓA 2001 article called ÒBusiness Perceptions of ConfidentialityÓ re-ported on the results of a survey conducted by the Urban Institute on
these business perceptions (Greenia, Lane, and Jensen, 2001). Of particu-
lar interest to the issue of privacy interests is the response to a set of ques-
tions about types of data that businesses view as very sensitive. The sur-
vey results showed that less than 5 percent of respondents thought their
name and address and industrial activity were very sensitive, but 85 per-
cent of respondents were very sensitive to data about their employees.
Between 50 and 75 percent of the respondents thought their financial data
were very sensitive.CURRENT INTERAGENCY SHARING OF BUSINESS DATAAmong the many examples of interagency sharing of business data,the oldest and most extensive is the use of tax information by the Census
Bureau to support its economic statistics programs. With the cooperation
of the IRS in modifying questions on tax returns and timely delivery of
tax records, the Census Bureau has been able to reduce reporting burden
in the quinquennial economic censuses for small businesses, to improve
the quality of key data from these censuses, and to develop new statistical
programs. This section discusses this sharing as well as other selected
examples; it excludes the County Business Patterns report (the Census
Bureau, IRS, and SSA) and the sharing of BLS quarterly unemployment
insurance data with BEA.Sharing by the Census Bureau and IRSAs reported in various editions of the history of the economic cen-suses, the extensive use of tax return records, from both the IRS and the
SSA, began with the 1954 economic censuses. In previous censuses, field
enumeration was used to collect the data. In 1954, the Census Bureau de-
veloped a mailing list from IRS records of employers with the industry
classification based on lists from the SSA. In addition, to assist the CensusImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES73Bureau, the IRS changed the 1954 tax forms to include information neededto determine the physical location of the business rather than the mailing
address and other changes needed by the Census Bureau to determine
whether firms had employees. As a result, for the first time, it became
possible for the Census Bureau to use tax return information as a source
of census data. The Census Bureau decided that because firms with no
paid employees represented a very small portion of the volume of retail
and service trade but constituted a large number of businesses, it would
forgo the collection of certain information from these firms and use the
available tax return information to ÒimputeÓ a complete report. For 1954,
they used this technique by selecting a 50 percent sample of retail and
service nonemployers. In 1963, this process was improved by the coop-
eration of the IRS in designing new census coverage questions for the
1963 tax returns, assigning industry classifications to nonemployer returns
in the field offices. In 1967, the Census Bureau used all tax records and
eliminated the sample. In addition, beginning with the 1987 economic cen-
sus, a separate publication on nonemployer statistics was introduced.
These data were published annually beginning with 1998, and the data
for 2003 were released in June 2005.The use by the Census Bureau of the IRS and SSA records was ex-panded significantly for the 1967 economic censuses. For 1967, the Census
Bureau began using the same information to impute a census report for
selected small employers. As a result, about 3 million small establishments

were relieved of the task of completing census questionnaires. Overall,
data for approximately 60 percent of the establishments included in the
scope of the census were obtained through the use of IRS and SSA records.
(Although large in number, these small establishments account for only
about 7 percent of total sales.) In another expansion of the use of the IRS
and SSA records, the Census Bureau also began to use tax return informa-
tion for the larger employer firms to review the quality of their responses
in the censuses.The Census Bureau also has used its access to tax return informationto create a new special supplement to the economic censuses, which is
now known as the Survey of Business Ownership (SBO). Using data col-
lected in the economic censuses, business tax return information from the
IRS, and administrative data from the SSA, the SBO provides statistics
that describe the composition of U.S. businesses by gender, race, and
ethnicity, as well as ownerÕs age, education level, and veteran status. In
the 1997 economic census, this survey was conducted as two separate sur-
veys; a survey of minority-owned businesses and a survey of women-
owned businesses. These surveys have been conducted as part of the eco-
nomic censuses since 1972.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGSharing by BEA and the IRSUnder access to tax returns provided by executive orders and nowSection 6103, BEA uses individual corporate income tax return data to
estimate adjustments to the published IRS corporate profits data and con-
verts these IRS data to accounting concepts underlying gross national
product. For its regional economic accounts program, using a provision
of Section 6103 that allows IRS to give access to BEA to review and tabu-
late individual tax return records for IRS, BEA produces tabulations (after
review by the IRS to ensure taxpayer confidentiality) of nonfarm propri-
etorsÕ income by state and county that are used to distribute BEAÕs na-
tional totals.Sharing by the Census Bureau and BLSAnother effort to improve the quality of the economic censuses camein 1992 when the Census Bureau and BLS entered into a memorandum of
understanding regarding the use of BLS records by the Census Bureau
for the economic censuses. Under this agreement, the Census Bureau
compiled a list of single establishment employer identification numbers
for which it needed the BLS industrial classification codes. The BLS
matched this against its own business register and returned a listing
of matched records with the appropriate industrial classification codes.
The codes provided by BLS were from its three-year classification update
program and provided the Census Bureau with more up-to-date classifi-
cation information, as the Census Bureau typically updated its classifica-
tion of these businesses once every five years. Records are not available
to determine the extent to which the Census Bureau classifications were
changed as a result of this effort.In 1998, BLS and the Census Bureau entered into another memoran-dum of understanding. This agreement authorized the agencies to con-
duct research to evaluate (1) the business registers maintained by the two
agencies, (2) opportunities to improve each otherÕs list, and (3) the ben-
efits and risks of sharing list information. After an initial round of com-
parisons had been completed and a report presented to the Federal Eco-
nomic Statistics Advisory Committee, the project was stopped by the IRS
because the Census Bureau may have given BLS staff access to tax return
information embedded in the census register. OMB has reported that this
research has resumed under a memorandum of understanding that has
been approved by IRS.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES75Sharing Between BEA and the Census BureauThe International Investment and Trade in Services Act of 1990 au-thorized BEA and the Census Bureau to exchange data collected by BEA
under this act and data collected by the Census Bureau under Title 13. The
purpose of the exchange was to improve the quality of each agencyÕs data
and to allow for the preparation of a report that showed the distribution
by industry and geography of establishments owned by foreign direct
investors. The act authorized a similar exchange between BEA and BLS.In 2003, using the authority from CIPSEA, BEA and the Census Bu-reau entered into an arrangement to match data from BEAÕs surveys called
Foreign Direct Investment in the United States and U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad with data from the Census Bureau Survey of Industrial Research
and Development (SIRD). Working with the National Science Founda-
tion, which funds SIRD, the project demonstrated the feasibility of linking
the the Census Bureau and BEA survey data to produce new data on the
domestic and international dimensions of U.S. research and development
(R&D) activity. The project generated new data on R&D activities of U.S.
and foreign multinational companies and on the location of U.S. R&D
activity by state. The project also allowed for a higher degree of integra-
tion between data on the domestic dimensions of R&D and data on the
international dimensions. The project also provided benefits to both the
Census Bureau and BEA through improvements in data quality. Research
on the outcomes of the matching resulted in the Census BureauÕs adding
over 500 companies to the sample for the 2003 SIRD and over 60 compa-
nies to the 2004 SIRD sample frame. The matching also indicated signifi-
cant differences in the reporting of both R&D expenditures and industry
classification. These differences were resolved and resulted in improved
quality in BEAÕs estimates.Sharing Between BEA and BLSBLS produced several reports as a result of the sharing authorized bythe International Investment and Trade in Services Act of 1990. In 1993,
BLS released 1989 employment data on the occupations for manufactur-
ing by industry and country of ownership in foreign-owned establish-
ments. BLS prepared this report using data from the BEAÕs 1989 Annual
Survey of Foreign Direct Investment in the United States to identify
foreign-owned establishments in the BLS Covered Employment and
Wages data. These establishments were then linked to establishments
from the BLS Occupational Employment Statistics Survey of Manufactur-
ing Industries for 1989.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGIn 1995, BLS released tabulations for the fourth quarter of 1991 show-ing a distribution by industry and geography for foreign-owned estab-
lishments in the United States based on employment data from their Cov-
ered Employment and Wages data. BEA is also planning to provide BLS
with company and revenue data from several of its international surveys
so that BLS can study expanding their International Price Program to in-
clude a new price index for royalties and license fees. BEA hopes to ben-
efit from this sharing by comparing its sample frame with the one com-
piled by BLS for this price program.REFERENCESBerner, R.2001Testimony before the House Subcommittee on the Census Committee on Govern-
ment Reform on the Statistical Efficiency Act of 1999, Washington, DC.Council of Economic Advisers2002Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the Presi-dent.Davenport, C., and the Administrative Conference of the United States1976Report on Administrative Procedures of the Internal Revenue Service, October 1975, tothe Administrative Conference of the United States. Senate document, 94th Congress,2nd Session; 94-266.Greenia, N., J. Lane, and B. Jensen2001Business perceptions of confidentiality. Pp. 395-429 in 
Confidentiality, Disclosure,and Data Access: Theory and Practical Applications for Statistical Agencies. P. Doyle,J.I. Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, and L.V. Zayatz, eds.  Amsterdam, The Netherlands:

North-Holland, Elsevier Science.Haver, M.1996Testimony before the House Subcommittee on Government Management,  Infor-
mation and Technology, 104th U.S. Congress, Washington, DC.Joint Committee on Taxation2000Study of Present-Law Taxpayer Confidentiality and Disclosure Provisions as Required bySection 3802 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998,Volume I: Study of General Disclosure Provisions (JCS-1-00). Washington, DC: U.S.Government Printing Office.McMillen, D.2003Privacy, Confidentiality, and Data Sharing. Unpublished paper presented at the
National Research CouncilÕs Committee on National Statistics Confidential Data
Access for Research Purposes Workshop, Washington, DC.National Research Council1976Setting Statistical Priorities: Report of the Panel on Methodology for Statistical Prioritiesof the Committee on National Statistics. Assembly of Mathematical and Physical Sci-ences, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washing-ton, DC: National Academy Press.1980Report of an October 1979 Conference on Sharing of Social Science Research Data. Com-mittee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences andEducation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA-SHARING HISTORY AND LEGISLATION: BACKGROUND NOTES771985Sharing Research Data. Committee on National Statistics. S.E. Fienberg, M.E. Mar-tin, and M.L. Straf, eds. Commission on Behavioral and Social  Sciences and Edu-

cation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.1993Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government Statis-tics. Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, Committee on National Statistics.
G.T. Duncan, T.B. Jabine, and V.A. de Wolf, eds. Commission on Behavioral andSocial Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.2000Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: Report of a Workshop. Com-mittee on National Statistics. C. Mackie and N. Bradburn, eds. Commission onBehavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Acad-emy Press.2005aPrinciples and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, Third Edition. Committee onNational Statistics. M.E. Martin, M.L. Straf, and C.F. Citro, eds. Division of Behav-ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Acad-
emies Press.2005bExpanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and Opportunities. Committeeon National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards1978A Framework for Planning U.S. Federal Statistics for the 1980Õs. Washington, DC: U.S.Department of Commerce.Privacy Protection Study Commission1977Personal Privacy in an Information Society. Washington, DC: U.S Government Print-
ing Office.Singer, E.2001The potential of confidentiality and attitudes toward data sharing by federal agen-
cies. Pp. 341-370 in Confidentiality, Disclosure, and Data Access: Theory and PracticalApplications for Statistical Agencies. P. Doyle, J.I. Lane, J.M. Theeuwes, and L.V.Zayatz, eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, Elsevier Science.Social Security Administration1991Social Security AdministrationÕs continuous work history sample. 
Social SecurityBulletin 52(10).U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and U.S. Bureau of the Census2003Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for 1997. Washing-ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.U.S. Census Bureau1968-Economic Censuses. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.2002
2005aCounty Business Patterns: 2003. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.2005bResearch and Development Data Link Project: Final Report. Washington, DC: U.S. De-partment of Commerce.2005cNonemployer Statistics Report: 2003. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Com-merce.2005d 2002 Survey of Business Owners: Advanced Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-ment of Commerce.U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics1993New Research on Occupations in Foreign-owned Manufacturing Establishments in theUnited States. (News release.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.1995Employment and Wages in Foreign-owned Businesses in the United States, Fourth Quar-ter 1991. (News release.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGU.S. Department of the Treasury, Department of Tax Policy2000Report to the Congress on Scope and Use of Taxpayer Confidentiality and DisclosureProvisions as Required by Section 3802 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuringand Reform Act of 1998, Volume I: Study of General Disclosure Provisions. Washing-ton, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury.U.S. General Accounting Office1979After Six Years, Legal Obstacles Continue to Restrict Government Use of the StandardStatistical Establish List. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.1998Statistical Agencies: Proposed Consolidation and Data-Sharing Legislation. Washing-ton, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.2001Record Linkage and Privacy: Issues in Creating New Federal Research and StatisticalInformation. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.U.S. Office of Management and Budget2001-Statistical Programs of the United States Government, Fiscal Years 2002-2005. Wash-2005ington, DC: Executive Office of the President.
Wilson, O., and W. Smith1983Access to tax records for statistical purposes. Pp. 595-601 in 
Proceedings of the Sur-vey Research Methods Section. Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.796IRS Data, Data Users, and Data SharingNick Greenia and Mark MazurInternal Revenue Service1The importance of tax data to the federal statistical system, in bothidentifiable and anonymized form, derives from the fact that they are a
national asset, a virtual treasure of information. Tax data are rich in both
individual and organizational financial details that are useful in a wide
variety of situations. First, these data underpin the administration of the
federal tax system, which in turn provides the resources for many federal
obligations. Second, tax data have almost as important a role as inputs to
critical statistical systems that inform analysts and policy makers both
inside and outside government. A critical issue for both the tax system
and the federal statistical system is the determination of when a compel-
ling need exists for identifiable tax data (often known as federal tax in-
formation or FTI) in lieu of aggregate anonymized data. The balance be-
tween the sometimes opposing interests of these systems is the focus of
this chapter.TAX DATA COLLECTEDThe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) collects data for a variety ofentitiesÑcovering over 130 million individuals and over 20 million busi-
nesses, tax exempt organizations, and governmental entities. The scope of
tax return data, often including complete balance sheets and financial1The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and may not represent theofficial positions of the Internal Revenue Service or the Treasury Department.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGstatements, is vast and contains information on everything from net busi-ness profits to charitable contributions made by individuals. Moreover,
the regularity of the data providedÑannually, quarterly, and even
monthly for some returnsÑand the fact that much of the data are cap-
tured electronically and for the universe of filers, makes FTI a potent re-
source for research and analysis.The subject of business data can be a broad one, covering corpora-tions, partnerships, and sole proprietorships and both employers and
nonemployers. Intuition can be a poor guide for the types of data col-
lected and available. For example, employer data are collected for part-
time and full-time sole proprietorships, associated with individual tax re-
turns, corporations, and partnerships, as well as entities that are not
typically thought of as businesses, such as nonprofit organizations. Em-
ployment data themselves can be compiled at the employer level through
the employment tax returns filed by businesses (for example the Form 941
series long used by the Census Bureau). They can also be compiled at the
employee level and associated with the related employers through Social
Security number/employer identification number (SSN/EIN) crosswalks
(for example, using the SSNs and EINs captured from Form W-2, used to
report annual wage and salary payments).Typically, the IRS tracks business data at the EIN or enterprise level,but not at the establishment or place of business level unless they are one
and the same. This practice differs from that used by most federal statisti-
cal agencies. Tax data accuracy is helped by the IRS compliance programs,
including legal disincentives for noncompliance. Nevertheless, given the
scope and frequency of the data processed by the IRS, the agency cannot
ensure the accuracy of all items or the complete (100 percent) coverage of
entities. That is, FTI faces limitations similar to those of data sets main-
tained by statistical agencies, so the tax data system per se should not be
viewed as the panacea for statistical program deficiencies. As experience
has shown, there will always be gaps and inconsistencies, even in rela-
tively high-quality data sets.PURPOSE OF DATA COLLECTIONFundamentally, FTI is collected for use in administering the tax sys-tem, including tax policy analysis in the administration (the Department
of the TreasuryÕs Office of Tax Analysis) and Congress (the Joint Commit-
tee on Taxation). The IRS considers the successful administration of the
tax system as highly dependent on voluntary compliance by millions and
millions of taxpayers. In turn, voluntary compliance is seen as reliant on
the protectionÑincluding the perceived protectionÑof taxpayer data con-

fidentiality. Taxpayers share personal information with the IRS and areImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRS DATA, DATA USERS, AND DATA SHARING81assured that their personal data will be handled with the utmost care. TheIRS believes that the tax administration purpose of FTI is paramount, and
other uses of tax data, including statistical uses, must not interfere with
that purpose.The statistical usage of FTI is authorized by the statute (Section 6103(j)of the Internal Revenue Code, IRC) and associated Treasury regulations,
which detail specific items and clarify the purposes for which access by
parties outside the IRS may be granted. The tax code implicitly recog-
nizes that statistical and administrative uses share common ground, in
that both missions are dependent on high-quality data. In summary, there
are two major goals for FTI. First, the dataÕs confidentiality should be
protected, so that voluntary compliance and the workings of the tax sys-
tem are not harmed. Second, the data should be used effectively and effi-
ciently for authorized purposes. It should be clear from these two goals
that the role of the IRS with respect to tax data is less one of ownership
than stewardship.DATA USERSThe foremost use of tax data is administering the tax system and in-cludes such functions as taxpayer account processing, audit and other
compliance activity, research, and the compilation of statistics. In addi-
tion, FTI is provided, through the federal-state program, to state tax agen-
cies in order to assist with statesÕ tax administration needs. In fact, states
account for the lionÕs share of FTI record disclosures to outsidersÑin
2004, over 3 billion of the total 4.5 billion reported disclosures. However,
the uses of tax data go well beyond that of tax administration, as the
nation has long recognized their value not only for the formulation of tax
policy and other program uses (such as Social Security) but also for sta-
tistical purposes. For the former purpose, tax data are used extensively
by TreasuryÕs Office of Tax Analysis and the congressional tax-writing
committeesÑthe Joint Committee on Taxation, the Senate Finance Com-
mittee, and the House Ways and Means Committee. Other congressional
uses include oversight work undertaken for a tax-writing committee, for
example, by the U.S. Government Accountability Office.For a handful of federal entities listed in the tax code, selected identi-fiable tax dataÑby no means all itemsÑare provided for statistical pur-
poses. These consist of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), the Cen-
sus Bureau, the Department of AgricultureÕs National Agricultural
Statistical Service (USDA-NASS), and the Congressional Budget Office
(CBO). The Census Bureau accounts for most of the statistical-purpose
FTI record disclosures: over one billion in 2004. Tax data are also broadly
used in statistical nonidentifiable form (usually tabulations) to assistImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGother entities, such as businesses, policy think tanks, federal agencies notauthorized to receive identifiable data, and academic researchers. AUTHORIZATION PROCESS FOR ACCESSEvery access to FTI, even within the IRS, must be authorized by stat-ute, meaning that legislation has been codified as part of Title 26 of the
United States Code. Furthermore, the statute requires that only the mini-
mum amount of authorized FTI be provided for accomplishing a given
authorized task. These constraints apply to all users, including the IRS.
For example, virtually all access to FTI within the IRS is authorized for the
purpose of tax administration, which is multifaceted, under Section
6103(h)(1) of the IRC.As might be expected, given the sensitivity of FTI, the law governingaccess to confidential or identifiable tax data, especially for statistical pur-
poses, is restrictive with respect to both access and use. Thirty years after
the tax code was overhauled with the 1976 Tax Reform Act, the number of
entities with statistical access to FTI can still be counted on one hand: the
Census Bureau, BEA, CBO, and USDA-NASS.2 Based on the statutoryrecord to date, it seems clear that Congress has regarded any expansion in
access to FTI for statistical purposes as deserving of cautious and compre-
hensive consideration. Unsurprisingly, the rate of change has been gla-
cial, primarily involving USDA-NASS, when the Census of Agriculture
was transferred to that agency from the Census Bureau in the late 1990s,
and CBO soon after, with its statutory addition for the purpose of long-
term modeling of Social Security and Medicare. Even in these instances,
however, the historical precedent provided some reassurance regarding
the entry of these two new members to the FTI club. Working as special
sworn status individuals in the Census Bureau, NASS had conducted
much of the previous agriculture censuses. Similarly, CBO had long-

standing experience in handling FTI as an agent for the Joint Tax Commit-
tee under Section 6103(f)(4) of the IRC. Thus, neither was a novice with
regard to either FTI or the associated culture of confidentiality that FTI
access requires.Adding statistical users or increasing access for current users of FTImeans Section 6103(j) must be amended; that is, a new law must be passed.
Thus, the first requirement of any data-sharing proposal entailing access2The Federal Trade CommissionÕs inclusion in this statute is vestigial, as its QuarterlyFinancial Report function was transferred to the Census Bureau in the mid-1980s. AlthoughTreasury is also listed in the statute, virtually all of its FTI receipts are authorized by Section6103(h)(1) as being related to tax administration.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRS DATA, DATA USERS, AND DATA SHARING83to tax data is that the agencies proposed for sharing data must all be in thetax statute or Section 6103(j). This is a necessary but not a sufficient condi-
tion, as the agencies must also share statutory authorization to receive the
same types of dataÑfor example, corporate total income and individual
investment income. In addition, applicable regulations, which require for-
mal approval by the Treasury DepartmentÕs assistant secretary for tax
policy, may also be needed to authorize access and use of the same
tax items for the agencies statutorily enabled to receive FTI. Treasury regu-
lations may not only list the specific item content an agency is authorized
to receive but also stipulate a more focused purpose. Regulations can also
be amended to remove items that are no longer needed by an authorized
recipient. In fact, need and, in particular, the requirement of providing
only the minimum amount of data needed to accomplish a compelling
agency task, is a bedrock principle used for determining not only the ne-
cessity of a new statute, but also a regulation amendment. Historically,
both Congress and the Treasury Department have required that a com-
pelling data-driven case be made for amending either statute or regula-
tion, although clearly, it is more difficult to amend the statute.Occasionally, policy agreements crafted by the Treasury Departmentor the IRS and one of the statistical agencies may be used to supplement
the statute and regulations. For example, the IRS-Census Bureau Criteria
for the Review and Approval of Census Bureau Projects that Use Federal
Tax Information (sometimes called the Criteria Agreement) has been used
to delineate and clarify the process under which FTI may be accessed for
new Census Bureau purposes, especially authorized research purposes at
the Census Bureau as part of their Research Data Center arrangement.CHALLENGES IN PROTECTING CONFIDENTIALITYProtecting the confidentiality of tax data is challenging for the IRS,especially because there is no statute of limitations and because the tax
code treats all FTI the same with respect to confidentiality protection. That

is, to the IRS, a business name or address is as deserving of confidentiality
protection as income items for a large corporationÕs or individualÕs tax
return, and all must be protected in perpetuity, even after they have been
anonymized as statistical tabulations for public release. Given these con-
straints, the resource consequences of safeguarding taxpayer confidenti-
ality over time are nontrivial. These constraints are exacerbated by the
potential for complementary disclosure, or the reidentification of taxpayer
data using indirect means, for example, using data in other publicly re-
leased data to identify FTI related to a particular taxpayer. Given the ever-
increasing public releases of tax and other data, the task of protecting FTI
is daunting, especially over time.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGCONSTRAINTS ON USING DATAAs indicated earlier, the access of FTI must be only for purposes au-thorized by statute, possibly supplemented with regulations and, infre-
quently, policy agreements. In addition, authorized recipients are subject
to regular safeguards reviews in order to confirm their understanding
and implementation of the many requirements covering physical and
computer security, data need and use, and appropriate documentation.
Other requirements include separate systems for processing or accessing
FTI and background checks on individuals accessing it within facilities
certified for such purposes. All these requirements are intended to pre-
serve the confidentiality of FTI, whether maintained in its original form or
commingled with data from other sources. In addition, the penalties and
fines for unauthorized disclosures or inspections (also known as brows-
ing) can be severe and are detailed in the tax code.All of these constraints are largely driven by concerns for taxpayerconfidentiality, and, in general, they seek to control or regulate the use of
tax data by conceptually limiting, physically confining, and tracking such
access in order to provide a documented audit trail that will withstand
outside or third-party scrutiny. Implicitly, both the IRS and Congress rec-
ognize that this approach does not guarantee complete confidentiality, as
the only means for such an assurance would be not to release any data at
all. However, padlocking the treasure of tax data is viewed as neither a
desirable nor a viable outcome, so some disclosure risk is accepted as part
of the necessary balance of protection and access. The challenge is to iden-
tify acceptable risk, and the approach utilized to date is taking steps that
prevent reidentification of tax data through Òreasonable means.Ó The in-
terpretation of reasonable means includes the use of reasonably available
computer technology, mathematical/statistical techniques, and a work-
ing knowledge of the related subject matter. The reasonable means stan-
dard attempts to avoid system meltdown in the use of FTI. ÒReasonable
meansÓ is a technology-relative concept and thus, it may be a moving
target. Nevertheless, it represents an attempt at balancing the two goals
for tax data: their protection and their effective use.It seems clear that there is probably some overall limit on tax dataaccess, even if that limit is not precisely known. The need for this limit can
be attributable to both resource costs of protection and what might be
termed as the perception of a plausible quantity limit on access. To see
why such a limit makes sense, consider that even large amounts of safe-
guarding resources cannot enable unlimited access to FTI. The reason is
credibility. It is simply not credible that unlimited access would ever pass
a perceptions test on confidentiality protection, especially for third-party
scrutiny. That is, such an outcome would not seem plausible, as it would
seem to turn the very concept of confidentiality on its head.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRS DATA, DATA USERS, AND DATA SHARING85SOMETIMES CONFLICTING MANDATESStatistical agencies such as the Census Bureau are mandated to useexisting data systems (especially administrative records) to the maximum
extent possible. Combined with the IRS statutory mandate to provide FTI
only to the minimum extent needed for authorized purposes, these man-
dates create a tension that drives a need to negotiate the appropriate
amount of FTI accessible for a given statistical task. This is not to say that
the relationship between tax agency and nontax agency needs to be very
adversarial. In effect, access to FTI should be treated as a scarce resource.
Accordingly, the opposing mandates create an initial starting point that
requires interagency cooperation in order to find a welfare-improving
outcome, in which both parties find it in their interest to move to this new
point. Thus, while tension from the conflicting mandates may be viewed
initially as a problem, it is probably necessary to ensure the protection of
taxpayer confidentiality and the provision of FTI only to the extent neces-
sary for compelling statistical needs. Without such tension, there would
probably be some biasÑeither too much access or too little. With this con-
straint, the IRS and the authorized statistical agencies are compelled to
bargain hard toward an equilibrium that upholds their respective man-
dates, and that both sides are willing to defend. Ultimately, any inter-
agency agreement must be documented in order to be clearly imple-
mented and to successfully withstand outside scrutiny. Thus, the conflict
in mandates provides a type of pricing mechanism for achieving a bal-
ance between supply and demand for FTI access. Forces likely to continue
exerting pressure on this mechanism would include declining survey re-
sponse rates, statistical processing costs, response burden, and, of course,
the need to maintain voluntary tax compliance by protecting taxpayer
confidentiality.THE CENSUS BUREAU-IRS CRITERIA AGREEMENTA 1999-2000 IRS safeguards review of the Census Bureau raised con-cerns over access by its research data centers (RDCs) to FTI, especially
from the perspective of statutorily authorized purpose. As a result, the

Census Bureau and IRS agreed to the terms of the coauthored Criteria forthe Review and Approval of the 
Census Bureau Projects that Use FederalTax Information, effective September 19, 2000. The Criteria Agreement
outlined protocols and other requirements governing access to FTI for
new uses by the Census Bureau, especially for RDC projects. The IRSreview role, assigned to the Statistics of Income Division, consists of ap-
proving or concurring on the predominant Title 13, Chapter 5, purpose
of proposed projects and ensuring that the minimal FTI needed would be
accessed for a given proposed usage. Scientific merit remained the prov-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGince of the Census Bureau and 
the researcher community, and, for pur-poses of the Criteria Agreement, outside researchers were treated as Cen-
sus Bureau employees (under the special sworn status designation). The
Criteria Agreement can be seen as a good outcome for the opposing
agency mandates governing access to FTI for statistical purposes. As a
policy agreement, it established an explicit interagency standard for au-
thorized purpose that supplemented long-standing statutes and regula-
tions in adapting to changing user needs. A cornerstone of the agreement
was its emphasis on proposal review documentation, including explicit
dual agency approvals on both the project proposals and post-project
certifications. In addition, the review process it fostered implicitly en-
listed the research communityÕs active participation by forcing it to de-
velop and maintain review capital and adding to the interagency appre-
ciation of confidentiality needed to make this process viable. Such an
outcome recognizes the limited review resources available in both the

Census Bureau and IRS and 
was essential in order to promote a viableflow of projects. The process also made all three participantsÑthe Cen-
sus Bureau, the IRS, and the researcher communityÑaware of the needto work together in order to make the process demonstrably credible for
purposes of potential third-party scrutiny.DATA-SHARING PROPOSALSFor three decades, the federal statistical community has attempted toovercome certain deficienciesÑparticularly list frame coverage across

agenciesÑof the decentralized data collection system by submitting a
number of proposed statistical data-sharing bills to Congress. These usu-
ally died in committee after being introduced, and many required an
amendment to the tax code, due to the importance of tax data in these
proposals, and because FTI for business is inextricably commingled with
non-FTI on the Census BureauÕs business register. As a result, a number
of the data-sharing proposals were accompanied by companion tax bills,
known as ÒJ bills,Ó due to their proposed amendment of Section 6103(j). In
the 1990s, two of these proposals addressed both demographic and busi-
ness data and encompassed all 10 major statistical agencies. Neither was
enacted.The most recent data-sharing legislation, part B of the ConfidentialInformation Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA), focused
on sharing only business data and was restricted to the three major busi-
ness data statistical agencies: BEA, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). A companion J bill accompanied CIPSEA when it
was introduced in Congress in July 2002. This strategy led to the enact-
ment of partial (nontax) data sharing when CIPSEA was signed into lawImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRS DATA, DATA USERS, AND DATA SHARING87in December 2002. However, the accompanying J bill attracted less legis-lative support, never made it to the floor of the House, and expired with
that Congress.From this experience a number of lessons have emerged, some ofwhich CIPSEA had already absorbed, and some of which, with hindsight,
might have led to some differences in both approach and content.LESSONS LEARNEDStrong Leadership Is NeededStrong leadership was provided for CIPSEA throughout the 2002 ef-fort by both the Council of Economic Advisers  and the Office of Manage-

ment and Budget. More advocates were probably needed, especially in
Congress, in order to advance both (tax and nontax) parts of the proposal
once it arrived there. In fact, support by members in both the House and
the Senate would seem critical in order to overcome concerns about in-
creased sharing of identifiable tax data. In a similar vein, the support of
congressional staffÑespecially on the tax-writing committeesÑneeds to
be enlisted, with a compelling case on why the bill is needed, including
not only how government statistical operations would be improved but
also how taxpayer confidentiality would remain protected.Dispell the Myth of Access Being a Zero-Sum ActivityPart of the education effort needed would be well spent focusing onthe myth in the tax community that expanded access to FTI is undesirable
in general and that access cannot be expanded in one area without a com-
mensurate reduction somewhere else. For example, the notion that in-
creasing the number of agencies accessing business data can only be ac-
complished at the expense of reducing another agencyÕs existing access to
FTI must be countered. One strong argument countering this position is
the evidence provided by adding both USDA-NASS and CBO to the stat-
ute as authorized recipients of FTI without reduction in access elsewhere
and without observable problems in terms of weakened confidentiality.
Another counterargument might be the controlled expansion in access
enabled by the Census Bureau-IRS Criteria Agreement for the RDCsÑ
now in its sixth year of implementation.Discrete Steps May Be Better than Bold LeapsConcerns articulated by some opponents of the 2002 CIPSEA effortinclude the notion that the J billÕs expanded access seemed too broad be-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGcause (1) it was modeled on the Census Bureau-IRS Criteria Agreement,which included access by researchers at the Census Bureau RDCs, and (2)
the statutory language referenced regulations to be released in the future
for purposes of authorizing access to specific items of FTI. The two major
purposes of sharing FTI for Part B of CIPSEA have largely been described
as establishing a common business list frame for all three agencies (BEA,
the Census Bureau, and BLS) and in providing common identifier infor-
mation that would enable the three agencies to exchange nontax data with
each other. The potential for excessive access to tax data under the CIPSEA
J bill was a concern, given that expanding item access via regulation would
require only Treasury approval, not an act of Congress. This concern may
have been heightened by the interest BLS has indicated in sharing limited
FTI with its state partners. Moreover, both BEA and BLS might some day
want to pursue access arrangements with researchers in a way similar to
what the Census Bureau has done with its RDC model, which would in-
crease the number of persons with FTI access. In short, these concerns
were raised about the ability to limit, track, or control access to FTI and
should be addressed by any future J bill.One possibility for assuaging such concerns is to stipulate a limitedamount of FTI in the statute itself, obviating the need for regulations. The
items themselves might be limited to, say, taxpayer identification number
(TIN), name, address, industry code, and one or two magnitude variables,
such as employment size and income, for the purpose of stratifying a
sample. Listing in the statute only the items needed for purposes of ad-
dressing the central problem (i.e., mutual list frame coverage, exchange of
nontax data) might help emphasize the agenciesÕ good faith effort to re-
quest and use only the items justified by the data-sharing rationale, so
that the principle of the minimum FTI needed would be met. In addition,
such a statutory limitation might help signify that these agencies did not
intend to replace surveys with FTI per se, an argument sometimes raised
by opponents of expanded access.Show Some Benefit to the TreasuryWhen CIPSEA and the J bill were introduced to Congress in July 2002,staff from both the House Ways and Means and the Senate Finance Com-
mittees raised questions about how the legislation, especially the data
sharing enabled by the J bill, would benefit the Treasury Department.
CIPSEA seemed to contemplate a one-way flow of data for statistical pur-
poses, which did not appear to include statistical tax analysis conducted
by the Office of Tax Analysis in the Treasury Department and the Statis-
tics of Income Division at the IRS. Thus, the general consensus seemed toImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IRS DATA, DATA USERS, AND DATA SHARING89be that Treasury would not directly benefit much by CIPSEA and the ac-companying J bill.One way of addressing this concern might be for Treasury (and otheroutside analysts) to benefit from the creation and release of more public-
use files, including those created with synthetic data. Two problems at-
tend this recommendation. First, the jury is still out on the utility of

public-use files created with synthetic data. Second, virtually no public-
use files of business data exist due to the difficulty of masking the inter-
esting data features of concentrated industry activity at the same time
that these properties are needed for analysis. A more direct way to pro-
vide Treasury with analytical benefit might be for the Census Bureau to
consider Treasury and the IRS researchers for RDC access on meritorious
project proposals, as long as they adhere to the same requirements as other
researchers, including predominant Title 13 purpose. Preliminary discus-
sions between the IRS and the Census Bureau so far indicate that this
might have value.One possible objection to this idea pertains to Section 7214(a)(8) of thetax code. This statute requires Treasury and IRS employees with evidence
of revenue law violations to report it. The Census BureauÕs concern is that
this obligation might overshadow the confidentiality oaths required for
special sworn status at the Census Bureau. Several factors might help miti-
gate this concern. For example, the statuteÕs evidentiary standard on what
constitutes information that a revenue violation has occurred is high, and
it is unlikely to be uncovered during the sort of research and analysis that
Treasury or the IRS might propose, especially given the limited data re-
lated to actual tax liability available at an RDC. An additional point is that
any Treasury or IRS researcher would most likely be intent on statistical
research. Enforcement personnel, such as auditors or tax examiners,
would not be likely candidates for access, so there would be little empha-
sis on case-by-case compliance issues. This standard would be consistent
with the engagement of some researchers at RDCs who represent com-
mercial enterprises with a variety of clients. That is, the suspension of a
non-RDC allegiance for purposes of data access is hardly unprecedented
in the Census BureauÕs RDC experience.Interagency Disclosure Coordination NeededAs additional assurance to reviewers of a future J bill, it may be advis-able to consider making explicit, perhaps in the narrative accompanying
the bill, that the agencies authorized to share FTI would collaborate on
statistical disclosure limitation methodologies. It is probably important
that such coordination be given clear prominence in the J bill itself, given
that the statute (Section 6103(j)(4)) requires that both direct and indirectImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGmeans of reidentification be prevented with any public release of data. AllFTI, including the building blocks of any list frame, such as name, ad-
dress, and TIN, will probably remain subject to perpetual protection un-
der provisions of the tax code, as discussed previously. Accordingly, leg-
islators who understand that the statistical community has the issue of
taxpayer and respondent confidentiality foremost in mind as it seeks ex-
panded access to confidential data may be more sympathetic to a future J
bill. Demonstrating such care and foresight may also assist with any fu-
ture proposals that might expand data sharing beyond three agencies and
encompass more than business data.CONCLUSIONWe view FTI as a national asset that can have great value in manysituations faced by the statistical community. However, this asset comes
with numerous constraints on its use, in particular, a strong emphasis on
taxpayer confidentiality and a requirement that only the minimum
amount of FTI be provided to meet authorized uses. These constraints can
be productively addressed through good faith bargaining between the
IRS and the statistical agencies authorized to receive FTI. We believe this
bargaining process is a useful way to strike the right balance between
needed access to FTI and concerns for taxpayer confidentiality. Future
expansions of the statutory provisions allowing access to FTI are possible,
but will take a concerted effort by the affected federal statistical agencies.
Learning from past efforts can help increase the chances of success in this
endeavor.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.917The Importance of Data Sharing toConsistent Macroeconomic Statistics
Dennis Fixler and J. Steven LandefeldBureau of Economic AnalysisThe Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has a unique position in thedecentralized U.S. statistical system. BEA produces the national income
and product accounts (NIPAs), a comprehensive and consistent double-
entry set of accounts for the economy. BEA uses a myriad of data col-
lected from public and private data sources to construct these accounts. In
this role, BEA often confronts major inconsistencies in piecing these data
together that are not evident from the perspective of the agencies collect-
ing the individual pieces of the economic puzzle. BEA has been described
as the canary in the mineshaft for the U.S. statistical system.The U.S. statistical system has evolved over time in such policy agen-cies as the U.S. Department of Commerce, Labor, the Treasury, Agricul-
ture, and Energy to provide data and answer questions relevant to the
agenciesÕ missions. Surveys and the legislation supporting them have
evolved independently. The result is a diverse set of data using different
business registers, different industry classifications for establishments,
different concepts and definitions, different timing, and different collec-
tion methods.These differences in survey frames and procedures produce signifi-cant quantitative differences in what would appear to be the same mea-
sures of economic activity. For example, employment in individual in-
dustries as reported by the Labor DepartmentÕs Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) can differ markedly from that reported by the Department of
CommerceÕs Census Bureau. Differences exist for wages and salaries
across industries, across states, and in the aggregate (see Tables 7-2
and 7-6).Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGWHY IT MATTERSThe implications of these differences in estimates is illustrated in Table7-1, which summarizes the various data sources used by BEA in construct-
ing one of its sets of accounts. Gross domestic product (GDP) is mainly
estimated using data collected by the Census Bureau, while gross domes-
tic income (GDI) is mainly estimated using data collected by BLS, the Cen-
sus Bureau, and the Statistics of Income (SOI, part of the Internal Revenue
Service, IRS). In concept, GDP should equal GDI because all final expen-
ditures should end up as income to households, business, or government.
However, because of the differences in the source data used in estimating
GDP and GDI, often they are not equal, and the result is the statistical
discrepancy.Such discrepancies between GDP and GDI can have large impacts onfiscal and monetary policy. During the latter half of the 1990s, a large and
persistent discrepancy arose, with real GDI growing 0.6 percent faster than
real GDP (1995-2000). This was important for budget planning because
real trend GDP growth is used as the baseline for estimating near-term
trend growth in 5-year budget forecasts made by the Office of Manage-
ment and Budget (OMB) and the Congressional Budget Office. To illus-TABLE 7-1BEA Summary Account 1ÑPrimary Data Sources (billions
of dollars)Primary Data Source2004
Income sideLabor compensationBLS$6,693.4

Corporate profits & govÕt enterprisesCensus Bureau, SOI973.6
ProprietorsÕ income and rental incomeCensus Bureau, SOI1023.8
Interest on assets, taxes, & misc. paymentsSOI, FRB1,531.3

DepreciationCensus Bureau1,435.3
GROSS DOMESTIC INCOME$11,657.5

Statistical discrepancy76.8
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT$11,734.3
Expenditure sidePersonal consumption expendituresCensus Bureau$8,214.3
Gross private domestic investmentCensus Bureau1,928.1
GovÕt consumption exp. & gross invest.GovÕt, Census Bureau2,215.9

Net exports of goods and servicesCensus Bureau, BEAÐ624.0
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT$11,734.3
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING93trate the impact, according to OMBÕs FY 2006 analysis of the Òsensitivityof the budget to economic assumptions,Ó a persistent understatement of
real GDP growth by 1.0 percent would result in an overstatement of the
projected deficit of $530 billion. Similarly, a persistent understatement of
real trend GDP growth could lower the Federal ReserveÕs estimate of non-
inflationary sustainable growth and signal the need for a tighter mon-
etary policy than necessary.One possible answer to the source of this discrepancy could lie in therecording of stock options, bonuses, and fringe benefits in employee com-
pensation. While there are many sources of the difference between BLS
and the Census Bureau payroll data, it is interesting that during the latter
half of the 1990s, when stock options and bonuses were growing rapidly,
the Census Bureau data rose at a 7.8 percent average annual rate, whereas
the BLS data rose at a 7.5 percent average annual rate (1995-2000). Part of
this may reflect the recording of stock options. For example, in Washing-
ton StateÑa state with significant stock option activityÑthe Census Bu-
reau data grew nearly twice as fast (11.5 percent) as the BLS payroll data
(6.2 percent) for 2000. If it turned out that stock options were under-
reported in the BLS data, it would suggest that the growth rate of GDI
might be even higher, thereby focusing additional effort on improving
the reporting of final expenditures on services and other less-well-
measured components of GDP.Another example of the importance of BEA accuracy is illustrated byits regional data, which are used in the geographic allocation of nearly
$200 billion in federal funds. These data are also used by virtually every
state for its tax and planning purposes. BEA uses BLS data for these state
and local estimates, which are taken from quarterly employment and un-
employment tax forms.The differences between the two sets of payroll data across states varyfrom the BLS setÕs being 4.2 percent higher in New Mexico to 9.5 lower in
Alaska than what is reported by the Census Bureau. These differences
could have a significant impact on the allocation of state Medicaid funds,
which uses BEA per capita state personal income to determine the federal
share of payments for each state. Differences in growth rates can also have
an important impact on state tax projections and spending plans. For ex-
ample, in New York the $1.2 billion difference in growth in wages and
salaries between 2001 and 2002 between BLS and the Census Bureau se-
ries would amount to about a $173 million difference in projected income
taxes.These are but a few of the examples of the implications for govern-ment and business decision makers. In the sections below, the implica-
tions for users of estimates ranging from profits and productivity to infla-
tion and offshoring are explored.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGDATA SHARINGOver the years, numerous proposals have been put forth to resolvethe problems associated with a decentralized system. One has been the
creation of a central statistical office such as those that exist in Canada,
Australia, and other countries. The creation of such an entity has not
proved popular for various reasons. Consolidation would require exten-
sive budget negotiation and resources to coordinate and implement a
process that ensures there is little to no disruption in data production.
Furthermore, the current system allows for the specialization that
has arguably led to many of the innovations produced by U.S. statistical
agencies.Given these difficulties, a practical way to achieve many of thebenefits of a central statistical agency without the costs is to permit the
sharing of business data among the three general-purpose statistical
agenciesÑBEA, BLS, and the Census BureauÑthat produce the bulk of
the nationÕs economic data. All three agencies have an excellent record of
protecting confidential data, have access to various types of tax data, and
share various types of data that could be significantly improved by data
sharing.A major step forward in allowing data sharing was the passage of theConfidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002
(CIPSEA). Section 521 stipulated that business data can be shared for sta-
tistical purposes among BEA, the Census Bureau, and BLS. At the time
CIPSEA was formulated, it was understood that for data sharing to be
completely operational, there would have to be some changes in Section
6103, paragraph (j), of Title 26 (Internal Revenue Code) and the accompa-
nying regulations that govern access to federal tax information (FTI).
These changes are necessitated by the facts that much of the Census Bu-
reau information is commingled with FTI and neither BEA nor BLS has
the Census Bureau level of access to use such data. Although there have
been discussions concerning the formulation of a bill to submit to Con-
gress to bring about the necessary changes in Title 26, to date no bill has
been written for submission.The absence of fully implemented data sharing especially affects BEAbecause it collects few data of its own and relies primarily on the Census
Bureau for its data. Data sharing, however, does not just affect the ability
of BEA to access Census Bureau data; the inability of BLS and the Census
Bureau to share data greatly affects the quality of the data that BEA re-
ceives from both agencies. In this chapter we provide examples of how
the absence of data sharing affects BEA estimates.The limited access to business tax data has enormous effects on BEAÕsability to access Census data that are commingled with tax data. The Cen-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING95sus Bureau sample frames are constructed from IRS data, and, under cur-rent rules, name, address, and employer identification numbers are gen-
erally considered tax data. Although in principle BEA has access to corpo-
rate tax records in the SOI sample, the Census Bureau does not know the
identification of those firms and so BEA has generally not been allowed
access to Census records. Without going into the arcane detail, whether
BEA has access to corporate Census records that are commingled with tax
data is determined by the extent to which the Census Bureau claims that
data are based on their own collection and not IRS records. Such a claim is
generally made by the Census Bureau in the case of multiunit establish-
ments. Thus BEA cannot access Census Bureau records from single-unit
establishments. Finally, because legislation limits BEA access to corporate
tax records, BEA cannot access partnership and sole proprietor Census
Bureau records, which are collected from tax dataÐbased sample frames.The limited access to tax data also impedes BEAÕs use of the Censusrecords to construct sample frames for its international surveys. The im-
pediment is especially problematic in the services area, because many of
these providers are not multiunit establishments. In a joint effort by BEA,
Census, and the National Science Foundation (NSF) regarding identify-
ing international research and development expenditures, it was discov-
ered that there was considerable difference between Census and BEA

sample frames. In this case, BEA had identified many firms that were not
in the Census Bureau sample.Below we provide some detailed illustrations of how the absence ofdata sharing affects BEA estimates. We also discuss how the effect on BEA
estimates would affect policy decisions that are based on those estimates.Industry Employment DifferencesBLS, the Census Bureau, and SOI are the main sources of wage andsalary data in the U.S. economy. Figures 7-1 and 7-2 show that the levels
and growth of total payroll according to these sources are broadly consis-
tent, but that there are significant differences in magnitudes. Below we
focus on the BLS and the Census Bureau data, as those are the two main
sources used by BEA.1BLS prepares comprehensive wage and salary data in its Quarterly1The SOI data are composed from a sample of tax returns and therefore are not as compre-hensive as either BLS or the Census Bureau data. Furthermore these data are released witha lag.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING3,0003,2003,4003,6003,8004,0004,2004,4004,6004,8005,000199819992000200120022003Census Business Patterns (CBP)BLS QCEW (formerly ES-202)SOI Salaries and wagesBillions of DollarsTotal PayrollYearFIGURE 7-2Payroll data comparisonÑthe Census Bureau, BLS, and SOI growth.
FIGURE 7-1Payroll data comparisonÑthe Census Bureau, BLS, and SOI levels.
-20246810121994199519961997199819992000200120022003Census Business Patterns (CBP)BLS QCEW (formerly ES-202)SOI Salaries and wagesPercentageTotal Payroll GrowthYearCensus of Employment and Wages Program (QCEW).2 These data arewidely used in BEA and are the basis for the wage and salary component
of personal income. The Census Bureau also prepares payroll data as part

of its Quinquennial Economic Census and Annual Survey programs.
These Census data are considered to be less timely than BLS data, but in
some areas, such as educational services, membership organizations, and
nonprofits, they are considered to be more complete than the QCEW data.2These data are commonly referred to as the ES-202 data, the former name of the program.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING97In addition, Census data on wages are generally recognized as providinga better industry distribution of aggregate wages, and incorporating these
data into BEA estimates offers a unique opportunity to create greater con-
sistency among the BEA industry accountsÕ measures of gross output, in-
termediate inputs, and value added. The decision, however, to choose
one set of data over the other has implications for the measurement of
value added in the industry accounts, which can be traced out through
examining the estimates prepared as part of the annual industry accounts.For some industries, the differences in the level of employment aresignificant. Table 7-2 identifies the differences in levels between BLS and
the Census wage and salary data for 2002, an economic census year.3 Theprimary explanations for the differences are that the Census Bureau and
BLS have different sample frames of establishments and that establish-
ments in both frames are not always classified in the same industry. The
Census Bureau and BLS are currently engaged in a project that seeks to
study this source of difference and explore other sources of differences.
Before this project could be undertaken, approval from the IRS had to be
obtained. The presentation at the workshop by James Spletzer (BLS) and
Paul Hanczaryk (Census Bureau) provided details of the study (see Chap-
ter 2 of this volume).As shown in Table 7-2, there are many relatively large differencesamong industries in which estimates are available from both BLS and the
Census Bureau. In the case of oil and gas extraction, the Census payroll
estimate is about 50 percent lower than the BLS estimate. In addition, the
Census Bureau estimate for all of manufacturing is about 15 percentÑor
roughly $100 billionÑlower than the BLS estimate. In contrast, Census
payroll estimate for management of companies and enterprises is about
63 percentÑor over $70 billionÑhigher than the BLS estimate.4Because employment and wage data are used in several places in thenational accounts, we will now show how BEA estimates would be differ-
ent if the Census data were used instead of the currently used BLS data
for manufacturing and a few other industries in the computation of value-
added. Although the current-dollar growth rate could change by as much
as 2.0 percentage points (e.g., computers and electronic products), Table
7-3 shows the relative rankings for the selected industries tended to be
relatively stable.3The Census payroll data used are from the U.S. Census Bureau web site as of April 1,2005. BLS wage data are consistent with the 2004 annual revision to the national income and
product accounts and the 2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.4This pattern may suggest a different classification treatment of head company offices bythe Census Bureau and BLS.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-2Differences in BLS Wages and the Census Bureau Payroll
by NAICS Industry, 2002 (in thousands of dollars)1997 NAICS CodesIndustry NameBEA Wages
aAll Industries4,968,131,000
Private industries4,119,730,000
11Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting31,815,000

111, 112Crop and animal production (ÒFarmsÓ)17,685,000
113, 114, 115Forestry, fishing, and related activities14,130,000
21Mining30,788,000

211Oil and gas extraction11,455,000
212Mining, except oil and gas10,470,000
213Support activities for mining8,863,000

22Utilities40,094,000
23Construction272,418,000
31, 32, 33Manufacturing675,523,000

33, 321, 327Durable goods441,182,000
321Wood product manufacturing17,585,000
327Nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing20,674,000

331Primary metal manufacturing23,209,000
332Fabricated metal product manufacturing59,742,000
333Machinery manufacturing57,050,000

334Computer and electronic product manufacturing98,359,000
335Electrical equipment and appliance manufacturing20,630,000
3361, 3362, 3363Motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing58,705,000

3364, 3365, 3366, 3369Other transportation equipment manufacturing38,954,000
337Furniture and related product manufacturing18,232,000
339Miscellaneous manufacturing28,042,000

31, 32 (excludingNondurable goods234,341,000
321 and 327)311 ,312Food product manufacturing60,356,000

313, 314Textile and textile product mills14,525,000
315,316Apparel manufacturing10,751,000
322Paper manufacturing25,611,000

323Printing and related support activities27,061,000
324Petroleum and coal products manufacturing7,632,000
325Chemical manufacturing57,293,000

326Plastics and rubber products manufacturing31,112,000
42Wholesale trade280,745,000
44, 45Retail trade360,341,000

48, 49Transportation and warehousing,162,206,000
excluding postal service481Air transportation30,550,000

482Rail transportation11,824,000
483Water transportation2,888,000
484Truck transportation47,917,000
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING99ContinuedPercent DifferencedBLS andBLSCensusBEA andBLS andCensus
WagesbPayrollcCensusCensusDifference
eÑÑ3,923,090,541ÑÑ
24,146,183ÑÑ

15,862,753ÑÑ
8,283,429ÑÑ
30,557,227ÑÑ

11,269,8295,564,811Ð51.4Ð50.6Ð5,705,018
10,321,3538,987,397Ð14.2Ð12.9Ð1,333,956
8,966,0446,707,242Ð24.3Ð25.2Ð2,258,802
39,895,55143,493,8048.59.03,598,253
260,841,814254,000,182Ð6.8Ð2.6
670,676,772573,401,510Ð15.1Ð14.5Ð97,275,262

437,547,486370,407,941Ð16.0Ð15.3Ð67,139,545
16,952,33115,909,908Ð9.5Ð6.1Ð1,042,423
20,543,61817,933,376Ð13.3Ð12.7Ð2,610,242

23,246,08021,508,667Ð7.3Ð7.5Ð1,737,413
59,352,28057,361,374Ð4.0Ð3.4Ð1,990,906
56,689,50949,470,768Ð13.3Ð12.7Ð7,218,741

98,045,56964,314,150Ð34.6Ð34.4Ð33,731,419
20,479,51617,957,015Ð13.0Ð12.3Ð2,522,501
58,579,12950,331,680Ð14.3Ð14.1Ð8,247,449

38,446,53431,231,174Ð19.8Ð18.8Ð7,215,360
18,107,13317,364,837Ð4.8Ð4.1Ð742,296
27,105,78727,024,992Ð3.6Ð0.3Ð80,795
233,129,286202,993,569Ð13.4Ð12.9Ð30,135,717
59,649,42152,334,562Ð13.3Ð12.3Ð7,314,859
14,501,50612,333,814Ð15.1Ð14.9Ð2,167,692
10,360,5888,567,969Ð20.3Ð17.3Ð1,792,619
25,744,23221,336,257Ð16.7Ð17.1Ð4,407,975

26,457,61025,738,613Ð4.9Ð2.7Ð718,997
7,891,0826,202,508Ð18.7Ð21.4Ð1,688,574
57,322,15044,032,801Ð23.1Ð23.2Ð13,289,349

31,202,69732,447,0454.34.01,244,348
276,607,852249,986,560Ð11.0Ð9.6Ð26,621,292
348,909,029296,215,722Ð17.8Ð15.1Ð52,693,307

146,810,674ÑÑÐ146,810,674
30,180,386ÑÑÐ30,180,386
10,869ÑÑÐ10,869
2,793,5563,031,8805.08.5238,324
46,824,53147,833,730Ð0.22.21,009,199
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING485Transit and ground passenger transportation8,996,000
486Pipeline transportation3,272,000
487, 488, 492Other transportation and support activities39,802,000

493Warehousing and storage16,957,000
51Information189,736,000
511Publishing including software58,394,000

512Motion picture and sound recording industries18,258,000
513Broadcasting and telecommunications84,838,000
514Information and data processing services28,246,000

52Finance and insurance370,088,000
521, 522Federal Reserve banks, credit intermediation132,010,000
and related services523Securities, commodity contracts, investments112,344,000
524Insurance carriers and related activities119,830,000
525Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles5,904,000

53Real estate, rental, and leasing71,785,000
531Real estate51,015,000
532,533Rental and leasing services and lessors20,770,000
of intangible assets54Professional and technical services415,422,000
5411Legal services80,297,000

5415Computer systems design and related services84,251,000
5412-5414, 5416-5419Other professional, scientific and technical services250,874,000
55Management of companies and enterprises117,147,000

56Administrative and waste services193,525,000
561Administrative and support services180,230,000
562Waste management and remediation services13,295,000

61Educational services74,446,000
62Health care and social assistance472,214,000
621Ambulatory health care services209,724,000

622, 623Hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities217,119,000
624Social assistance45,371,000
71Arts, entertainment, and recreation51,526,000

711, 712Performing arts, museums, and related activities24,724,000
713Amusements, gambling, and recreation26,802,000
72Accommodation and food services153,922,000

721Accommodation40,764,000
722Food services and drinking places113,158,000
TABLE 7-2Continued
1997 NAICS CodesIndustry NameBEA Wages
aImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING101Continued7,787,2987,575,497Ð15.8Ð2.7Ð211,801
3,277,9323,082,558Ð5.8Ð6.0Ð195,374
39,101,44534,489,516Ð13.3Ð11.8Ð4,611,929

16,834,65818,689,12210.211.01,854,464
188,758,526ÑÑÐ188,758,526
58,307,08964,712,02810.811.06,404,939

17,879,78512,516,040Ð31.4Ð30.0Ð5,363,745
84,664,46188,624,4634.54.73,960,002
27,907,19127,686,444Ð2.0Ð0.8Ð220,747
356,371,058ÑÑÐ356,371,058
131,188,066124,076,870Ð6.0Ð5.4Ð7,111,196
108,325,327101,285,387Ð9.8Ð6.5Ð7,039,940
110,965,984120,683,1830.78.89,717,199
5,891,681ÑÑÐ5,891,681
68,801,129ÑÑÐ68,801,129
48,110,83241,911,444Ð17.8Ð12.9Ð6,199,388
20,690,29618,706,319Ð9.9Ð9.6Ð1,983,977
390,450,138ÑÑÐ390,450,138
69,875,72869,939,404Ð12.90.163,676

83,897,95272,168,495Ð14.3Ð14.0Ð11,729,457
236,676,458ÑÑÐ236,676,458
117,462,176190,807,53162.962.473,345,355

191,825,310ÑÑÐ191,825,310
178,563,429195,425,0358.49.416,861,606
13,261,88112,178,484Ð8.4Ð8.2Ð1,083,397

64,700,545ÑÑÐ64,700,545
456,030,369ÑÑÐ456,030,369
204,320,753203,716,200Ð2.9Ð0.3Ð604,553

215,390,850212,480,514Ð2.1Ð1.4Ð2,910,336
36,318,76636,090,970Ð20.5Ð0.6Ð227,796
47,050,671ÑÑÐ47,050,671

24,652,96124,057,801Ð2.7Ð2.4Ð595,160
22,397,71021,069,716Ð21.4Ð5.9Ð1,327,994
142,208,429ÑÑÐ142,208,429
36,805,62934,874,261Ð14.4Ð5.2Ð1,931,368
105,402,80192,632,794Ð18.1Ð12.1Ð12,770,007
Percent DifferencedBLS andBLSCensusBEA andBLS andCensus
WagesbPayrollcCensusCensusDifference
eImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING81Other services, except government155,989,000
Government848,401,000
Federal civilian141,631,000

Federal military59,529,000
State and local647,241,000
TABLE 7-2Continued
1997 NAICS CodesIndustry NameBEA Wages
aNOTE: Census payroll data are from the U.S. Census Bureau web site as of April 1, 2005. BLS
wage data are consistent with the 2004 annual revision of the national income and productaccounts and the 2004 annual revision of the annual industry accounts.aWage and salary disbursements consists of the monetary remuneration of employees,including corporate officers salaries and bonuses, commissions, pay-in-kind, incentive pay-ments, and tips. It reflects the amount of payments disbursed, but not necessarily earnedduring the year. Wage and salary disbursements are measured before deductions, such as
social security contributions and union dues. In recent years, stock options have become apoint of discussion. Personal income includes stock options of nonqualified plans at the timethat they have been exercised by the individual. Stock options are reported in wage and
salary disbursements. The value that is included in wages is the difference between theexercise price and the price that the stock options were granted.Estimates of value-added in the annual industry accounts are pre-pared in a two-part process. First, three-digit North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) industry estimates are controlled to the
national income and product accounts for compensation of employees and
Òtaxes on production and imports less subsidies,Ó and initial estimates of
gross operating surplus are extrapolated from the most recent set of Òbal-
ancedÓ gross operating surplus estimates.5 Second, these three-digitNAICS industry controls are distributed to greater industry detail in the
annual input-output tables through a two-step process. Detailed industry
levels are extrapolated using QCEW data for compensation, and Òtaxes
less subsidiesÓ and gross operating surplus are extrapolated using de-
tailed gross output estimates. Then all three components are scaled back
to the three-digit controls. Extrapolation of industry detail for compensa-
tion could result in differences in shares depending on the choice to use5The recently adopted integration methodology for the annual industry accounts allowsfor intermediate inputs and gross operating surplus to adjust during the iterative row-and-column balancing procedure. For a discussion of the integration methodology, see Moyet etal. (2004)Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING103bReported quarterly total wages are the wages paid by Unemployment Insurance coveredemployers during the calendar quarter, regardless of when the services were performed.Reported total annual wages are the sum of the total wages reported for the correspondingquarters.cPayroll includes all forms of compensation, such as salaries, wages, commissions, dis-missal pay, bonuses, vacation allowances, sick-leave pay, and employee contributions, toqualified pension plans paid during the year to all employees. For corporations, payroll
includes amounts paid to officers and executives; for unincorporated businesses, it does notinclude profit or other compensation of proprietors or partners. Payroll is reported beforedeductions for social security, income tax, insurance, union dues, etc. This definition of pay-
roll is the same as that used by the IRS on Form 941.dComputed as Census Payroll less BLS wages, divided by BLS wages.eComputed as Census Payroll less BLS wages.QCEW or the Census data. Again, these differences would be the largestfor detailed industries in which the magnitude of the difference is the
greatest.The employment differences also have an impact on the computationof chain-type quantity indexes, real value-added by industry, and contri-
butions to real growth. To measure the impact, BEAÕs double-deflation
method for preparing real value-added for the industry accounts was
simulated to incorporate different nominal value-added levels, and then
the resulting impact on the real value-added estimates was examined. For
this exercise, three-digit NAICS industry estimates for value-added were
allowed to increase (decrease) by the difference in wage data between
BLS and the Census Bureau, and new levels of nominal intermediate in-
puts were computed as the difference between published gross output by
industry and the simulated value-added by industry. Next, the new inter-
mediate input levels were deflated by the published price indexes for in-
termediate inputs to produce real intermediate inputs. Finally, real value-
added by industry was computed as the difference between published
real gross output by industry and real intermediate inputs by industry.The choice of wage data affects the resulting change in real value-100,987,088ÑÑÐ100,987,088
ÑÑ0
ÑÑ0

ÑÑ0
ÑÑ0
Percent DifferencedBLS andBLSCensusBEA andBLS andCensus
WagesbPayrollcCensusCensusDifference
eImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104TABLE 7-3Differences in Current-Dollar Value-Added Growth by Manufacturing Industries and for ICT-
Producing Industries Combined, 20022002PublishedSimulated
1997 NAICS CodeIndustryPublishedSimulatedRankRank
31, 32, 33Manufacturing0.40.7
33, 321, 327 Durable goodsÐ0.9Ð0.4
321Wood product manufacturing
Ð4.2Ð4.41516
327Nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing
Ð3.5Ð3.71415
331Primary metal manufacturing
1.21.788
332Fabricated metal product manufacturing
Ð2.4Ð2.31313
333Machinery manufacturing
Ð5.4Ð5.41717
334Computer and electronic product manufacturing
Ð4.7Ð2.71614
335Electrical equipment and appliance manufacturing
Ð6.2Ð6.31818
3361, 3362, 3363Motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing
10.010.211
3364, 3365, 3366, 3369Other transportation equipment manufacturing1.10.899
337Furniture and related product manufacturing
Ð0.7Ð0.61010
339Miscellaneous manufacturing
3.93.955
31, 32Nondurable goods2.32.1
(excluding 321 and 327)311, 312Food product manufacturing
3.23.177
313, 314Textile and textile product mills
Ð1.8Ð1.61111
315, 316Apparel manufacturing
8.610.221
322Paper manufacturing
3.83.965
323Printing and related support activities
Ð1.8Ð1.81112
324Petroleum and coal products manufacturing
Ð23.1Ð24.91919
325Chemical manufacturing
6.26.033
326Plastics and rubber products manufacturing
4.54.444
Addenda:ICT-producing industriesaÐ2.3Ð1.4
NOTE: The 3-digit NAICS industry estimates for value added were allowed to increase (decrease) by the difference in wage data between BLS andthe Census Bureau. Estimates were simulated based on data published as part of the 2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.aConsists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software); information and data processing services; and com-puter systems design and related services.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105TABLE 7-4 Differences in Real Value-Added Growth by Manufacturing Industries and for ICT-Producing
Industries Combined, 20022002PublishedSimulated
1997 NAICS CodeIndustrySimulatedPublishedRankRank
31, 32, 33Manufacturing2.32.8
33, 321, 327Durable goods1.32.0
321Wood product manufacturing
Ð3.2Ð3.41616
327Nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing
Ð5.2Ð5.41818
331Primary metal manufacturing
1.01.598
332Fabricated metal product manufacturing
Ð2.9Ð2.91414
333Machinery manufacturing
Ð5.9Ð6.01919
334Computer and electronic product manufacturing
7.415.643
335Electrical equipment and appliance manufacturing
Ð4.4Ð4.21717
3361, 3362, 3363Motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing
15.016.022
3364, 3365, 3366, 3369Other transportation equipment manufacturingÐ1.1Ð1.51111
337Furniture and related product manufacturing
Ð3.1Ð3.21515
339Miscellaneous manufacturing
1.11.1810
31, 32Nondurable goods3.73.8
(excluding 321 and 327)311, 312Food product manufacturing
Ð1.9Ð2.51213
313, 314Textile and textile product mills
0.71.2109
315, 316Apparel manufacturing
10.111.834
322Paper manufacturing
5.25.266
323Printing and related support activities
Ð2.3Ð2.31312
324Petroleum and coal products manufacturing
31.634.611
325Chemical manufacturing
6.67.155
326Plastics and rubber products manufacturing
3.53.477
Addenda:ICT-producing industriesa2.03.6
NOTE: BEAÕs double-deflation methodology for preparing real value added for the industry accounts was simulated to incorporate different nominal value-addedlevels and then the attending impact on the real value added was examined. For this exercise, three-digit NAICS industry estimates for value added were allowed toincrease (decrease) by the difference in wage data between BLS and the Census Bureau, and new levels of nominal intermediate inputs were computed as thedifference between published gross output by industry and the simulated value added by industry. Estimates were simulated based on data published as part of the2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.aConsists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software); information and data processing services; and computer systems designand related services.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGadded for an industry. In general, the impact is greatest for industrieswith the largest differences in BLS-Census payroll levels. For example,
real value-added for computer and electronic products would double that
of the published estimates (15.6 versus 7.4 percent) if the 2002 Census
rather than BLS payroll data had been used (see Table 7-4). This impact
on the real value-added growth for computers would have resulted in a
different story for the recovery of manufacturing in 2002: the published
estimates show real growth for manufacturing increasing 2.3 percent; the
simulated estimates result in a 2.8 percent real growth. In addition, the
real value-added growth for the ICT-related industries6 would have in-creased by 3.6 percent in 2002, or 1.6 percentage points over the pub-
lished estimate, if BEA used the Census Bureau payroll data. The shifts
in the industry distribution of real value-added growth shown in Table
7-4 also affect the estimates for contributions to growth and productivity.In addition, the changing labor and capital shares for an industry thatresult from the changes in the computation in real value-added would in
turn produce changes in the weighting of each industryÕs value-added
price index. An industryÕs value-added price index represents the prices
of its primary factors of production. Thus, the industryÕs price index and
the current-dollar components of its value-added can be used to assess
the contribution of each component to the value-added price index. To
illustrate, suppose that the Census payroll data were used in place of the
BLS wages in preparing a measure of current-dollar value-added for the
oil and gas extraction industry. Compensation of employees would fall
by the amount of the difference in wage data or by approximately 50 per-
cent (see Table 7-2), thereby reducing current-dollar value-added by the
difference between the two wage measures. Thus, compensation of em-
ployees as a percentage of current-dollar value-added for the oil and gas
extraction industry would fall from approximately 19 to 13 percent, and
gross operating surplus would rise from approximately 66 to 72 percent,
thereby increasing the cost of capital.7In the annual industry accounts, value-added unit costs are computedby dividing current-dollar value-added and its components by real
(chained-dollar) value-added. The resulting quotients provide the value-6Consists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software);information and data processing services; and computer systems design and related
services.7Shares of current-dollar value-added were computed from the data in Table 7-2 and frompublished data on current-dollar value-added by industry found in the GDP-by-industry
accounts. The published current-dollar data are available on the BEA web site, at http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/gdpbyind_data.htm. Choose the GDPbyInd_VA_NAICS.xls fileunder the header Ò1998-2004 NAICS data.ÓImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING107added chain-type price indexes and the component price indexes. That is,unit cost measures provide estimates of a componentÕs share of the value-
added price index for an industry. The changes in the share for unit labor
costs, reflected by the change in compensation of employees and for unit
capital costs and embedded in the change in gross operating surplus, will
have an impact on the value-added unit costs as well.8 The reason is thatvalue-added unit costs attribute changes in the value-added unit prices to
the components of value-added in proportion to the componentÕs share of
current-dollar value-added. As a result, year-to-year changes in compo-
nent shares of current-dollar value-added result in changes in the contri-
butions of the cost components to value-added prices even if the prices do
not change.Table 7-5 presents ratios of gross output, as measured by BEA, to thedifferent measures of employment. The data for gross output come from
the preliminary 2002 benchmark input-output accounts instead of the
GDP-by-industry measures used above. Also, the Census employment
data are of a different vintage: data are as of October instead of the April
data used in the other tables. In general, the absolute value of the differ-
ence between the NIPA ratio and the Census ratio exceeds that of the
NIPA ratio and the BLS ratio. In addition, there are several industries for
which there is a sign difference. If these ratios are viewed as indicators of
industry productivity, one would tell different stories for many indus-
tries. However, comparisons of the rankings of industries by the ratio re-
veal that there are no substantive differences between them; that is, the
rankings differ by several places, but the top and the bottom of the
rankings contain similar industries.Analysis of Impact on Regional EstimatesThe choice of wage data affects the analysis of state economic activity.At the state level the range of differences in total private wages and sala-
ries in 2003 vary from BLS being 4.2 percent higher in New Mexico to 9.5
percent lower in Alaska than what is reported by the Census Bureau in its
County Business Patterns (CBP) data (see Table 7-6). Although the U.S.
level of BLS wages is lower by only 0.6 percent, or $25.1 billion, New
YorkÕs BLS data is lower than the Census data by 2.0 percent, or $6.7 bil-
lion, and the combination of Connecticut, New Jersey, and New York is
lower than the Census by $13.0 billion.The differences between the two programs have implications for8Gross operating surplus in the annual industry accounts reflects a measure of capitalinputs and net profits. For more information, see Strassner et al. (2005).Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-5Employment Data and Ratios from the BEA, Census, and
BLS, 2002BEA GrossOutput2002(billions ofNAICS CodeIndustry Namedollars)
a11Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting270.6
111-112 Farms220.4

113-115 Forestry, fishing, and related activities50.1
21Mining179.1
211Oil and gas extraction103.7

212Mining, except oil and gas48.0
213Support activities for mining27.4
22Utilities314.7

23Construction909.2
31-33Manufacturing3,839.2
321, 327, 331-335, 3361-3366, 3369, 337, 339Durable goods2,080.5
321Wood products87.5
327Nonmetallic mineral products93.0

331Primary metals138.2
332Fabricated metal products243.4
333Machinery241.2

334Computer and electronic products353.2
335Electrical equipment, appliances, and components100.5
3361-3363Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts463.6

3364-3366, 3369Other transportation equipment162.8

337Furniture and related products74.2
339Miscellaneous manufacturing122.7
311-316, 322-326Nondurable goods1,758.7

311-312Food and beverage and tobacco products562.3
313-314Textile mills and textile product mills75.2
315-316Apparel and leather and allied products47.7

322Paper products151.8
323Printing and related support activities94.7
324Petroleum and coal products212.4

325Chemical products444.8
326Plastics and rubber products169.8
42Wholesale trade866.6

44-45Retail trade1,046.0
48-49Transportation and warehousing603.6
481Air transportation98.1

482Rail transportation45.5
483Water transportation23.7
484Truck transportation202.3

485Transit and ground passenger transportation31.6
486Pipeline transportation28.0
487-488, 492Other transportation and support activities129.9

493Warehousing and storage44.5
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING109ContinuedNIPACensusBLSNIPACensusBLS
EmploymentbEmploymentcEmploymentdRatioRatioRatio
Thousands of EmployeesOutput per Employee in Dollars
1,564N/AN/A173,018N/AN/A
870N/AN/A253,333N/AN/A

694N/AN/A72,190N/AN/A
511485507350,489369,548353,411
124105121836,290991,595853,547

213197210225,352243,214228,932
175183176156,571149,964156,025
594663591529,798474,629532,493
6,9787,3746,694130,295123,306135,822
15,34914,69315,218250,127261,299252,280
9,5289,0529,454218,356229,830220,064
574540554152,439162,102157,953
520484517178,846192,311179,816

506495506273,123279,422273,160
1,5521,5731,545156,830154,736157,569
1,2291,1641,221196,257207,158197,561

1,5001,2611,497235,467280,024235,913
498492496201,807204,486202,626
1,1531,0881,152402,082425,957402,594
679608678239,764267,911240,188

607596604122,241124,467122,948
708752685173,305163,151179,020
5,8225,6405,764302,078311,803305,123

1,7601,6661,743319,489337,432322,570
487449484154,415167,639155,416
419387404113,843123,156118,037

542488541280,074311,126280,597
724719706130,801131,795134,088
1171031181,815,3852,062,6171,798,598

928846923479,310525,512481,711
845982844200,947172,862201,176
5,7115,8655,617151,742147,749154,283
15,50014,64815,01267,48471,41169,677
4,265N/A3,989141,524N/A151,329
562N/A561174,555N/A174,796

194N/AN/A234,536N/AN/A
546653438,889358,260445,757
1,3671,4351,337147,988140,955151,294
40339837278,41279,32184,946
423742666,667761,076660,673
1,1271,0501,108115,262123,756117,229
51656651486,24078,68786,524
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING51Information956.6
511Publishing industries (includes software)251.3
512Motion picture and sound recording industries81.6
515-517Broadcasting and telecommunications525.6

518-519Information and data processing services98.2
52-53eFinance, insurance, real estate, rental, and leasing3,358.0
54-56Professional and business services1,838.4

54Professional, scientific, and technical services1,052.1
5411Legal services215.7
5415Computer systems design and related services171.5

5412-5414, 5416-5419Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and664.9
technical services55Management of companies and enterprises297.8

56Administrative and waste management services488.5
561Administrative and support services435.0
562Waste management and remediation services53.5

61-62Educational services, health care, and1,310.8
social assistance61Educational services152.9

62Health care and social assistance1,157.9
621Ambulatory health care services526.8
622-623Hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities523.4

624Social assistance107.7
71-72Arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation,709.3
and food services71Arts, entertainment, and recreation175.7
711-712Performing arts, spectator sports, museums,82.3
and related activities713Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries93.4
72Accommodation and food services533.6
721Accommodation143.7

722Food services and drinking places389.9
81Other services, except government452.7
TABLE 7-5Continued
BEA GrossOutput2002(billions ofNAICS CodeIndustry Namedollars)
aaGross output data were obtained from the BEa web site at the following address: http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/i-o_benchmark_2002.htm (October 7, 2005).bData were obtained from the NIPA tables at the BEA web site at the following address:http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/nipaweb/TableView.asp#Mid (October 7, 2005).cData were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau web site at the following address: http://www.census.gov/econ/census02/data/us/US000.HTM (October 7, 2005).dData were obtained from the BLSÕ Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (Octo-ber 12, 2005).Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING111eNot all of the industry entitled ÒFunds, trusts, and other financial vehicles (525)Ó is in-cluded. The gross output for finance, insurance, and real estate includes the imputation for
owner-occupied dwellings which causes higher output to employment ratios.fThe Census Bureau data for hospitals for 2002 include government and nongovernmenthospitals. To make data comparable, government hospitals were not included.3,3813,7363,359282,934256,045284,821
9981,090961251,804230,638261,548
393303385207,634269,176211,980
1,5071,7721,534348,772296,694342,739
484572479202,893171,737204,877
7,9998,5467,724419,803392,955434,753
16,41818,64915,926111,97598,578115,434
7,1037,3026,662148,121144,084157,915
1,2791,1701,116168,647184,422193,209
1,1481,1071,144149,390154,874149,851

4,6765,0254,402142,194132,318151,059
1,6852,6051,682176,736114,306177,041
7,6308,7427,58164,02455,88164,434
7,3118,4107,26459,49951,72459,887
319332318167,712161,232168,376
16,752N/A15,35378,247N/A85,375
2,709N/A1,96156,442N/A77,985
14,04314,01013,39382,45482,65186,457
4,7584,9384,630110,719106,681113,790
6,8936,965
f6,84675,93275,14176,448
2,3922,1061,91745,02551,14256,189
12,25511,97012,00057,87859,25859,109
1,9101,8491,80291,99095,04197,528
495546494166,263150,835166,705
1,4151,3031,30866,00771,67871,415
10,34510,12110,19851,58152,72252,322
1,7931,8131,76980,14579,24781,242

8,5518,3088,43045,59746,93346,254
6,859N/A4,25366,001N/A106,443
NIPACensusBLSNIPACensusBLS

EmploymentbEmploymentcEmploymentdRatioRatioRatio
Thousands of EmployeesOutput per Employee in Dollars
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-6Census Bureau (CBP) Payroll and BLS (QCEW) Private
Wage Comparison (billions of dollars, unless otherwise noted)Yr-Yr % ChgCBP Annual Payrolla2001-2002-
20012002200320022003
Alabama45.245.547.10.73.5
Alaska8.38.48.71.23.0

Arizona60.061.164.41.85.3
Arkansas25.825.927.00.54.3
California521.8510.8520.6Ð2.11.9

Colorado71.567.867.9Ð5.20.2
Connecticut68.968.569.7Ð0.61.8
Delaware15.014.715.1Ð2.02.5

D.C.20.821.422.52.75.1
Florida189.6192.9202.41.74.9
Georgia115.9113.8116.3Ð1.92.2

Hawaii12.713.414.15.35.9
Idaho12.412.613.11.74.3
Illinois204.3197.8201.0Ð3.21.6

Indiana79.379.481.40.12.6
Iowa34.534.836.01.13.4
Kansas33.333.234.0Ð0.52.7

Kentucky42.642.543.8Ð0.12.9
Louisiana45.245.647.11.03.3
Maine14.214.414.81.22.9

Maryland74.275.078.91.15.1
Massachusetts134.7127.9127.1Ð5.0Ð0.6
Michigan142.9142.4144.0Ð0.41.1

Minnesota84.984.587.3Ð0.43.3
Mississippi22.722.823.60.23.8
Missouri74.474.175.6Ð0.42.0

Montana7.27.47.72.84.0
Nebraska20.821.723.14.46.2
Nevada27.529.331.36.46.9

New Hampshire18.518.718.80.91.0
New Jersey154.2152.4154.5Ð1.21.4
New Mexico14.815.115.81.94.9

New York343.5329.8332.6Ð4.00.9
North Carolina103.0101.8104.6Ð1.22.7
North Dakota6.46.66.91.85.3

Ohio156.9154.8157.5Ð1.31.7
Oklahoma33.433.633.60.50.0
Oregon44.143.544.3Ð1.31.9

Pennsylvania169.9169.2174.5Ð0.43.1
Rhode Island13.213.514.53.07.3
South Carolina43.844.044.60.41.4

South Dakota7.67.88.01.82.7
Tennessee70.771.373.20.82.7
Texas282.3277.8281.6Ð1.61.4

Utah26.126.226.80.42.3
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING113ContinuedQCEW Private WagesbYr-Yr % Chg20012002200320022003
44.945.646.81.62.8
7.37.67.93.83.3
62.763.165.80.64.3
25.525.926.51.92.2
518.6508.2521.1Ð2.02.5
71.668.969.1Ð3.70.3
68.366.868.0Ð2.21.9
13.713.714.20.53.5

22.122.723.62.94.0
191.0195.7204.52.44.5
116.3114.8116.4Ð1.21.3
13.313.814.53.45.5
12.812.913.20.92.4
199.2196.8198.3Ð1.20.8
78.979.681.10.91.8
34.134.635.61.42.9
33.033.133.30.20.9

43.343.845.11.12.8
44.244.745.71.12.3
14.114.414.92.23.3

73.474.977.72.13.7
130.4126.4127.6Ð3.00.9
144.0143.0145.3Ð0.71.6
82.483.185.40.82.8
22.623.023.51.71.9
73.273.774.70.71.4
7.47.78.14.14.7
20.621.021.72.03.1
29.730.332.62.27.5

19.119.119.60.02.8
146.0147.0150.00.72.0
15.615.916.52.53.6
334.6322.1325.9Ð3.71.2
101.9101.8103.1Ð0.11.2
6.36.56.82.84.9
154.1154.2156.60.11.5
32.332.232.8Ð0.31.7
44.043.744.5Ð0.81.9
167.5169.0173.40.92.6
13.013.414.23.05.9
42.542.944.00.82.5
7.57.67.92.43.5
70.571.773.91.72.9
286.6281.7284.1Ð1.70.8
25.925.726.2Ð0.61.6
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-6Continued
Yr-Yr % ChgCBP Annual Payrolla2001-2002-
20012002200320022003
Vermont7.37.47.72.13.0
Virginia102.5101.7106.1Ð0.84.3
Washington86.583.190.6Ð3.99.0

West Virginia14.514.815.22.33.0
Wisconsin74.375.378.31.44.0
Wyoming4.95.15.42.76.3

US sum3,989.13,943.24,040.9Ð1.22.5
US published3,989.13,943.24,040.9Ð1.22.5
aIn addition to private wages, the CBP payroll data cover those government employeeswho work in government hospitals, federally chartered savings institutions and creditunions, liquor stores, and wholesale liquor establishments.b The BLS data do not cover certain religious elementary and secondary schools because aSupreme Court decision exempts some of these schools from unemployment compensationtaxes. The BLS data also exclude college students (and their spouses) who are employed by
the school in which they are enrolled and student nurses and interns who are employed byhospitals as part of their training. In half of the states, the BLS data only include nonprofitTABLE 7-6 ContinuedBLS less Census Bureau% Difference
200120022003200120022003
AlabamaÐ0.30.1Ð0.3Ð0.70.2Ð0.5

AlaskaÐ1.0Ð0.8Ð0.8Ð11.9Ð9.7Ð9.5
Arizona2.72.01.54.53.32.3
ArkansasÐ0.30.0Ð0.5Ð1.20.1Ð1.9

CaliforniaÐ3.2Ð2.70.5Ð0.6Ð0.50.1
Colorado0.11.11.20.11.61.7
ConnecticutÐ0.6Ð1.7Ð1.7Ð0.9Ð2.5Ð2.4

DelawareÐ1.4Ð1.0Ð0.9Ð9.0Ð6.7Ð5.8
D.C.1.31.31.26.16.35.2
Florida1.42.72.10.71.41.1

Georgia0.31.10.10.30.90.0
Hawaii0.60.40.44.93.02.7
Idaho0.50.40.13.72.91.1

IllinoisÐ5.1Ð1.0Ð2.8Ð2.5Ð0.5Ð1.4
IndianaÐ0.40.2Ð0.4Ð0.50.3Ð0.4
IowaÐ0.4Ð0.2Ð0.4Ð1.0Ð0.7Ð1.1
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING115organizations with four or more employees during 20 weeks in a calendar year. Beginningin 2001, BLS classifies all Native American tribal data under local government; previously,commercial establishments were classified as private.SOURCES: CBP (County Business Patterns) from the Census Bureau web site: 2003 datareleased 08/05, downloaded 9/28/05. QCEW (Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages)
from flat file downloaded from BLS web site on 9/28/05. Fixed decimals.ContinuedQCEW Private WagesbYr-Yr % Chg20012002200320022003
7.57.57.70.92.3
103.2102.4106.3Ð0.83.9
82.681.883.5Ð1.02.0

15.115.215.41.01.0
73.074.276.11.72.6
5.05.25.33.23.8
3,952.23,930.84,015.8Ð0.52.2
3,952.23,930.84,015.8Ð0.52.2
State and Local Inc TaxEffective State and Local Tax BLS to
as % of Total WagesCensus Bureau Difference (millions of dollars)
200120022003200120022003

3.703.573.49Ð113Ð9

0.000.000.00000
2.802.572.56765238
4.894.684.53Ð152Ð23

6.675.215.18Ð211Ð13925
3.483.963.7224444
5.264.484.64Ð34Ð77Ð79

5.024.474.43Ð68Ð44Ð39
2.792.272.28363126
0.000.000.00000

4.784.464.4416483
5.545.264.88342119
6.604.934.8931187

3.053.173.06Ð155Ð33Ð84
4.534.334.32Ð1711Ð15
4.534.244.15Ð16Ð11Ð17
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGKansasÐ0.3Ð0.1Ð0.7Ð0.9Ð0.3Ð2.0
Kentucky0.71.31.31.83.02.9

LouisianaÐ0.9Ð0.9Ð1.4Ð2.1Ð2.0Ð3.0
MaineÐ0.10.00.1Ð0.80.20.6
MarylandÐ0.8Ð0.1Ð1.2Ð1.1Ð0.2Ð1.5

MassachusettsÐ4.3Ð1.50.5Ð3.2Ð1.20.4
Michigan1.00.51.30.70.40.9
MinnesotaÐ2.4Ð1.5Ð1.9Ð2.9Ð1.7Ð2.2

MississippiÐ0.10.2Ð0.2Ð0.41.0Ð0.8
MissouriÐ1.3Ð0.4Ð0.9Ð1.7Ð0.6Ð1.2
Montana0.20.30.32.43.74.3

NebraskaÐ0.2Ð0.7Ð1.4Ð1.0Ð3.3Ð6.1
Nevada2.11.01.27.73.44.0
New Hampshire0.60.40.83.22.34.1

New JerseyÐ8.3Ð5.4Ð4.5Ð5.4Ð3.5Ð2.9
New Mexico0.70.80.74.95.54.2
New YorkÐ8.9Ð7.7Ð6.7Ð2.6Ð2.3Ð2.0

North CarolinaÐ1.10.0Ð1.5Ð1.10.0Ð1.4
North DakotaÐ0.10.0Ð0.1Ð1.4Ð0.4Ð0.9
OhioÐ2.8Ð0.6Ð0.9Ð1.8Ð0.4Ð0.6

OklahomaÐ1.1Ð1.3Ð0.8Ð3.2Ð3.9Ð2.3
OregonÐ0.10.10.1Ð0.20.30.3
PennsylvaniaÐ2.3Ð0.2Ð1.1Ð1.4Ð0.1Ð0.6

Rhode IslandÐ0.1Ð0.1Ð0.3Ð1.0Ð0.9Ð2.2
South CarolinaÐ1.3Ð1.1Ð0.6Ð3.0Ð2.5Ð1.4
South DakotaÐ0.1Ð0.1Ð0.1Ð1.9Ð1.4Ð0.6

TennesseeÐ0.20.50.6Ð0.30.70.9
Texas4.33.92.51.51.40.9
UtahÐ0.2Ð0.4Ð0.6Ð0.7Ð1.6Ð2.4

Vermont0.20.10.12.61.50.8
Virginia0.70.70.30.70.70.3
WashingtonÐ3.9Ð1.3Ð7.1Ð4.5Ð1.6Ð7.9

West Virginia0.60.40.14.12.80.9
WisconsinÐ1.3Ð1.1Ð2.2Ð1.8Ð1.5Ð2.8
Wyoming0.10.10.01.52.0Ð0.5

US sumÐ36.9Ð12.4Ð25.1Ð0.9Ð0.3Ð0.6
US publishedÐ36.9Ð12.4Ð25.1Ð0.9Ð0.3Ð0.6
TABLE 7-6 ContinuedBLS less Census Bureau% Difference
200120022003200120022003
SOURCES: CBP (County Business Patterns) from Census Bureau web site: 2003 data re-leased 08/05, downloaded 9/28/05. QCEW (Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages)from flat file downloaded from BLS web site on 9/28/05. Fixed decimals.
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING1174.724.324.19Ð14Ð4Ð29
6.246.206.21477980

3.193.163.12Ð30Ð29Ð44
6.545.915.75Ð725
7.817.427.35Ð65Ð11Ð88

6.295.125.46Ð269Ð7625
4.143.753.57422047
5.055.445.25Ð123Ð79Ð101

3.293.183.16Ð38Ð6
4.664.254.17Ð59Ð19Ð37
5.324.794.8391316

4.574.163.97Ð10Ð30Ð56
0.000.000.00000
0.350.300.22212

4.443.753.67Ð367Ð202Ð166
3.943.993.80293326
7.936.966.96Ð709Ð536Ð468

5.895.595.42Ð67Ð3Ð81
2.472.202.12Ð2Ð1Ð1
6.286.305.97Ð175Ð37Ð54

5.225.004.98Ð55Ð66Ð38
7.317.237.47Ð799
4.904.584.54Ð115Ð10Ð49

5.464.884.65Ð7Ð6Ð15
4.354.144.09Ð57Ð46Ð25
0.000.000.00000

0.230.160.13011
0.000.000.00000
5.144.644.60Ð9Ð20Ð29

4.664.784.26953
5.614.654.91383213
0.000.000.00000

5.095.145.0330227
5.805.395.44Ð77Ð60Ð119
0.000.000.00000

ÑÑÑÐ2,353Ð1,084Ð1,276
ÑÑÑÑÑÑ
State and Local Inc TaxEffective State and Local Tax BLS to
as % of Total WagesCensus Bureau Difference (millions of dollars)
200120022003200120022003
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGpublic policy and business administration. Specifically, regional data af-fect federal government fund allocations to states, analysis of state gov-
ernment tax efforts, state and local government tax and revenue planning,
business analyses of the size of markets, and the extent of the safety net at
the state level. For example, the Medicaid program uses BEA per capita
personal income in the Federal Medicaid Assistance Percentage formula
to determine the federal share of payments for each state. Since wages
and salaries and wage-related components account for about two-thirds
of personal income, the level of differences among the statesÑvarying
from $2.5 billion in Texas to Ð$7.1 billion in Washington for 2003Ñwould
have a significant impact on the federal share of Medicaid payments for
each state.In New York, the $1.2 billion dollar difference in growth in wages andsalaries from 2001 to 2002 between BLS and the Census Bureau series,
shown in Table 7-6, would amount to about a $173 million difference in
projected state and local government income taxes received. New Jersey
would have a $165 million projected difference in income taxes, and Mas-
sachusetts would have a $193 million projected difference.If the difference between BLS and the Census Bureau reflects cover-age differences, then, for example, the 10.4 percent average difference in
Alaska for the years 2001 through 2003 would reflect the percentage of the
workforce that is not covered by unemployment insurance. This informa-
tion would be very useful to those officials interested in the extent of the
unemployment insurance safety net among the states.Finally, the differences may also reflect changes in coverage betweenthe programs. For example, beginning in 2004, the Washington State un-
employment insurance program no longer covers exercised stock options
in its definition of covered wages and salaries, whereas the Census Bu-
reau wages continue to cover exercised stock options for all states. Thus
an increase in the differences between the two programs is expected be-
ginning in 2004. Access to microdata in the programs would allow identi-
fication of the amount of the exercised stock options in the state.Regional and Industry Influences Combined:County Business Patterns by Industry Compared withBLS QCEW DataBEA uses BLS QCEW data in its initial estimates of wages, since it isthe most comprehensive and earliest available data. This choice is made
because the CBP data become available later. These data, however, are
used as a check on the initial estimates as well as a data source for certain
areas that are not covered by QCEW. Although the two data series have a
large amount of overlap, at the NAICS sector (two-digit) level of wageImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING119detail, CBP data and QCEW data can show different trends for certainindustries. In Table 7-7, the mean absolute difference in average annual
growth between 1998 and 2002 across industries is 0.9 percentage points.
Table 7-8 shows larger variations across industries with respect to one-
year growth rates: mean absolute differences in growth rates are 1.0, 2.1,
2.0, and 1.2 percentage points for 1999 through 2002, respectively.9For individual industries, there is a considerable difference in growthrates as well. Between 1998 and 2002 the absolute difference in
growth rates can vary as much as 2.2 percentage points, as is the case for
the information sector (51), and as little as 0.2 percentage points, as in the
health care and social assistance sector (62). One-year growth rates show
larger differences. In 2002 there was a 5.6 percentage point difference in
growth for the administrative, support, waste management, and
remediation services sector (56), and in 2001 there was a 6.5 percentage
point difference for the arts, entertainment, and recreation sector (71). In
2000, there was a 9.0 percentage point difference in the growth rate for the
information sector (51) and a 6.7 percentage point difference for the for-
estry, fishing, hunting, and agriculture support sector (11). In the latter
case, CBP data show a decline of 2.7 percent, while QCEW data show an
increase of 4.0 percent.Employment Differences and BEA International AccountsBEA collects data on the activity of multinational firms at theenterprise level. In the early 1990s a study was conducted to compile
establishment-based data for foreign-owned establishments in the United
States, the results of which are included in Foreign Direct Investment in theUnited States: Establishment Data for 1987. For this study, BEA shared itsconfidential enterprise-level data with BLS and the Census Bureau so
that each could determine the relevant set of establishments. There was
no interaction between the Census Bureau and BLS in the compilation of
each list. As shown in Table 7-9, BLS identified 3 percent more establish-
ments for all industries than the Census Bureau, and the corresponding
BLS employment level is 4 percent less than the corresponding Census9All of the QCEW data in Table 7-7 are based on the private sector in order to better matchthe survey population of the CBP. In addition, it should be noted that the 2001 growth ratesare based on 2000 levels that are backcasted for QCEW; that is, all QCEW data prior to 2001
are backcasted for NAICS. For a description of the backcasting procedure, see Morisi (2003).Many of the larger differences between the data series during the period of backcasting arein services sectors.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-7Private Annual Payroll DataÑCensus Bureau (CBP) and BLS
(QCEW): LevelsNAICS1998
CodeIndustry Code DescriptionCBPQCEW$ Diff.% Diff.
Total3,309.43,338.729.30.9
11Forestry, fishing, hunting, and4.721.516.8362.0
agric. support21Mining21.929.57.534.3
22Utilities38.134.5Ð3.6Ð9.4

23Construction198.5202.94.42.2
31Manufacturing607.3678.971.611.8
42Wholesale trade233.9238.54.62.0

44Retail trade260.3294.334.013.1
48Transportation and warehousing108.6128.720.218.6
51Information146.8160.113.29.0

52Finance and insurance290.0279.2Ð10.8Ð3.7
53Real estate, rental, and leasing49.955.85.911.9
54Professional, scientific, and technical services277.6309.131.411.3

55Management of companies and enterprises175.6105.4Ð70.3Ð40.0
56Admin, support, waste management,163.7152.2Ð11.5Ð7.0
remediation services61Educational services52.347.7Ð4.6Ð8.8
62Health care and social assistance395.5358.3Ð37.2Ð9.4
71Arts, entertainment, and recreation36.037.91.85.1

72Accommodation and food services109.6117.68.07.3
81Other services (except public administration)96.082.3Ð13.7Ð14.2
Mean (excluding Total and 11)1.9
Bureau level. However, at the individual industry levels, the differencescan be substantial. The average percentage difference in the number of
establishments (fifth column in the table), without regard to direction of
the difference, is 24 percent and the corresponding average difference in
employment is 7.7 percent. Inasmuch as the table reflects data classified
under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system, the movement
to NAICS is likely to have affected these estimates. For example, under
the SIC system, auxiliaries in manufacturing (mainly head offices) were
included in the manufacturing sector as a separate industry, and while
the Census Bureau followed that classification, BLS dispersed the auxil-
iaries into the other manufacturing industries. Under NAICS, auxiliaries
are still separately identified, but they are now placed in a sector entitledImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING121ÒManagement of Companies and EnterprisesÓ; thus, they are no longerin the sector of the establishments that they serve. Indeed, one of the
major differences in the number of manufacturing establishments that
can be found in the 1997 economic census between the SIC system and
NAICS is due to the different treatment of auxiliary establishments.A more recent study examined differences in establishments and em-ployment in the area of research and development (R&D) performed by
U.S. firms. The NSF through the Census Bureau collects data on the R&Dexpenditures of U.S. firms. BEA collects data on the R&D expenditures of
U.S. and foreign multinational companies. The BEA/Census Bureau/NSF
R&D link project was a study to determine whether an integrated data set
on U.S. R&D performance and funding could be created by linking the

Census Bureau data on the R&D activity of all U.S. companies with BEA1999CBPQCEW$ Diff.% Diff.
3,554.73,594.740.11.1
4.822.317.5363.6
21.028.17.133.8
39.435.5Ð3.9Ð9.8
219.1224.25.12.3
625.5702.476.912.3
250.0255.65.62.2

281.9314.332.411.5
116.7137.721.018.0
170.3186.215.99.4

313.2303.0Ð10.3Ð3.3
54.159.45.39.9
311.2362.551.316.5

192.4113.3Ð79.1Ð41.1
183.1167.1Ð16.0Ð8.7
56.951.2Ð5.7Ð10.0
409.2372.1Ð37.1Ð9.1
39.441.01.64.0
116.9125.78.87.5
102.086.9Ð15.1Ð14.8
1.7ContinuedImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-7Continued
NAICS2000
CodeIndustry Code DescriptionCBPQCEW$ dif.% dif.
Total3,879.43,889.09.60.2
11Forestry, fishing, hunting, and agric. support4.723.218.5395.7

21Mining22.129.77.634.3
22Utilities40.737.9Ð2.7Ð6.7
23Construction239.9245.85.92.4

31Manufacturing644.0743.899.815.5
42Wholesale trade270.1276.86.72.5
44Retail trade302.6335.833.211.0

48Transportation and warehousing125.6147.221.617.2
51Information209.4212.32.91.4
52Finance and insurance346.8333.8Ð13.0Ð3.7

53Real estate, rental, and leasing59.264.45.28.8
54Professional, scientific, andtechnical services362.0395.433.49.2
55Management of companies and enterprises211.4124.0Ð87.4Ð41.4

56Admin, support, waste management,
remediation services210.3185.4Ð24.9Ð11.8
61Educational services61.955.6Ð6.4Ð10.3

62Health care and social assistance431.4394.7Ð36.8Ð8.5
71Arts, entertainment and recreation43.245.11.94.4
72Accommodation and food services125.6134.28.66.9

81Other services (except public administration)109.992.7Ð17.2Ð15.6
Mean (excluding Total and 11)0.9
NOTE: BLS QCEW data prior to 2001 have been backcasted to NAICS 2002 using NAICSreports from employers in the first quarter of 2001. Data for 2001 and 2002 also use NAICS2002. CBP data are based on NAICS 1997.data. This project was conducted under the authority of the InternationalInvestment and Trade Act and CIPSEA. No Title 26 data were used in the
linking operation or subsequent tabulations or reports for this study; nei-
ther BEA nor the Census Bureau data sets used for the project containedsuch data, as all original FTI were replaced by respondent data for the
Census Bureau surveys being linked. The Census Bureau informed theIRS of the project to alleviate any questions or concerns the IRS might
have.The project demonstrated that it is feasible to link the Census Bureauand BEA survey data, and that by linking the data an integrated data set
on the domestic and international dimensions of R&D can be created.
Table 7-10 compares the NSF data with the BEA data for U.S. parent com-
panies and therefore examines only a subset of U.S. firmsÑU.S. affiliates
of foreign companies were not included. Despite the smaller BEA uni-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING123SOURCES: Census Web site (5/23/05): http://censtats. census.gov/cgi-bin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl; and BLS Web site (5/24/05):  ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/.
verse, the table shows that in some industries BEA data indicate afar higher level of R&D expenditures than that for all U.S. firmsÑ
pharmaceuticals and medicines, for example. At the micro level, there
were 11 cases in which the BEA and Census data for total R&D spending
for the matched U.S. parent companies differed by more than $500 mil-
lion. There is a substantial difference in the collected data for manufac-
turing and nonmanufacturing. The substantially lower number for non-
manufacturing may result from the fact that R&D expenditures for
nonmanufacturing firms are relatively more difficult to define and iden-
tify; so this area is more likely to be affected by differences in treatment.The study also demonstrated some of the main benefits of data shar-ingÑin the improvement of sample frames and the quality of reported
data. For example, as a result of the project, the Census Bureau added
over 500 companies to the sample for the Survey of Industrial Research20012002
CBPQCEW$ dif.% dif.CBPQCEW$ dif.% dif.
3,989.13,952.2Ð36.9Ð0.93,943.23,930.8Ð12.4Ð0.3
4.823.618.8393.25.024.119.2385.0
25.031.96.927.724.030.66.627.5
41.939.3Ð2.6Ð6.241.839.9Ð1.9Ð4.7
247.2260.213.05.2247.3260.813.55.5

617.7704.186.414.0580.4670.790.315.6
275.9279.63.71.3262.5276.614.15.4
314.8344.129.39.3320.7348.928.28.8

129.5149.820.315.6127.3146.919.615.4
207.1205.8Ð1.3Ð0.7188.1188.80.70.4
373.6359.4Ð14.2Ð3.8372.7356.4Ð16.3Ð4.4
64.066.92.94.665.268.83.65.5
374.4403.729.37.8368.8390.521.75.9
213.1118.4Ð94.8Ð44.5204.8117.5Ð87.3Ð42.6
221.4189.1Ð32.3Ð14.6212.2191.8Ð20.4Ð9.6
67.160.4Ð6.7Ð10.072.064.7Ð7.3Ð10.1
465.7425.5Ð40.3Ð8.6499.2456.0Ð43.1Ð8.6
46.145.2Ð0.9Ð2.047.747.1Ð0.7Ð1.4
128.6138.19.57.4131.1142.211.18.5

115.297.7Ð17.5Ð15.2118.9101.0Ð17.9Ð15.1
Ð0.70.1
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-8 Private Annual Payroll DataÑCensus Bureau (CBP) and
BLS (QCEW): GrowthGrowth Rate (%)1999NAICSAb.CodeIndustry Code DescriptionCBPQCEWDiff.Diff.
Total7.47.70.30.3
11Forestry, fishing, hunting, and
agric. support3.43.80.40.4
21MiningÐ4.4Ð4.7Ð0.30.3

22Utilities3.32.8Ð0.50.5
23Construction10.410.50.10.1
31Manufacturing3.03.50.50.5

42Wholesale trade6.97.20.30.3
44Retail trade8.36.8Ð1.51.5
48Transportation and warehousing7.56.9Ð0.50.5

51Information16.016.30.40.4
52Finance and insurance8.08.50.50.5
53Real estate, rental, and leasing8.46.5Ð2.02.0

54Professional, scientific, and technical services12.117.35.25.2
55Management of companies and enterprises9.57.5Ð2.02.0
56Admin, support, waste management,
remediation services11.99.8Ð2.02.0
61Educational services8.87.4Ð1.41.4
62Health care and social assistance3.53.90.40.4

71Arts, entertainment, and recreation9.48.2Ð1.11.1
72Accommodation and food services6.76.90.20.2
81Other services (except public administration)6.25.5Ð0.70.7
MinimumÐ2.00.1
MeanÐ0.21.0

Maximum5.25.2
and Development. For more information, see a report on the findings ofthe projectÑÒResearch and Development Link Project: Final ReportÓ at
www.bea.gov/bea/di/FinalReportpublic.pdf.How Data Sharing Could HelpA large part of BEAÕs job is adjusting the various data for differencesin timing, concepts, and definitions. However, this is often difficult be-
cause, for the most part, BEA does not have access to the underlyingImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING125microdata. If armed with full data-sharing capability, BEA, BLS, and theCensus Bureau could explore and resolve differences in the activities of
major companies or in their classification to various industries and re-
gions. The agencies could also compare data to investigate and resolve
persistent differences, such as the reporting of bonuses and stock op-
tions, the capitalization of computer investment, the impact of differences
in timing, and the differences in company practices with respect to the
writing-down of inventories or to the treatment of pensions and other
fringe benefits.2000CBPQCEWDiff.Ab. Diff.
9.18.2Ð0.90.9
Ð2.74.06.76.7
5.35.70.40.4

3.36.93.63.6
9.59.60.10.1
2.95.92.92.9

8.08.30.20.2
7.36.8Ð0.50.5
7.66.9Ð0.70.7
23.014.0Ð9.09.0
10.710.2Ð0.50.5
9.58.4Ð1.11.1
16.39.1Ð7.27.2
9.99.4Ð0.40.4
14.811.0Ð3.93.9
8.98.5Ð0.30.3
5.46.10.60.6

9.610.10.40.4
7.46.8Ð0.60.6
7.86.7Ð1.01.0
Ð9.00.1
Ð0.62.1
6.79.0
ContinuedImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 7-8 Continued
Growth Rate (%)2001NAICSAb.CodeIndustry Code DescriptionCBPQCEWDiff.Diff.
Total2.81.6Ð1.21.2
11Forestry, fishing, hunting, and
agric. support2.31.8Ð0.50.5
21Mining13.27.7Ð5.65.6
22Utilities3.23.70.50.5
23Construction3.05.92.82.8

31ManufacturingÐ4.1Ð5.3Ð1.31.3
42Wholesale trade2.11.0Ð1.11.1
44Retail trade4.02.5Ð1.61.6

48Transportation and warehousing3.11.8Ð1.31.3
-51Information1.1Ð3.1Ð2.02.0
52Finance and insurance7.77.7Ð0.10.1

53Real estate, rental, and leasing8.13.9Ð4.24.2
54Professional, scientific, and technical services3.42.1Ð1.31.3
55Management of companies and enterprises0.8Ð4.5Ð5.45.4

56Admin, support, waste management,
remediation services5.32.0Ð3.33.3
61Educational services8.48.70.40.4

62Health care and social assistance7.97.8Ð0.10.1
71Arts, entertainment, and recreation6.80.3Ð6.56.5
72Accommodation and food services2.42.90.50.5

81Other services (except public administration)4.95.30.50.5
MinimumÐ6.50.1

MeanÐ1.52.0
Maximum2.86.5
The limited access also affects BEAÕs ability to study observed anoma-lies in the Census Bureau data. The following are some examples of obser-vations that BEA would like to study.¥There are substantial differences in the reported payrolls from theCensus Bureau and BLS, by area. For example, in Washington state, be-
tween 1999 and 2000, the Census Bureau reports an 11.5 percent increase
(more than $9 billion) while BLS reports a 6.2 percent increase ($5 billion).
There are many possible reasons for the discrepancy, and data sharingNOTE: BLS QCEW data prior to 2001 have been backcasted to NAICS 2002 using NAICSreports from employers in the first quarter of 2001. Data for 2001 and 2002 also use NAICS2002. CBP data are based on NAICS 1997.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING127with access to tax data would help get at the cause. For example, onesource of the difference could be differences in the recording of stock op-
tions. By knowing the companies in the state, it would be possible to check
with firm reports about reported stock options and thereby reconcile any
difference. Such huge differences in the payroll numbers affect the esti-
mation of GDI.¥BEA obtains monthly data from the Census Bureau for the manu-facturing sector based on the M3 (ManufacturersÕ Shipments, Inventories
and Orders) survey. However, because participation in this survey is vol-20021998-2002
CBPQCEWDiff.Ab. Diff.CBPQCEWDiff.Ab. Diff.
Ð1.2Ð0.50.60.64.54.2Ð0.30.3
3.92.2Ð1.71.71.72.91.21.2
Ð4.2Ð4.3Ð0.10.12.20.9Ð1.31.3
Ð0.21.41.71.72.43.71.31.3
0.00.30.20.25.66.50.80.8
Ð6.0Ð4.71.31.3Ð1.1Ð0.30.80.8
Ð4.8Ð1.13.83.82.93.80.80.8
1.91.4Ð0.50.55.44.3Ð1.01.0
Ð1.7Ð1.9Ð0.20.24.03.4Ð0.70.7
Ð9.2Ð8.30.90.96.44.2Ð2.22.2
Ð0.2Ð0.8Ð0.60.66.56.3Ð0.20.2
1.92.80.90.96.95.4Ð1.61.6
Ð1.5Ð3.3Ð1.81.87.46.0Ð1.31.3
Ð3.9Ð0.83.23.23.92.7Ð1.21.2
Ð4.21.45.65.66.76.0Ð0.70.7
7.27.1Ð0.10.18.37.9Ð0.40.4

7.27.20.00.06.06.20.20.2
3.44.00.60.67.35.6Ð1.71.7
1.93.01.11.14.64.90.30.3

3.23.40.20.25.55.2Ð0.30.3
Ð1.80.0Ð2.20.2
0.71.2Ð0.40.9
5.65.61.32.2
SOURCES: Census Bureau web site (5/23/05): http://censtats. census.gov/cgi-bin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl and BLS Web site (5/24/05): ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128TABLE 7-9Comparison of the Census Bureau and BLS Data for Foreign-Owned Establishments, 1992
CensusBLS Value as Percentage of
BureauBLSCensus Bureau Value
NumberNumberNumberNumberNumberNumber

ofofof Reportingofofof
EstablishmentsEmployeesUnitsEmployeesEstablishmentsEmployees
All industries102,9584,944,157106,0414,747,63710396

Agricultural services, forestry,1395,8141394,26510073
and fishingaMining120,7821,640102,81410285

Construction3,3222,30590,86618997
Manufacturing812,004,94713,0761,930,13510296
Transportation and public utilitiesb231,6383,792222,9999796
Wholesale trade91513,01234,999491,57818696
Retail trade3,19026,756853,15871100

Finance, insurance, and real estate401,0189,558360,2878390
Services2,77512,899676,0918594
Otherc91,1165693,137n.m.n.m.
NOTE: n.m. = not meaningful.aExcludes agricultural production of crops and livestock.bThe Census Bureau data exclude railroad transportation.cFor the Census Bureau: consists of private education and noncommerical establishments; for BLS: consists of nonclassifiable establishments.SOURCES: The Census Bureau data: Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for 1992 available on BEAÕs Web site athttp://www.bea.gov/bea/ai1.htm#BEACENS. BLS data: BLS news release: ÒEmployment and Wages in Foreign-Owned Businesses in the UnitedStates, Fourth Quarter 1992,Ó October 1996.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING129TABLE 7-10Comparison of NSF R&D Expenditures by All U.S.
Companies with BEA R&D Expenditures by U.S. Parent Companies,2001 (millions of dollars or percentage)ParentNSF:BEA: U.S.Companies as

All U.S.ParentPercentage of all
CompaniesCompaniesU.S. Companies
All industries198,505143,01772
Manufacturing120,705115,11895
Food1,81991450
Beverage and tobacco products152469309

Textiles, apparel, and leather(D)125n.a.
Wood products182(D)n.a.
Paper, printing and support(D)(D)n.a.
activitiesPetroleum and coal products(D)1,002n.a.
Chemicals17,89231,927178
Basic chemicals1,8761,74293
Resin, synthetic rubber,(D)2,972n.a.
fibers, and filamentPharmaceuticals and medicines10,13723,169229
Other chemicals(D)4,045n.a.
Plastics and rubber products(D)929n.a.

Nonmetallic mineral products99033934
Primary metals485484100
Fabricated metal products1,59955435

Machinery6,4048,561134
Computer and electronic products47,07938,35681
Computers and peripheral(D)7,727n.a.
equipmentCommunications equipment15,50714,52694
Semiconductor and otherelectronic components14,35811,11477
Navigational, measuring,12,9474,15832
electromedical, and control
instrumentsOther computer and electronic(D)832n.a.
productsElectrical equipment, appliances,4,9802,00840
and componentsTransportation equipment25,96525,14797
Motor vehicles, trailers, and parts(D)18,183n.a.
Other(D)6,964n.a.
Furniture and related products30112843

Miscellaneous manufacturing6,6062,57039
Nonmanufacturing77,79927,89936
Mining, extraction, and(D)411n.a.
support activitiesUtilities1335944
ContinuedImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGConstruction320(D)n.a.
Trade24,372(D)n.a.

Transportation and warehousing1,848121
Information(D)9,514n.a.
Publishing13,7606,45247
Newspaper, periodical,book, and database649(D)n.a.
Software13,111(D)n.a.
Broadcasting andtelecommunications(D)796n.a.
Telecommunications(D)782n.a.

Other(D)14n.a.
Other information(D)2,266n.a.
Finance, insurance, and real estate(D)624n.a.

Professional, scientific, and27,70410,34837
technical servicesArchitectural, engineering,3,386181
and related servicesComputer systems design9,1548,92998
and related servicesOther15,1641,4019
NOTES: (D) = suppressed to avoid disclosure of data of individual companies; n.a. = notavailable.SOURCES: R&D spending by all U.S. companies: Research and Development in Industry: 2001available on the NSF web site at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf05305/htmstart.htm;R&D spending by U.S. parent companies: U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Operations of U.S.Parent Companies and Their Foreign Affiliates, Revised 2001 Estimates available on the
BEAÕs web site at http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai/iidguide.htm#link12b.TABLE 7-10Continued
ParentNSF:BEA: U.S.Companies as

All U.S.ParentPercentage of all
CompaniesCompaniesU.S. Companies
untary and some firms decide not to participate, BEA does not know theextent of participation. A recent example is the decision by a major pro-
ducer of semiconductors to terminate its participation, which represented
a huge erosion in the representativeness of the surveys. The Annual Sur-
vey of Manufacturers, however, is mandatory. Thus BEA must wait until
the annual data are available before it can check the estimates based on
the monthly data. If BEA had access to the M3 data, then it could identify
the firms responsible for missing data and possibly estimate the missing
information from publicly available sources such as company reports.
Publicly available sales data from company reports could aid in the esti-
mation of missing shipment data from a company that did not provideImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA SHARING131such information in the M3 survey. The ability to estimate such missinginformation would serve to reduce revisions to GDP.¥Relatedly, the M3 surveys provide inventories data to BEA, andBEA does not always know whether a company has reported an inven-
tory adjustment to the Census Bureau in the same way that the company
has entered it on its financial accounts. A few years ago the press reported
a major write-down of inventory by a major producer of information tech-
nology equipment. Without knowing how the firm entered the write-
down in its Census Bureau report, BEA had no way of checking if the
inventory adjustment was accurately reflected both on the product side of
the national accounts (inventories is a component of investment) and on
the income side (the valuation of inventories affects corporate profits). In
fact, there was a large adjustment to inventories.How Data Sharing Would Help Cope with DisastersThe massive destruction wrought by Hurricane Katrina is having asignificant impact on the ability of the statistical agencies to collect eco-
nomic data in the affected regions. As a result of the disappearance of
sample units, estimates of retail trade, construction, employment and
wages, and other components of the principal economic indicators will
contain many imputations. Data sharing would allow a combining of data
that would enable the statistical agencies to better impute missing values.
For example, in the absence of complete business list reconciliation be-
tween the Census Bureau and BLS, data sharing would allow one of the
agencies to find alternative establishments that might serve as proxies for
missing establishments and thereby provide a straightforward imputa-
tion. In addition, the Census Bureau sales values might be used by BLS to
impute prices for its price indexes. The ability to share data would also
enable the statistical agencies to examine each otherÕs establishment-level
imputations to see if they suit an agencyÕs needs. For example, the BEA
regional program would have access to the BLS establishment imputa-
tions for QCEW to see if their needs are met. In short, data sharing would
allow the statistical agencies to economize resources to efficiently handle
disruptions to the usual production of economic statistics.REFERENCESMorisi, T.2003Recent changes in the National Current Employment Statistics Survey. 
MonthlyLabor Review June.Moyer, B.C., M.A. Planting, M. Fahim-Nader, and S.K.S. Lum2004Preview of the comprehensive revision of the annual industry accounts. 
Survey ofCurrent Business 84(March):38-51.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGNational Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics2005Research and Development in Industry: 2001. (NSF #05-305.) Arlington, VA: NationalScience Foundation. Available: http://nsf.gov/statistics/nsf05305/front.htm [ac-cessed May 2006].Strassner, E.H., G.W. Medeiros, and G.M. Smith2005Annual industry accounts: Introducing KLEMS input estimates for 1997-2003.
Survey of Current Business 85(September):34.U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, International Economic Accounts2005aForeign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for 1992. (Censusdata.) Available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai1.htm#BEACENS [accessed May2006].2005bU.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Operations of U.S. Parent Companies and Their ForeignAffiliates, Revised 2001. 
Available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai/iidguide.htm#
link12b [accessed May 2006].U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and U.S. Census Bureau1992Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for 1987. Washing-ton, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.U.S. Census Bureau2003County Business Patterns, NAICS. Available: http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl [accessed May 2006].U.S. Census Bureau, Bureau of Economic Analysis, and National Science FoundationDivision of Science Resources Statistics2005Statistics Research and Development Data Link Project: Final Report. Available: http:
//www.bea.gov/bea/di/FinalReportpublic.pdf [accessed May 2006].U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics1996Employment and Wages in Foreign-Owned Businesses in the United States, Fourth Quar-ter 1992. (News release.) Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau ofLabor Statistics.2002Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages Program Data. Available: ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/ [accessed May 2006].Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1338Using Tax Return Data to Improve
Estimates of Corporate Profits
George A. PleskoUniversity of Connecticut School of BusinessThis chapter describes the role of tax and financial accounting infor-mation in the estimation of corporate profits, summarizes the current
dual-reporting requirement that publicly traded firms are subject to, and
describes how a broader use of tax return information, coupled with a
greater use of financial accounting information, might increase the accu-
racy of preliminary national income estimates of corporate profits.MEASURING CORPORATE INCOMEFor the purposes of this volume, there are two relevant measuresavailable to assess the profitability of corporations. The first, based on the
rules for financial reporting (generally referred to as Òbook incomeÓ), pro-
vides a measure of income to the users of financial statement information.
The users, under the concepts of financial accounting for publicly traded
corporations, are investors, creditors, and any other party needing infor-
mation to make a decision about whether or not to engage in a business
relationship with a firm, but not necessarily able to compel the firm to
provide the information.It is worth noting that foundations of financial accounting and re-porting do not explicitly include tax authorities as a user. The reason for
this exclusion is that financial accounting disclosures are intended to pro-

vide information to those who do not otherwise have the ability to de-
mand information. The separation of audiences, and rules, leads to the
second measure of corporate income, based on the Internal Revenue
Code. In contrast to the rules of financial reporting, tax reporting removesImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGmuch of the discretion for the application of rules that are built into fi-nancial reporting.The differences between the amount of income reported to sharehold-ers and the amounts reported to tax authorities, known as book-tax differ-
ences, have generated attention both in the press and in policy. However,
once a dual measurement system is in place, income differences are a natu-
ral occurrence, and the key issue becomes understanding the causes and
consequences of the differences. Book-tax differences have been a char-
acteristic of the U.S. reporting system since the inception of the corporate
income tax, generating academic interest from the start. For example,
Smith and Butters (1949) provide an analysis of book-tax differences for a
small sample of corporations active during the 1930s.SOURCES OF BOOK-TAX DIFFERENCESBook-tax differences occur because the amount of income reported asearned is based on different concepts and rules under each reporting sys-
tem. Since the target audience of financial statements is investors and oth-
ers who need information to make decisions about a company, including
whether to invest in the companyÕs equity or debt, companies that issue
publicly traded equity or debt securities are required by the Securities
and Exchange Commission to file audited financial statements. Such state-
ments must follow generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP),
which include an adherence to pronouncements of the Financial Account-
ing Standards Board (FASB) and other accounting standards.Tax accounting is designed to administer the U.S. tax laws, with theInternal Revenue Service (IRS) the primary audience for tax filings. In
contrast to GAAP, tax rules can change frequently, depending on legisla-
tive initiatives, and are not necessarily designed to present as consistent a
definition of income over time as are financial accounting rules.An important element of financial accounting is the amount of discre-tion left to the corporation in implementing GAAP in their business. For
example, in determining the useful life and depreciation pattern of a capi-
tal asset, depreciation schedules of the same asset can vary by company
and by usage and usually follow a straight-line pattern. Tax depreciation
is determined by the Internal Revenue Code and leaves less discretion to
the company. The lack of discretion in the tax code is intended to lead to
more uniform application of the tax system.Differences between tax and financial measures of income can arisefrom two types of measurement differences in the accounting systems:
temporary and permanent. Temporary (timing) differences occur when
both tax and financial reporting recognize the same total amount of in-
come or expense, but they do so either over different time periods or inImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING TAX RETURN DATA TO IMPROVE ESTIMATES135different patterns over the same period. Timing differences arise not onlyfrom the different reporting rules under each system, but also because
GAAP allows managers greater discretion in determining the amounts of
income and expense in each period than does the tax system.Permanent differences in the measures of income arise when a par-ticular item of income or expense is recognized under one system but not
the other. For example, tax-exempt interest on municipal bonds is in-
cluded in book income but not in the determination of tax net income.Both temporary and permanent differences are reported in corpora-tionsÕ financial statements. Under FASBÕs Statement of Financial Account-
ing Standards Number 109, corporations report a total amount of tax li-
ability based on current-year financial reporting income, delineating the
portion currently owed to the government from that which is deferred
due to differences in income and expense recognition between the two
methods. If the deferred portion is positive, a deferred tax liability is cre-
ated, representing the amount of taxes not paid on financial statement
income during this period because of temporary differences reducing tax-
able income below book income. Such is usually the case in the short term
with depreciation, as more deductions are taken for tax purposes during
the early years of an assetÕs life than are recognized as expenses for book
purposes. The deferred tax liability associated with the asset on a
corporationÕs financial statements represent the (undiscounted) amount
of tax to be paid in the future relative to future book earnings when the
tax depreciation deductions fall below the book depreciation expense. In
contrast to deferred tax liabilities, deferred tax assets are created when
more taxes are paid than would be paid if financial reporting income were
used to base tax liability, and they represent a financial claim on the gov-
ernment for taxes paid ahead of time relative to financial reporting.Permanent differences, such as the effect of tax-exempt interest, neverreverse and therefore do not create deferred tax assets or liabilities. Cor-
porations account for permanent differences in a separate financial dis-
closure in the tax footnote of their financial statements.Book-tax differences have generated increased attention since the1999 Treasury Department report on tax shelters and related testimony
(Talisman, 2000), in which reporting differences were suggested as evi-
dence of increased tax sheltering by corporations. The Joint Committee on
Taxation (2003) report on Enron provided additional evidence of tax shel-
tering behavior and of reporting differences for book and tax purposes.BEA METHODOLOGYThe methodology used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)explicitly incorporates a combination of publicly available informationImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGdrawn from both financial statements and tax return data to estimate cor-porate income. The concept of corporate income in the national accounts
is closer to tax than book income, but the time lag in the availability of tax
data, described below, requires BEA to forecast current income based on
past tax data and recent financial reports. The recent attention to the role
of book-tax differences in affecting the estimate of corporate profits is re-
lated to the occurrence of large, unexpected differences in the growth rate
of each income measure in the 1990s and early 2000s. The sharp revisions
in estimated corporate profits have been discussed by others, including
the Congressional Budget Office (2005), Mead et al. (2004), and Patrick
(2001).The rules governing financial reporting by public corporations, spe-cifically Financial Accounting Standard 109 called ÒAccounting for Income
TaxesÓ (Financial Accounting Standard Board, 1992), require firms to rec-
oncile their book measure of tax liability to their actual liability. Further-
more, income tax reporting requires firms to reconcile their taxable in-
come to their book income on Form 1120. As a result, the underlying
economic activity of a firm is reported using two distinct measurement
systems and, in theory, allows for a better understanding of the financial
position of a firm. Ideally, the information in the tax and financial statements is comple-mentary, since each provides a unique measure of the same economic
activities. Furthermore, research suggests that information about book-
tax differences, as reported in firmsÕ tax footnote, is useful to investors
(Hanlon et al., 2005) in predicting their future performance.However, a problem occurs when the components of the tax disclo-sure are examined at the firm level and a user tries to determine specific
information, such as taxable income and a companyÕs tax payments. Fi-
nancial disclosures have been found to be unsatisfactory in providing
inferences about the tax attributes of a firm (see Hanlon, 2003; Plesko,
2000a, 2003).Figure 8-1 is a schematic of these reporting relations. Until 2004, thereconciliation of income for tax reporting purposes was reported on the
Schedule M-1 of the corporate income tax return Form 1120. An analysis
of the M-1Õs shortcomings outlined by Mills and Plesko (2003) shows that
these reconciliations were of little practical value to the IRS. As a result,
for tax year 2004 and after, the Schedule M-1 has been replaced by Sched-
ule M-3 for larger corporations. The efficacy of the Schedule M-3 has yet
to be assessed.The importance of these issues, from an empirical view, is that thefinancial statement information that BEA relies on will misrepresent the
taxable income numbers it is trying to infer if book-tax differences are
large and changing in ways not observable in the financial data. RecentImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING TAX RETURN DATA TO IMPROVE ESTIMATES137Adjustment for All Corporations [Excluding S, RIC, and REIT] 1990-2003
-200,0000200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,00019901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003
YearPretax book incomeTax net incomeBook-tax difference
Millions of DollarsFIGURE 8-1Pretax book income, tax net income, book-tax difference, M-1 ex-
plains, and estimated intercompany dividend.work by Plesko (2000b, 2002), Plesko and Shumofsky (2005), and Boyntonet al. (2005) has established that book-tax differences are not only large,
but also growing. Figure 8-2, reproduced from Boynton et al. (2005), shows
that book income has differed from taxable income both in scale and in
annual changes. Similarly, Table 8-1 shows that these differences are not
uniform across industries.-40-20020406080100
12019901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003
YearPercentage of Tax Net Income
FIGURE 8-2The book-tax difference as a percentage of tax net income, 1990-2003.
Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGTABLE 8-1How Significant Are Book-Tax Differences?
BTD as a Share of Tax Net IncomeRawAllMaterials andDistribution and
ActiveIndustrialEnergyGoodsTransportation
CorporationsDivisionsProductionProductionof Goods

1995 0.104
1996 0.140

1997 0.182

1998 0.242Ð0.088 0.0370.116

1999 0.690 0.297 0.6030.471

2000 0.611 0.900 0.4060.273
2001Ð0.150 1.277Ð0.0260.103
As Figure 8-2 shows, there are two years in which the book-tax differ-ence is negative, 1992 and 2001, and both are generally explainable. In
1992, a financial accounting change required firms to begin recognition ofexpenses to pay postretirement benefits, leading to large reductions inreported book income for that year. The negative difference in 2001 is
driven by firms with large negative tax net income that have smaller, or
positive, book income. The change in 2003, the most recent year for which
data are available, is dramatic, with book income almost double taxable
income.The existence, magnitude, and pattern of book-tax differences raisestwo important issues for national income purposes: (1) why these differ-
ences exist and (2) whether these differences can be identified in financial
statements in the years before tax return data become available and cor-
porate profits estimates are finalized. Since both sets of information are
driven by the same underlying economic events, the hope is that financial
information, which is available sooner than tax information, can comple-
ment other available data to make profit estimates and generate both time-
lier, and more accurate, estimates.THE TIMING OF INCOME REPORTINGIn the case of corporate profits, it is important to note that the amountof information released to investors a short time after the accounting pe-
riod has ended is large relative to that which can be inferred concurrentlyImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING TAX RETURN DATA TO IMPROVE ESTIMATES139Finance,Insurance,Education,Leisure,
Real Estate,ProfessionalHealth,Accommodation,

and Rentaland Businessand Socialand FoodOther
Informationand LeasingServicesAssistanceServicesServices
0.9540.9450.0647.7260.323Ð0.138
1.0211.3560.6477.3490.097Ð0.530

4.8301.0620.9313.2860.283Ð0.503
2.7840.1810.2721.9730.393 3.047
Begin year 0
End year 0End year 2
End year 1
Quarterly Tax Payments
Earnings Releases
10-
K filed(March 30)Return Due
(March 15)Return Received
(September 15)SOI Tabulations Available
AuditFIGURE 8-3Timeline of financial and tax reporting.
from the tax system. Figure 8-3 provides an abbreviated time line for acalendar year corporation, that is, one with a year end of December 31.Companies make quarterly announcements of their profits and quar-terly payments of their expected tax liabilities, although these dates do
not directly align. Of greatest importance is when annual earnings, whichImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGare described here and in Figure 8-3 as year 0, ending on December 31,are disclosed. For publicly traded firms, financial reports are filed by
March 30 of the following year. The due date for a calendar year corpora-
tion to file a tax return is March 15, prior to the filing of financial state-
ments; however, corporations typically file their returns, after an exten-
sion, six months later. As a result, the tax return is not usually filed until
September 15.Shortly after the March 30 filing date, financial data become availablein machine-readable form. Tax return data, however, may take two or
more years to collect and tabulate and exclude any audit activities. If cor-
porate financial reporting can be used to infer tax attributes, it may be
possible to effectively model and estimate taxable income two or more
years ahead of having tax return data. Quarterly tax liability patterns are
potentially inferable via estimated tax payments; the financial statements,
in theory, provide sufficient disclosure of tax items to estimate the taxable
income of the firm. In other words, if the financial statement information
correctly conveys the information it is intended to, it can be used to pre-
dict, or improve the predictions of, the ultimate aggregate tax information
eventually reported in the Statistics of Income tabulations.SOURCES OF DIFFERENCESIdentifying the sources and magnitude of the differences betweenbook income and taxable income has been a growing research interest
since the 1999 Treasury Department study. The previous discussion sug-
gests that the differences between book and taxable income are relatively
straightforward and dictated by a clear set of regulatory requirements. In
practice, however, understanding these differences is not a simple matter.
Two different approaches have been used to analyze them, depending on
the data available. The first approach uses publicly available data to esti-
mate the book-tax difference using information in financial statements
and then attempts to model the amount of book-tax difference as a func-
tion of firm and industry characteristics (such as the amount of depre-
ciable assets or foreign operations). The second, direct, approach for ana-
lyzing book-tax differences relies on tabulations from tax returns and is
discussed by Plesko (2002), Plesko and Shumofsky (2005), and Boynton et
al. (2005).A significant factor in the recent divergence between book and tax-able income has been stock options, which do not affect financial account-
ing earnings but do reduce taxable income. The difficulty in isolating their
effect, however, is that, for tax purposes, the option-related expense is
included in total compensation and not separately identified. Thus, evenImproving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING TAX RETURN DATA TO IMPROVE ESTIMATES141with access to tax return data, disclosures may be insufficient to fully un-derstand the causes of the differences.The new Schedule M-3 (see http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/
2005f1120sm3.pdf) will provide a large amount of additional data to help
the IRS, Treasury, and BEA better understand how financial reporting can
inform tax administration. Schedule M-3 covers three pages and provides
much more information than the Schedule M-1, which consisted of 10
lines.An important element of the M-3 appears on page 1, where firms arenow required to provide identifying information on the financial state-
ment filing entity of which the tax entity is a part. This is followed by a
precise derivation of the amount of book income attributable to the tax
entity. This reconciliation will better enable tax authorities and analysts to
adjust for consolidation differences.The remaining two pages of the M-3 provide greater detail relative towhat was provided prior to 2004, requiring information not only on the
amount of an item reported for financial and tax accounting purposes, but
also a delineation of the amount of the difference that is temporary and
permanent. Among the additional items now reported, stock options ap-
pear in Part III on Line 8.THE BENEFITS OF ADDITIONAL DATATwo brief examples demonstrate the importance of additional data toanalysts. First, in forecasting corporate profits, the additional data pro-
vided by the M-3 will offer greater insight into the relation between tax-
able income and the book profits reported in financial statements. This
greater detail should allow for a better use of book income and other in-
formation in financial statements to estimate the pattern that taxable in-
come will follow.Tax policy will also be assisted by the collection of additional infor-mation. With the Schedule M-3, not only will analysts have more data
concerning the specific operations and organization of a firm, including
specific decisions related to tax planning, but also the link to financial
statements will make contemporaneous financial information more use-
ful. In estimating the effects of changes in tax policy on businesses, better
information about current operations, rather than that reported for previ-
ous tax years, should allow for improved estimates of the economic and
fiscal effects of proposed changes.The tax return is the ultimate source of information for determiningthe effects of tax policy, but it is not the only one. There is substantial
evidence suggesting that firms look beyond tax reporting when making
tax planning decisions. Changes in corporate behavior, such as invest-Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142IMPROVING BUSINESS STATISTICS THROUGH INTERAGENCY DATA SHARINGment or financial policy, take place in a tax system that interacts with thecapital market through other types of reporting. Without a way to link all
of the constraints affecting a business, analysts will have difficulty fully
identifying and accurately measuring the effects of changes in tax policy.
A better use of both financial and tax information, supplemented by new
data provided by the new Schedule M-3, will provide a better understand-
ing of the interrelationships between the two systems.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSI have benefited from discussions with Dan Feenberg, Ralph Rector,John Phillips, and David Weber.REFERENCESBoynton, C., P. DeFilippes, and E. Legel2005Prelude to schedule M-3: Schedule M-1 corporate book-tax difference data 1990-
2003. 109 Tax Notes 1579 (December 19).Congressional Budget Office2005 
The Budget and Economic Outlook: An Update. Washington, DC: U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office.Financial Accounting Standards Board1992Accounting for Income Taxes. FASB Statement No. 109. Norwalk, CT: Financial Ac-counting Standards Board.Hanlon, M.2003What can we infer about a firmÕs taxable income from its financial statements?
National Tax Journal (4):831-863.Hanlon, M., S. Kelley LaPlante, and T. Shevlin2005Evidence on the Possible Information Loss of Conforming Book Income and Taxable In-come. Available: http://ssrn.com/abstract=686402 or DOI:10.2139/ssrn.686402
[accessed May 2006].Joint Committee on Taxation2003Report of Investigation of Enron Corporation and Related Entities Regarding Federal Taxand Compensation Issues, and Policy Recommendations. (JCS-3-03). Washington, DC:U.S. Government Printing Office. Available: http://www.gpo.gov/congress/
joint/jcs-3-03/vol1/index.html [accessed May 2006].Manzon, G., and G. Plesko2002The relation between financial and tax reporting measures of income. 
Tax LawReview 55(2):175-214.Mead, C.I., B.R. Moulton, and K. Patrick2004NIPA Corporate Profits and Reported Earnings: A Comparison and Measurement Issues.Paper presented at the ASSA/AEA meetings, January 3-5, San Diego, CA. Avail-able: http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers.htm [accessed May 2006].Mills, L.F., and G.A. Plesko2003Bridging the reporting gap: A proposal for more informative reconciling of book
and tax income. National Tax Journal (4):865-893.Patrick, K.2001Comparing NIPA profits with S&P 500 profits. Survey of Current Business(April):16-20.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USING TAX RETURN DATA TO IMPROVE ESTIMATES143Plesko, G.A.2000aBook-tax differences and the measurement of corporate income. 
Proceedings of theNinety-second Annual Conference on Taxation 1999:171-176.2000bEvidence and theory on corporate tax shelters. 
Proceedings of the Ninety-secondAnnual Conference on Taxation 1999:367-371.2002Reconciling corporation book and tax net income, tax years 1996-1998. 
SOI Bulle-tin 21(4):1-16.2003An evaluation of alternative measures of corporate tax rates. 
Journal of Accountingand Economics 35(2):201-226.Plesko, G.A., and N. Shumofsky2005 
Reconciling CorporationsÕ Book and Taxable Income, 1995Ð2001. Washington, DC: U.S.Government Printing Office.Smith, D.T., and Butters, J.K .1949Taxable and Business Income. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of EconomicResearch.Talisman, J.2000Penalty and Interest Provisions, Corporate Tax Shelters. U.S. Department of the
Treasury Testimony before the Senate Committee on Finance, March 8.U.S. Department of the Treasury1999The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis and Legislative Proposals.Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.Improving Business Statistics Through Interagency Data Sharing: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.