DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11824Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation,Preparedness, Response, and Recovery192 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38663-0 | DOI 10.17226/11824Ramesh R. Rao, Jon Eisenberg, and Ted Schmitt, Editors; Committee on UsingInformation Technology to Enhance Disaster Management; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ramesh R. Rao, Jon Eisenberg, and Ted Schmitt, EditorsCommittee on Using Information Technology toEnhance Disaster ManagementComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardDivision on Engineering and Physical SciencesIMPROVINGDISASTER MANAGEMENT
THE ROLE OF IT IN MITIGATION, PREPAREDNESS, 
RESPONSE, AND RECOVERY
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  500 Fifth Street, N.W.  Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.This study was supported by the Battelle Memorial Institute under subcontractnumber 189936 to a contract between the Federal Emergency Management Agencyand the Battelle Memorial Institute. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or rec-
ommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the organizations and agencies that provided sup-port for the project.International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-10396-1International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-10396-7Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press,500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242
or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.Copyright 2007 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Printed in the United States of AmericaImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating soci-ety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedi-cated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A.Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy ofSciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal gov-
ernment. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Acad-emy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the NationalAcademy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing
services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering commu-nities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute ofMedicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair,
respectively, of the National Research Council.www.national-academies.orgImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON USING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TOENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENTRAMESH R. RAO, University of California, San Diego, ChairYIGAL ARENS, University of Southern California
ART BOTTERELL, Contra Costa County, California, Office of the Sheriff
TIMOTHY X. BROWN, University of Colorado, Boulder
JOHN R. HARRALD, George Washington University
RICHARD HOWARD, Rutgers University
NANCY JESUALE, NetCity Engineering, Inc.
DAVID KEHRLEIN, Environmental Science Research Institute
WILLIAM MAHEU, San Diego, California, Police Department
ROBIN R. MURPHY, University of South Florida
ROBERT NECHES, University of Southern California
MASANOBU SHINOZUKA, University of California, Irvine
ELLIS STANLEY, City of Los Angeles
PETER STEENKISTE, Carnegie Mellon University
GIO WIEDERHOLD, Stanford UniversityStaffJON EISENBERG, Study DirectorTED SCHMITT, Program Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Officer
GLORIA WESTBROOK, Senior Program Assistant (through December2006)JENNIFER M. BISHOP, Program AssociateImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDJOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, ChairERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC
FREDERICK R. CHANG, University of Texas, Austin
WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center
DAVID J. DEWITT, University of Wisconsin, Madison
DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Independent Consultant, Pelham, New York
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC
PETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon UniversityJON EISENBERG, DirectorKRISTEN BATCH, Associate Program Officer
RADHIKA CHARI, Administrative Coordinator
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Officer
JANICE SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant
TED SCHMITT, Program Officer
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Program Assistant
JOAN WINSTON, Program OfficerFor more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org,write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Wash-
ington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail at cstb@nas.edu.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
viiTo improve how information technology is used in disaster manage-ment, Section 214 of the E-Government Act of 2002 called on the admin-
istrator of the Office of Electronic Government in the Office of Manage-
ment and Budget, in consultation with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), to Òensure that a study is conducted on
using information technology to enhance crisis preparedness, response,
and consequence management of natural and manmade disastersÓ (see
Box P.1). In early 2005, in response to a request from FEMA to the Na-
tional Research Council (NRC), via a contract with Battelle Memorial
Institute, the Committee on Using Information Technology to Enhance
Disaster Management was established under the auspices of the Com-
puter Science and Telecommunications Board to study these issues. The
committeeÕs first report, Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Tech-nology to Enhance Disaster Management,1 summarized the discussions at apublic workshop held on June 22-23, 2005. Representatives of federal,
state, and local government agencies; private industry; and the research
community participated in the workshop.Over the next year the committee met four times and made severalsite visits to gather input from federal agencies; state and local public1National Research Council, Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology toEnhance Disaster Management, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., September2005.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEBOX P.1Section 214 of the E-Government Act of 2002,Public Law 107-347SEC. 214. ENHANCING CRISIS MANAGEMENT THROUGH ADVANCED IN-
FORMATION TECHNOLOGY(a) PURPOSE.ÑThe purpose of this section is to improve how information tech-nology is used in coordinating and facilitating information on disaster prepared-ness, response, and recovery, while ensuring the availability of such informationacross multiple access channels.(b) IN GENERAL.Ñ(1) STUDY ON ENHANCEMENT OF CRISIS RESPONSE.ÑNot later than 90 days afterthe date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with the Feder-
al Emergency Management Agency, shall ensure that a study is conducted onusing information technology to enhance crisis preparedness, response, and con-sequence management of natural and manmade disasters.(2) CONTENTS.ÑThe study under this subsection shall addressÑ(A) a research and implementation strategy for effective use of informa-tion technology in crisis response and consequence management, including the
more effective use of technologies, management of information technology re-search initiatives, and incorporation of research advances into the information andcommunications systems ofÑ(i) the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and(ii) other Federal, State, and local agencies responsible for crisispreparedness, response, and consequence management; and(B) opportunities for research and development on enhanced technolo-gies into areas of potential improvement as determined during the course of thestudy.(3) REPORT.ÑNot later than 2 years after the date on which a contract isentered into under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall submit a report on thestudy, including findings and recommendations toÑ(A) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate; and(B) the Committee on Government Reform of the House of Representa-tives.(4) INTERAGENCY COOPERATION.ÑOther Federal departments and agencieswith responsibility for disaster relief and emergency assistance shall fully cooper-ate with the Administrator in carrying out this section.(5) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.ÑThere are authorized to be appropriat-ed for research under this subsection, such sums as are necessary for fiscal year2003.(c) PILOT PROJECTS.ÑBased on the results of the research conducted undersubsection (b), the Administrator, in consultation with the Federal EmergencyManagement Agency, shall initiate pilot projects or report to Congress on other
activities that further the goal of maximizing the utility of information technology indisaster management. The Administrator shall cooperate with other relevant agen-cies, and, if appropriate, State, local, and tribal governments, in initiating such pilot
projects.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixsafety officials and emergency management practitioners; experts in di-saster management; information technology researchers; and hardware
and software vendors. In preparing this, its final report, the committee
also drew on perspectives and information gleaned from professional
conferences, the technical literature, and government reports.Chapter 1 briefly characterizes disaster management, placing theuse of information and communication technology in the broader hu-
man and organizational context and providing a framework for con-
sidering the range and nature of information and communication
needs. Chapter 2 presents the committeeÕs vision of the potential for
information and communication technology to improve disaster man-
agement. Chapter 3 focuses on structural, organizational, and other
non-technical barriers to the acquisition, adoption, and effective use
of IT in disaster management. Chapter 4 provides an initial outline of
the elements of a research program aimed at strengthening IT-en-
abled capabilities for disaster management.During the development of this report, Hurricane Katrina struck theU.S. Gulf Coast. In the days following the hurricaneÕs landfall, damage to
the communications infrastructure, together with a host of other commu-
nications and information concerns, was cited by decision makers and
reported on in the press as among the major challenges facing those in-
volved in response and recovery efforts. The tragic events that occurred
in KatrinaÕs wake have, of course, served to underscore the importance of
disaster management; they have also highlighted the role of information
technology in disaster management, the interplay between technical and
organizational considerations, and the contributions that research and
development in these areas could make to future disaster management
activities. However, although a number of the inputs focused on Katrina,
the committeeÕs charge, its deliberations, and this report encompass di-
sasters in all (natural and human-made) forms and in all phases, from
mitigation and preparedness to response and recovery.Ramesh R. Rao, ChairCommittee on Using Information Technologyto Enhance Disaster ManagementImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgment of ReviewersxiThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosenfor their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance
with procedures approved by the National Research CouncilÕs Re-port Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in
making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon-
siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript
remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We
wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:David Borth, Motorola,Thomas J. Cowper, New York State Police,
Sharon Dawes, University at Albany, State University of New York,
Otto Doll, State of South Dakota Bureau of Information andTelecommunications,Mica Endsley, SA Technologies,
Al Flax, Consultant, Potomac, Maryland,
W. Craig Fugate, State of Florida Office of Emergency Management,
Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon University,
Prabhakar Ragahvan, Yahoo!,
Eric Rasmussen, U.S. Navy Medical Corps,
Myra Socher, TriMed, Inc.,
Kathleen Tierney, University of Colorado, Boulder, and
Charles Werner, Charlottesville, Virginia, Fire Department.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu-
sions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Samuel H.
Fuller, Analog Devices, Inc., and Richard N. Wright, National Institute of
Standards and Technology (retired). Appointed by the National Research
Council, they were responsible for making certain that an independent
examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institu-
tional procedures and that all review comments were carefully consid-
ered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with
the authoring committee and the institution.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsSUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS1
1INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT15
2THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT:KEY IT-BASED CAPABILITIES34
3IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT FORDISASTER MANAGEMENT68
4ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA108
APPENDIXESAIllustrative Fictional Narratives of IT Use in DisasterManagement135
BReview of Interoperability Initiatives151
CWorkshop Agenda157
DSpeakers and Participants at Meetings and Site Visits165
EBiographies of Committee Members and Staff167
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary and Recommendations
Section 214 of the E-Government Act of 2002 called on the Office ofManagement and Budget, in consultation with the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency (FEMA), to Òensure that a study is con-ducted on using information technology to enhance crisis preparedness,
response, and consequence management of natural and manmade disas-
ters.Ó This, the final report from the National Research CouncilÕs Commit-
tee on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster Management,
addresses the issues listed in Section 214 and provides recommendations
for enhancing disaster management through the use of IT.1 In this study,disasters are defined as natural, technological, and human-initiated eventsthat disrupt the normal functioning of the economy and society on a large
scale; information technology (IT) is broadly defined as including comput-ing and communications technology; and disaster management is definedas encompassing mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery ef-
forts undertaken to reduce the impact of disasters.The purpose of this report is to inform federal, state, and local policymakers and public safety and emergency management professionals
about future opportunities for the application of IT to disaster manage-1The committeeÕs first reportÑNational Research Council, Summary of a Workshop onUsing Information Technology to Enhance Disaster Management, The National Academies Press,Washington, D.C.Ñwas published in September 2005.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTment. Many of the reportÕs recommendations are aimed at the diverse setof federal, state, and local agencies and other organizations (referred to
here as disaster management organizations) with responsibility for disas-
ter management activities. Several recommendations indicate what might
be done at the federal level to foster IT innovation that would enhance
disaster management efforts, but it was beyond the scope of this study to
recommend exactly where responsibility for implementing these recom-
mendations should be placed within the federal government. This report
is not intended as a comprehensive look at the complex, highly multi-
disciplinary topic of disaster management, nor does it explicitly address
tradeoffs between investments in IT and other capabilities for disaster
management or make recommendations about levels of funding for IT (or
indeed other) disaster management activities.USING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AS A POINT OFLEVERAGE TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENTThe challenge of disaster management is reducing the harm disasterscause to society, the economy, and the lives of individuals and communi-
ties. That task requires disaster managers to reduce uncertainty, to calcu-
late and compare costs and benefits, and to manage resources, often on a
much larger scale and at a much faster pace than are supported by meth-
ods and means for solving ordinary problems. IT provides capabilities
that can help people grasp the dynamic realities of a disaster more clearly
and help them formulate better decisions more quickly. And IT can help
keep better track of the myriad details involved in all phases of disaster
management.The committee concluded that IT has as-yet-unrealized potential toimprove how communities, the nation, and the global community handle

disasters. Briefings to the committee suggested that some progress is
being made in using IT to enhance disaster management. Presentations
made at its June 2005 workshop, additional briefings to the committee,
and reports on responses to recent disasters indicated, however, that
disaster management organizations have not fully exploited many of
todayÕs technology opportunities. This situation stands in contrast to the
considerable success enjoyed by some sectors such as financial services
and transportation in adopting new IT technologies routinely and
aggressively.This report describes both short- and long-term opportunities to en-hance responsiveness and increase resilience by applying IT to disaster
management. As in other sectors, successful use of IT involves multiple
factorsÑmaking smarter use of existing technologies, creating opportu-
nities to develop and adopt new technologies, and evolving organiza-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS3tional practices to best employ those technologies. Accordingly, this re-port also examines mechanisms to facilitate the development and effec-
tive use of IT.Short-Term Opportunities to Use ITAlthough the committee believes that investment in IT research anddevelopment (R&D) for disaster management should be guided in the
long run by a comprehensive, stakeholder-driven roadmap (see below), it
also sees opportunities for short-term investment in a number of specific
areas that would yield significant benefits. The committee heard of many
instances in which responders were able to make use of readily available
technologyÑeither provided by their organizations or acquired person-
allyÑthat proved valuable during a disaster. The network effects associ-
ated with many of these technologies can create a critical mass of users
that provides a potential point of interoperability and cooperation across
agencies. For example, ad hoc use of 802.11x wireless capabilities in
laptops carried by some first responders, peer-to-peer use of Land Mobile
Radio System (LMRS) radios, and use of Family Radio Service/General
Mobile Radio Service Òwalkie-talkiesÓ all can help to provide communi-
cations even when the communications infrastructure is damaged. Such
technology options may already be in the hands of users but may not be
deployed in disasters because policies and procedures for their use are
not in place.Other examples of Òlow-hanging fruitÓ include the following:¥Use of sensors, wikis (editable Web sites), blogs, and data-miningtools to capture, analyze, and share lessons learned from operational ex-
periences;¥Use of database, Web, and call center technologies to establish aservice to provide information about available equipment, materiel, vol-
unteers, and volunteer organizations;¥Use of planning, scheduling, task allocation, and resource manage-ment tools to help in formulating disaster management plans and track-
ing execution of the plans and to ensure timely recognition of problems
and associated follow-up decision making; and¥Use of deployable cell phone technology to rapidly establish stand-alone communications capabilities for use in disasters where local infra-
structure is damaged.To exploit such short-term opportunities involves identifying them,establishing policies and procedures for their use, and providing training
to users.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTRecommendation 1:Disaster management organizations should
take advantage of opportunities for adoption of existing technology
or adjustment of policies and procedures that would allow signifi-
cant short-term enhancement of disaster management.Key IT-Enabled Capabilities and R&D to Achieve ThemMaking good decisions and taking appropriate action during extremeevents require having access to communications, data, and computational
resources that can be used to effectively coordinate a large number of
geographically dispersed participants and assets, to exchange a wide va-
riety of types of information, and to evaluate many scenarios and re-
sponsesÑall of which are changing dynamically.The committee identified six key areas of IT-enabled capability (de-scribed in Box S.1 and discussed in more detail in Chapter 2) in which
shorter-term development and longer-term research offer the potential
for significant benefits:¥More robust, interoperable, and priority-sensitive communications;¥Better situational awareness and a common operating picture;¥Improved decision support and resource tracking and allocation;¥Greater organizational agility for disaster management;¥Better engagement of the public; and¥Enhanced infrastructure survivability and continuity of societalfunctions.Some of these capabilities address rather specialized problems thatdo not have a large commercial market, although commercial technolo-
gies will provide many of the building blocks needed to realize the capa-
bilities. Disasters are low-frequency events outside the normal planning
horizons of most organizations, whose structure, operations, and IT sys-
tems are designed to ensure day-to-day efficiency rather than the resil-
ience and scalability that disasters demand. As a result, current research
and development efforts may not necessarily focus on developing IT ca-
pabilities in a manner optimized for disaster management.As detailed in Chapter 4, IT R&D needs and opportunities areevident across a spectrum from adoption (off-the-shelf technology is

available today) to adaptation (the technology is on the horizon and
ready for transfer to disaster management) to development (the technol-
ogy is on the horizon and requires development for use in disaster man-
agement) to applied research (disaster-management-specific research is
required) to basic research (fundamental research is needed to develop
new capabilities).Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS5In government mission areas such as defense and energy, a researchinfrastructure has been built over decades to ensure long-term, mission-
driven scientific and engineering advancesÑan effort that has included a
long history of investments in IT. The Department of Defense, for ex-
ample, funds a mix of shorter- and longer-term R&D carried out through
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the ser-
vice laboratories as in-house, university-based, and contract research.
These investments are aimed at building a variety of capabilities, such as
the militaryÕs transition to a capability for network-centric warfare, that
are also relevant to disaster management. To make the sort of IT-enabled
progress in disaster management that is envisioned in this report, the
disaster management community should also devote significant attention
and investment to a long-term research program.A number of agencies could play a role in developing and imple-menting such a program. The directly relevant mission of the Department
of Homeland SecurityÕs (DHSÕs) Science and Technology Directorate is
Òto protect the homeland by providing Federal and local officials with
state-of-the-art technology and other resources.Ó2 Other agencies haverelevant capabilities in terms of IT and disaster-related research programs,
modalities, constituencies, and existing connections with particular re-
search communities, including the National Science Foundation (NSF),
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), DARPA, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the re-
search laboratories of the armed services.In a number of federal programs, multiple agencies work jointly totackle broad problems. One possible model for such an interagency pro-
gram is the Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program, in which NIST has a
lead role and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), FEMA, and NSF are
participants. Similarly, for disaster management, a lead agency (logically
DHS) could provide a clear single point of responsibility, coordinate ac-
tivities, report on progress, and so forth; the lead agency would not be
responsible for all aspects of execution, which would fall to all of the
participating agencies and their contractors and grantees.R&D activities also need to be well coupled to the parts of DHS thatare responsible for mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery ac-
tivities to ensure that requirements are grounded in operational needs
and to ensure that solutions can be transferred into federal operations and
the parts of DHS responsible for developing policy to ensure that techno-
logical and organizational questions are considered together.2See http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/editorial_0530.shtm.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTRecommendation 2:The federal government should leverage the
capabilities of its agencies to carry out multidisciplinary research
in pursuit of six key IT-enabled capabilitiesÑmore robust, inter-
operable, and priority-sensitive communications; better situational

awareness and a common operating picture; improved decision
support and resource tracking and allocation; greater organiza-

tional agility for disaster management; better engagement of the
public; and enhanced infrastructure survivability and continuity
of societal functionsÑand establish a coordinating mechanism for
those research activities.Roadmapping as a Tool to Engage Stakeholders andInform R&D InvestmentsUntil fairly recently, the technology choices facing most disaster man-agement organizations were few, with much of the investment focused
on building specialized communications systems in close partnership withBOX S.1Key IT-Enabled Capabilities¥More robust, interoperable, and priority-sensitive communications. Disastermanagement requires robust, priority-sensitive communications systems capableof supporting interoperation with other systems. Providing these requires commu-nication networks that are more resilient to disruption than todayÕs commercial
networks, that can last longer without utility power, that can expand capacity tomeet emergency needs, that can autonomously reconfigure themselves, that canhandle the range of communication needs and environmental conditions that arise
in disasters, that have well-defined points of interoperability, and that are able todistinguish between and properly prioritize communications.¥Better situational awareness and common operating picture. Situationalawareness is the ability for actors in a disasterÑfrom national coordinators toemergency responders to the general publicÑto have information about an inci-dent, to understand what that information means in the context of the situation and
their goals, and to project patterns and trends. The common operating picture is ashared understanding of a situation by a group of people who need to act togetherto achieve common goals. The aim is to improve a personÕs ability to do his or her
job more effectively.¥Improved decision support and resource tracking and allocation. Whereassituation awareness provides decision makers with information relevant to their
tasks and goals, decision support focuses on assisting them in formulating pro-spective actionsÑhelping them understand and assess characteristics and conse-quences of alternative courses of action and follow-up on decisions, closing thefeedback loop from decision to result.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS7a small set of vendors. Today, the set of technologies to choose from ismuch wider, and many more choices are possible in any particular area.
But because disaster management is a system-level problem, there are no
IT Òsilver bullets.Ó Dramatic improvements in one area of technology or
process may have relatively little overall impact unless other intercon-
nected pieces are modified to make use of such advances. Too much
invested in radios and not enough in logistics might mean, for instance,
that one can call for help but cannot get it.A clear vision of end-user goals, a detailed understanding of the indi-vidual pieces of the problem and their interrelationships, a detailed un-
derstanding of the required technologies, and defined paths for progress
would help greatly to inform investment decisions. These are among the
elements of a roadmapÑan agreed-on, coordinated vision that can help
organizations to plan development and investment strategies that can
bring technologies together at the right time. Roadmaps are used in a
number of sectors to accomplish this sort of alignment and cooperation.A number of stakeholders, including first responders, public safety¥Greater organizational agility for disaster management. The use of IT hasenabled and driven changes to organizational structures and processes (e.g., moredistributed decision making). Agility is at a premium in disasters because no onetype of organization or group of organizations is always best suited for the variety
of problems that arise. Related issues with significant IT implications include build-ing rapport among people who do not share a history of cooperation and morequickly integrating the operations of multiple organizations.¥Better engagement of the public by (1) supplying information and (2) mak-ing use of information and resources that members of the public can supply. Al-though IT is used today to alert and inform the public before, during, and after a
disaster, more use could be made of new communications modalities, and infor-mation could be better tailored and targeted to the needs of particular populations.More attention should be paid to the information and resources held by the public
because members of the public collectively have a richer view of a disaster situa-tion, may possess increasingly sophisticated technology to capture and communi-cate information, and are an important source of volunteers, supplies, and equip-
ment. One important factor is how to engage the entire population, given theexistence of groups with cultural and language differences and other specialneeds.¥Enhanced infrastructure survivability and continuity of societal functions.Large disasters upset physical infrastructure, such as the electric grid, transporta-tion, and health careÑas well as IT systems. IT infrastructures themselves need to
be more resilient; IT can also improve the survivability and speed the recovery ofother infrastructure by providing better information about the status of systems andadvance warning of impending failures. Finally, IT can facilitate the continuity ofdisrupted societal functions by providing new tools for reconnecting families,friends, organizations, and communities.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTand emergency management agencies, government officials, medical pro-viders, volunteer organizations, infrastructure and transportation system
owners, vendors, IT researchers, and disaster researchers, have important
perspectives on how to build on existing organizations and technology
where possible and how to drive the creation of new, cost-effective tech-
nologies and organizational structures where needed. However, an insti-
tutional home is needed to launch and sustain such activity.Recommendation 3:The federal government should develop and
regularly update an IT R&D roadmap for disaster management with
the involvement of a full range of stakeholders. IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OFINFORMATION TECHNOLOGYAdoption of IT for disaster management is challenging for a numberof reasons, including the following (which are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 3):¥Disaster management organizations often lack the resources to ac-quire valuable capabilities.¥The development and deployment of many promising technolo-gies are risky and costly given the limited opportunities presented by
commercial markets for these technologies.¥In most agencies with disaster management responsibilities, thereis no person or unit specifically charged with tracking IT, identifying
promising technologies, integrating them into operations, and interacting
with IT vendors to make sure needs are addressed.¥Decisions regarding IT tend to be made independently by localorganizations that must work together in disasters.¥Disaster management is concerned with environments that are in-trinsically uncertain and unstable.¥Important sources of funds are typically only available once a di-saster has been declared and also must be spent in a short time window.Diversified Acquisition Strategy and Attention to Design IssuesDisaster management has traditionally relied heavily on speciallybuilt technology and on a traditional ÒwaterfallÓ acquisition model in
which a full set of specifications is developed and a vendor is selected to
build a system in compliance with the specifications. In the commercial
world and in sectors such as defense, there is growing acceptance of a
richer, more diversified acquisition strategy that employs a mix of tradi-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS9tional (purpose-built) systems, adoption and adaptation of commercialoff-the-shelf (COTS) technology and services, and use of open source
software, open standards, and community-driven development ap-
proaches. Such a strategy for disaster management should draw on the
strengths of the traditional vendor community yet also foster bottom-up
development as a complement to traditional acquisition practices and
more formal top-down development; tap the nationÕs technology base;
and also encourage the Òcan-doÓ spirit of commercial developers, profes-
sionals, and volunteers involved in disaster management.As mentioned above, COTS technology alone is unlikely to deliver allof the desired capabilities. But it is important in two waysÑ(1) adoption
and adaptation of readily available technologies offer a path for building
up disaster management capabilities in the short term, and (2) the inter-
operability often characteristic of COTS technologies makes them useful
as building blocks for disaster management systems.Recommendation 4:Federal, state, and local agencies should em-
brace a diversified acquisition strategy that includes increased use
of commercial information technology and greater use of open
source software and open standards development as a complement
to more traditional acquisition approaches.Reliance on turn-key systems has meant that disaster managementorganizations have paid less attention to the underlying design issues
that ultimately affect the functionality of their IT systems. Often technolo-
gies have been acquired as stand-alone products with little consideration
for how they integrate with other technologies already in use, even within
the same agency. However, with networking becoming increasingly per-
vasive, careful attention should be given to how each particular IT system
fits into the broader context of interconnected systems. Off-the-shelf tech-
nology such as desktop computers or network routers can provide basic
building blocks, and some elements of design are also well established
such as the Internet Protocol standard for packet networks, but a domain-
specific architecture understood and owned by the organization is also
needed. To accomplish this, organizations have to develop the necessary
technical and technology management capabilities.Recommendation 5:Disaster management organizations should
work closely with technology providers to define, shape, and inte-
grate new technologies as a coherent part of their overall IT system.The committee believes that more can be done to embrace provenapproaches for IT acquisition. Best practices for acquisition include anImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTemphasis on iterative development, increased opportunities to test andevaluate technology in practice together with realistic concepts of opera-
tions, and design and evaluation processes that allow for strong coupling
among practitioners, researchers, and industry.The committee also identified four design principles (discussed inmore detail in Chapter 3) that have particular importance for disaster
management systems:¥Build emergency management systems for effective scaling fromroutine to disaster operation;¥Exploit redundancy and diversity to achieve resilience;¥Design systems with flexibility, composability, and interoperability
as core guiding principles; and¥Distinguish between the user interface and the underlying tech-nologies used to deliver a capability.Training and Practice Through Routine Use of ITUnless experience is gained through routine use or regular training,the full benefits of investment in IT systems are unlikely to be realized.
Training, drills, and exercises all play an important role in the introduc-
tion of new technologies into organizational practice. Moreover, it is
through routine use that the competence and confidence required to suc-
cessfully use a technological capability, especially in the high-stress situa-
tion of disasters, are best developed. However, training large numbers of
people to deal with infrequent events poses logistical challenges and is
also costly.Recommendation 6:In the design, acquisition, and operation of IT
systems, disaster management organizations should emphasize the
incorporation of disaster response capabilities into the systems that
support routine operations. Measurement and Assessment to Enhance EffectivenessAs the saying goes, one can only manage what one can measure.Because the resources available for disaster management are limited, de-
cision making always involves tradeoffs. Weighing the benefits from par-
ticular IT investments against the returns on other sorts of investment is
challenging. Although having measures of effectiveness is necessary to
making such assessments, few applicable metrics are currently available.Above all, acquisition of IT and associated organizational changesImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS11should be driven by a focus on improving the effectiveness of those whose
actions are integral to effective disaster management. The emphasis
should be on measuring the resulting net effectiveness of disaster man-
agement activities, not the performance of the IT per se. For example,
rather than focusing on the performance of particular systems (e.g., a
firefighter radio system has 90 percent coverage), it is important to try to
gauge net effectiveness (e.g., better communications coverage allows fire-
fighters to better coordinate their response, improving capabilities for
fighting forest fires by 20 percent). The development of such metrics is an
area for further research.Recommendation 7:Disaster management organizations should
employ metrics to inform cost-benefit decisions for investment in
IT for disaster management and should make enhanced end-user
performance a primary objective of disaster management acquisi-
tion programs.Independent mechanisms for assessment, such as the TransportationSafety Board, the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board,
and the NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System, have proven useful in
their respective domains. A critical requirement of these organizations is
their independence from the agencies that have operational responsibili-
ties. It may be advantageous to employ several organizations rather than
a single national one, with each one focusing on a particular type of
disaster or the range of disasters typical in a particular region. It is also
important for assessments to be founded on multiple areas of expertise,
including technical, social, and organizational dimensions. Obviously, the
effectiveness of IT use is just one facet of an assessment of the overall
effectiveness of disaster management activities for any particular inci-
dent, albeit an important one.Recommendation 8: Disaster management organizations shouldmake use of independent mechanisms for assessing the effective-
ness of disaster management operations, including the use of IT,
and for disseminating lessons learned and best practices.Systematic Collection of DataIt is well understood as a result of endeavors in many areas (e.g.,aircraft accident investigations) that making significant improvements
depends on putting in place processes that allow learning from experi-
ence. IT can play a critical role in enhancing the science of disaster man-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTagement by helping to support continuous improvement. Collecting ad-equate and trustworthy data is essential for the feedback necessary to
drive improvements in disaster management. Doing so requires better documentation of disasters and the re-sponses to them, including the role of supporting technology. The wide-
spread introduction of IT into disaster management provides opportuni-
ties for large-scale, automated, comprehensive collection of data about
operations, decision making, and situational knowledge throughout a
disaster. This information can be processed after the fact to improve un-
derstanding of the process of disaster management. IT can also help to
make these lessons learned available in real time, putting them into the
hands of decision makers when they are most needed.Accomplishing this goal requires enhanced technical capabilities tocapture data during the course of a disaster. In some cases, it may be
necessary to find ways to anonymize data so that accurate statistics can be
gathered without the difficulty of dealing with potential liability issues.
Policy changes (analogous to the adoption of Good Samaritan laws3) mayalso be needed to ensure that individuals involved in a disaster response
can be protected from liability (e.g., amendments to the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA] may be needed). Legislation
may also be needed to ensure that intellectual property, privacy, liability,
and other concerns of information providers are addressed if they are
required to share such data for research purposes.COUPLING RESEARCH AND PRACTICEEffective development, use, and deployment of IT depend on a solidunderstanding of context and user needs. Moreover, the introduction of
new IT often presents opportunities for new organizational approaches,
and these opportunities should be considered in reorganization efforts.
Similarly, successful technology development requires consideration of
organizational context.This issue of co-development of technology and organizational prac-tice seems especially important at present. In the wake of Hurricane
Katrina, a number of organizational structures, policies, and procedures
are being examined. Also, a number of relevant technologies have reached
a sufficient level of maturity to allow innovative organizational ap-
proaches to disaster management.The interdependence of technology and practice suggests that devel-oping a cadre of people with expertise in both disaster management and3Good Samaritan laws shield people from liability in emergency circumstances providedthat they have acted in a reasonable manner.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS13IT is likely to yield significant payoffs. Such a cadre of people is likely tobe more astute at translating user requirements to technical needs. One
basic need, of course, is to train a group of first responders and others
responsible for disaster management in IT skills that go beyond those of a
general user and to train a group of IT workers (e.g., database and system
administrators and application builders) to have domain expertise in di-
saster management. Deeper expertise spanning both domains could be
fostered through a number of mechanisms, including the following:¥A combination of fellowships, shorter-term visits to research cen-ters, and other training and educational activities that help technology
experts and other practitioners to stay abreast of the latest developments
in both practice and technology;¥Field tests and field work conducted by IT researchers workingwith disaster management practitioners; and¥Combined disaster management-IT expert teams that jointly ana-lyze the performance of processes and systems after a disaster.Recommendation 9:Disaster management organizations should
support the development of a cadre of people with expertise in
both disaster management and IT.Especially in light of the significant non-technical factors affectingadoption of IT for disaster management, it is critical to establish mecha-
nisms that ensure that researchers are exposed to real problems and that
practitioners are exposed to new technology opportunities. Because most
practitioners are distributed across local agencies, forging such ties is
likely to be harder in disaster management than in sectors like defense,
but it is no less important.Collaborative research centers could bring together experts from di-verse domains in a neutral environment conducive to collaboration. Such
centers could (1) develop a shared understanding of the challenges in all
phases of disaster management from both a technological and an organi-
zational perspective, (2) evaluate the application of technology advances
to disaster management practice, (3) develop a culture and processes for
transitioning knowledge and technology to the operational communities
on a sustained basis, (4) build human capital at the intersection of IT and
disaster management, (5) serve as repositories for data and for lessons
learned from past disasters and disaster management efforts, and (6) pro-
vide forward-looking analysis to inform the development of technology
capabilities, associated organizational processes, and roadmap develop-
ment. A number of academic centers exist that offer a capacity for at least
some of these efforts.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTPractitioners in multiple disciplines could contribute to such centers,including scientists, engineers, and hazard and disaster researchers, and
centers should include partnerships with federal, state, and local disaster
management agencies. Indeed, it is critical that experienced and capable
officials and operational elements of disaster management organizations
be deeply involved in the work of these centers. One approach for engag-
ing these groups would be to provide incremental funds to agencies spe-
cifically for working with researchers and developing next-generation
technologies. Having multiple centers (rather than a single entity) also
helps to ensure healthy intellectual competition, cross-fertilization of
ideas, specialization in specific types of disasters and specific technology
capabilities, and attention to the comprehensive needs of particular geo-
graphical areas.Research centers could also act as a resource for agencies seeking toimplement a diversified acquisition strategy and incorporate the latest
best practices and a mechanism for disaster managers and responders to
share experiences and communicate requirements to guide further tech-
nology developments.Recommendation 10:The federal government should sustain (and
develop as needed) a network of research centers where IT research-
ers, hazard and disaster researchers, and disaster management prac-
titioners can collaborate to study and evaluate the use of IT for
disaster management from both a technological and an organiza-
tional perspective, to transition knowledge and technology to those
who practice disaster management, to build human capital at the
intersection of IT and disaster management, and to develop future
IT capabilities.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151Introduction and Context
This volume is the final report from the National Research CouncilÕsCommittee on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster
Management, which was established in response to a congressionalrequest for a study to examine the use of information technology Òto
enhance crisis preparedness, response, and consequence management of
natural and manmade disastersÓ (see Box P.1 in the Preface).Drawing on a June 2005 workshop (see the agenda in Appendix C)and a series of briefings and site visits (listed in Appendix D), as well as
the experience and expertise represented on the committee itself (out-
lined in Appendix E), the committee sought to identify promising appli-
cations of information and communication technology (hereafter referred
to as IT) to disaster management, promising areas of research for improv-
ing the effectiveness of IT, and mechanisms that would enhance research,
development, and deployment efforts. The resulting report is intended to
inform federal, state, and local policy makers and public safety and emer-
gency management professionals about future opportunities for the ap-
plication of IT to disaster management. It is not intended as a comprehen-
sive look at the complex, highly multidisciplinary topic of disaster
management. Nor do the committeeÕs findings and recommendations ex-
plicitly address tradeoffs between investments in information technology
and other capabilities for disaster management or offer advice about lev-
els of funding for IT or other disaster management activities.This chapter provides a brief overview of challenges confronted indisaster management, focusing particularly on the use and role of IT;Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTpresents several different ways of thinking about information and com-munication needs in disasters, which together provide a framework for
understanding the various roles that IT plays in disaster management;
and places the issue of IT use into the broader social context of disasters
and disaster management.DISASTERS, DISASTER MANAGEMENT, ANDINFORMATION TECHNOLOGYDisasters are events that disrupt the normal functioning of theeconomy and society on a large scale (for more on terminology, see Box
1.1). Natural, technological, and willful (terrorist initiated) sources of di-
sasters all cause dramatic losses of life and property.BOX 1.1Terminology Used in Disaster ManagementA variety of terms are used in the fields of emergency and disaster manage-ment. Over time, a fairly standard set of definitions has emerged, as reflected in aseries of reports from the National Research Council and other groups. Emergen-cies, disasters, and catastrophes, for example, are distinct events with importantdifferentiating characteristics.1 This report does not specifically consider Òemer-genciesÓÑa term that connotes ÒeverydayÓ events that can be handled within the
normal operational limits of public safety agenciesÑnor does it distinguish be-tween disasters and larger-scale events that might be called catastrophes, eventhough it is likely that the value of IT capabilities increases as the complexity and
scale of communication problems become greater. Throughout this report, the termÒdisasterÓ can be read as Òdisaster and catastrophe.ÓThis report uses the following set of definitions, adapted in part from FacingHazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimensions: 2¥Disasters are non-routine events in societies, regions, or communities thatinvolve conjunctions of physical conditions with social definitions of human harmand social disruption. The term ÒdisasterÓ has significant policy implications; forexample, a declaration of an event as a disaster is needed before certain resourc-
es are made available.¥Hazards are a source of potential or actual harm. Hazards may be natural,technological, or willful in origin. Examples of natural hazards include floods, hur-
ricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis, tornados, and so on. Technological hazards in-clude industrial accidents and other human-made sources of potential harm. Bho-pal and Chernobyl are examples. Terrorist attacks such as those on September
11, 2001, and the bombing in Oklahoma City are examples of willful hazards.¥Incident (or event
) is the specific occurrence of a disaster. A single disasterincident may lead to additional incidents. For instance, an earthquake may lead to
a tsunami and the tsunami may lead further to flooding. The term ÒincidentÓ alsoImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT17has important bureaucratic meaning (e.g., incident period) that determines, forinstance, who qualifies for financial assistance.¥Risk is a function of the likelihood (i.e., probability) of a specific event occur-ring and the potential consequences of harm should it in fact occur.¥Hazard vulnerability is the potential for physical harm and social disruptionto societies and their larger subsystems associated with hazards and disasters.There are two general types of vulnerability: physical vulnerability and social vul-
nerability. Physical vulnerability represents threats to physical structures and infra-structures, the natural environment, and related economic losses. Social vulnera-bility represents threats to the well-being of human populations and relatedeconomic losses.¥Hazard mitigation is an ongoing effort to reduce the physical and socialimpact of future disasters. It includes interventions made in advance of disasters to
prevent or reduce the impact. There are two major types of hazard mitigation:Structural mitigation involves designing, constructing, maintaining, and renovatingphysical structures and infrastructures to resist the physical forces of disaster im-
pacts. Nonstructural mitigation involves efforts to decrease the exposure of humanpopulations, physical structures, and infrastructures to hazardous conditions.¥Disaster preparedness includes actions taken in advance of disasters todeal with anticipated problems of disaster response and recovery. Actions includetraining and exercises to improve readiness; development and refinement of re-sponse and recovery plans; development, deployment, testing, and maintenance
of systems used for disaster management; and public education and informationprograms for individuals, households, firms, and public agencies.¥Disaster response provides for the immediate protection of life and proper-ty, reestablishing control and minimizing the effects of a disaster. It encompassesthe issuance and dissemination of predictions and warnings; planning and prepa-
ration immediately before an event (such as preparations following a hurricanewarning); evacuation and other forms of protective action; mobilization and organi-zation of emergency personnel, volunteers, and material resources; search and
rescue; care of casualties and survivors; damage and needs assessment; damagecontrol and restoration of public services; and maintenance of the political andlegal system.¥Disaster recovery encompasses both short-term activity intended to returnvital physical and social systems to operation and longer-term activities designedto restore these systems to their pre-disaster state. The concept of recovery en-
compasses both objective measures, such as reconstruction and assistance ef-forts, and the subjective experiences of disaster victims and processes of psycho-logical and social recovery.1E.L. Quarantelli, ÒEmergencies, Disasters and Catastrophes Are Different Phenomena,ÓDisaster Research Center, University of Delaware, 2000; available at http://dspace.udel.
edu:8080/dspace/handle/19716/674.2National Research Council, Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-sions, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, pp. 13-21. The report providesa detailed discussion of the importance of agreeing on basic definitions and the difficulty in
doing so. See also D. Alexander, ÒThe Study of Natural Disaster, 1977-1997: Some Reflec-
tions on a Changing Field of Knowledge,Ó Disasters 21(4):284-304, 1997.BOX 1.1 ContinuedImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTOne of the essential characteristics of disasters is their complexity.Although disasters may have relatively discrete origins, their effects
propagate and interact in ways that intensify the complexities and uncer-
tainties of dealing with them effectively. One major result is that disasters
must be responded to in an environment that can be overwhelming, unfa-
miliar, and disorienting. These challenges are quite familiar to experi-
enced emergency managers and first responders, as manifest in a home-
spun sign found in many U.S. emergency operations centers (Figure 1.1a).
This sign stands in marked contrast to a sign described by a reviewer of
this report in draft form that lists what emergency managers aspire toÑ
and often achieve despite the many obstaclesÑin a disaster (Figure 1.1b).Disaster management is a multifaceted process aimed at minimizingthe social and physical impact of these large-scale events. The difficult
nature of disaster management is well illustrated by the Catastrophic
Incident Annex to the National Response Plan, which lists some of the
potential problems faced in the aftermath of a disaster (Box 1.2). DisasterFIGURE 1.1 Wording on two signs displayed in emergency operations centersillustrating (a) challenges to decision making and (b) basic goals. SOURCES:
(a) Art Botterell, Office of the Sheriff, Contra Costa County, California, personalcommunication; (b) W. Craig Fugate, State of Florida Office of Emergency Man-agement, personal communication.The Emergency Operations Center:Where Uncomfortable OfficialsMeet in Unfamiliar SurroundingsTo Play Unaccustomed Roles
Making Unpopular DecisionsBased on Inadequate InformationAnd in Much Too Little TimeStanding Orders for All Disasters:1.Establish/reestablish communication with affected area.

2.Secure and complete search and rescue.
3.Meet basic human needs for medical treatment, water, food, shelter,
and emergency fuels; ice is a distant fifth (unless itÕs really hot).4.Restore critical infrastructure.
5.Open schools and local businesses.
6.Begin the recovery.
abImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT19management is typically thought of as encompassing four phases: mitiga-tion, preparedness, response, and recovery.1Reducing the exposure to an event prior to its occurrence may beBOX 1.2Catastrophic Incident Annex to the National Response Plan¥The response capabilities and resources of the local jurisdiction (to includemutual aid from surrounding jurisdictions and response support from the State)may be insufficient and quickly overwhelmed. Local emergency personnel whonormally respond to incidents may be among those affected and unable to perform
their duties.¥A detailed and credible common operating picture may not be achievablefor 24 to 48 hours (or longer). As a result, response activities must begin without
the benefit of a detailed or complete situation and critical needs assessment.¥Federal support must be provided in a timely manner to save lives, preventhuman suffering, and mitigate severe damage. This may require mobilizing and
deploying assets before they are requested via normal NRP protocols.¥Large numbers of people may be left temporarily or permanently homelessand may require prolonged temporary housing.¥A catastrophic incident may produce environmental impact that severelychallenges the ability and capacity of governments and communities to achieve atimely recovery.¥A catastrophic incident has unique dimensions/characteristics requiring thatresponse plans/strategies be flexible enough to effectively address emergingneeds and requirements.¥A catastrophic incident results in large numbers of casualties and/or dis-placed persons, possibly in the tens of thousands.¥A catastrophic incident may occur with little or no warning. Some incidents,such as rapid disease outbreaks, may be well underway before detection.¥The incident may cause significant disruption of the areas of critical infra-structure, such as energy, transportation, telecommunications, and public healthand medical systems.¥Large-scale evacuations, organized or self directed, may occur. The health-related implications of an incident aggravate attempts to implement a coordinatedevacuation management strategy.SOURCE: Extracted from Department of Homeland Security, National Response Plan(amended May 25, 2006). Links to the National Response Plan and annexes are available at
www.dhs.gov/nrp.1See, for example, Board on Natural Disasters, National Research Council, ÒMitigationEmerges as a Major Strategy for Reducing Losses Caused by Natural Disasters,Ó Science284(5422):1943-1947, June 1999; U.S. National Committee for the Decade for Natural Disas-ter Reduction, National Research Council, A Safer Future: Reducing the Impacts of NaturalDisasters, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTachieved by mitigation efforts aimed at preventing or reducing the threatand by preparedness measures meant to increase the capability or capac-
ity of response and recovery efforts from anticipated problems in advance
of an actual disaster event. Examples of mitigation include constructing
buildings to accommodate impacts, identifying and measuring hazards
to avoid putting social or physical assets in harmÕs way, and designing
computer networks to degrade gracefully and recover from cyberattacks.
Examples of preparation include detailed response planning, positioning
resources prior to the onset of an event, setting up operations centers,
training responders, and creating emergency management plans. Imme-
diate response seeks to contain the event and minimize loss of life and
injuries (rescue), health impacts, and property loss. Examples of immedi-
ate response include search and rescue operations. Sustained response
seeks to restore critical systems to functionality and meet basic social
needs. Examples of sustained response include restoration of sewers,
water, and communications. Recovery seeks to minimize cascading im-
pacts and facilitate long-term restoration to the pre-event situation.Widespread efforts at managing disasters in a comprehensive fashionare a relatively modern phenomenon. Disaster management in the United
States has historically been and remains a highly localized task that de-
pends largely on local resources. Still, regional, state, and national efforts
have grown out of the need to meet the increasing scale of disasters and
the associated costs of managing them. (Box 1.3 identifies major mile-
stones in the evolution of federal disaster management.)Much progress has been made over the years in reducing the loss oflife. Even loss of property from disasters is less than it might otherwise
have been where various mitigation and preparedness strategies have
been adopted and aggressive response and recovery efforts undertaken.2Yet, losses continue to increase.3 Many factors have contributed to grow-ing losses despite considerable progress in our understanding of them
and in the practice of disaster management.IT has been a major contributor to the progress that has been made.4Indeed, some of these applications have become so commonplace that it is
easy to forget the improvements made over recent decades. One familiar2See, for example, Board on Natural Disasters, National Research Council, ÒMitigationEmerges as a Major Strategy for Reducing Losses Caused by Natural Disasters,Ó Science284(5422):1943-1947, June 1999.3S.L. Cutter and C. Emrich, ÒAre Natural Hazards and Disaster Losses in the U.S. In-creasing?Ó EOS, Transactions, American Geophysical Union 86(41):381-386, October 2005. Asthe title implies, this article focuses on natural disasters.4Board on Natural Disasters, National Research Council, Reducing Disaster Losses ThroughBetter Information, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT21BOX 1.3Major Milestones in the Evolution of the Functions andProfession of Federal-Level Disaster Management in theUnited States¥Development of the comprehensive emergency management taxonomybased on an all-hazards approach and the four phases of mitigation, prepared-
ness, response, and recovery by the National GovernorsÕ Association in the 1970s.¥Establishment of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in1979, which consolidated federal mitigation, preparedness, and response activi-
ties into one agency, reporting directly to the President. Responsibility for responseto terrorist events, oil and hazardous materials releases, nuclear incidents, andhealth emergencies remained the province of other agencies, including the De-
partment of Justice (DOJ), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), U.S. CoastGuard, Department of Energy (DOE), and Department of Health and Human Ser-vices (DHHS).¥Publication of the Federal Response Plan (FRP) in 1991, providing a mech-anism for organizing and coordinating the resources of 23 (later 27) federal agen-cies and departments and the American Red Cross.¥Amendment of the FRP in 1999 to include a terrorism annex for coordinat-ing emergency management (termed consequence management) and law en-forcement (termed crisis management) during a terrorist attack.¥Creation of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in 2002 and themovement of FEMA, the Office for Domestic Preparedness, and the U.S. CoastGuard under DHS, consolidating all emergency management functions into onedepartment.¥Issuance of Presidential Decision Directive Number Five (HSPD-5) in 2003,directing DHS to create a national system for the management of all domesticincidents.¥Publication of the National Response Plan (NRP) in 2004, establishing pro-tocols for the management of all incidents under DHS/FEMA direction. The NRPsuperseded and incorporated the FRP, the National Contingency Plan, and theFederal Radiological Emergency Response Plan.¥Issuance of the National Incident Management System (NIMS) in 2004, thecreation of the NIMS Integration Center, and establishment of the requirement thatstate, local, and non-governmental emergency management organizations must
be NIMS compliant in order to receive federal funds.SOURCE: William L. Waugh, Living with Hazards, Dealing with Disasters: An Introduction toEmergency Management, M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, N.Y., 2000, p. 230; George D. Haddow andJane A. Bullock, Introduction to Emergency Management, Butterworth Heinemann, ElsevierScience, Burlington, Mass., 2003, p. 275; Claire Rubin, Disaster Time Line and TerrorismTime Line, 2004, available at http://www.disaster-timeline.com.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTexample is application of IT to weather forecasting that has resulted inmore accurate and timely warnings of hurricanes and floods.5 IT has thepotential for even greater impact on enhancing disaster management prac-
tice across all of its phasesÑmitigation, preparedness, response, and re-
coveryÑprovided it is used consistent with the knowledge of hazards,
disasters, and disaster management practices that has been gained from
the diverse range of disciplines that contribute to that knowledge base.6Box 1.4 provides a sampling of uses and examples of particular technolo-
gies that illustrate the myriad ways in which IT is an integral part of
disaster management today.Responding to disasters involves such information- and communica-tion-intensive activities as marshaling available resources and materiel,
mobilizing and organizing sufficient skilled personnel, deploying them
with those resources to where they are needed, and finally coordinating
their actions. Specific tasks include establishing connectivity with poten-
tial resource providers, authorizing the use of resources and coordinating
their use into something akin to a supply chain, integrating information
from diverse (including ad hoc) sources, reducing the volume of data to
relevant information for recipients, directing ongoing operations based
on an overall awareness of the situation, adjusting and altering prior
plans and commitments based on the evolving situation, and supporting
collaboration and distributed decision making. The mitigation process is
similarly complex and can involve many situation- and location-specific
details, and it relies heavily on tools such as predictive models of the
impacts of particular disasters. It is thus not surprising that IT has become
a critical tool for facilitating the communications and information-pro-
cessing activities in managing disasters.The larger human and organizational context of disaster manage-ment was the subject of a recent National Research Council study. FacingHazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimensions describes researchundertaken during the past three decades by social scientists on hazards
and disasters and recommends a continuing research agenda.7 The reportobserves that the management of disaster mitigation, preparedness, re-
sponse, and recovery has been aided by improvements in information5National Research Council, The Atmospheric Sciences Entering the Twenty-First Century,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1998.6U.S. National Committee for the Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, National Re-search Council, A Safer Future: Reducing the Impacts of Natural Disasters, National AcademyPress, Washington, D.C., 1991.7National Research Council, Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-sions, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT23technology but cautions that events such as Hurricane Katrina provide avivid demonstration that technology alone does not guarantee an effec-
tive organizational and public response to disasters.8Indeed, an important lesson from past disasters is that applying IT ina vacuum (i.e., without considering the broader organizational and social
context) may not only be ineffective but detrimental by, among other
things, creating the perception that technology will solve all problems.9Put another way, there is no IT ÒBand-AidÓ that will by itself overcome
underlying organizational problems or problems rooted in systemic pro-
cess, procedural, and policy issues that have never been reconciled.10 Norcan IT alone address societal decisions such as settlement and land use
patterns, construction standards and practices, and issues of social justice
and equity. All of these factors and many others may increase vulnerabil-
ity to hazards of large segments of the population and property. IT does,
however, provide useful capabilities for tackling many of these challenges.This experience is consistent with what is understood about the rolethat IT has played in productivity and quality advances in other sectors,
ranging from defense to banking and finance. The empirical evidence
shows, for example, that IT is not simply a tool for automating existing
processes and that its real impact is as an enabler of organizational
changes.11 It is the complementary investment in decentralized decision-making systems, training, and business processes along with technology
that allows organizational efficiency improvements.There are a number of barriers to the adoption and use of IT in disas-ter management, growing out of the unique character of the institutions
responsible, the organizational structure of the community as a whole,
their need to focus on day-to-day operational missions, and their need to
actively cooperate only under the most trying circumstances. Limited
budgets, lack of expertise and other resources, demographic differences8Ibid., p. 68.9E.L. Quarantelli, ÒProblematical Aspects of the Information/Communication Revolu-tion for Disaster Planning and Research: Ten Non-Technical Issues and Questions,Ó DisasterPrevention and Management: An International Journal 6(2):94-106, 1997.10Sharon Dawes, Thomas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, and Carrie A. Schneider, Informa-tion, Technology, and Coordination: Lessons from the World Trade Center Response, Center forTechnology in Government, University at Albany, State University of New York, June2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.11Jason Dedrick, Vijay Gurbaxani, and Kenneth L. Kraemer, ÒInformation Technologyand Economic Performance: A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence,Ó ACM ComputingSurveys 35(1):1-28, March 2003.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTBOX 1.4Some Examples of Uses of Information Technology inDisaster Management¥Remote Human-to-Human CommunicationsÑStarting with the first use ofradios in coordinating disaster responses, voice communication over radio hasbeen the primary role for IT in managing disasters. Indeed, by 1912 radio was
recognized as critical to disaster response with the enactment of a law, in re-sponse to the Titanic disaster on April 14 of that year, which required all ships tohave radios with two operators and auxiliary power and licensed transmitters.1¥Remote SensingÑNetworks of sensors are used in many ways, such asproviding data for weather prediction and earthquake detection, to mitigate theimpact of and to prepare for many natural disasters. Sensors are also extensively
used to prevent or control human-made disasters. Doppler radar is used to identifyand track hurricanes, tornados, and other weather phenomena. Networks of earthand structure motion detectors provide information about the severity and nature
of earthquakes. Satellite imagery is used to map and plan operations in majorwildland fires. Tsunami detectors provide advanced warning of the location andnature of tsunamis. Interferometric synthetic aperture radar (IfSAR), which uses an
aircraft-mounted sensor to measure surface elevation, produces topographic im-agery. Light detection and ranging (LIDAR) technology can measure the speed,distance, rotation, and chemical composition of a remote target, where the target
can be either a clearly defined object, such as a building, or a diffuse object, suchas a cloud. Other optical methods can also be used to remotely measure chemicalcomposition of air masses to track toxic materials.¥Warning and AlertingÑSirens systems have been used for over 100 yearsas a means to alert as many people as possible as quickly as possible.2 Onefamiliar IT-based warning system is the Emergency Alert System (EAS) estab-lished by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in November 1994;EAS replaced the Emergency Broadcast System (EBS) as a tool to warn the public(e.g., urban versus rural), and the press of routine responsibilities alsorepresent major constraints.However, as was illustrated in testimony to the committee and inafter-action reports of disaster responses, inventiveness, improvisation,
and ingenuity have partially compensated for some of these shortcom-
ings. Indeed, the often tacit knowledge of practitioners of disaster man-
agement about the realities of what works must also be incorporated if
strategies for improving the use of IT in disaster management are to have
maximum effect. The committee was mindful of this Òcan-doÓ spirit as it
examined the needs and opportunities for using IT and ways of overcom-
ing obstacles to its successful deployment and use.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT25about emergency situations. EAS includes AM and FM radio and broadcast andcable television (satellite operators can participate voluntarily). The National Oce-anic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Weather Radio All Hazards networkof radio stations broadcasts continuous weather information directly from a nearby
National Weather Service office along with localized warnings, watches, forecasts,and other hazard information. Recent years have seen efforts to extend warningsystems to newer IT such as cell-phone- and Internet-delivered text messages.¥Emergency Call SystemsÑThe 911 emergency call systems for wiredphones have been deployed over a 20-year period across the United States andhave now reached near universal coverage. The 911 service for mobile phones
has recently been enhanced to provide location information about the caller.¥ReportingÑSatellite communication hubs have enabled media to reportfrom disasters. The public is also able to participate in new ways through the use
of mobile phones, text messaging, and the Internet. While the technical capabilityfor public participation in disaster reporting continues to grow, it has gone largelyunrealized, even though recent disasters have shown that these alternative com-
munication techniques are more robust than previously thought.¥Modeling and SimulationÑIncreasingly sophisticated models are being cre-ated of weather, storm surge, earthquake ground motion and shake intensity, toxic
plume modeling, hazard prediction, and loss analysis. Culturally dependent mod-els of population response would also be important for managing evacuations andother aspects of disaster management.1University of San Diego, ÒHistory of Radio.Ó See http://history.sandiego.edu/gen/recording/radio.html.2Laura Olson, Public Safety Best Practices: Talking Siren Technology: An Evaluation of U.S.Implementation of Early Warning Systems, Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments,Washington, D.C., July 7, 2005. The report includes an examination of local government best-
practice case studies of siren use across the United States.THE DIMENSIONS OF INFORMATION ANDCOMMUNICATIONS NEEDS IN DISASTER MANAGEMENTInformation and communications needs for disaster management arehighly diverse in nature, reflecting the multiple purposes for information
and communication and the different activities and information and com-
munications requirements that occur at different times and locations with
respect to a disaster.12 Communications and information processing re-quirements in a disaster are very heterogeneous, varying according to
context, use, time, latency, distance, and bandwidth. There are also many12Board on Natural Disasters, National Research Council, Reducing Disaster Losses ThroughBetter Information, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtypes of information that can be communicated from many informationsources. Indeed, the types of information available continue to grow with
ongoing advances in IT. There is also a broad range of information actors
and organizations involved in managing disasters; their ability to make
appropriate decisions and function effectively can be greatly enhanced by
IT and may depend on it for dealing with increasingly complex situations.Given the heterogeneity of the information, the dynamics of the situ-ation, and the diversity of actors, it is not surprising that there are a
number of tensions that arise between more centralized, top-down, and
planned disaster management activities and more decentralized, bottom-
up, and ad hoc activities. For example, consider the following:¥The needs of ÒofficialÓ first responders versus those of emergentgroups of people,¥Command-and-control decision making versus distributed deci-sion making,¥The needs of first responders in the field versus the needs of higher-level decision makers, and¥The need for security and privacy protection versus the benefits ofbroadened access to information.There are also inherent tensions between local governments andamong federal, state, and local levels of government.In each of these cases, the design and deployment of an IT systemcan make the tensions more acute and more visible. Moreover, IT cannot
be used to paper over organizational problemsÑbut its appropriate use
may enable disaster managers to successfully accommodate a wider spec-
trum of disaster management activities, and do so more effectively and
efficiently.Examples of the Kinds of InformationUseful in Disaster ManagementThe first applications of IT to disasters were in the form of voicecommunications. Advances since then have led to many additional forms
of information that have been included in disaster management practices
to varying degrees, including text, geospatial data, video, sensor data,
and collections of these and other types of data in databases or other
electronic forms.The number of available information sources has expanded consider-ably in recent years to include surveillance cameras; ground, air, and
satellite sensors; telemetry from assets and personnel; unmanned vehicles;
and eye witnesses with more technology. Some of these data sources haveImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT27been well integrated into disaster planning. Other sources could improvesituation awareness with efforts at better integration. The National Re-
search Council study Reducing Disaster Losses Through Better Informationcatalogs a number of potential information sources (base data, scientificdata, engineering data, economic data, environmental data, response data)
and major types of information held and being gathered by federal agen-
cies (e.g., base cartographic, land-use, seismic, hazardous site, demo-
graphic, aircraft route, river flow, and meteorological information).13 Al-though some of these data sources are currently being used by disaster
researchers for vulnerability assessment,14 they are often inaccessible,unused, out of date, unusable, or inadequate for disaster managers, espe-
cially during response.15Further advances in sensor technology (both pre-positioned and post-incident deployable) are likely to lead to opportunities for further im-
provements in both the volume and quality of data available. A number
of factors affect data qualityÑcompleteness, timeliness, accuracy, and
consistencyÑand advances should target all of them.IT Needs and the Incident Time LineIn thinking about the use of IT in a disaster it is useful to think of anincident time line consisting of three segments: pre-incident, trans-incident,and post-incident. In fact, the value of considering disasters and disastermanagement chronologically is unquestionable and taken for granted.16Disaster management can be viewed as roughly divided into three parts:
(1) reducing exposure to and preparations for a hazard under routine,
pre-incident circumstance; (2) preparations and actions immediately prior
to and during an event; and (3) dealing with the consequences once it has
occurred. Thinking in terms of time is also essential for understanding the
different requirements for disaster management depending on the type of
disaster. IT plays important roles in each time segment, and the commit-
tee considered the potential for increasing effectiveness in each one.13Board on Natural Disasters, National Research Council, Reducing Disaster Losses ThroughBetter Information, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999, pp. 13, 16-17.14See, for instance, S.L. Cutter, B.J. Boruff, and W.L. Shirley, ÒSocial Vulnerability toEnvironmental Hazards,Ó Social Science Quarterly 84(2):242-261, June 2003.15See, for example, Sharon Dawes, Thomas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, and Carrie A.Schneider, Information, Technology, and Coordination: Lessons from the World Trade Center Re-sponse, Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, State University ofNew York, June 2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_
lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.16National Research Council, Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-sions, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 23.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTExamples of the Kinds of DataCommunicated in the Response to a DisasterOne important kind of data communicated in a disaster is directivesand authorizations for inter- and intraagency coordination. These are
largely synchronous exchanges about where to go, where to meet, and
reporting status. They can generally be accomplished through low-band-
width mechanisms such as voice and text (e.g., e-mail, text messaging)
and can be transmitted using both real-time media (voice or chat) and
near-real-time media (such as e-mail). Coordination tasks result in inter-
dependencies where Agency A cannot proceed with a task without au-
thorization from or the arrival of Agency BÑwaits that can introduce
significant delays in response activities if robust communications are not
available.Another important kind of data is requests for distributed decisionmaking, especially logistics and planning. The content of these exchanges
is akin to those that arise in dynamically creating a supply chain or a
business enterprise where requests are tracked and processed. The ex-
changes may be more asynchronous where text and other files are sent
and the time for a response is less immediate. Bandwidth requirements
may generally be modest and traffic levels relatively low, but large files
may need to be shared and databases kept synchronized.Data are also needed to inform decision making at all levels andto help form a common operational picture. Relevant data include the
following:¥Human observations from direct response activities. These are the re-ports from observers in the field, such as from local emergency operations
centers, country transportation workers, pre-positioned trained observ-
ers, or other responders. The exchanges are largely one-directional, from
the observer to a commander. Voice (e.g., cell and satellite phones) and
text are both useful.¥Geographic information system (GIS)-oriented data. GIS informationflows both to and from the field, with maps and projections such as flood-
ing pushed to responders or tracking of personnel and assets collected by
commanders. GIS information is typically in the form of high-resolution
maps. If appropriate map sets have not been pre-positioned, large
amounts of data may need to be transmitted; otherwise communications
will generally take the form of updates and overlays to base maps.¥Visual-oriented data. Overhead imagery, satellite photos (before andafter), and pictures and video of the disaster from other sources such as
the public or other responding agencies can be extremely valuable. These
data are inherently high-bandwidth and often need to be shared amongImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT29agencies, even if a common operating picture (a shared understanding ofa situation by a group of people who need to act together to achieve
common goals) is not established. Consider, for example, that a high-
resolution overhead image of a coastline would help urban search-and-
rescue units prioritize searches and allow transportation and law enforce-
ment officials to determine avenues of access for supplies, controlling
access, and so on.¥Logistical information. Information about the location and status ofresources provides an important part of the common operational picture.
Relevant data include databases and schedules describing where re-
sources are, what and who has been dispatched to which affected areas,
and so on; and what resources are needed by whom, where, and when,
and the specific capabilities and limitations of those resources.17¥Sensor data. Information about the status of built infrastructure andenvironmental factors provided from pre-deployed instrumentation and
devices deployed post-incident.18Examples of Sources of Data for ResponseThe source of data may have implications for their use as well aswhether and how they are transmitted. Improving the effectiveness of
data sources may include improving the usefulness of and access to the
data. Valuable data sources exist for all phases of disaster management.
Some sources of data for response include the following:¥Data being ÒpushedÓ from the field. During response, some sources ofvaluable data include data mapping damage, locations of responders and
other resources, information on the status of response activities, and sen-
sor data. High-fidelity (and thus high-bandwidth) data are required for
some applications. For example, pictures or video of damage to a bridge
could be transmitted to off-site experts for structural assessment.¥Data being ÒpulledÓ from and ÒpushedÓ into the field. A few examplesof data respondersÕ requests or data sent to them include field reports,17This need for more detailed information about the specific capabilities and limitationsof those resources is discussed in Sharon S. Dawes, Thomas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, andCarrie A. Schneider, Information, Technology, and Coordination: Lessons from the World TradeCenter Response, Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, State Univer-sity of New York, 2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.18In the response to the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, environ-mental information was also needed about the construction materials and possible hazard-ous materials in damaged or destroyed buildings.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTimagery and map updates, and status information on resource deploy-ments.¥Discovery services. The Internet offers the prospect of identifyingand creating information resources dynamically from a wide variety of
official and non-official sources.Tactical Versus Strategic OperationsTactical operations focus on the response operations in the affectedarea. They may involve stabilizing the situation sufficiently to carry out
those operations. (In the case of a terrorist incident, this could involve
capture or neutralization of the threat as well as responding to it.) Deci-
sions are often immediate, based on direct observation and a priori
knowledge. Any available information useful for gaining a broader un-
derstanding of the situation to aid in the decision-making process may
help answer questions critical to tactical operations such as, What re-
sources are nearby that I can use? How extensive is this problem? Can
neighboring resources/units be directed my way? When can I expect
help to get here? A secondary role of tactical operations is as general
information gatherers for the strategic operations.Strategic operations, by contrast, are essentially ÒenterpriseÓ deci-sions and may span weeks to months. Information flow for strategic op-
erations is highly computer-centric and more akin to the flow of informa-
tion in a supply chain management system.A particular challengeÑand one where IT can play an importantroleÑin disasters is connecting tactical operations and strategic opera-
tions. The physical distance between the tactical and strategic decision
makers, as well as the differing time spans for decisions, poses additional
challenges for cooperative work and information sharing. Another area
requiring further research is in understanding what the roles should be
for strategic and tactical operations and how IT should be structured in
order to properly support those roles.A FRAMEWORK FOR CONSIDERING USE OF INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY IN THE BROADER SOCIAL CONTEXTAs suggested above, both successes and failures in disaster manage-ment depend on the effectiveness and resilience of human as well as
technological systems. As a result, broad statements about IT failures
during disaster, although often true, can be a major source of confusion
about the complex sources of disaster management failures. A four-layer
ÒstackÓ model developed by the committee illustrates the range of issuesImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT31that are sometimes lumped under the rubric of Òcommunication,ÓÒinteroperability,Ó and Òinformation technologyÓ issues. The model in-
cludes the following elements:1.Organizational and social context comprises the goals, metrics, pri-orities, and beliefs of each organization involved, as well as those of
Òmeta-organizationsÓ such as an incident command structure or an emer-
gency operations center that involves multiple organizations. It is con-
cerned with the purpose, content, and partners in communication. The
social side goes beyond the logical layer that facilitates transmitting con-
tent. It includes the cultural and organizational constraints and work-
arounds to organizational barriers, such as informal social networks be-
tween trusted friends in different organizations. One source of
ÒcommunicationÓ problems at this level can be simple misalignment be-
tween the goals and priorities of different organizational elements; for
example, at a potential terrorism site there might be a ÒdisconnectÓ be-
tween organizations focused on criminal investigation and others con-
cerned chiefly with rescue or restoration of services.2.Human behavioral context includes the many variables of individualhuman performance, including skill sets, training, experience, health,
personal stress, and other personal factors. Despite efforts at standard-
ization, human beings inevitably bring a degree of variability into the
execution of procedure and the pursuit of organizational goals and val-
ues. This is not necessarily a bad thing; indeed human originality and
adaptability are often critical to meeting unforeseen challenges. But they
can insert an only partly controlled variable into the performance
of carefully planned processes and can give rise to problems that are
sometimes mischaracterized as technology-related communications
problems, especially under conditions of high stress or uncertainty typi-
cal in disasters.3.Procedural and policy framework refers to predictable patterns ofbehavior. Sometimes these are formalized and documented, but often
they are unwritten and even unconscious artifacts of an organizational or
disciplinary culture. Procedures are often event-driven, that is, expressed
in the form Òwhen X happens, do Y.Ó A great deal of implicit knowledge
about the immediate system and its environment is encoded in such
procedures. As a result, they can be confounded by the profound changes
in context that may accompany a disaster. For example, an emergency
communications plan can be disrupted by loss of, or interference with,
expected technical channels. Without an effective way to devise and tran-
sition to an alternate plan, such disruptions can lead to perceived major
failures of communication, even when significant technical capability
remains.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT4.Technology includes the bulk of what is frequently understood inthe terms Òcommunications,Ó Òinteroperability,Ó and Òinformation tech-
nology.Ó Technology is the medium through which communications and
infrastructure needs are met, and can be thought of as the physical layer
of communications. It includes all of the capital infrastructure investment
for communications and information technology. Although technical fail-
ures are by no means uncommon, they can frequently be circumvented
using alternate technologies, provided the procedures, skills, and organi-
zational will remain to implement such expedients.This conceptual model presents a number of useful insights. First,problems (and the perceptions of problems) tend to propagate downward(from 1 to 4) through the stack, so that various non-technical issues can
end up being framed as technology failures. For example, police and
firefighters at a traffic accident might have subtly different organizational
priorities. The firefighters might be focused on the well-being of victims
at the scene, while the police might be tasked with reestablishing unham-
pered traffic flow for the larger community. This organizational differ-
ence might lead to personal and procedural conflicts that ultimately might
be (mistakenly) characterized as a Òcommunication problemÓ and then
(also mistakenly) interpreted as a failure of Òinteroperability,Ó which is
frequently assumed to be a technical issue.Second, change tends to propagate upward (from 4 to 1) through thestack. Effective use of new technologies requires and enables new proce-
dures, which in turn require new skills and create new challenges, to
which organizations ultimately must adapt. For example, in many large
organizations, computer-based word-processing software was first intro-
duced in a Òword-processing poolÓ office, by analogy to previous typing
and dictation pools. Over time the opportunities that provided for faster
and more flexible service moved the new technology out to secretarial
desks in the operating departments, and eventually onto the desktops of
commanders and executives. The word-processing pool, and in some
cases the secretary as well, faded into organizational history.Third, many interoperability and data-sharing challenges are not fully oreven mostly technical in nature. Indeed, as noted in the report summariz-ing a workshop convened as part of this project, better Òhuman organiza-
tion, willingness to cooperate, and a willingness of government at higher
levels to listen to those at local levels who really do the work and who are
the actual responders are all critical factors in making better use of infor-
mation technology for disaster management.Ó19 As a result, many inter-19See National Research Council, Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technologyto Enhance Disaster Management, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005,p. 2.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT33operability and data-sharing challenges may not be amenable to techni-cal solutions aloneÑor at all.LEVERAGING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE THEEFFECTIVENESS OF DISASTER MANAGEMENTChapter 2 builds on the discussion in this chapter to outline a visionof the potential for IT to improve the effectiveness of disaster manage-
ment in all its phases. The vision encompasses six areas of IT-enabled
capabilities identified by the committee as having particularly significant
potential. Chapter 3 examines mechanisms for focusing IT research and
development on disasters and disaster management in a way that re-
flects disaster research and the experience of practitioners. It also ex-
plores mechanisms for improving the transfer and adoption of IT into
practice. Chapter 4 sketches a potential IT research agenda based on the
vision elaborated in Chapter 2 and driven by the mechanisms described
in Chapter 3.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.342The Potential to EnhanceDisaster Management:Key IT-Based Capabilities
How could better application of information technology (IT) todisaster management reduce the human and economic costs of
catastrophic events? This chapter outlines a vision for IT-enhanced disaster management in terms of six areas of IT-based capabili-
ties. Three scenarios developed by the committee (presented in Appendix
A) describe specific fictional disasters to help place those capabilities in
the context of existing IT use in disaster management and to highlight
how progress would have tangible positive impacts.Reducing the impact of disasters requires a complex mix of technicaland social endeavors, and no single prescription or discipline can provide
all the answers.1 Indeed, disaster researchers have frequently expressedconcerns that technology not be viewed as a panacea.2 The committeeshares the view that enhancing disaster management requires attention to1See, for example, National Research Council, A Safer Future: Reducing the Impacts ofNatural Disasters, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991.2See, for example, E.L. Quarantelli, ÒProblematical Aspects of the Information/Commu-nication Revolution for Disaster Planning and Research: Ten Non-Technical Issues andQuestions,Ó Disaster Prevention and Management 6(1), 1997. See also Sharon S. Dawes, Tho-mas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, and Carrie A. Schneider, Information, Technology, and Coor-dination: Lessons from the World Trade Center Response, Center for Technology in Govern-ment, University at Albany, State University of New York, 2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT35technological, organizational, and social factors and depends on a solidunderstanding of disaster management as well as the technologies.3Nonetheless, IT represents an important point of leverage for enhanc-ing disaster management.4 Briefings to the committee suggested thatprogress continues to be made toward ever more effective use of informa-
tion technology to enhance disaster management. Better preparation and
training of public safety officials and the public, improved mitigation and
prevention measures, more efficient and effective response, and more
rapid recovery are all possible.5 Furthermore, the public has high expec-tations that technology that it sees deployed ever deeper into other soci-
etal systems will be applied to improve the handling of disasters.This chapter discusses six key IT-based capabilities that were selectedby the committee because they (1) have the potential to address major
problem areas in current disaster management practice and (2) represent
areas where there appears to be significant potential for further advance-
ment of the current state of the art. These capabilities span areas that
could improve hazard mitigation, disaster preparedness, disaster re-
sponse, and disaster recovery. They also aim to address requirements of
practitioners at all levelsÑfirst responders, local or regional emergency
managers, and national emergency managers. Improving these capabili-
ties is applicable to addressing natural, accidental, and terrorist-induced
disasters, though some capabilities may be more specific to one type.Table 2.1 lists these capabilities together with examples of near-term,mid-term, and long-term opportunities for technology development that
were identified by the committee. Some of these technology areas are
already the focus of significant federal research and development invest-
ment. For example, self-managing and repairing networks are the focus
of a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) research pro-
gram. Some technologies are the focus of considerable research and de-
velopment investment from the private sector, such as wireless mesh3J.-L. Wybo and H. Lonka, ÒEmergency Management and the Information Society: Howto Improve the Synergy?Ó International Journal of Emergency Management 1(2):183-190, 2003.4Robin Stephenson and Peter S. Anderson, ÒDisasters and the Information TechnologyRevolution,Ó Disasters 21(4):305-334, December 1997. This paper reviews the application ofIT to disaster management from 1970 through the middle 1990s. It identifies a considerable
body of literature showing the evolution of the use of IT in disaster management from itsbeginnings to becoming Òan indispensable component of disaster operations worldwide.Ó5John Pine, ÒResearch Needs to Support the Emergency Manager of the Future,Ó Journalof Homeland Security and Emergency Management 1(1), Article 3, 2004. Originally presented atthe National AcademiesÕ conference ÒThe Emergency Manager of the Future: A DisastersRoundtable,Ó June 13, 2003.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTTABLE 2.1 Key IT-Based Capabilities for Disaster Management andRelated Promising TechnologiesPromising TechnologiesKey CapabilityNear Term
More robust, interoperable, andCellular
priority-sensitive communicationsWireless networking
Redundant and resilient infrastructure
Internet/IP-based networkingImproved situational awarenessRadio-frequency identification for resource
and a common operating picturetracking and logistics
Improved decision support andOnline resource directories
resource tracking and allocationCommercial collaboration software and
file sharingGreater organizational agility forComputer-mediated exercises
disaster managementPortable unmanned aerial vehicles and
robotsBetter engagement of the publicAutomated, multimodal public notification
and resource contact systemsMultimodal public reporting capabilitiesValidated online information sources
Reverse 911 capability (i.e., two-wayemergency reporting)Enhanced infrastructure survivabilityMobile power generators
and continuity of societal functionsRedundant radio systems
Dynamic stockpiled supply managementImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT37MidtermLong Term
Mobile cellular infrastructureSoftware-defined radios
Intelligent spectrum sharingDelay-tolerant networking
Multiple input/multiple outputPassive and active embedded conductors
wireless systemsand relays for enhanced communication in
Integrated voice and databuildings, rubble, and underground
Policy-based access controlPolicy-based routing and congestion
mechanismsmanagement
Self-managing and repairing (autonomousand adaptive) networksEmbedded, networked sensorsSemantic routing
Routine information fusionData mining across diverse information
Publish/subscribe informationsources
disseminationCalibrated information confidence tools
User-centered situational awarenessDeployable sensor networks
information presentationAutomated information fusion from
diverse sourcesNetwork and information securityAugmented cognitionDynamic responsibility chartingDecision sentinels
Intelligent adaptive planning toolsDistributed emergency operation centers
Resource use modelingCoordinated transportation, communication,and decision supportComputer-assisted decision-making toolsEvent-replay toolsContinuous learning tools
Online repositories of lessons learnedComputer-assisted disaster simulation

Integrated ad hoc data-collection toolstraining
(blogs/wikis)Distributed, scalable, survivable data
loggingDynamic capability profiling andcredentialingCollective sensemakingVolunteer mobilization systemsAutomated public reporting tools
Distributed, dynamic private resourceOptimized data formatting for differing
directoriespresentation devices
Enhanced two-way communicationwith publicNetwork redundancyRisk management tools with uncertainty
Renewable power sourcesmodeling

Embedded sensors for nondestructiveResilient ÒsmartÓ materials and structures
asset evaluationfor infrastructure survivability
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTnetworks and collaboration software. Different actions are likely to berequired to move technologies toward deployment in the field depending
on where they are in the technology pipeline (discussed in Chapter 3), the
degree of specialized technological adaptation required for use in disaster
management, and the need for organizational changes.The sections that follow examine each of the six key capabilities inmore detail.MORE ROBUST, INTEROPERABLE, ANDPRIORITY-SENSITIVE COMMUNICATIONSDuring a disaster, both commercial and public safety communicationinfrastructureÑtelephone lines, radio towers, communication switches,
network operation centers, and the requisite power neededÑis often de-
graded or damaged. Simultaneously the demand on communication in-
creases from the public and from first responders. Mobile communication
demand is especially acute. New users from external public safety juris-
dictions enter the disaster region. The public may have to be mobilized
for evacuations. Moreover, environments confronted by first responders,
such as collapsed buildings, place unusual requirements on communica-
tions capabilities. And, finally, hostile action may compromise even those
resources that survive the initial disaster. Simple availability of communications is thus a critical starting pointfor disaster response. Communication robustness can be improved by
applying well-understood techniques for improving the availability of
systems, that is, hardening infrastructure, improving network resilience
and adaptability, providing redundancy and diversity, improving com-
ponent robustness, and optimizing recovery speed. Notably, many com-
munications problems are caused by the destruction of communication
devices or communication lines, by the loss of power to radio towers,
switches, and other infrastructure, and by the lack of ability to recharge
handsets and other mobile devices. These are often the result of damage
to physical structures (buildings, cell towers). Although it is not economi-
cally feasible to harden all relevant equipment for worst-case scenarios,
improvements are certainly possible.Commercial services could provide a valuable complement to dedi-cated disaster management communications systems by providing re-
dundant infrastructure for voice and data communications. Generally
implemented on a different technology base than that of dedicated sys-
tems, they also add diversity. Commercial infrastructure, such as the cel-
lular network, is also, by design, highly interoperable. (Mobile callers can
readily communicate with a subscriber to their carrier, any other carrier,
or a landline subscriber.) The participation of wireless Internet serviceImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT39providers in Hurricane Katrina response and relief efforts hints at thepossibilities of embracing and integrating another type of commercial
technology into disaster management practice. Of course, one reason for
deploying separate public safety radio systems is that they are designed
to be more resilient that commercial infrastructure. And public safety
radios are designed to much more stringent operational standards than
mobile phones. Yet, both commercial and public safety communications
infrastructures have suffered breakdowns in recent disasters.One critical issue that arises in considering commercial services ispriority access. When using commercial services, priority could be pro-
vided in a variety of ways. For example, it is possible to set up a cellular
network in a spectrum band that is dedicated to disaster management,
though cellular handsets would have to be modified (at a significant addi-
tional cost) to support this (and the spectrum allocated). Alternatively, a
commercial service can be used, with arrangements made (preferably
prior to an incident) to reserve a certain fraction of the capacity for priori-
tized disaster management traffic. Of course, priority access to commer-
cial services requires a contractual and regulatory framework as well as
technology adaptation.Commercial technology (and adaptations of commercial technology),whether used as part of commercial services or incorporated into dedi-
cated disaster communications systems, could be used to more quickly
leverage the latest technology advances and capabilities. Commercial
technologies provide a range of capabilities supporting voice and data at
rapidly increasing transfer rates. Two examples of commercial technolo-
gies widely embraced by the public which hold potential for disaster
management are cellular telephony and 802.11 standards-based wireless
networking. Cell phones are now used by a large majority of people on a
daily basis, so it is natural to continue to use them in a disaster. Besides
traditional voice calls, cell phones often also support push-to-talk capa-
bilities, text messaging, and Web access, all of which could be usefully
employed. Wireless networking is also becoming ubiquitous in many ar-
eas and is supported on laptops and handheld devices. More generally,
Internet Protocol (IP)-based communications networks could allow sup-
port of emerging IP-based multimedia services, high-data-rate access, and
mission-critical tactical group voice and interoperable communications
during emergency responses.6 All these technologies are widely usedand relatively inexpensive. Their familiarity addresses another issue re-6Krishna Balachandran, Kenneth C. Budka, Thomas P. Chu, Tewfik L. Doumi, and Jo-seph H. Kang, ÒMobile Responder Communication Networks for Public Safety,Ó IEEE Com-munications Magazine 44(1):56-64, 2006.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTlated to communications robustnessÑthe tendency to fall back on tech-nology used routinely.7Although some commercial communication technologies have beensuccessfully adopted by some first responders, there is certainly addi-
tional scope for using these technologies, often with minimal adaptation,
to improve disaster response. Rapid deployment of wireless, cellular,
and satellite infrastructure to replace infrastructure damaged in a disas-
ter is one such opportunity. Mobile, rapidly deployable infrastructure
has the advantage of leveraging commercial technology without neces-
sarily relying on commercial service providers. Mobile infrastructure can
be brought in after an event to quickly reestablish communications, (par-
tially) replacing infrastructure lost during the event. Mobile cellular tech-
nology might also be used to bring cellular infrastructure to rural or
other areas lacking pre-deployed cellular service just as it has already
been demonstrated to bring such service to areas where existing cellular
infrastructure was destroyed.8There are, however, important communications problems that arisein disaster management, especially in response activities, that are un-
likely to be addressed in the commercial market. One notable example is
meeting communications needs inside buildings or other enclosed spaces,
including damaged structures. Possible approaches include mandating
the deployment of hardened repeaters in buildings, developing and de-
ploying special low-frequency radios, and developing and deploying low-
cost Òbread crumbÓ repeaters for first responders. Another example of
such a communications problem is the congestion (both local and system-
wide) that arises when and where communication is most needed, result-
ing in a spike in communications traffic, especially in the area where
infrastructure is likely to be most damaged. Handling surging demand
that coincides with reduced capability will require new approaches.Not surprisingly, given the number of organizations that must cometogether to cope with a major disaster, the interoperability of communica-
tions and other IT systems is often cited as a major concern. The overall
evolution of communications systems (and, indeed, IT more broadly) in
disaster management has been characterized by local, agency-level acqui-
sition and deployment driven by local budgets from local taxing bodies7National Research Council, Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technology toEnhance Disaster Management, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, p. 4.8Presentation of Mark Koro, Qualcomm, to the committee on December 12, 2005, onQualcommÕs deployment of mobile cellular on wheels, including mobile switches on wheels,during Hurricane Katrina.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT41and by local priorities. This has led to the creation of a heterogeneousmixture of voice and (more recently) data systems across the United States.
The result is that different public safety agencies (e.g., police, fire, and
emergency medical), even in the same community, are often unable to
communicate or share information with each other. Interoperation is not
typically considered when IT is acquired. Thus, it is not surprising that
limited technical interoperability exists.Concerns about public safety communications interoperability are notnew, though they have received increasing attention in recent years. For
example, the Public Safety Wireless Advisory Committee (PSWAC), in a
1996 report to the Federal Communications Commission and the Na-
tional Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), con-
cluded that Òunless immediate measures are taken to alleviate spectrum
shortfall and promote interoperability, public safety will not be able to
adequately discharge their obligation to protect life and property in a
safe, efficient, and cost-effective manner.Ó9 A 1997 National Institute ofJustice (NIJ) study that surveyed state and local law enforcement agencies
confirmed and quantified a number of issues identified in the PSWAC
report.10Additional emphasis has been placed on interoperability and associ-ated issues in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, the debate on the transition to
digital television, and the response to Katrina. The 9/11 Commission, for
example, cited first responder voice communications interoperability as a
considerable issue in the response to the attacks and concluded that the
highest-priority remedy was assignment of additional radio-frequency
spectrum as a way of achieving interoperability. It recommended that
Congress enact legislation providing for the Òexpedited and increased
assignment of radio spectrum for public safety purposes.Ó11 The 9/11Public Discourse project report-card-like ÒFinal Report on 9/11 Commis-
sion RecommendationsÓ gave an ÒFÓ to progress on providing adequate
radio spectrum for first responders, citing lack of progress freeing up the
analog television broadcast spectrum and reserving some of it for public9Public Safety and Wireless Advisory Committee (PSWAC), Final Report of the PublicSafety and Wireless Advisory Committee, presented to the FCC and NTIA September 11, 1996,p. 2; available at http://ntiacsd.ntia.doc.gov/pubsafe/publications/PSWAC_AL.PDF.10Mary J. Taylor, Robert C. Epper, and Thomas K. Tolman, ÒWireless Communicationsand Interoperability Among State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies,Ó NCJ 168945, Na-tional Institute of Justice, Washington, D.C., January 1998.11National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (also known as the9/11 Commission), The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission onTerrorist Attacks Upon the United States
, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 2004,
p. 397; available at http://www.9-11commission.gov.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTsafety purposes.12 More recently, legislation was enacted that calls for ahandover in 2009.13First responder interoperability is often cited as a major problem inresponding to disasters, and recommendations aimed at addressing inter-
operability frequently appear prominently in after-action reports on ma-
jor disasters. Indeed, improved first responder communications would
have important benefits in terms of enabling communications across ju-
risdictions and among fire, police, and medical services. The issue has
deservedly received attention from the public, government officials, and
lawmakers. However, to place this issue in context, it is worth noting that
interoperability is only one of many significant communications issues
facing first responders, and first responder communications are not the
only technology-related disaster management need (see Box 2.1).Furthermore, interoperability issues arrive in many guises, from com-patibility of waveforms and message formats (technical), to terminology
and definitions (semantic), to practices and procedures (organizational).
Much of the public attention has been focused on voice communications,
but within the public safety community, data communications interoper-
ability is an increasingly critical component and central part of any com-
munications system. Data communications interoperability, while having
some issues in common with voice communications, raises a number of
specific issues that arise when sharing information from different sources.
The 1997 NIJ study noted the trend toward increasing reliance on infor-
mation sharing and the importance of data communications interoper-
ability to enable it. (For an overview of interoperability initiatives, see
Appendix B.)A number of efforts are underway to increase technical standardiza-tion, and a number of technical solutions have been developed that allow
systems such as first responder radios to be ÒpatchedÓ together. How-
ever, interoperability should not be viewed as solely a technical problem.
The harder problem is deciding when the various users across these
interoperable systems should talk to each other, the protocol for doing so,
who can make those decisions, and how teams get formed and dissolved.Although information could, in principle, flow arbitrarily in distrib-uted networks, in order to act, some sort of structure is needed. Most
information is hierarchically organized, but there are many different pos-
sible hierarchies, reflecting the need and point of view of the creators.129/11 Public Discourse Project, ÒFinal Report on 9/11 Commission Recommendations,ÓDecember 5, 2005.13Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, S. 1932, Sec. 3403, ÒAnalog Spectrum Recovery: HardDeadline,Ó Congressional Budget Office, Washington, D.C., January 27, 2006.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT43BOX 2.1Interoperability in ContextInteroperability is only one of many significant communications issues facingfirst responders. Consider the following, for example:¥One cannot interoperate without being able to operate in the first place.Simple availability of communications (i.e., operability) is an important consider-ation because disasters often cause damage to communications systems. Bothagility, which makes it possible to more rapidly reconstitute communications, and
robustness, which makes it easier to keep communication systems operating, areat a premium. Moreover, environments such as collapsed buildings that confrontfirst responders place unusual requirements on communications capabilities.¥No single communication or information system is likely to suffice in a majordisaster, no matter how comprehensive its scope or how much investment hasbeen made in its interoperability or technical robustness. A variety of communica-tions systems may end up being pressed into service, reflecting the value of redun-dancy.¥Technical communications interoperability does not address the challengesof data interoperation among organizations. Disaster response often requires ac-cess to information held by multiple independent organizations. However, eachorganizationÕs information is structured first to benefit its own routine needs and
secondarily to meet non-routine external needs. Experience from many domainsshows that working across these so-called silos cannot be addressed simply byimposing a single standard across all organizations.1First responder communications are far from the only technology-related di-saster management need. Consider the following:¥The very first individuals on the scene of a disaster are likely not first re-sponders but members of the public.¥Many other actors and organizations (other than first responders) are in-volved in managing disasters; their ability to make appropriate decisions and func-
tion effectively also depends on IT.¥Communications and information-processing requirements in a disaster arevery heterogeneous, varying according to context, use, time, latency, distance,
and bandwidth.1Related to this, there may also be different regulatory conditions among organizationsÑforexample, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) governs how pa-
tientsÕ health care information can be handled by health care organizations. In the wake of
Hurricane Katrina, the Department of Health and Human Services issued guidance to remind
health care organizations about HIPAAÕs emergency provisions. See U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS), ÒHurricane Katrina Bulletin: HIPAA Privacy and Disclo-
sures in Emergency Situations,Ó HHS, Washington, D.C., 2005; available at http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/hipaa/KATRINAnHIPAA.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTThere are numerous examples where elements are covered in differenthierarchies, and for good reasons. Efforts to determine a priori a ÒcorrectÓ
information hierarchy are often ineffective. Thus, simply making commu-
nications and systems technically capable to interact may create more
problems than it solves, unless the deeper meaning of interoperation is
understood and addressed.IMPROVED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS AND
A COMMON OPERATING PICTURESituational awareness capabilities, like communications capabilities,have received considerable attention recently, especially in the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina. Involving much more than Òhaving all the informa-
tion,Ó situational awareness is an achieved mental state; it does not begin
or end with the presentation of data on a display. It is the degree to which
oneÕs perception of the situation reflects reality. Improving situational
awareness capabilities must include advancing and integrating technol-
ogy that assists disaster managers in building an accurate and complete
mental model, in addition to improving the amount and quality of the
information available. Reflecting the difficulties of achieving situational
awareness, one researcher has compiled a list of the Òdemons of situ-
ational awarenessÓ (Box 2.2). Just as it is important to caution that solving
technical interoperability is not enough to achieve interoperation among
organizations, it is important to clearly caution that solving technical situ-
ational awareness is not enough. IT could enable implementation of solu-
tions to situational awareness demons, but the solutions must come from
an understanding of the human dimensions of those demons, and the IT
systems incorporate that understanding.As described in Chapter 1, an increasing amount of information canpotentially be brought to bear in disaster management. More information
about a disaster may initially seem like a good thing. Yet, data from
disparate sources can be difficult to assimilate into useful information
because of a multitude of formats, the difficulty of placing sensors where
they are needed, and the difficulty of communicating sensor data to those
who need it. Moreover, without filtering by human or automated media-
tors, those receiving the information are likely to become overloaded and
to ignore excessive inputs as distractions or to devote already-scarce re-
sources to monitoring or processing them.Research to identify leverage points for IT to augment and amplifythe human ability to make sense of data may improve the effectiveness of
disaster management. ÒSensemakingÓ is Òthe process of searching for arepresentation and encoding data in that representation to answer task-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT45BOX 2.2Eight Major Demons of Situation Awareness¥Attentional tunneling. Good situation awareness is highly dependent on theability to monitor multiple sources of information simultaneously. Unfortunately,people frequently lock in on certain aspects of the situation they are trying to pro-
cessÑget tunnel visionÑand will either intentionally or inadvertently ignore all oth-er aspects. This leads to their situation awareness of those other aspects becom-ing quickly outdated. People may believe this is the proper course because the
aspect that they are focusing on appears to them to be the most critical. However,keeping at least a high-level understanding of what is happening across the boardis a prerequisite to being able to know that certain factors are indeed still more
important than others. It is often the neglected aspects of a situation that prove tobe fatal. Human-information interaction systems that foster high-bandwidth, low-fidelity assessments of incoming data coupled with low-bandwidth, high-fidelity
processing (e.g., focus plus context techniques) are potential solutions for mini-mizing these problems.¥Requisite memory trap. People have a limited amount of short-term mem-ory. As they gain experience with an environment (e.g., air traffic control), peoplecan learn to be more efficient at building mental models, allowing them to formmeaningful groupings of information and thereby extend what they can manage
in short-term memory. However, the volume and complexity of information re-quired for situation awareness creates situation awareness bottlenecks leadingto memory failures with serious consequences. Techniques (e.g., informationvisualization, broadband displays) aimed at expanding human working memorycapacity by offloading information patterns onto external memory may amelio-
rate these problems.¥Workload, anxiety, fatigue, and other stressors. People working in a disas-ter situation are particularly vulnerable to a number of serious stressors that tax
their ability to maintain situation awareness. In a situation where lives are at stake,it is not surprising that stress and anxiety could significantly strain a personÕs abilityto create and maintain situation awareness. Other factors may also come into play
(e.g., self-esteem, career advancement). Stressors will undermine situation aware-ness by making the entire process of taking in information less systematic andmore error-prone.¥Data overload. A personÕs ability to create and maintain a proper mentalmodel of a situation can be overwhelmed by too much input. If more data arereceived than can be processed, situation awareness will quickly become out-
dated or contain gaps. While it is easy to think of this problem as simply a naturaloccurrence that people are ill-suited to handle, in reality it is often a function of theway that data are processed, stored, and presented in many systems. For in-
stance, people are able to process graphical data much more rapidly than textualdata (a picture is worth a thousand words).¥Misplaced salience. Salience is a measure of how compelling informationappears to be. Yet what is most compelling is not necessarily what is most impor-tant. This is misplaced salience. The evolutionary process has adapted the humanperceptual system to be more sensitive to certain signal characteristics than oth-continuedImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTers. IT systems that take advantage of these adaptations can promote or hindersituation awareness. Unfortunately, many systems overuse knowledge of humansalience, creating distractions that hinder the creation of proper mental models of
situation awareness. People are unable to distinguish between false alarms andthe real thing and begin to ignore or filter such input. Techniques for highlightingimportant information with pre-attentive codings, or presenting summaries appro-
priate to the task could help address this problem.¥Complexity creep. Many IT systems are designed with complex sets offeatures that make it difficult for people to understand how they work or how to
operate them. Videocassette recorders (VCRs) are a common example of thisproblem. Even automated flight management systems operated by highly trainedpilots suffer from complexity creep. Complexity slows down a personÕs ability to
correctly process and properly interpret information presented, ultimately under-mining proper understanding of the situation. Training is often prescribed as asolution to dealing with complexity, but situations that occur infrequently (e.g.,
disasters) mean that a user is likely to have little or no experience with featuresused only in those situations and is highly likely to have forgotten or incorrectlyremember the training.¥Errant mental models. Mental models form a key interpretation mechanismfor information taken in. They tell a person how to combine disparate pieces ofinformation, how to interpret the significance of that information, and how to devel-
op reasonable projections of what will happen in the future. Errant mental modelscause people to misunderstand the situation. Mode errors (a special case of errantmental models) cause people to misunderstand information because they believea system to be in one mode when it is in reality in another mode. This type of erroris particularly insidious because it is difficult for people to realize their error. Re-
search on IT to distribute more attention to highly diagnostic evidence and tosearch for disconfirming relations may provide a leverage point for addressing thisproblem.¥Out-of-the-loop syndrome. Excessive or inappropriate automation can leadto this problem, where people are taken out of the decision-making loop and leftwith inadequate information about what the automation is doing or the state of the
system. Automation can help situation awareness by reducing workload, but whenautomation reaches situational conditions it is not equipped to handle and theperson has been left out of the loop, he or she may be unable to understand what
is occurring and intervene in the situation.NOTE: The term Òsituation awarenessÓ is used here, following the usage of the authors fromwhose work this material is adapted, rather than the perhaps more familiar Òsituational aware-
nessÓ used elsewhere in the report.SOURCE: Adapted from Mica R. Endsley, Betty Bolt”, and Debra G. Jones, Designing forSituation Awareness: An Approach to User-Centered Design, Taylor & Francis, London, Unit-ed Kingdom, 2003, pp. 31-42.BOX 2.2  Continued
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT47specific questions.Ó14 
There are a number of implications for the develop-ment of IT to aid human sensemaking, including integrated design of
human interfaces, representational tools, and information retrieval sys-
tems. Sensemaking systems have both front ends (visualization) and back
ends (content analysis and reasoning) that could aid human ability to
skim, power read, recognize patterns, take notes, summarize, drill for
details, and flag biases.15Another factor that can color a personÕs understanding of a situationis organizational affiliation. Affiliation will drive decision making in early
stages over situational needs. This reflects the need to fall back on in-
grained and trusted culture and training when uncertainty is high and
trusted information scarce. Over time, if uncertainty decreases and infor-
mation on the situation increases, affiliation goal drivers dissipate and
situational needs come to drive decisions. However, if there is the percep-
tion that the situation is out of control, then affiliation factors again drive
the decision making. Situational awareness tools that help build a shared
reality can reduce affiliation and culturally related misperceptions.Given the number and variety of relevant parties, a detailed, accurate,and shared picture of both the disaster area and the status of the response
is an obvious requirement for effective management of the disaster, and it
is an area where information technology can be of considerable benefit.
Technologies that can help in the near term include improved resource
tracking (e.g., using radio-frequency identification tags [RFIDs]), infor-
mation fusion from a priori known sources, reconciling data collection
with privacy concerns, and publish-subscribe systems to deliver the in-
formation to the appropriate people. Longer-term research is needed to
develop large-scale embedded sensor networks, automatic calibration of
data confidence, automatic information fusion and data mining of diverse
resources, routing of information to users based on semantics, filtering of
false alarms, and effective presentation of information to users. Another
relevant area is augmented cognition. DARPA is currently funding the
Improved Warfighter Information Intake Under Stress program, which
seeks to enhance human performance in diverse, stressful, operational
environments by developing a closed-loop computational system in
which the computer adapts to the state of the human to determine infor-
mation presentation.Data monitoring about situational variables, ranging from long-term14See D.M. Russell, M.J. Stefik, P. Pirolli, and S.K. Card, ÒThe Cost Structure of Sense-making,Ó Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1993, pp. 269-276.15Mark Stefik, ÒThe New Sensemakers: The Next Thing Beyond Search Is Sensemaking,ÓInnovation Pipeline (a Red Herring newsletter), 2(10):13, December 2004.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTvariables (e.g., demographics) to midterm (e.g., status and location ofstockpiles) to immediate (e.g., road and traffic conditions, weather), may
be used to continuously update and adapt both mitigation and response
plans to reflect local issues.Finally, continuing advances in unmanned or robotic search and res-cue capabilities could improve the ability to obtain access remotely to
detailed information about casualties, infrastructure damage, and other
information critical to response where responders are unable to reach as
quickly or at all. Advances in this area hold promise for improving the
safety of responders, as well as the timeliness and effectiveness of re-
sponse and recovery.IMPROVED DECISION SUPPORT AND RESOURCETRACKING AND ALLOCATIONWhereas situational awareness focuses on providing operators anddecision makers with information relevant to their tasks and goals, deci-
sion support focuses on assisting them in formulating prospective ac-
tions, primarily by helping them understand and assess characteristics
and consequences of alternative courses of action. Decision support is
about explicitly recording candidate course(s) of action and generating,
analyzing, and evaluating those alternatives. It also provides the means to
monitor the effectiveness and progress of response activities. Lines be-
tween situational awareness and decision support tend to blurÑdecision
support is dependent on understanding the situation, and decisions affect
the subsequent situation, thus setting up a continuous feedback loop.Some specific examples of how decision support systems might aidresponders include the following: recommending on-the-fly decision
evaluation, triggering ÒnaggingÓ for decisions to be made and executed,
tracking down the next alternate decision maker (an assistant chief, for
example), tracking data and underlying simulation models used to make
decisions against the actual situation and presenting warnings when de-
viations from the model appear, and updating the response plan. Further
examples include the providing of early-warning triggers for notification
that time is running out to exercise an option and the raising of red flags
when decisions need to be made or when execution lags.One open research challenge is how to support decisions in the face ofsignificant uncertainty. Example research topics include computer-as-
sisted decision-making tools, resource use modeling, risk management in
the face of uncertain data and outcomes, sentinel processes to automati-
cally monitor processes, and technologies that support distributed emer-
gency operations centers. Progress on uncertainty management couldImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT49yield significant progressÑperhaps eventually making it possible to takeactions that come well within 90 percent of perfect hindsight.16An especially sensitive aspect of decision support tools deals withtaking humans out of the decision loop. Some decisions may be appropri-
ately made using a rule-based decision-making process. This could offload
routine decisions so that human decision makers can focus more attention
on those decisions requiring policy-based decision and judgment. Deter-
mining which decisions can be rules-based and which policy-based and
under what circumstances will require both research and an adoption
strategy that allows disaster managers time to build trust and confidence
in these systems.Decision support technology could also facilitate access to and col-laboration with other organizations, such as mass media, the private busi-
ness sector, the Army Corps of Engineers, public health and public works,
as well as traditional first responder organizations.17 Indeed, the globalcharacter of current information and communications technology means
that the decision support could come from qualified sources anywhere in
the world.The issue of scalability requires particular attention for decision sup-port systems to be truly effective in a large-scale disaster. For disaster
management, scalability of these systems is intertwined with the issue of
the dynamics of the situation. IT has been implemented on a massive
scale, resulting in impressive gains in efficiency and productivity. But the
inherent chaos that arises in a disaster creates unique problems for realiz-
ing these gains in disaster management practice.Closely linked to decision support is the topic of logistics manage-ment. The ability to monitor movements of personnel, goods, services,
and victims; to recognize mismatches; and to trigger adaptive action
(whether it be redirecting the patients or augmenting the facility) would
greatly enhance disaster response management. Often, retrospective
analyses of disaster responses effectively say, ÒRegardless of resource
limitations, we didnÕt make the best use of the resources that we did
have.ÓRouting systems for trucking and airline industries are examples of16Laboratory results are already beginning to show early promise toward this possibil-ity: e.g., see R.T. Maheswaran, C.M. Rogers, R. Sanchez, and P. Szekely, ÒReward Estima-tion by Communicating Aggregated Profiles (RECAP): Distributed Coordination in Uncer-tain Multi-Agent Systems,Ó submitted to 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, January 6-12, 2007.17For more perspective on collaboration and associated tools, see C.A. Bolstad and M.R.Endsley, ÒChoosing Team Collaboration Tools: Lessons Learned from Disaster Recovery
Efforts,Ó Ergonomics in Design 13(4):7-13, 2005.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTdecision support systems that manage the reallocation of resources andgive human operators feedback on potential options. These systems know
the resources available and make adjustments based on changes in the
status of those resources. They handle massive amounts of resources and
processes in a highly efficient mannerÑthey scale extremely wellÑas
long as resources are added slowly and in an orderly manner and pro-
cesses are predictable. They are optimized for bounded, stable situations.
They handle problems by planning for a degree of reserve capacity. These
systems become quickly overwhelmed when reserve capacity is exceeded.
The problem of decision support for disaster management is that it is
inherently an out-of-bounds, unstable situation. (See Box 2.3 for a discus-BOX 2.3The Limits of Commercial Logistics Operational Models forDisaster ManagementA frequently expressed frustration with recent disaster management effortsconcerns the inefficiency of logistics operations deploying resources (e.g., ice,
water, trailers, medical supplies, generators) to affected areas. ÒIf FedEx and UPScan do it, why canÕt disaster managers?Ó is a common refrain. As performed todayin disaster management practice, logistics activities tend to make very limited useof information technology (despite the models provided by leading-edge distribu-tion companies).Recent investments by the Federal Emergency Management Agency havebegun to bring its practices up to date with those of commercial systems, addingsome tracking capabilities, though it appears that much more can be done.1Expanding these investments will certainly improve logistics operations. Ideally,technologies like radio-frequency identification (RFID) tagging, Global Position-ing System (GPS), and others used to manage massive supply chains like those
managed by Wal-Mart and others could be pervasively implemented for disastermanagement.However, there are critical differences between commercial logistics opera-tions and those required for disasters. These differences mean that even if state-of-the-art commercial logistics technologies are adopted, they will go only so far inaddressing the logistics and resource management needs in a disaster. The im-
portance of techniques for recognizing impending problems is not generally under-stood. Thus, the history of military and emergency supply chain management con-tains periodic calls for blindly adopting commercial methods. Rapid shipping
companies such as FedEx are quite rightly lauded for the speed and efficiency oftheir operations. However, the underlying algorithms are designed not to ensurethat all packages are delivered on time, or even that important packages are deliv-
ered on time. Priorities are handled through channeling into faster shipping meth-ods, but the same algorithms apply. The underlying commercial algorithms deter-mine the schedules and transportation resources needed to ensure that mostpackages will be delivered in timely fashion if the depots and distribution centersdo not change and the situation stays within predicted bounds. The underlyingalgorithms further assume that priorities of packages are undifferentiated within
broad categories (i.e., if you cannot deliver all packages in a priority class, it isImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT51acceptable to allow circumstances to determine which ones get through). Theyalso tend to assume that packagesÕ priorities do not change once in the systemand that destinations of packages do not change once in the system. If any ofthese assumptions is violated, commercial shipping organizations do the cost-ef-fective thing: they apologize, remind customers of disclaimers in the shippingagreement, and perhaps offer a refund.The techniques used by commercial organizations are highly adapted to theirpurpose. They have achieved excellence by developing specialized logistics solu-tions, but to problems that are qualitatively different from those present during
disasters. Ensuring delivery of critical items in disaster situations is a related prob-lemÑbut it is not the same problem. Because it is a related problem, techniquesthat have been applied to the commercial problem are relevantÑbut recognizing
that they are relevant is not the same as having actually adapted and appliedthem. Nor, because the problem is related but different, are those techniques suf-ficient. When lives depend on a shipmentÑdeaths ensue if that shipment is lateÑ
the function, and thus the underlying algorithms, must be different.Disasters are by definition unstable, Òout-of-boundsÓ situations. Logistics sys-tems developed for them must be designed to handle a complex and evolving set
of problems. Once problems with a plan or schedule are detected, the critical ques-tion is how to revise it to contain the ripple effectsÑwhich is essential to minimizingcosts and time delays in adapting to the changed situation.Thus, a number of technical challenges differentiate the commercial problemfrom the disaster management problem:1.Scale introduced by the surge requirements inherent in disasters,
2.Complexity introduced by the much-finer-grained and more strongly in-
teracting issues of prioritization,3.Complexity introduced by dynamics (managing the risk that actions will
be rendered inappropriate by the fluidity of the situation),4.Complexity introduced by information uncertainty (managing the risk that
actions will be rendered inappropriate because they were based on incomplete orinaccurate information), and5.Minimally disruptive plan revision.
Because of the inherent complexity of the number of issues and constraintsthat must be considered, humans are limited in their ability to handle these chal-lenges unaided by technology. Instead, for ordinary situations, most approacheshave focused on maintaining reserve capacity as a buffer. A large amount of work
in operations research and other fields has focused on techniques for calculatingwhat a safe reserve capacity should be. Disasters, by their very definition, exceedavailable resources and overtax the process of effectively allocating them. Thus,
computing and maintaining safe reserve capacities, although highly necessary, isnot sufficient. Intelligent adaptive planning technology that addresses the five chal-lenges listed above is still largely in the research stages. Nevertheless, it is a
critical capability.1Robert Block, ÒFEMA Regroups After Katrina, But Some Question Its Readiness,Ó WallStreet Journal, August 7, 2006, p. A1.BOX 2.3  Continued
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTsion of differences between commercial logistics operations and logisticsand resource tracking for disaster management.)As performed today in disaster management practice, logistics, re-source tracking, and allocation activities tend to make very limited use of
information technology (despite the models provided by leading distri-
bution companies). Consequently, any notification of problems is likely to
be reactive rather than proactive (e.g., ÒWeÕre at the bridge but itÕs down.
. . . WerenÕt they supposed to be here by now? . . . Why are there only 500
child-sized crutches when we asked for 5,000?Ó).Problem notification and consequent situational awareness tend to besequential and therefore subject to propagation delay during which par-
ties can get out of synchronization, rather than having immediate and
shared situational awareness. (An all-too-familiar conversation frequently
starts with Destination asking Dispatch, ÒWhen are they coming?Ó and
Dispatch replying, ÒTheyÕre not there? IÕll find out whatÕs going on and
get back to you.Ó). Problem resolution processes are unlikely to identify
and simultaneously involve all affected parties, thus producing local in-
stead of global solutions.Existing technology makes it quite possible to do much better. WithRFID tags, every item, box, pallet, and truck can know and report its
relationship to the shipping manifest. With the Global Positioning System
(GPS) and satellite connections, continuous position reporting is possible.
Thus, knowing what you have, exactly where it is, and where it is going
(even if the destination itself is a moving target) is all possible. Geo-
graphic information systems make it possible to record and display that
status information, while simultaneously recording and displaying other
status information such as weather conditions and transportation infra-
structure condition.It is easy to set alarms when planned directions of travel and rates ofmotion are not met, and it is feasible for users monitoring these systems to
notice when displays indicate potential barriers to planned movements.
When human operators notice problems, route-planning software can
greatly facilitate rerouting the movements. Peer-to-peer file-sharing tools
can ensure that all participants automatically receive updates of the infor-
mation they need. Many such commercially available tools have encryp-
tion built in, ensuring the security of shipment information in the event of
extreme situations in which theft or diversion is a concern. Exercises such
as Strong Angel have demonstrated the effectiveness of relatively crude
measures to provide synchronization, even in situations where conven-
tional communications have broken down (e.g., jeeps or unmanned aerial
vehicles [UAVs] surveying an area and receiving and re-broadcasting
update information on wireless network frequencies).1818See Strong Angel III at http://www.strongangel3.net.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT53Thus, solutions exist today that would reduce error rates, promoteproactive action in recognizing problems, and provide higher levels of
shared situational awareness regarding those problems. Functions that
remain problematic, however, include initial decisions about resource al-
locations, recognition of many problems in the execution of plans and
schedules, and development of good repairs to the plans.If these problematic issues are addressed, it is possible to do evenbetter. There are nascent technologies in the research community that
could make a significant impact. If nurtured and transitioned, these would
produce far better initial resource allocations, identify a wider range of
problems proactively (with significantly greater lead time for resolution),
and help develop more effective and globally beneficial solutions to prob-
lems as they arise. Effective determination of needs requires combining
pushes and pullsÑinterrelating, rather than stovepiping, intelligent fore-
casting of requirements with rapid aggregation of requests.Simulation systems provide one useful tool for decision makers totest potential resource allocation and planning options in a virtual envi-
ronment. They can provide a vehicle to promote understanding and dia-
logue on actions and issues related to the development of an effective
preparedness and response plan, and serve as a forum and basis for mu-
tual understanding between agencies and disaster management practitio-
ners. Further advances in simulation environments promise to provide
comprehensive modeling frameworks that integrate both inverse and for-
ward points of view, applicable at multiple levels of analysis in diverse
fields of study, in a structured manner. Computational architecture that is
flexible, scalable, and adaptable promises the ability to create persistent
virtual worlds for continuous replication, verification, validation, uncer-
tainty quantification, and margin-of-error estimations.Alternative recovery plans could be developed and tested in the con-text of simulations and risk models that allow plan effectiveness to be
tested and that enable continuous adaptation of plans in light of available
resources and past experience. Instrumentation and data collection are
critical elements for learning from one disaster to amend management
practices of future events. Data collected during response and recovery
operations can also be used in post-disaster analyses to feed future miti-
gation efforts. It can be used to validate and improve models and simula-
tions. Learning from instrumentation and post-incident analysis have
proven invaluable in other fields, such as health (with todayÕs emphasis
on evidence-based medicine), defense (where the military collects reports
and other data from exercises and operations to develop lessons learned
that are fed back into the development of both doctrine and weapons
systems), and air transportation (where the National Transportation
Safety Board investigates every civil aviation accident in the United States
in order to improve the reliability and operational safety of airplane sys-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtems). Indeed, in most of these fields incorporation of lessons learned ishighly systematized to ensure timely implementation of changes in prac-
tices and systems.Advances in high-performance computing are now demonstratingthe ability to execute, log, and analyze discrete event simulations with
literally millions of separate ongoing computational processes. These have
been integrated into wargames extending over weeks, involving tens and
hundreds of thousands of human personnel. This means that it is becom-
ing technically feasible to run situation analysis systems for disasters that
continuously operate on Òbest available understandingÓÑfilling in miss-
ing information with simulations, models, and forecasts when necessary,
replacing them with sensor data, situation reports, and incoming supply
requests when available.Advances in computing power, as well as the development of newalgorithms, also create the prospect of adaptive planning, scheduling, and
resource allocation processes that continually fine-tune logistical support
plans to the evolving situation. These algorithms are increasingly able to
reason about managing the risk of a plan in the face of various kinds of
uncertainty. One type of uncertainty concerns information quality. (How
sure are we that the roads are passable?) Another type concerns the like-
lihood of success for potential courses of action. (Since we donÕt know
whether a convoy from the north will get through quickly, would it make
sense to also route some of the supplies from the south or to send excess
shipments that will be redirected if the others get through?)In addition, advances both in power and accessibility of high-perfor-mance computing combined with new algorithms are pointing the way
toward automated solutions of increasingly larger planning and schedul-
ing problems. Not only are the algorithms more efficient, but techniques
such as ÒbackdoorsÓ and hybrid problem solvers have shown how large
problems can be transformed into simpler and more manageable ones.
ÒBackdoorsÓ is a technique for identifying critical decisions within a large
set of alternatives that, once made, reduce the number of other options
that have to be considered without significantly reducing the likelihood
that the best overall choices are still made. Hybrid problem solving is a
related technique in which fast but ÒsuboptimalÓ techniques are used to
produce rough sketches of plans, which are examined for characteristics
that can be used to restrict the options considered by slower, higher-
quality algorithms.Taken together, these techniques offer a future in which much moreefficient plans are generated on the basis of much more meaningful infor-
mation. This ensures that responses are initiated with the best-tuned
courses of action available at the time. The next challenge is to keep those
responses tuned when the situation changes during the course of execut-
ing them.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT55In order to do better, the challenge is to provide individuation ofshipped items. The first element of this, tracking the items, is increasingly
easy (see above). The next challenge is to use the tracking information to
trigger warnings that a shipping plan is going awry. As noted above, the
technology is basically in place to do this by asking, ÒIs it where it should
be at this time?Ó However, it is possible to do better than that. If a bridge
on the trucking route is down, rerouting should start as soon as any part
of the system knows that factÑrather than waiting for an overtaxed hu-
man to notice, much less waiting until the trucks get to the bridge.DARPA has funded related research in the areas of plan sentinels andmathematical approaches for estimating progress and probability of suc-
cess on goal structures. Plan sentinels extend a range of existing planning
techniques that use explicit descriptions of goals and methods for achiev-
ing those goals. Plan sentinels focus on capturing assumptions underly-
ing methods and generate software in order to explicitly monitor data
streams for evidence that those assumptions are violated. For example,
driving a truck from point A to B is a method for getting to a location
which assumes that roads and bridges are intact, so plan sentinel software
would generate code for monitoring data streams and routing traffic re-
ports. In contrast to plan sentinels, the mathematical approaches adapt
techniques such as nonlinear filtering methods (previously used to track
progress in geometric spaces) in order to track progress in symbolic
spaces. These techniques generate probability distributions that can be
used to assess likelihood of the Òspeed and directionÓ of future progress
on the plans.Symbolic approaches like plan sentinels and mathematical techniquessuch as just described can make complementary contributions to the abil-
ity to proactively predict problems and to begin as early as possible to
respond to them.GREATER ORGANIZATIONAL AGILITY FORDISASTER MANAGEMENTDisasters are varied and no single organizational structure is neces-sarily the best for dealing with the range of possible incidents. During
disaster response, organizations must be able to form quickly and work
well together across space and time. They must be able to adapt and
resize easily as the disaster develops. The 9/11 disaster expanded in scope
and scale in a matter of hours even as the primary emergency operations
center was lost within the World Trade Center complex. The National
Response Plan and National Incident Management System provide frame-
works for dynamic organizations to be formed, but do not address the
diversity of technology in different organizations, the lack of rapport, or
the ability of organizations to quickly integrate operations. They also ar-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTticulate an elaborate set of command and control systems that are inflex-ible and work against the idea that agility and flexibility are at least as
important as command and control hierarchy.Simulation systems offer one avenue for training disaster manage-ment professionals, from first responders to disaster managers, to better
anticipate problems and to become more flexible and adaptable to work-
ing across organizational boundaries, integrating operations, and adapt-
ing to different technologies. Simulation systems can simultaneously in-
terface with and drive both planning systems and training systems.19This would enable preparatory work to ensure the robustness of plans
against multiple scenarios. It could also support training according to the
plans and seamless transition into systems for response execution. Using
detailed analysis of the response to past disasters, these simulations would
be solidly grounded in reality, and their accuracy would increase with
each incident.Capturing lessons learned and making them available in a form use-ful to the broad community of disaster management is another area of
potential for IT to support organizational learning. Learning from past
experiences is an important element supporting the ongoing improve-
ment of disaster management. Lessons learned can cover a wide range of
topicsÑfrom experience with specific processes and organizational struc-
tures to the effectiveness of specific communication technologies or soft-
ware systems. The Department of Homeland Security has established
Lessons Learned Information Sharing (http://www.llis.gov) as a mecha-nism for disseminating lessons learned.20 It provides an illustration ofhow the Internet can be used to support dissemination of lessons learned.
Nevertheless, lessons learned from previous disasters have not typically
propagated quickly through the disaster management community.Another organizational issue is management of the flow of personnelin and out of an incident area. Improved IT infrastructure for credentialing
and identification checksÑwho they are, whether they have the capabili-
ties they say they haveÑcould improve the efficiency of response and
recovery operations, such as dispatching medical workers, repair techni-
cians, and other appropriate people into a disaster area. In the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina, much damage to information and communications19Several areas of potential opportunity to improve disaster management practice usingsimulation technology are drawn from a briefing to the committee by Alok Chaturvedi,director of Purdue University Homeland Security Institute. Presentation on September 20,2005.20Lessons Learned Information Sharing is a national network for emergency responseproviders and homeland security officials to share lessons learned and best practices. Formore information, see https://www.llis.gov.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT57infrastructure was fixable, or there were backups and alternatives. How-ever, the lack of access because of the security ring around New Orleans
and limited means for authorities to quickly validate peopleÕs credentials
meant that repairs could not be effected; generators ran out of fuel and
alternatives could not be switched in. Similar problems involving physi-
cal access were cited during the response to 9/11.21 Recent credentialingefforts for emergency responders, including databases to keep track of
volunteers, have been advancing and expanding to include telecommuni-
cations specialists, utilities workers, and other private-sector disaster re-
sponse workers.Authentication and credentialing constitute a complex topic, involv-ing many technical and non-technical issues.22 A few example areas ofwhere further IT research might bear fruit include voice print analysis in
the network, fingerprint sensor on the push-to-talk radio buttons,23 RFIDtags (badges), and verbal authorization codes issued to first responders
and other authorized personnel (e.g., city workers, volunteers, and so on)
that are linked to the radios. In addition, back-end database and architec-
tural considerations regarding the identity and credentialing manage-
ment system as a whole also merit attention. Currently, as with Internet

purchase orders, identity authentication is accomplished through the veri-
fication of several independent pieces of information, not one code or
password. In the case of false negatives, lost tags, mismatches between
tag and radio, and so on, one model of mitigationis for the system to

transfer the transaction to a dispatcher who could decide whether suffi-
cient evidence exists to authorize authentication. The entire realm of
credentialing and identity management is clearly a fruitful research area.Further advances are needed to improve understanding of how com-munication structures map onto organizational structure requirements.
Dynamic authority mapping is one potentially useful tool.In the short term, information technology is likely to be appliedchiefly to automate and accelerate traditional disaster management pro-
cesses and practices. In the midterm to long term, however, increases in
information-processing capacity offer the potential to enable a transfor-21See, for example, National Research Council, The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learn-ing from September 11, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.22More information about the technical, architectural, and policy challenges associatedwith large-scale identity and credentialing systems can be found in a report from the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board; see National Research Council, IDsÑNotThat Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity Systems, National Academy Press, Washing-ton, D.C., 2002.23One potential drawback is that such a radio could not be used by others if the desig-nated operator was disabled or otherwise not available.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTmation of those very processes by enabling innovation in organizationalpractices. Such IT-driven shifts have occurred in many sectors, with ma-
jor organizational implications.24 Although these transformations arenot entirely predictable, the empirical evidence suggests a number of
possibilities.The militaryÕs hierarchical command chain is one well-known organi-zational model for managing extremely complex, distributed activities. It
reflects the development over many years of a clear sense of what to
centralize and what to decentralize. In recent years, the military has un-
dertaken significant, IT-enabled revisions to doctrine based on the idea of
providing more information to individual units or warfighters and en-
abling increasingly distributed network-centric operations. The commit-
tee believes that a similar analysis and evolution of doctrine that takes
into account the unique characteristics of disaster management (such as
diverse actors and jurisdictions in a federal system and the important role
of private-sector organizations) as well as new technological capabilities
are also needed.One such possible shift would be from information-centered architec-tures updated in batches (e.g., ÒreportsÓ) toward distributed processing
of continual messaging-streams fed by pervasive sensors providing real-
time situational awareness data, with different users detecting trends and
transitions according to their local requirements. There could be a corre-
sponding shift from specialized management systems that are activated
for disasters and deactivated afterward to an Òalways-onÓ state of activa-
tion that varies more in scale than in nature as events occur. A move
should also be possible from command models of resource management
toward negotiated ÒbrokerageÓ approaches working with current models
of the best actions that can be taken with available resources. Another
possibility is the ability to reach a mature compromise between the dual
extremes of rigid bureaucracy and all-to-all interoperability toward a
Òmanaged ad-hoc-racyÓ of disaster management and responder organi-
zations that can evolve seamlessly and continuously over the entire course

of a disaster. Finally, a role-based concept of individual and unit identity
could reduce the significance of jurisdictional, disciplinary, and even offi-
cial/civilian distinctions. The cumulative effect of these changes could be
a shift from a mechanical focus on preserving and restoring the status quo
ante toward a flexible strategy of resilience and adaptability to the dy-
namics and inherent complexities of disasters.A common organizational theme is the strong tension between cen-24Jason Dedrick, Vijay Gurbaxani, and Kenneth L. Kraemer, ÒInformation Technologyand Economic Performance: A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence,Ó ACM ComputingSurveys 35(1):1-28, 2003.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT59tral authorities, which want to assert hierarchical control over disasters,and the distributed nature of most disasters. Authorities may want to be
seen as Òin charge,Ó even though most of the actual work in disasters
results from the many less-coordinated and distributed actions of indi-
viduals. Responders typically bring tremendous energy to the scene. One
response is to put someone in charge to channel (and bind) this energy.
Another is to let the energy emerge and then harvest it. Organizations
have a hierarchical comfort zone that has driven them to the former re-
sponse, but disasters are also accompanied by the rapid development of
emergent multiorganizational networks.25These networks form the locus for collective sensemaking and orga-nizational learning under conditions where ambiguity and uncertainty
are an inherent part of the environment.26 Information technology couldsupport emergent networks by helping them deal more effectively with
unpredictable information sources, lowering barriers to information flow,
making organizational boundaries more permeable, and easing coordina-
tion between diverse and distributed actors. For example, a number of
emergent groups, existing in entirely virtual space and formed using the
Internet and technology such as blogs and wikis, performed important
services during Hurricane Katrina. Research to find more systematic ways
to leverage such technology may yield new means for supporting emer-
gent networks.While this report is primarily limited to the IT aspect of disaster man-agement and did not specifically look at problems from an organizational
theory or management theory point of view, the potential contributions
that management and organizational science can make to better under-
standing the situation in command centers and to improving other as-
pects of disaster management are undoubtedly significant. Moreover, as
research progresses in these areas, analysis both of the impacts that greater
use of IT may have and of how IT can help ameliorate other problems will
be useful. For instance, organizational research on collective sensemaking
could help focus IT research on how to address confusion that stems from
ambiguous information rather than simply finding better ways to reduce
ignorance arising out of uncertainty by increasing the quantity and qual-
ity of information.27Another common theme, and one that came up frequently in testi-25Kathleen Tierney and Joseph Trainor, ÒNetworks and Resilience in the World TradeCenter Disaster,Ó Research Progress and Accomplishments 2003Ð2004, Multidisciplinary Cen-ter for Earthquake Engineering Research, University at Buffalo, State University of New
York, May 2004, pp. 157-172.26K.E. Weick, Sensemaking in Organizations, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, Calif., 1995.27Ibid., pp. 185-187.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTmony to the committee, is the issue of building trust among the variousactors involved in responding to a disaster. But in a disaster situation,
cooperation is often required between people who are strangers with no
existing trust relationship. Thus, approaches and supporting technolo-
gies are needed that aid coordination and structure across people and
organizations that have little trust but some common goals. ITÕs ability to
enhance organizational agility in disaster management may be limited
by the extent to which it is unable to overcome barriers to working in an
environment of limited trust. Applying existing understanding about the
relationship between trust and technology and extending that knowl-
edge through further research will be critical to advancing organiza-
tional agility.BETTER ENGAGEMENT OF THE PUBLICTwo distinct aspects of better engagement of the public through bet-ter use of IT involve (1) the use of warning systems and broadcast alerts to
inform the public of actions that they should take to protect themselves
and their property and (2) the ability to leverage the public as providers of
information and sources of valuable technology tools. The potential to
improve the use of IT in both areas is substantial, although the second will
also require considerable shifts in culture among public safety and emer-
gency management professionals.Alerting and Warning SystemsImproving warning systems for various types of disasters has re-ceived considerable attention, especially in the aftermath of the 2004 In-
dian Ocean tsunami.28 Effective warnings save lives, reduce damage, andspeed recovery. Warnings are most effective under the following circum-
stances:¥They are accurate and result in appropriate action.¥Any probabilistic aspects (e.g., likely hurricane landfall probabili-ties) are clearly communicated.¥They are standard, consistent, and easily understood.¥They are delivered to just the people at risk and in a timelymanner.¥They are delivered through a variety of mechanisms to achievemaximal reach.28Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction, Grand Challenges for Disaster Reduction, ExecutiveOffice of the President of the United States, Washington, D.C., June 2005.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT61Technology has greatly improved the ability of forecasters to makeaccurate predictions about natural disasters. Public education has im-
proved actions that people take in response to warnings. Experience and
policy changes have made authorities better at communicating consis-
tent, clear messages. Further improvements are possible in all of these
areasÑespecially through broader deployment of sensor systems and fur-
ther advances in sensor technology. But, there is now a significant gap in
how warnings are delivered and what is possible with existing technol-
ogy.Forecasting and sensing technology has made it possible for siren-based warnings to be issued minutes to seconds before the onset of a
disaster where previously no warning was possible, and future advances
may improve detection and lengthen warning times (earthquake detec-
tion is one such promising area). Where the time for delivering alerts is
still very short, sirens can be highly effective because they can be rapidly
and broadly disseminated. Sirens require people to know what action to
take (e.g., for a tornado find shelter, under ground if possible). Public
education and drills are used to instill this knowledge. State-of-the-art
siren technology can now include a public address capability, allowing
more specific information to be communicated. However, sirens are in-
herently outdoor systems. They are valuable because they may reach
people who would otherwise receive no warning. They will continue to
play an important role in alerting the public, and technology advances
can make them even more effective.Warning systems using information and communications networkscan be significantly upgraded using existing and emerging technologies.
The Congressional Research Service report Emergency Communications:The Emergency Alert System (EAS) and All-Hazard Warnings describes anumber of government efforts to develop a digital warning system, in-
cluding the ongoing pilot projects of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, the Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection director-ate at DHS, and the Association of Public Television Stations to develop
an integrated public alert and warning system.29A Presidential Executive Order of June 26, 2006, aims to establish anintegrated alert and warning system and to Òestablish or adopt, as appro-
priate, common alerting and warning protocols.Ó30 Revamping the Emer-29Linda Moore and Shawn Reese, Emergency Communications: The Emergency Alert System(EAS) and All-Hazard Warnings, Congressional Research Service (CRS) Report for Congress(RL32527), CRS, Washington, D.C., 2005.30George W. Bush, Executive Order: Public Alert and Warning System, 2006; available athttp://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2006/06/20060626.html.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTgency Alert System (EAS) was also a finding and recommendation in theFederal Communications Commission (FCC) independent study of com-
munications during Hurricane Katrina31 and in the White House reporton Katrina.32 These reports note the potential of new technologies (satel-lite, cellular, pagers, Internet, wireless) to send more targeted messages.
As the FCC review of EAS notes, Òwireless products are becoming an

equal to television and radio as an avenue to reach the American public
quickly and efficiently.Ó33One common technological denominator in recent efforts has beenthe Common Alerting Protocol (CAP), a warning format standard devel-
oped by emergency managers, promoted by the Partnership for Public
Warning, and codified by the Organization for the Advancement of Struc-
tured Information Standards (OASIS) standards organization. CAP has
been used in most of the major warning system prototypes in recent years
and features prominently in the FCC proceedings on the future of EAS.Communication with the Entire Affected PopulationThe importance and challenge of reaching the entire affected popula-tionÑincluding all social and socioeconomic groups, disabled, elderly,
and other special-needs groupsÑbefore, during, and after a disaster
strikes were highlighted by Hurricane Katrina. More generally, reaching
these groups is among the most significant of issues relating to engaging
the public to ensure their own survival and recovery during disasters.
Hurricane Katrina tragically demonstrated the error in assuming that bet-
ter communications alone guarantees effective public engagement.34 Italso served as a reminder that access to and familiarity with information
technology is not universal. Further, the ability to act on available infor-
mation, even when it is accessible, may be limited.31See Federal Communications Commission (FCC), ÒReview of the Emergency Alert Sys-tem, First Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,Ó FCC 05-191,Washington, D.C., November 2005; and FCC, Recommendations of the Independent Panel Re-viewing the Impact of Hurricane Katrina on Communications Networks, FCC 06-83, Washington,D.C., June 2006.32See The White House, The Federal Response to Hurricane Katrina: Lessons Learned, Febru-ary 2006, pp. 83, 109-110.33FCC, ÒReview of the Emergency Alert System: First Report and Order and FurtherNotice of Proposed RulemakingÓ (EB Docket No. 04-296), FCC, Washington, D.C., p. 29;available at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-05-191A1.pdf.34National Research Council, Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-sions, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 68.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT63Risk CommunicationUnderstanding what information should be provided to the publicbefore, during, and after a disaster falls under the general topic of risk
communications, which an earlier National Research Council report de-
fines as Òan interactive process of exchange of information and opinions
among individuals, groups, and institutions [and] a dialog involving
multiple messages that express concerns, opinions, or reactions to risk
messages or to legal and institutional arrangements for risk manage-
ment.Ó35 Insights from such work can be used to inform future efforts toapply IT for improved risk communication.The Public as an Information and Technology ResourceWhile warning and alerting systems are important, their perspectiveis of the center talking out to the masses. The committee finds vast poten-
tial to further engage the public by changing this perspective to embrace
two-way communications between authorities and the public. Interac-
tions with the public are an important part of disaster management, yet
these interactions have received relatively little attention. Changes in tech-
nology available to the public mean that there are not only new ways to
reach them (with warnings), but also new ways for the public to both
gather and communicate information. One typically thinks of the public
playing a passive role of information receiver in a disaster. People have
thus far been engaged only marginally and conditionally as sources of
information with valuable technology in critical or otherwise unreachable
locations (e.g., certified amateur radio operators). The now ubiquitous
911 emergency calling system is an example of how responders can get
useful information from the public. It is a simple mechanism for allowing
the public to report information.Yet, there is potential for the public to play a much larger role duringa disaster, and information technology is increasingly making it possible
to engage the public in a variety of ways. CiviliansÑpeople on the streetÑ
are nearly always the very first people on the scene of disaster, especially
in situations with little or no warning. Collectively they have a richer
view of at least a small portion of a disaster situation than is available
from within an emergency operations center. Even 10 years ago most
people carried little or no technology around with them. Today, much of35National Research Council, Improving Risk Communication, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1989.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTthe public has sophisticated mobile communication and sensing capabil-ity. Camera phones, wikis, the Web, and text messaging are all capabili-
ties increasingly available to people on the scene. Harnessing these sources
of valuable information holds great promise for providing critical infor-
mation to disaster managers, especially in the initial response stages.Victims can be transformed into actively engaged responders if givena meaningful and appropriate means to participate. They can be recruited
to assist in disaster response. They can be kept informed as to how and
when to act appropriately. Furthermore, they can offer critical redundant
IT resources as traditional sources are impacted by a disaster. IT mecha-
nisms that interface disaster response agency information systems to in-
teractive public communications channels (e.g., Internet, wireless com-
munication) could provide information gathering and dissemination
mechanisms that ameliorate problems of agency overload from affected
populations seeking situational information or having the ability to pro-
vide local information.The redundancy of this approach would also improve the reliabilityof the communications with the attendant advantages of improved per-
formance and public perception of appropriate actions. Valid concerns
about the trustworthiness of information have inhibited any major steps
toward incorporating these types of changes more fully. Yet, changes in
the amount and quality of technology carried by individuals and continu-
ing advances in filtering, qualifying, and analyzing information of uncer-
tain quality means that a major opportunity may be missed for making
better use of IT, especially given limited resources available to public
officials.The Strong Angel exercises have explored Òtechniques and technolo-gies that support the principle of resilience within a communityÓ with the
objective of effectively tapping Òthe expertise and creativity within an
affected community, including through public-private partnerships. A
second overarching objective is the development of social tools and tech-
niques that encourage collaborative cooperation between responders and
the population they serve during post-disaster reconstruction.Ó36Cybercitizen networks also hold promise as an important new ele-ment of response similar to, but on a much larger scale than, the role filled
by amateur radio operators. IT can help facilitate these interactions. In the
near term it is possible to use or adapt existing technologies to create
validated online information sources, to deploy multimodal public re-
porting sites, and to build directories of private resources to facilitate36See Strong Angel III at http://www.strongangel3.net.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT65deployment. Research is needed into technologies that do dynamic capa-bility profiling and credentialing, semantic routing, and filtering of
multimodal public input, and research is also needed to optimize data
formatting for diverse terminal devices.ENHANCED INFRASTRUCTURE SURVIVABILITY ANDCONTINUITY OF SOCIETAL FUNCTIONSDisasters inherently cause disparate communities, infrastructures,and organizations to interact (and not interact) in unanticipated ways.
Hurricane Katrina is an obvious example, having displaced much of an
entire metropolitan region, with residents being dispersed across the
country. But smaller-scale disasters also disrupt societal functions. Fami-
lies and friends are separated. Families need access to housing, schools
for children, and social services. People lose access to medical facilities
and medical records. Jobs are lost. Important cultural institutions are dis-
rupted. There is considerable opportunity for improving the use of IT to
reconnect people, provide a temporary bridge to restore and maintain
relations and interactions, and to speed their restoration. Hurricane
Katrina demonstrated that people can come together, using the Internet
and other information and communications technologies, to apply knowl-
edge, skills, and technology to have a positive impact on the lives of those
affected by a disaster.37Another well-publicized example of an emergent use of IT was thecreation of wikis38 that enabled volunteers to connect with victims. Someof the functions wikis served in the aftermath of Katrina were listing
helpline numbers, posting offers of temporary shelter, identifying where
and how to make donations, serving as a clearinghouse for identifying
government resources, offering health and safety information, sharing
advice and experience on relocation, publicizing fund-raising events, pro-
viding information about lost and found pets, reconnecting families, and
posting help-needed notifications. The emergent behavior exhibited by
these wikis is one of their great strengthsÑrising to meet an unantici-
pated and highly diffuse need. They are highly flexible and adaptable and37For example, see Keith Axline, ÒCraigslist Versus Katrina,Ó Wired News; available athttp://www.wired.com/news/planet/0,2782,68720,00.html.38According to Wikipedia, Òa wiki is a type of website that allows users to easily add,remove, or otherwise edit and change some available content, sometimes without the needfor registration. This ease of interaction and operation makes a wiki an effective tool for
collaborative authoring. The term wiki can also refer to the collaborative software itself(wiki engine) that facilitates the operation of such a website.Ó See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/wiki.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTdemonstrate just one way that the emergence and ongoing advance ofcollaborative tools could contribute to disaster management. The chal-
lenge for disaster managers is to leverage the power of these emergent
uses of ITÑand support research and development to advance their ap-
plication to disaster managementÑwithout destroying their inherent flex-

ibility and adaptability.In addition to making better use of IT to help people, IT can be used toimprove the survivability of critical infrastructureÑanother major factor
in speeding recovery and restoring societal functions. The committee
heard numerous possibilities for advancing IT and extending its applica-
tions to improve the resilience and management of critical infrastructure
systems, such as the electric grid, water, transportation, housing, and
health care. The interdependencies between these systems are often not
well understood and rarely proactively engineered for resilience because
they are usually designed and operated by independent entities over a
long period of time. The structural couplings between these systems may
also manifest themselves on a wide range of spatial and temporal scales,
making it difficult to quantify them. Solving these problems requires dif-
ferent jurisdictionsÑcities, counties, statesÑto work closely with each
other and with federal agencies. The restoration of New Orleans, for ex-
ample, is widely understood to require a concerted rebuilding across gov-
ernment agencies, public safety organizations, businesses, and public utili-

ties. Simply clearing damage, processing insurance claims and other
compensation, and rebuilding residential, government, and commercial
infrastructure constitute a very complex, multifaceted process that is likely
to take years to complete.Advances in IT can revolutionize other technical disciplines with di-rect and indirect implications for advances in disaster management. A
salient example is the entirely new class of monitoring and control capa-
bilities made available to civil and mechanical engineers by the creation
of small sensors, microprocessors and wireless communication devices.
Many applications require the deployment and use of sensors on a wide
scaleÑcapabilities that are starting to emerge from research into distrib-
uted sensor networks.When terrorists attacked the World Trade Center in New York inSeptember 2001, thousands of occupants of those doomed structures had
an hour to escape. But delays in the assessment of the structuresÕ integrity
stole crucial minutes from the evacuation and ultimately doomed thou-
sands of innocent civilians. Today it is possible to instrument such struc-
tures using sensors and wireless connections, in such a way that the chang-
ing forces within the towersÕ structures could be recognized and evaluated
almost instantly.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE POTENTIAL TO ENHANCE DISASTER MANAGEMENT67On a larger scale, ubiquitous monitoring of the condition and utiliza-tion of highways could trim minutes or even hours from the travel time of
responders by routing them around damaged or clogged routes. Supervi-
sory Control and Data Acquisition systems for water, gas, and other utili-
ties are being enhanced to provide detailed analysis of damage due to
earthquakes or explosions, enabling system operators to speed restora-
tion and minimize peripheral disruptions of service.The benefits of comprehensive monitoring and management of engi-neered systems can extend beyond their own boundaries, for example
managing interactions between systems, such as the power grid and the
communication networks that rely on them. This underscores the impor-
tance not only of collecting system-specific data but also of normalizing
and exchanging real-time assessment data between systems.Buildings, roads, and other constructed infrastructure exhibit signifi-cant resilience and robustness in the face of disaster. However, infrastruc-
ture that appears to be intact may in fact have been severely damaged in
ways that are not readily apparent. For example, in the wake of an earth-
quake, a building might be on the verge of collapse or a bridge might be
ready to fail after even the smallest aftershock. By making hidden damage
more apparent, sensors combined with information technology can en-
hance response and recovery operations by reducing uncertainty about
the state of infrastructure.Continuous monitoring and analysis of critical infrastructure couldbe done by developing new instrumentation capabilities. This would en-
able the routing of sensor information from buildings, bridges, and infra-
structure systemsÑfor example, roads and water, gas, sewer, communi-
cations, and power systemsÑto monitoring locations, providing
responders with information about the robustness and safety of the infra-
structure affected. As in other areas, power supply independent of the
electric grid is a critical issue that must be addressed to extend sensor
capabilities.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.683Improving Acquisition and Adoption of
IT for Disaster ManagementThis chapter focuses on information technology (IT) acquisition andadoption issues confronting the various federal, state, and local
agencies and private organizations (hereinafter called disaster man-agement organizations) that have official responsibility for disaster man-
agement. It does not explore the complex issues of IT acquisition or adop-
tion by individuals or private firms for use in disasters; however, it does
briefly consider opportunities for leveraging IT systems and services of
private-sector firms, citizens, and non-governmental organizations. The
chapter starts by considering some of the key barriers to more effective
use of IT in disaster management. It then discusses some best practices
and design principles that would help address these barriers. It concludes
with a discussion of roadmapping as a technique for guiding overall in-
vestment in research and development and a discussion of multidisci-
plinary centers as a way of better coupling IT research and practice.OVERVIEW OF NON-TECHNICAL BARRIERSMany sectors, such as banking, manufacturing, and services, havebeen able to adopt new IT technologies routinely and aggressively. Some
disaster management organizations have also been quite effective in inte-
grating state-of-the-art IT technologies into their day-to-day operations
(e.g., the use of Internet Protocol [IP]-based emergency management tools,

the use of cell phones to listen in on first responder land mobile radio
traffic, and the use of laptops and wireless local area networks). However,Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT69in the committeeÕs view, the disaster management community has notbeen nearly as broadly successful.The following are among the complicating factors:¥Disaster management organizations often lack the resources to acquirevaluable capabilities. Responsibility for disaster management is widely dis-tributed among agencies and organizations at all levels of governmentÑ
with resources and operational responsibilities mainly concentrated at
the local level. These organizations have vastly different technologies and
capabilities. These characteristics lead to highly scattered adoption and
lengthy adoption cycles and a highly fragmented market for disaster man-
agement IT. Moreover, many of the organizations are small and have very
constrained budgets for IT. Most acquisition resources are focused on
capabilities to improve day-to-day operations, whereas disaster manage-
ment is, by definition, not a routine activity. Some of what agencies do
acquire specifically for disaster incidents nonetheless becomes Òshelf-
wareÓÑunused even when the need for which it was acquired arises.¥Both the development and the deployment of many promising technolo-gies are risky and costly compared with the opportunity presented by the com-
mercial market for these technologies today. For example, there are sensorsthat would be very useful for assessing in real time the status of the built
environment. However, developing and manufacturing such sensors for
the uncertain and highly cost-constrained disaster management market
do not constitute attractive commercial opportunity at this time.¥In most agencies with disaster management responsibilities, there is noone who is charged specifically with tracking IT technology, identifying promis-
ing technologies, integrating them into operations, or interacting with IT ven-
dors to make sure that needs are addressed. Many organizations are too smallto grow and support significant in-house expertise, and they naturally
look to vendors to provide turn-key solutions, which may mean that the
organizationÕs long-term, broad needs are not fully met. Long intervals
occur between acquisitions, with the result that any institutional learning
that does occur is likely lost in the interim. The acquisition dynamics
created by this situation tend to limit the potential market, leading IT
vendors to adapt IT technologies only slowly for use in disaster manage-
ment. There is no focal point for addressing these issues at the federal
level, further contributing to the problem. Finally, the complexity of IT
systems and the organizational changes that they introduce are often met
with resistance and ambivalence by both managers and users, especially
in the absence of a technology Òchampion.Ó¥Decisions regarding IT tend to be made independently by local organiza-tions that must work together in disasters. Organizations with disaster man-agement responsibilities are typically highly independent and have lim-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTited regular contact with one another. However, these organizations findthemselves having to collaborate in disasters, giving rise to interoper-
ability issues at many levels. State and federal organizations charged with
disaster management face similar coordination challenges, further com-
plicating collaboration in responding to a disaster. Acquisition managers
concerned about collaboration typically have no place to go to determine
if the technologies they are acquiring will interoperate with those of their
peers. Further, no mechanism exists for them to synchronize technology
acquisitions in order to make them compatible. Recent trends toward the
establishment of regional groups to address IT and related disaster man-
agement issues are a promising trend.¥Disaster management is concerned with environments that are intrinsi-cally uncertain and unstable. This contrasts with the typical IT acquisitionenvironment, where development, deployment, operation, and mainte-
nance take place in fairly well understood and stable environments and
where requirements are better understood.¥Important sources of funds are typically only available once a disaster hasbeen declared and must also be spent in a short window of time. Funds tend tobecome available in much greater quantity during a period of time after
disaster declarations. Experienced emergency managers are well aware of
this recurrent Òwindow of opportunityÓ effect, and many of them keep IT
and communications projects in draft, ready to proceed as soon as a disas-
ter redirects attention and money to their needs. However, these pur-
chases are naturally driven by immediate concerns rather than longer-
term considerations.One conclusion (overly pessimistic in the committeeÕs view) giventhese barriers would be that advanced IT solutions are impractical for
most local governments and emergency management agencies. Such a
view assumes that the existing problems are insurmountable, whereas the
committee believes that many of these problems can be mitigated if best
practices and principles are followed and if appropriate mechanisms are
put in place to support their adoption, such as the research centers that
couple technology advancement with practice and community-wide tech-
nology roadmapping.Another related potential misreading of the challenge is that technol-ogy that is ÒadvancedÓ or Òleading-edgeÓ is necessarily more complexÑ
and is thus unsuited for organizations without considerable in-house
technology expertise. In fact, some trends in information technology
are in exactly the opposite direction, with advances aimed at reduced
complexity from the standpoint of those acquiring, managing, or using
the technology. A reflexive avoidance ofadvanced technology and new
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT71developmentscould thus counterproductively translate into a failure to
adopt systems that are more robust, reliable, and usable.BEST PRACTICES FOR ACQUISITIONBest practices for acquisition include an emphasis on iterative devel-opment; increased opportunities to test and evaluate technology in prac-
tice, together with realistic concepts of operations; and design and evalu-
ation processes that allow for strong coupling among practitioners,
researchers, and industry.From Waterfall Acquisition to Iterative DevelopmentHistorically, as in many other areas, the introduction of technology indisaster management has been characterized by a series of major deploy-
ments, occurring at intervals sometimes measured in years or even de-
cades. These long cycle times reflect in part the traditional ÒwaterfallÓ
acquisition process. This acquisition model presumes a linear develop-
ment process that proceeds in stages from development of a comprehen-
sive requirements specification to design, then to implementation fol-
lowed by integration, next to testing, then to installation, and finally to
maintenance. Modified versions of the model acknowledge some role for
feedback between each of these stages and preceding ones.1 They alsomirror the typical capital planning cycles of federal, state, and local gov-
ernment and agencies, which have traditionally made periodic, large in-
vestments in new systems and capabilities.Long acquisition cycles are well known to make it hard to incorporaterapid technological change. The doubling of various measures of comput-
ing performance every 1 to 2 years places an obvious premium on pro-
cesses that can more rapidly incorporate new technology. Moreover, this
linear process that periodically seeks to produce the solution often fails todeliver the expected capabilities. Requirements creep may end up making
the ultimate design overly cumbersome, complex, or costly to implement,
leading to cost overruns, delays, and even program cancellation. Users,
who only have input to the front end of the process, may find that the
delivered capabilities do not meet their needs.Also, new capabilities and technology opportunities that arise after1This development process is described in terms of the software development modelexplicated in considerable detail by Barry W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics,Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1981.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTthe system development leaves the initial requirements stage are difficultand expensive to incorporate. The reason is that many artifacts of a sys-
tem grow organically. The practical reality is that large systems emerge
from incremental additions in ways entirely unanticipated by the design-
ers of the original system. If the original system is successful, users will
almost certainly want to add new functionality. The new functionality
desired is by definition unanticipatedÑif the designers had known it
would be useful, they would have included it in the first place.Indeed, it is essentially impossible in practice for even the most op-erationally experienced IT systems developers to be able to anticipate in
detail and in advance all of a systemÕs requirements and specifications.
Often users change their minds about the features they want, or (even
more difficult to deal with) they want contradictory features. And, of
course, it is difficult indeed to anticipate all potential uses. Thus, system
requirements and specifications are inherently incomplete, even though
they underlie and drive the relationships among various components of
the system. Put differently, the paradox is that successful system develop-
ment requires non-trivial understanding of the entire system in its ulti-
mate form before the system can be successfully developed. System de-
signers need experience to understand the implications of their design
choices. But experience can be gained only by making mistakes, learning
from them, and having a mechanism to modify and evolve systems over-
time as the understanding of both user and designer grows and as re-
quirements and technology evolve.For these reasons, development methodologies have been developedthat presume an iterative approach to building systems. An iterative pro-
cess uses multiple, short acquisition cycles, which over time deliver and
improve on system capabilities. Such a process encourages feedback from
users and allows them to play a constructive and central role in a systemÕs
evolution. An iterative process requires, among other things, mechanisms
for users to provide feedback to technology innovators and providers.
(The committee discusses some possible mechanisms for supporting this
process later in this chapter.)With iterative development, systems that initially include limitedfunctionality are often introduced. As users adopt the technology, they
have a mechanism for identifying improvements to that functionality and
for identifying desirable new features that technology providers can in-
corporate into the new product versions. The progression of mobile phone
functionality to incrementally include increasingly greater performance
and a wider range of features is a familiar example of this process.An iterative acquisition process has other advantages. Often require-ments thought to be essential turn out to be relatively unimportant or
little used once deployed. The functionality supporting those require-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT73ments can be dropped from future product versions, helping minimizecomplexity creep. Essential features frequently go unidentified until the
system begins to be widely used. These features can be added in a more
orderly fashion, evolving the system with continuing feedback from us-
ers. Incremental introduction of technology also allows one to exploit the
current technology Òsweet spotÓÑwhere the costs of components such as
microprocessors are lowestÑkeeping down costs and making more fre-
quent acquisition cycles possible.In disaster management a tension inevitably arises between a naturaldesire to fully meet demanding or perceived unique requirements and
the cost and speed of development and deployment. Disaster manage-
ment professionals often say that they must be able to depend Òabso-
lutelyÓ on the technology they employÑnoting the life-or-death nature
of their work. An iterative process allows time for users to build trust in
the systemÕs ability to deliver on those critical requirements and a mecha-
nism for providing feedback to request (or demand) changes as needed.
It also allows an opportunity to minimize initial demands for unique
requirements involving specialized equipment and maximizing the op-
portunity to incorporate ÒcommodityÓ components, thus minimizing cost
and delays.Metrics-Driven InvestmentAs the saying goes, one can only manage what one can measure.  The
resources available for disaster management are limited, and decision
making always involves tradeoffs. To motivate the IT expenditures
needed to provide adequately for disaster management, there must be an
understanding of the benefits that are obtainable. Weighing the available

benefits from particular IT investments against the returns on other sorts
of investment is challenging. When considering the effects of disasters,
these tradeoffs can easily be driven by emotions, even more than in many
other sectors. Having metrics allows an analytical assessment to be made,
comparing the costs of preventive and mitigating investments with the
likely impacts of disasters, and with other potential investments. The
sections that follow briefly discuss several aspects of metrics-based deci-
sion making. The development of suitable metrics to guide investment in
IT for disaster management is a topic for further research and something
that a roadmapping effort (described later in this chapter) might address.Estimating RisksEstimating the risks of infrequent events is hard, but failing to con-sider risks explicitly cripples any rational decision-making process. Gath-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTering the necessary information will necessarily be an iterative process,with initial information providing a basis for further discussion, expan-
sion, and revision. An additional benefit of systematizing this process is
the potentially useful feedback on needs and opportunities that it can
provide to the technology research and development community.Costs and BenefitsThe economic model needed to assess the trade-off of the costs versusthe benefits of investing in technology for disaster mitigation differs from
business investment models. Typical business investments are related to

a steady income stream, not to a variety of infrequent future costs and
benefits. An economic model for disaster management must combine ini-
tial investments, ongoing costs, and infrequent events. An investment is
based on the net present value, computed using some discount rate for all
those components. Those rates incorporate the expected lifetime of the
assets and the risks associated with deriving income from those assets
over that period. For business IT investments, those rates typically vary
from 12 to 20 percent. Communication infrastructure has used much

lower discount rates in the past, but the merger of those technologies is
forcing the rates for those investments upward.Any technology deployment has initial costs, as well as ongoing main-tenance and training costs, and a finite life. This long horizon requires
using discounting of future benefits, as well as ongoing costs. Since the
occurrence, magnitude, and timing of future disasters are uncertain, ap-
propriate discount rates may have to be quite high, so that results ad-
equately reflect the intuition of the participants and funders of disaster
mitigation expenses. While economic cost estimates of disaster impacts
are never precise, they do provide order-of-magnitude estimates needed
to allow projects and proposals to be ranked.Estimation of the savings resulting from reduced impact due to miti-gation efforts is particularly difficult. Many IT benefits will be due to
being able to respond more rapidly. Developing models on how faster
response can reduce eventual costs is a substantial, but interesting, chal-
lenging, and rewarding task. An actual economic quantification of the
cost of disaster mitigation versus the benefits obtained could be a fruitful
area for research.Use of a Cost-Benefit ModelAny recommendation for new and increased outlays must be accom-panied by a quantification of their benefits. While costs are easy to quan-
tify, the benefits of disaster mitigation are hard to quantify, but a reason-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT75able attempt is required. It is expected that the costs of improving thetechnology available for disaster mitigation will be offset by substantial
benefits accruing to the country. The most important of these benefits

cannot be directly quantified, since they represent the human dimension:
reduction of suffering, preservation of family stability, and prevention of
losses of items of purely personal value. Other benefits of disaster mitiga-
tion can and should be quantified.The low frequency of major disasters greatly reduces the prioritiesthat local planners, faced with many short-term needs, actually assign to
accumulating and maintaining the resources that are adequate for dealing
with disasters. While some supplies can be stockpiled for decades, IT

becomes obsolescent much faster and requires an ongoing infusion of
funds. In the commercial world, a spending rate of 15 percent of the initial
and upgrade investments is expected. Costs are reduced when obsolete

systems are taken out of service. For many systems, the military tends to
spend less annually but is then faced with huge, wholesale replacement
costs every 12 years and has an inadequate system for more than half of
that period.Readiness for mitigating disasters requires a modest but steady in-vestment in technology. The total benefits are due to cost reduction that

occur at unpredictable times and are of unpredictable magnitude. Major,
quantifiable benefits are due to infrequent events. For an individual

county, the investment in disastermitigation technologies appears to rep-

resent an instantaneous expense, sometimes aided by state or federal

grants. Maintenance costs are indifferent budgets and are hard to assess.
Technology EvaluationThe decentralized nature of disaster management, spread across thou-sands of agenciesÑfrom the smallest volunteer fire department, to so-
phisticated urban police departments, to state, regional, and federal agen-
ciesÑpresents particular problems for effective technology evaluation and
diffusion. Today, many managers responsible for the acquisition of tech-
nology for public safety and emergency management are, quite under-
standably, unable to keep-up-to date with the volume of technology and
choices available. Managers often rely on vendors to tell them what they
need and have to base decisions largely on the often-conflicting ÒadviceÓ
of various vendors.Professional conferences, workshops, and other meetings held bypublic safety and emergency management associations are one mecha-
nism for facilitating diffusion of the latest technology. IT capabilities, most
notably the Internet, may prove useful as well by providing a conduit for
sharing and discussing information about what works.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTMore systematic approaches to evaluation would likely yield deeperand broader technology adoption over the long term. One option is to
make use of formal mechanisms for providing unbiased evaluations and
guidanceÑa sort of Consumer Reports for disaster managers. The militaryÕsexperience with technology demonstrations, described in the next sec-
tion, may provide one model for this type of ÒclearinghouseÓ approach.
Important differences exist between the defense and disaster manage-
ment contexts regarding technology evaluation. For instance, the military
has a somewhat-well-defined acquisition chain that flows from initial
ideas to deployment agencies. In civilian disaster management, develop-
ment and procurement are far more decentralized. Decentralization intro-
duces hand-off issues for successfully demonstrated technology. Still,
adapting the lessons of military technology transfer to civilian disaster
management yields at least two insights.The first insight is that technology demonstration will be successful tothe extent that more knowledgeable technology adopters are available for
experimentation. The next two sectionsÑon processes that bring technol-
ogy developers and practitioners together and on building capacity at the
intersection of IT and disaster managementÑdiscuss mechanisms and
examples for growing the capacity of practitioners as knowledgeable tech-
nology adopters.A second insight is the importance of an honest broker serving as aneutral technology clearinghouse that can help provide the expertise to
identify and evaluate technology. There are a few examples, from which
others have successfully learned, where local and state agencies have
taken the lead in demonstrating the viability of a technology. Some states
(e.g., South Dakota and Indiana2) have taken on this role, identifying andevaluating technology, infrastructure, and services, and in several cases
providing one or more of these to local agencies.Private-sector integration centers aimed at bringing together diversetechnologies can have value in getting vendors to make their products
work with those of other vendors. But, they are necessarily designed to
promote both their particular partnerÕs products and their own consult-
ing and integration services. These vendor-driven efforts will likely fall
short of being truly neutral.One option for achieving the neutrality of an honest broker to vettechnology intended for disaster management is used for similar reasons
in other government mission areas. It is the Federally Funded Research2Based on the testimony of Otto Doll, Bureau of Information Technology, state of SouthDakota, and Dave Smith, Indiana Integrated Public Safety Commission, at the committeeÕsJune 2005 workshop.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT77and Development Center (FFRDC) model. FFRDCs are independent, non-profit entities sponsored and funded by the U.S. government to meet
specific long-term technical needs. FFRDCs typically assist government
agencies with scientific research and analysis, systems development, and
systems acquisition. They draw together expertise and perspectives from
government, industry, and academia to address complex technical issues.An FFRDC for disaster management would not have any operationalresponsibilities. Rather, it would serve the disaster management commu-
nity by identifying, developing, and assessing technologies and concepts
of operation for using those technologies.Processes That Bring TechnologyDevelopers and Practitioners TogetherAn iterative development process goes hand in hand with an acquisi-tion process which assumes that technologies and organizational pro-
cesses will co-evolve. Coordinating technological advances and organiza-
tional process changes requires new knowledge and skills on the part of
both practitioners and technology developers and new relationships be-
tween them. Such coordination depends on practitioners and developers
gaining a better understanding of one anotherÕs methods and on mecha-
nisms that maintain dialogue between them in order to identify promis-
ing technologies, define appropriate uses for them, and evaluate and dis-
seminate the outcomes.The Department of Defense has a broad set of programs aimed atbringing together technology developers and users, speeding innovation,
and transitioning it into use in the field. One notable model with consid-
erable applicability to disaster management is the Advanced Concept
Technology Demonstration (ACTD) model,3 which also pays particularattention to the interplay between technology and organization. An ACTD
is used at the phase where promising technologies have been developed
together with a vision of how they could be used. An ACTD provides a
framework in which to assemble a group that is willing to be an early
adopter and a context into which the technology can be inserted and
evaluated. A well-run ACTD includes a phase where the system, organi-
zation, and technology are all analyzed together, and modifications to
each are identified and implemented.A particular strength of the ACTD approach is that it recognizes that3A description of the goals of an ACTD is available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/actd/transit.htm.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTit is not enough to build the technology. One needs to analyze the organi-zation and look at how processes are going to change as a result of having
the technology. The idea is to simultaneously develop requirements for
organizational change and adaptations of technology to fit that.To use the ACTD approach effectively, patience is required. Other-wise, the design phase may be overly compressed to the detriment of the
ultimate product. Promising innovations may wither while waiting to be
adopted, or problems identified during the acquisition phase may result
in a technologyÕs being abandoned before researchers are able to find
solutions.Building Capacity at the Intersection of IT andDisaster ManagementThe committee heard from state and local agencies that one of themajor barriers to advancing practice and adoption of technology was a
lack of resources to allow staff time for ongoing development of technical
expertise. Yet, without the in-house development of technology expertise
able to draw on external resources (such as centers of excellence), adop-
tion of technology will continue to lag and is unlikely to be optimally
implemented when adopted.The interdependence of technology and practice means that develop-ing a cadre of experts at the intersection of disaster management and IT is
likely to yield significant payoffs. Expanding the human assets available
involves both the promotion of cross-fertilization between the technology
and practitioner communities and the promotion of a culture of innova-
tion in both. Such a cadre of people will be more astute at translating user
requirements to technical need, and will serve as a self-reinforcing feed-
back mechanism between technology advances and disaster management
practices.A number of mechanisms could contribute to increasing human capi-tal along these lines. These include both mechanisms for fostering innova-
tive environments wherever possible and mechanisms for disseminating
their results elsewhere. For example, programs could be established to
support fellowships, field tests and other experiments, and training and
educational activities. Also, programs that incorporate both disaster and
IT expertise could be funded to analyze the performance of systems after
a disaster.Federal grants could support creation of expertise within state andlocal agencies by, for instance, sending people from public safety agencies
to regional centers for training and to interact with technology experts
and other practitioners to stay abreast of the latest developments in both
practice and technology.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT79Exploiting Open, Practitioner-Driven ProcessesThe rapid pace of technological change, the growing complexity oftechnology, and perceived economies of scale are driving many disaster
managers to move from being owner-operators of their IT and communi-
cations to being customers of contractors and service providers. Even
where public safety and emergency management agencies retain owner-
ship of their IT and communications assets, they increasingly have be-
come reliant on vendors for information on what is technically possible
and worthwhile.Formal acquisition and management processes are generally designedto enforce appropriate procurement standards. However, they also run
the risk of filtering out many useful, original ideas and possible contribu-
tions from outsiders and can present insurmountable obstacles to the
acceptance of new technologies, unless and until they have been con-
verted into profitable commercial products. Even when emerging capa-
bilities are tracked and assessed, traditional design and acquisition meth-
ods are ill-suited to keep pace with accelerating shifts in technology.4 Asdiscussed below, there are a number of opportunities to broaden the set of
users that participate in the shaping, development, and evolution of IT
systems.The recent movement of open source software and standards devel-opment is one recent expression of this voluntary impulse. (See Box 3.1
for background on open source software and open standards.) Although some of the resistance to the use of open source software indisaster management might ultimately be traceable to active opposition
by commercial vendors, there are also structural obstacles to non-com-
mercial innovation within disaster agencies. This is regrettable, since
many technical innovations begin as non-commercial experiments, though
only a relatively few survive the road to commercialization. Despite this
resistance, there are some examples of how the open source software/
open standard development model has been applied to disaster manage-
ment. (See Box 3.2 for one such example.)Several strategies are available for extracting the most valuable itemsfrom the non-commercial offerings of the volunteer and open source
communities:¥Organized experimentation and evaluation of non-commercial andpre-commercial technology. (The city of San Diego and the state of Cali-4J.C. Herz, Mark Lucas, and John Scott, ÒOpen Technology Development, RoadmapPlan,Ó Version 3.1 (Final), Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 2006.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTfornia, among others, have ongoing programs under which non-commer-cial innovators can test and demonstrate their ideas in parallel with disas-
ter exercises.)¥Assistance in refining useful non-commercial technologies. Suchassistance might be provided in a number of forms, including coordinat-
ing small-business loans and developmental microgrants, brokering in-
troductions to commercial implementers, and offering user feedback and
review to non-commercial development projects.¥Use of selected non-commercial advisers as independent sourcesof information and reviewing IT and communication plans under the
auspices of an advisory organization.Judged on the merits of their results, open source software/openstandards developers could become valuable members of the disasterBOX 3.1Open Source Software and Open StandardsOpen source software and open standards are two aspects of a cooperativeapproach to information technology that has deep roots in the Internet. Opensource refers to the internal programmingÑthe source codeÑof an application. In
traditional proprietary software, the secrecy of the source code is the foundation ofits commercial value. Access to source code is restricted, and details of its opera-tion are disclosed only in general terms. Open source software, on the other hand,
is freely published and generally visible. While some financial value can be recov-ered in fees for ancillary services (e.g., consulting and sales of reference books),the chief reward for the creation of open source software accrues to the reputation
of the programmer or programmers who contribute to its creation.Although much open source software is the work of individual programmersor small, discrete teams, the Òreputation economyÓ of open source software devel-
opment lends itself to the formation of large ad hoc collaborations, often involvingdevelopers widely distributed geographically and interacting via the Internet, com-peting for recognition of the quality of their contributions instead of for commercial
equity.The open source approach has produced some of the worldÕs most popularsoftware, such as the widely used Apache Web server program and the Linux
computer operating system. Proponents of open source software argue that ittends to be more secure (since security weaknesses cannot be hidden within pro-prietary programming) and more flexible (since it can be readily customized) at
lower costs than commercial software products. They suggest that the lack of fi-nancial constraints leads to software that is Òproblem-oriented rather than profit-orientedÓ and that the lack of a commercial incentive to lock in customers to aparticular program helps preserve market efficiencies over time.Critics of open source software dispute the cost-effectiveness of such ÒfreeÓsoftware, countering that it demands more of IT staff and cannot be proven to beImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT81any less expensive to maintain than commercial software (for which 15 percent ofthe purchase price annually is a common estimate of maintenance costs). Theyalso warn that the design of open source software may reflect the interests of the
developers more than the needs of the users.Open standards, by contrast, are blind to the internal composition or econom-ics of any particular program or device. Open standards specify certain external
behaviors of a program or device in order to ensure interoperability among variousimplementations. Open standards may describe file formats, communication pro-tocols, or equipment configurations. They are deemed ÒopenÓ to the extent that
they are published so that products and applications can implement them withoutlicensing or other costs.Arguably the most successful open standards effort to date has been theInternet itself. By publishing a collection of non-proprietary technical standards(the Internet protocols) for unencumbered use, the creators of the Internet enableddata exchange among diverse computer systems and software packages. As a
result, the data and functionality available on any Internet-connected computernow vastly exceed the usefulness of that same computer standing alone.The open standards movement and the open source community share anemphasis on collaboration and cooperation as sources of value. This ÒnetworkeconomicsÓ view sees value as the product of connectivity among numerous enti-ties, as opposed to the more traditional view that value is a function of scarcity.
(The classic illustration of the former line of thought is that the value of the first faxmachine was nothing until there was a second one. And the more fax machinesthere were in the world, the more valuable each of them became.)Open source software and open standards are not so much challenges totraditional commercial approaches as they are extensions and supplements thattake advantage of voluntary collaboration and cooperation, especially in low-fre-quency, high-risk, and high-uncertainty applications where commercial incentivesalone may not yield needed results.management community. Successful examples of applying this model inother areas range from widely used programming languages and operat-
ing systems to the Internet. They have a few key common elements im-
portant to their success:¥Commitment to open source and open standards processes, withsupported organizations for managing them, to harness the energy and
skills of individuals and small groups that best understand the needs of
the community;¥Small but very-high-leverage investments in accelerating technol-ogy dissemination by funding organizations to provide Òsupported
sharewareÓÑreference implementations of technology robust enough for
users to use and evaluate, while open to all members of the community
(users and technologists alike) to refine and improve and extend to oth-
ers. This is a highly proven model for transitioning to robust, commer-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTcially supported products without locking government to limitations re-sulting from single sources of supply;5 and¥Support for the development and exchange of information aboutbest practices through Internet support for forums of information dis-
semination and discussion, for example via blogs and wikis.Full exploitation of the open source software/open standards devel-opment model requires organizations and institutions that take on new
responsibilities to guide and carry out activities. Many different types ofBOX 3.2Common Alerting Protocol (CAP)ÑAn Example of OpenStandards Development Applied to Disaster ManagementOne recent example of open-standards-style development in support of di-saster management is the Common Alerting Protocol (CAP). This internationaldata standard for alerting and warning messages was initially developed by an adhoc group and subsequently attracted the attention of two non-profit organizations
(the ComCARE Alliance and the Partnership for Public Warning). Later, the CAPstandard was adopted by the international Organization for the Advancement ofStructured Information Standards (OASIS) standards body and by a number of
federal agencies (including Department of Homeland Security, Department of De-fense, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and U.S. GeologicalSurvey), and state and local organizations began to use CAP in a variety of emer-
gency alerting and notification applications.1 Ultimately, the international OASISstandards group partnered with U.S. and international disaster response programsto formalize CAP and an associated family of Emergency Data eXchange Lan-
guage (EDXL) standards2 for disaster management.1See Partnership for Public Warning; available at http://www.partnershipforpublicwarning.org/ppw/cap.html. See also Common Alerting Protocol, v. 1.0, OASIS Standard 200402, March2004; available at http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.php/6334/oasis-200402-
cap-core-1.0.pdf.2See Emergency Data Exchange Language (EDXL) Distribution Element, v. 1.0, OASISStandard EDXL-DE v1.0, May 1, 2006; available at http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/
download.php/18774/EDXL-DE%201.0%20Standard.html.5The World Wide Web took off in part because the National Center for SupercomputingApplications at the University of Illinois was funded to provide a supported sharewareWeb browser, Mosaic, which went on to form the underlying code basis of every commer-cial Web browser in the world.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT83organizations could fill this role. However, there is a tremendous commu-nity-building opportunity if the role is filled by an organization that has
an educational component, has systems development and support skills,
and is rooted in the practitioner communities. The ideal structure would
be one where training of both IT developers and technology-savvy
practioners is performed in an environment that includes testbed technol-
ogy innovations and where the practitioner community and IT develop-
ment community could learn from each other, providing a positive feed-
back loop for the development of IT solutions grounded in practical
realities.TRAINING AND THE IMPORTANCE OF ROUTINE USEDisaster managers emphasize the importance of technology beingused on a routine basis by practitioners if it is to be used effectively, or at
all, during a disaster event. Understandably, practitioners turn to the
things they trust and are most familiar with, especially in the high-stress
situation of disaster response. Training is important, but it often occurs
only once, shortly after a technology is introduced. Technology that sits
idle until the onset of an event will likely remain unused. The committee
heard of instances where responders did not know or remember where
the technology was or how to access it when it was eventually needed.
Frequent training is also necessary because the technology itself often
changes rapidly.In each of the areas of disaster management activity, most of theorganizations and personnel (e.g., law enforcement, firefighting, emer-
gency medical treatment, sea patrol and rescue) involved have regular
day-to-day responsibilities and activities different in kind and in magni-
tude from major disaster operations. Training and equipment provided
for disaster responsibilities may not be optimum for day-to-day activities,
so that compromises or separate parallel training and equipment may be
necessary. Full consideration of cost, complexity, and other issues associ-
ated with this problem are such that implementation is difficult.Training programs are expensive and take critical resources out ofservice for the duration of the training. It is often logistically difficult to
arrange training for huge public safety organizations, with training some-
times spread over many months. The less relevant the lessons are to their
daily tasks, the less likely practitioners are to retain lessons from the
training. Yet, IT developed for disaster management is frequently de-
signed for use only during major events, and using it effectively requires
special knowledge or familiarity based on experience (which rarely ex-
ists). The result is that much IT goes unused or underused when an event
occurs. Building adaptable tools that people use every day is critical toImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTthose tools being used in a disaster.6 Indeed, routine use is more impor-tant than specialized training in building the competence and confidence
required to use a technological capability successfully, especially in the
high-stress situation of disasters.One partial solution is to seek technology that has the broadest pos-sible application in daily operations, with smooth transition (from a userÕs
perspective) to functionality required only in handling disaster events.
The switch over to disaster operations should be as seamless as possible.
As an example of what to avoid, the committee saw an operations center
during a site visit where two separate software applications with overlap-
ping functionality coexisted; one application was used during routine
operations, the other only in disaster situations. The application used on a
daily basis was widely and effectively used. The application with addi-
tional specialized disaster functionality was ill understood by all but a
few personnel.LEVERAGING ÒNON-OFFICIALÓ INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYAlthough disaster management is typically associated with govern-ment response agencies, the true boundaries of the disaster management
community are difficult to draw. Non-governmental organizations of vari-
ous kinds, government agencies not normally concerned with disasters or
public safety, trained volunteers and emergent ones (especially within the
victim population itself)Ñall these are active participants in disaster man-
agement. Private voluntary organizations play important roles in disaster
response and recovery activities, including the distribution of food, wa-
ter, and other supplies and the provision of shelter. Amateur radio opera-
tors have long played a role in disaster communications and have been
formally incorporated into disaster communications planning and proce-
dures. Moreover, in a disaster, many individuals and organizations will
step forward as volunteers. Some will be those who happen to be present
at the scene of a disaster. (For example, a number of live rescues after an
earthquake are performed by bystanders, not official responders.)Many volunteers prove to be crucial contributors to a disaster re-sponse and possess resources or expertise not otherwise available. Others6This is one of the conclusions of Sharon Dawes, Thomas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, andCarrie A. Schneider, Information, Technology, and Coordination: Lessons from the World TradeCenter Response, Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, State Univer-sity of New York, June 2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT85may consume more of official respondersÕ time than their contributionsare worth. Some create confusion for the response system: Are they re-
sponders or victims? Are their motives altruistic, selfish, or even crimi-
nal? Are they actually who they say they are? Nor are the priorities of
volunteers necessarily well aligned with those of officials. As a result,
volunteers and their contributions to official agencies are generally fil-
tered through coordinators and programs that act to limit their impact on
the agenciesÕ official programs.Recent IT advances offer new ways for volunteers to contribute todisaster response and recovery efforts. For example, the following are just
a few of the many volunteer activities in the response to Hurricane
Katrina:¥Web-based information aggregation systems at http://katrinalist.netand http://www.disastersearch.org. These are systems for posting and
aggregating information about people affected by Hurricane Katrina and
resources available for those directly affected by the disaster.¥An online repository at http://www.hurricanearchive.org of user-
contributed information about the hurricane experience. This repository
has a Òmap browserÓ page that incorporates the use of Google maps. A
similar map display was used on another site during the immediate after-
math of Hurricane Katrina to provide information about damage at spe-
cific sites throughout the city of New Orleans.¥A toll-free locator service established by MCI in the aftermath ofHurricane Katrina that provided toll-free numbers where volunteers
could register themselves (877-HELP-KAT) and could search for missing
family and friends (866-601-FIND).Exceptional circumstances require the rapid construction of workingrelationships among groups and individuals with very different back-
grounds and priorities. Network technology has created new opportuni-
ties, as the above examples demonstrate, for rapid establishment of work-
ing relationships, but much remains to be learned about the practical
management of these crucial Òadhocracies.Ó The large number of private
companies providing IT-related services, wide access to information sys-
tems, the natural support that the Internet provides for Òvirtual commu-
nitiesÓ of users and developers, and the relative ease with which new
methods of communications can be tried out have led to the creation of
many novel communications mechanisms that have applications for di-
saster management. The success of technologies like GoogleÕs search en-
gine, Wikipedia, blogs, and Google maps is evidence that information
technologies that provide user-driven information access are powerful
enablers.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTThese tools are revolutionary in that the information providers arenot forced into pre-authorized pre-formatted reporting and because users
are presented with multiple sources providing data on any query. At the
same time, users are forced to sift, evaluate, and decide what information
is helpful. And old problems, such as conflicting and redundant efforts,
unclear motivations, lack of accountability, inaccurate information, and
differing priorities are all present.Problems or not, it can be safely assumed that future disasters willbring about the spontaneous creation of similar non-official uses of ITÑ
and most likely completely novel ones as well. The obvious potential
value of these initiatives to various aspects of disaster response and re-
covery activities coupled with the potential for problems should drive
disaster managers to seek constructive ways to incorporate them into
disaster management practice whenever feasible and appropriate. Care-
ful study should be undertaken with the goal of making iterative im-
provements in leveraging these non-official, emergent activities so that
they eventually become part of the standard inventory of techniques and
procedures used to deal with disasters.EFFECTIVELY USINGCOMMERCIAL COMMUNICATCIONS SERVICESCommercial communications services offer potentially large cost sav-ings over dedicated systems but raise questions as to whether stringent
capacity and reliability requirements can be met. Striking the right bal-
ance in the face of market forces that drive commercial service providers
will require careful and ongoing evaluation by public safety agencies.Public safety agencies maintain extensive infrastructure independentof the commercial infrastructure available to the general public. There are
a number of important reasons for this. The National Task Force on
Interoperability (NTFI) guide for public safety officials ÒWhy CanÕt We
Talk?Ó asks the question, ÒWhy canÕt they just use cell phones?Ó7 It an-
swers the question by noting that responding to disaster situations, where
every second counts, requires reliable, dedicated equipment. Public safety
officials cannot depend on commercial systems that can be overloaded
and unavailable; experience has shown that these systems are often the
most unreliable during critical incidents when public demand over-7National Task Force on Interoperability, ÒWhy CanÕt We Talk?: Working Together toBridge the Communications Gap to Save Lives: A Guide for Public Officials,Ó February2003, p. 11; available at http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/204348.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT87whelms the systems. The NTFI guide summarizes the Òunique and de-manding communications requirementsÓ for optimal public safety com-
munication systems as including dedicated channels with priority access,
reliable one-to-many broadcast capability, highly reliable and redundant
networks, the best possible coverage within a geographic area, and equip-
ment designed for quick responseÑin short, something officials can con-
trol and count on.And yet, the use of commercial infrastructure by first responders andpublic safety officials is increasing. This is happening for several reasons.
First, commercial infrastructure is much less expensive than dedicated,
purpose-built public safety communications infrastructure. Second, it is
often what is at hand during an incident. Third, it helps achieve resilience
by provided redundancy and diversity, potentially at relatively low costs.
(See the detailed discussion on redundancy and diversity to achieve resil-
ience later in this chapter.) Efforts, both formal and informal, are under
way to make additional use of commercial services. Commercial infra-
structure used today for disaster management includes the following:¥Cellular voice networks,¥Cellular data networks for mobile data terminals (such as those inpolice cars and ambulances),¥Cellular data networks for text messaging and e-mail services,¥Satellite phone networks,¥Ad hoc wireless networks,¥Municipal wireless networks (some of these are dedicated net-works for public safety personnel),¥Traffic management systems,¥Aerial photo systems,¥Radio over IP systems,¥Cable/public television broadcasting systems,¥Video monitoring and conferencing systems,¥Paging systems,¥Telephone bridges,¥Internet services, including (but not limited to) Voice over IP,¥Remote hosted incident management services (e.g., eTeam,WebEOC), and¥Commercial imagery satellites and image databases.Commercial hardware, software, and network services are subject tointense competitive price pressure. Maintaining profitability entails a vig-
orous effort by the providers to minimize costs. But many of the steps
available to control costsÑreduction of component count, use of the least
expensive components available, avoidance of unused ÒoverheadÓ capac-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTity, and the likeÑcan directly reduce the resilience of the product when itis used in unusual circumstances.For example, unused capacity is expensive for shared telecommuni-cations systems such as the public telephone network, cellular phones,
and satellite systems. System operators conduct careful statistical studies
to estimate the level of capacity needed to satisfy most of their customers
under most circumstances. Any capacity in excess of that is, from a busi-
ness perspective, wasted, and operators have a fiduciary duty to avoid
such waste. Unfortunately, this means that during exceptional surges in
traffic, as occur during disasters and even on holidays and during certain
sporting and cultural events, the available network capacity is exceeded
and service becomes unreliable. (This economic phenomenon is some-
times obscured by memories of successful use during previous disasters,
when the system in question was new and not yet fully loaded to profit-
ability.)DESIGN PRINCIPLESA high degree of reliance on turn-key systems has meant that disastermanagement organizations have not had to pay a great deal of attention
to the underlying design issues that ultimately affect the functionality of
their IT systems. Today, pervasive networking and the increasing impor-
tance of off-the-shelf technologies make it possible for organizations to
assemble a greater portion of their disaster management systems from
components provided by different vendors. Doing so successfully will
require that those organizations take on more responsibility for the de-
sign of those systems. In the course of its work, the committee has identi-
fied four system design principles that have particular importance for
disaster management systems:¥Build emergency management systems for effective scaling from routineto disaster operation. System designs that feature wrenching and risk-ladentransitions between daily operational mode and ÒdisasterÓ mode can
make bad situations worse. All system components should be used regu-
larly, even if not at full scale, by the people who will need them in a
disaster. Familiarity smoothes transitions from routine to disaster opera-
tions. Indeed, people tend to avoid or are ineffective with the unfamiliar.¥Exploit redundancy and diversity to achieve resilience. Improving over-all resilience can be achieved using many different techniques in combi-
nation. One approach is to ÒhardenÓ systems, designing them to higher
operational standards than those typically applied to commercial services
and technology. A valuable alternative, which offers both the promise ofImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT89improved performance and lower cost, is to exploit redundancy and di-versity to improve the overall resilience of an IT system.¥Design systems with flexibility, composability, and interoperability ascore guiding principles. Each of these characteristics has important, wide-ranging implications for system design. Systems that place a premium on
flexibility and agility lend themselves to the sorts of ad hoc use that often
is needed in a disaster. Systems composed of standard components will
improve the ability to evolve them incrementally and reduce reliance on
any single vendor. Systems with designed-in interoperability points
greatly facilitate interoperation with other systems.¥Distinguish between the user interface and the underlying technologiesused to deliver a capability. A particular user experience and the particulartechnologies used to deliver it need not be the same. Consider, for ex-
ample, that first responder radios encapsulate multiple attributesÑpush-
to-talk, the form factor of the handset and microphone, and push-to-talk
communications within defined groupsÑthat could be unbundled and
repackaged for more effective use. Similarly, future handheld communi-
cations devices might employ cell phone technology (not commercial cell
phones themselves) but with appropriate adaptations (in durability, form
factor, or frequency) that meet disaster management requirements yet
leverage lower-cost commercial technology.Each of these principles is discussed in more detail below.Effective Scaling from Routine to Disaster OperationDisasters are sufficiently different from day-to-day life events to beperceived as a completely separate mode of operations involving differ-
ent organizational structures and priorities, different attitudes and skills,
different methods, and different technologies. This impression is rein-
forced by a collection of binary words and concepts: disasters are Òde-
clared,Ó emergency plans and facilities are Òactivated,Ó resources are Òmo-
bilizedÓ and then later Òdemobilized.ÓYet this clear-cut distinction between Òdisaster modeÓ and normaloperations is in some sense a matter of administrative convenience. Ac-
tual disasters vary enormously both in scale and quality. Some, such as
earthquakes, terrorist explosions, and electrical blackouts, come on sud-
denly and with a minimum of warning. Others, such as riverine floods,
hurricanes, and food shortages, come on relatively gradually. Some, such
as infectious disease epidemics and bioterrorism attacks, might actually
be in progress for some time before being recognized. By the same token,
some disasters conclude quickly, allowing a rapid shift from responseImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTinto recovery, while others persist for longer and sometimes unpredict-able periods. And while the generalized incident command functions of
command, operations, plans, logistics, and finance are generic and appli-
cable to all hazards, the specific makeup and activities of each function
can vary considerably depending on the nature, scope, and phase of the
particular event.In addition to the challenge of matching the response to the situation,these broad ranges of possibilities create challenges for managing the
transition into and back out of Òdisaster mode.Ó Many problems in disas-
ter response may be artifacts of these transition challenges, especially as
regards interpersonal and interorganizational communication and coor-
dination. Differences in situational awareness and assessment and result-
ing differences in the timing and degree of ÒactivationÓ between organi-
zations and individuals can lead to procedural and perceptual disconnects
and to falsely calibrated expectations. For example, in 1991 California
regional emergency management personnel near a major urban wildfire
experienced difficulty in mobilizing their headquarters to respond to re-
source requests. The more distant headquarters had not yet received tac-
tical and media reports of the extent and rapid growth of the blaze and
thus had not yet fully activated.This tendency toward representation errors and Òmode bindingÓ maybe exacerbated by the tendency to focus on worst-case scenarios in plan-
ning and exercises. The tacit assumption that a worst-case scenario will
exercise all emergency management functions overlooks the problems
inherent in transitions and the ambiguities of borderline situations that
may or may not turn out to be disasters or that are evaluated differently
by different response entities.Thoughtful use of IT could do a great deal to mitigate the problem oftransitions, largely by reframing occasional disaster activities as continual
processes that can be scaled up or down without creating discontinuities.
At least four potential benefits could be realized.First, the interconnection of emergency management applicationsusing shared data standards could permit activities such as situation re-
porting and resource management to be turned into continual ÒflowÓ
processes rather than ÒbatchÓ activities based on paper-based document-
oriented systems. This conversion could reduce the time delays and the
unintended synchronization of reports, requests, and orders inherent in
fixed reporting cycles. It could also permit more rapid and precise detec-
tion of trends and conditions by allowing observations to be shared at a
rate suited to the phenomena observed rather than one dictated by a fixed
reporting schedule.Second, a continually updated shared knowledge base, in the form ofa Òcommon operating picture,Ó could reduce various difficulties that canImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT91result from different entities having different editions of situation andresource reports at a single point in time.Third, the greater ÒvirtualizationÓ of emergency management pro-cesses using network technologies could reduce the impact of disasters on
day-to-day operations by allowing many organizations and individuals
to participate in the emergency information system from their regular
workplaces. It also allows for more phased relocation to emergency facili-
ties, thus reducing the vulnerability of the emergency management sys-
tem that can result when all participants are in transit at the same time.Finally, in addition to reducing the necessary size of physical emer-gency operation centers, greater virtualization might also permit a more
gradual activation of emergency procedures, one that can be more closely
matched to the particular ÒcurveÓ of a particular disaster. This could
reduce both the disruption and missteps associated with all-at-once acti-
vations and the tardy activations that sometimes result from hesitance to
take the disruptive and expensive step of dislocating large numbers of
key personnel.One key to obtaining each of these benefits would be to abandoncontingent Òin case of disaster, break glassÓ systems and procedures in
favor of an Òalways onÓ approach enabled by modern IT and communica-
tions. It is also critical to understand the degree to which IT can effectively
complement, support, and substitute for face-to-face communications.Redundancy and Diversity to Achieve ResilienceOne of the fundamental dynamics of disaster management is thetradeoff between efficiency and resilience. At a technical level, communi-
cation can be disrupted by many factors, such as the following: physical
destruction of equipment or infrastructure (e.g., towers, cables, and sub-
stations), loss of power, interoperability problems, and environmental
factors (e.g., obstacles for wireless). Hardening devices and infrastructureis an obvious way to reduce failures of equipment and infrastructure and
reduce the chances of power loss. While it is not economically feasible to
harden all critical equipment, improvements are certainly possible. For
example, it should be possible to develop tools to analyze the robustness
of the communication infrastructure in certain disaster scenarios and to
apply resources optimally to harden those at greatest risk.While hardening equipment and infrastructure continues to offer po-tential for improvements, other means of achieving resilience in IT sys-
tems for disaster management are often discounted or overlooked. Redun-dancy and diversity are two well-known techniques for building resilient(reliable, robust) IT systems.Redundancy can be provided inside a network that uses a specificImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtechnologyÑfor example, by building additional relay stations or accesspoints into the infrastructure. This would make it possible to route traffic
over alternate paths if some components fail. The ability to establish par-
allel redundant networks quickly can reduce down time. Two examples
are (1) parallel wireless networks based on commercial technology and
(2) cellular-on-wheels (COW)Ñmovable cellular sites with satellite
backhaul to establish cellular bubbles using dedicated spectrum.8 It isnecessary to plan for such deployments in advance. Equipment must be
available, spectrum must be allocated, and people must be trained. Also,
organizational support must be created (e.g., directory services).Technological diversity in the basic infrastructure for all organiza-tions (including large and small businesses, government agencies, and
community organizations) would reduce the impact of disasters.9 A re-lated risk is that a technology monoculture, in which a technical attack in
a single operating system or other piece of software could cripple re-
sponse activities across the board. Indeed, integrating disaster planning
efforts across private and public IT systems that embrace diversity and
redundancy could lead to significant improvements in the overall reli-
ability of information and communications capabilities in the event of a
disaster.As discussed earlier in this chapter, one important opportunity forachieving better resilience is by using commercial technology and ser-
vices. Commercial technologies offer significant opportunities for both
better redundancy and increased diversity. Two examples of this oppor-
tunity are cellular and wireless networking technologies. Nearly every-
one uses cell phones on a daily basis, so they will naturally continue to
use them during a disaster. Besides traditional voice calls, cell phones also
increasingly support other communications capabilitiesÑfor example,
push-to-talk, text messaging, Web access, and instant messagingÑall of
which may be useful and familiar. Wireless networking is also becoming
ubiquitous in populated areas and is supported on multiple mobile de-8COWs have been deployed for wilderness firefighting, and Qualcomm deployed animprovised system that included movable switches (switches-on-wheels, or SOWs) with
satellite backhaul to create cellular bubbles in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.9Sharon Dawes, Thomas Birkland, Giri Kumar Tayi, and Carrie A. Schneider, Informa-tion, Technology, and Coordination: Lessons from the World Trade Center Response, Center forTechnology in Government, University at Albany, State University of New York, June2004; available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/wtc_lessons/wtc_lessons.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT93vices such as laptops and handheld devices. These technologies are com-mercially supported and widely used, and the equipment is relatively
inexpensive. These characteristics naturally lead to IT capabilities that are
both redundant and diverse.Flexibility, Composability, and Interoperability asCore Guiding PrinciplesSystems designed to exhibit the characteristics of flexibility, com-posability, and interoperability as core guiding principles can produce
many long-term improvements with wide-ranging implications for the
effectiveness of IT use for disaster management. Each of these characteris-tics has important implications for system design.Almost by definition, one cannot anticipate every contingency thatmust be dealt with in a disaster. In disaster management, where informa-
tion channels can be interrupted and informal channels established with-
out official sanction, developing and encouraging these characteristics are
especially important, though often counter to the urge for control.This observation suggests favoring composed systems consistingof diverse components over turn-key, integrated solutions. Composing
systems from diverse (standard) components allows selection of best-of-
breed solutions, enables federated solutions made up of diverse technolo-
gies with carefully chosen operational boundaries at which interoper-
ability can be managed, and provides greater overall robustness through
diversity.Another important design principle is to build systems assuming fu-ture needs for interoperation with other systems. By constructing systems
using layered architectures with potential points of interoperation de-
signed in from the beginning (e.g., by designing to established standards),
systems can be made interoperable without requiring technological mo-
nocultures.Composability offers further advantages. The short-term economiesattributed to lockstep standardization can be substantially offset by the
improved marketplace power of users who are not locked in to a particu-
lar vendorÕs wares but instead obtain the benefits of continued competi-
tion for their business. The costs of technological diversity are real, but so
are the benefits. This is true in non-disaster systems and even more so in
disaster management systems where resilience is more important than
efficiency. The diverse agencies responsible for responding to disasters
and for acquiring technology to do so should embrace the natural ten-
dency toward heterogeneity that this organizational reality engenders.
The challenge is to work with other agencies to standardize the right
things.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTAnother driver of purpose-built proprietary systems involves currentefforts to eliminate technological stovepipes and single-agency systems
that greatly hamper effective, interoperable communication on the scale
necessary during a disaster. This is an important goal given the signifi-
cant and ongoing problems with interoperability already discussed in
Chapters 1 and 2. These systems improve interoperability but generally
do so by moving the stovepipes to a higher organizational level (e.g.,
multiple police departments are integrated into a state-wide police com-
munication system, or municipal police and firefighting communication
systems are integrated within a municipality or region), but boundaries
will remain (e.g., police and fire fighters cannot communicate, or public
safety agencies across jurisdictions cannot communicate). Federated solu-
tions made up of diverse technologies and platforms could be imple-
mented without the technological and operational risks associated with
purpose-built, integrated solutionsÑand still provide interoperability, as
long as interoperability points are designed into the system.Mobile phone companies have managed a major technology genera-tion change about once every 10 years. Is this an argument for a mono-
lithic system or a federated system? Mobile networks generally consist of
monolithic and non-interoperable technology at the wireless interface.
However, mobile phones have a clear interoperability point, the telephone
network (and more recently the Internet). Operators may make technol-
ogy changes (large and small) internally to their network while continu-
ing to maintain an interface to the interoperability point. This is, in fact,
why cellular networks built on Global System for Mobile Communication
(GSM) technology can interoperate with Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA)-based networks. In the same way, different agencies might have
different and incompatible networks but maintain an interoperability
point with other agenciesÕ networks.Even within integrated, all-in-one systems, substantial value fromtechnological diversity can be achieved by allowing for integration of
diverse components built with standard interfaces rather than building
end-to-end proprietary systems. Systems that have taken the trouble to
meet the challenges of a diverse technology base at any one point in time
are also Òfuture-proofedÓ against technological change. New components
become just additional instances of diversity, allowing incremental sys-
tem upgrades that can leverage the latest technology advances, rather
than introducing dilemmas requiring fundamental and potentially dis-
ruptive Òforklift upgradesÓ or lost opportunities for improving effective-
ness. That same flexibility makes diverse systems more agile in the face
of sudden change. Mergers, relocations, and major changes in scale are
characteristic of day-to-day operations as much as of disasters, and a
diversity-tolerant approach to technology can facilitate them all.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT95 The User Interface and theUnderlying Technologies to Deliver a CapabilityMany familiar information and communication technologies are bestknown by the various controls, displays, sounds, or other sensory experi-
ences they present to the user. The familiar package of a public safety
responderÕs portable two-way radio stands, in many peopleÕs minds, for
the whole infrastructure of frequencies, repeaters, and towers of which
the radios are the outward and visible sign. First responder radios encap-
sulate multiple attributesÑpush-to-talk capability, the form factor of the
handset and microphone, and communications within defined groupsÑ
that could be unbundled and repackaged for more effective use. Handheld

communications devices might employ cell phone technology but with
adaptations (in durability, form factor, or frequency).But the association of the Òuser interfaceÓ with the underlying infra-structure is not nearly as fixed as in the past, and grows less so every year.
Push-to-talk operation has, for example, been added to cell phone sys-
tems. Similarly, the Internet connects two-way radio networks and tele-
phone calls, while telephones send e-mails and images to computers over
the Internet. Television transmitters broadcast data, while TV programs
are ÒstreamedÓ over data connections. The long-heralded Òdigital conver-
genceÓ of various communications and computing platforms has arrived,
and in arriving has demolished many of the traditional connections be-
tween how a communications capability is embodied in a user interface
and the underlying infrastructure used to deliver it. This is creating no
small degree of confusion in procurement, regulation, and management
of IT systems.Too often, would-be innovators have been hamstrung by regulationsor procedures that confuse the user interface with the underlying infra-
structure. However, the opportunities created by tearing down the walls
between systems are much greater than the costs. Single devices can be
used to replace multiple devices, thus cutting costs and simplifying the
work of first responders and emergency managers alike. Different sys-
tems can be interconnected in unforeseen and expedient ways, creating
new capabilities such as circumventing damaged infrastructure.The conflation of interface device (e.g., computer, phone) and infra-structure (e.g., the network hardware and networking protocols) also
leads to the mistaken presumption that a diversity of communication
systems must present huge challenges for the users to learn and effec-
tively operate in a diverse technology environment. However, a variety of
familiar as well as novel interface devices could coexist while still en-
abling interoperation and communication between systemsÑeven where
the underlying networks are vastly different. Likewise, users could beImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTprovided with a single, consistent interface that nonetheless utilizes morethan one discovery, routing, and transport regime. The underlying infra-
structure can hide the technological ÒglueÓ necessary to communicate
between systems. Either way, interface device choices should be driven
by how best to ease training and promote familiarity through routine use,
and should be largely independent of decisions about the underlying
infrastructure.An awareness of the difference between these two distinct layersof technology and a thorough understanding of how they can be most
effectively coupled with each other, depending on system requirements,
is a critical skill for builders and managers of disaster management IT
systems.THE TECHNOLOGY PIPELINEThe current state of the art in technology and level of technologyadoption differs considerably across the capabilities discussed in Chap-
ters 2 and 4. These differences in terms of readiness can be usefully
thought of in terms of a technology pipeline. Where a given capability is
in the technology pipeline affects the type of investment needed to ad-
vance it toward use in practice and the amount of time before a payoff can
be expected. A technology investment process to produce a steady stream
of improvements for incorporation of IT in disaster management should
include a detailed assessment of where technologies are in the pipeline.
Investments are most likely to provide continuous improvements when
balanced across the spectrum of possibilitiesÑfrom adoption, adaptation,
and development to applied research and general research. A
roadmapping process, described in the following section, is a tool that
could help guide such investments.One way of dividing up the stages in the technology pipeline is thefollowing:¥AdoptionÑtechnology available today requiring efforts to overcome adop-tion barriers. Some IT technology is already available but has not beenwidely (though possibly partially) adopted by the public safety or disas-
ter management communities that could benefit from it. Such technology
does not require significant further adaptation, development, or research.
There are many reasons that such technology has not been adopted, in-
cluding cost, lack of awareness or training, and resistance to change.

Nonetheless, adoption of these technologies can have immediate impact
on attaining important goals for the use of IT for disaster management.
The time to realize benefits from these technologies is limited chiefly by
the time necessary to overcome the barriers to adoption, which will varyImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT97by organization and the nature of the barriers to be overcome. Thesebarriers may include the time to secure the investment and to make the
appropriate connection between that investment and the fully discounted
net present value of the savings that the investment will accrue. Advances
in general data processing, storage, communication, display, and soft-
ware technologies will continue to make components of IT systems less
expensive and more capable with timeÑaiding the adoption process. (Ex-
amples of technologies in this category and described in Chapter 4 in-
clude radio-frequency identification (RFID) for resource tracking and lo-
gistics; computer-mediated exercises; reverse 911 capability, i.e., two-way
emergency reporting; and portable unmanned aerial vehicles and robots.)¥AdaptationÑtechnology on the horizon and ready for transfer to disastermanagement practice. Effective systems to serve disaster management maybe assembled by combining and adapting available commodity compo-
nents. IT systems are mainly built using hardware that is available off the
shelf and adapted using off-the-shelf software components. Some hard-
ware componentsÑsuch as personal computers and disk drivesÑhave
become commodities. Commodity hardware benefits from significant
economies of scale, so that the hardware cost of a cell phone is roughly
one-tenth that of a police handheld radio. Part of the cost differential is
due to specialized functionality and ruggedness requirements, but a sig-
nificant portion of the difference comes from much higher production
volumes. Adapting commodity hardware to disaster management (in con-
trast to developing wholly novel hardware) could significantly lower cost
due to specialized requirements. Software exhibits more flexibility. Many
software and Web-based applications are expressly designed to allow
customization for specific uses. Some useful software exists that has been
developed in an open and freely shared environment that lends itself to
adaptation and customization. In such an environment, investment can
be distributed, often close to the end users, making it possible for users
and vendors to adapt many existing IT technologies to disaster manage-
ment readily and rapidly. Useful results can be obtained on time scales
measured in months. (Examples of technologies in this category and de-
scribed in Chapter 4 are commercial collaboration software and file shar-
ing, online resource directories, multiple input/multiple output wireless
systems, integrated ad hoc data collection tools (blogs/wikis), and mobile
cellular infrastructure.)¥DevelopmentÑtechnology on the horizon and development needed foruse in disaster management. For some requirements the technology anddesign principles are fairly well understood, but existing technology is
simply not adequate for disaster management. A concerted effort is re-
quired to develop significant software, hardware, and organizational
structures to take advantage of them. In this case, a request-for-proposalsImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTprocess can be used to solicit capable organizations to deliver a productthat implements the desired technology. Development time depends on
project complexity, but useful results can often be obtained within a year.
(Examples of technologies in this category and described in Chapter 4 are
volunteer mobilization systems, event-replay tools, and intelligent adap-
tive planning tools.)¥Applied researchÑissues requiring disaster-management-specific re-search. There remain some difficult issues in disaster management forwhich solutions are not at handÑfor example, reliable radio communica-
tions inside buildings or rubble. Research aimed specifically at improving
disaster management could be conducted by university, commercial, and
government laboratories, and even volunteer relief agencies such as the
Red Cross. This type of activity is managed and directed within the gov-
ernment by agencies such as the National Science Foundation, the De-
partment of Homeland Security (DHS), the National Institutes of Health,
and by defense-related organizations such as the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency and the service research laboratories. Support for
smaller companies is given through Small Business Innovation Research
and Small Business Technology Transfer programs administered by many
of the above agencies. Because of the nature of disaster management and
the types of challenges that the community faces, disaster-management-
related IT research is becoming increasingly broad and interdisciplinary
(see Box 3.3 for a discussion of the challenges of interdisciplinary re-
search), involving contributions from multiple technical and social sci-
ence fields. Fully realizing potential gains will often involve the fostering
and management of collaborative research. Even so-called short-term re-
search is typically a multiyear proposition and requires validation in the
field at real disasters, as well as simulations. (Examples of technologies in
this category and described in Chapter 4 are software-defined radios,
tools for data mining across diverse information sources, decision senti-
nels, deployable sensor networks, and computer-assisted disaster simula-
tion training tools.)¥General researchÑissues requiring research followed by adaptation todisaster management. Some problem areas in disaster management overlapgeneral needs in IT management. IT is a broad, active area of research,
and relevant research aimed specifically at disaster management is per-
formed at university, commercial, and government laboratories and is
sponsored by the same constellation of agencies. Many of these labs are
engaged in broad areas of research that have the potential to develop new
IT capabilities which, though not directed specifically to that end, could
be harnessed for disaster management. As with applied research, this
research is typically a multiyear proposition. Further development or ad-
aptation may also be needed for effective utilization in disaster manage-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT99BOX 3.3Interdisciplinary Research forEnhancing Disaster ManagementInterdisciplinary approaches to disaster management have been discussedfor quite some time. As noted in the recent NRC report Facing Hazards and Disas-ters, interdisciplinary research (i.e., research that blends researchers, expertise,and tools from a variety of disciplines to address compelling and crosscutting prob-lems) has been gaining prominence in almost every field of scientific endeavor,
including disaster management research.1 Indeed, the report cites earlier NRCwork that describes four factors promoting the growth of interdisciplinary research:
(1) the complexity of nature and society, (2) the desire to address scientific prob-
lems that cross disciplines, (3) the need to solve societyÕs problems, and (4) thepower of new technologies.2The benefits of interdisciplinary research for disaster management can besubstantial. For example, Facing Hazards and Disasters describes a number ofÒexemplarsÓ of interdisciplinary research in disaster managementÑfrom infrastruc-ture failures and urban economics to casualty analysis through a common frame-
work to decision making for risk protection. However, Facing Hazards and Disas-ters also goes on to describe how interdisciplinary research can be particularlychallenging when overlapping social sciences with natural sciences (something
one sees quite a bit of in disaster management research).According to the same report, interdisciplinary research for disaster manage-ment faces a number of significant challenges of its own (in addition to the normal
challenges for such research, such as lack of funding and academic incentives) ifit is to prove successful. For example, the report notes that some issues often stemfrom Òthe failure of a research team to function collaborativelyÓ owing to such thingsas difficulties in spanning culture gaps between the disciplines or the devaluationor undervaluation by one discipline of the work of another. Another challenge cited
revolves around how disaster management research is most often viewed as ap-plied research rather than basic research geared toward advancing overall knowl-edge in a given area.Facing Hazards and Disasters surveys the available literature in the areaand also suggests a number of factors contributing to the success of interdiscipli-nary research (pp. 186-187). First, it notes that problem-oriented research is
probably best suited for interdisciplinary work in disaster management. Second,it notes that the particular characteristics and abilities of researchersÑincludingsuch things as interpersonal skillsÑare very important for such interdisciplinary
research. Third, it describes how studies that keep research teams relativelysmall and have stable membership appear to be more successful at integrationand research.1National Research Council, Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimen-sions, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 181.2National Research Council, Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research, The National Acade-mies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTment, which may add more time. This report identifies topics that requiregeneral research, but it is not expected that funding specific for disaster
management will be employed for these topics. (Examples of technolo-
gies in this category and described in Chapter 4 are delay-tolerant net-
working, automated information fusion from diverse sources, and cali-
brated information confidence tools.)ROADMAPPINGAny research agenda aimed at improving the long-term effectivenessof IT use in disaster management must be placed in the context of the
technology pipeline and must prioritize the items in the agenda against
each other, in particular noting where progress in one area may be depen-
dent on progress in other areas or on organizational advances. An effi-
cient approach to investment requires a clear vision of the path to im-
provement and a detailed understanding of the individual pieces of the
problem and their interrelationships, together with a mechanism to mea-
sure progress.Disaster management is, ultimately, a system-level problem. Thus,improving IT use in disaster management requires a system-level ap-
proach. The research agenda is likely to have the most impact if it con-
forms to a clear vision of the path to improvement defined in a fully
articulated roadmap. By establishing a process for making improvements,
currently unimagined concerns can be efficiently addressed as they arise,
and as both technology and practice evolve.A technology roadmap is a planning tool that can provide informa-tion to make better technology investment decisions by identifying criti-
cal technologies, technology gaps, and interdependencies between tech-
nologies that dictate coordination of research and development cycles. It
can also help uncover interconnections between technologies and adop-
tion issues related to organizational or human behavior characteristics.
Perhaps most importantly, it can serve as a mechanism through which
diverse participants, often with conflicting priorities but with common
goals (i.e., saving lives and reducing economic and other impacts), can
cooperate to address a larger problem of common interestÑin this case
the most effective handling of disasters possible.Until relatively recently, the technology choices facing most disastermanagement organizations were comparatively few, with much of the
investment focused on building specialized communications systems in
close partnership with a small set of vendors. Today, there is a much
wider set of technology options available. There is also an increasing need
for the diverse organizations with public safety and homeland security
responsibilities to be able to cooperate during large-scale disasters. InImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT101response, efforts have been made to identify appropriate technologies(such as DHSÕs Select Equipment List).An effective, useful roadmap is driven by a clear set of user-driven(not technology-driven) goals and needs to evolve continuously as a liv-
ing document in consultation with the full range of stakeholders. Some
pieces of a roadmap are in place (e.g., the National Incident Management
System), but an overarching strategic vision of how IT can best be evolved
and applied to disaster management is missing.A roadmap can serve as an anchor for a strategic vision and helppolicy makers avoid lurching from one priority to the next, driven by the
most recent major disaster. Unfortunately, in the absence of a roadmap,
more or less haphazard, reactionary IT investment is occurring and is
likely to continue.10 New incidents (like a major hurricane) should triggera reevaluation of the existing roadmap, potentially leading to some ad-
justments in priorities within the strategic framework. But the continuityof investments should result in continuous and more predictable improve-
ments in the application of IT to disaster management.A roadmap can also assist policy makers and planners in balancinginvestments across different technologies appropriate at different times
in the disaster management life cycle, that is, mitigation preparation, re-
sponse, and recovery. A roadmap can also make explicit investment
choices concerning tradeoffs among competing priorities and between
tensions such as security versus openness and other such tensions previ-
ously identified.Finally, a roadmapping process provides an opportunity to considerthe interrelationships between technology and organizational models and
technology and policy. Successful technology development and deploy-
ment are widely understood to require active consideration of the organi-
zational context in which they will be introduced. Similarly, potential
policy barriers must be considered when developing new technologies
and organizational approaches.Critical to the success of a roadmap activity is the inclusion of a broadarray of stakeholders and an institutional home to get started and remain
viable. All participants must make a long-term commitment to the result-
ing roadmap and to its continuing evolution as technological advances
and organizational innovations are made.10The fiscal year 2007 Senate Appropriations Bill for the Department of Homeland Secu-rity shows evidence of this type of planning, focusing on hurricanes and immigration. SeeMichael Arnone, ÒDHS Bill Slashes Research Funds,Ó Federal Computer Week, July 17, 2006,p. 11; available at http://www.fcw.com/article95287-07-17-06-Print.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTExamples of Successful Technology RoadmappingRoadmapping is a technique frequently used by firms to plan futureresearch and development activities. The U.S. military, for example, uses
a roadmapping approach in its Quadrennial Defense Review report11 todrive plans for incorporating technology advances into its future capabili-
ties. The International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative has developed
a sensors technology roadmap that examines technology capabilities and
applications in a variety of sectors, including transportation, health care,
and consumer electronics.12Perhaps the most familiar application of roadmapping is the semicon-ductor industryÕs roadmap. In the late 1980s, it became clear that the
integrated circuit industry was not only a rapidly growing part of the
global economy but also critically important to the economy and national
security of the United States. Unfortunately, concerns grew that the United
States, after an initial leading role, had fallen behind in technology leader-
ship relative to other countries, especially those in Asia. A 1990 National
Research Council report outlined the consequences of not maintaining a
commercial and technological lead in this area.13 The Semiconductor In-dustry Association (SIA) would take on the role of pulling together a
long-term technology roadmap for the industry based both on end-user
needs and technology trends.This was not an industrial plan in the usual sense, but rather anagreed on, coordinated vision that would help each organization plan
development and investment strategies that would bring the thousands
of pieces of technology needed to make an integrated circuit together at
the right time and the right level of development. A technology piece
developed too early would be prohibitively expensiveÑdeveloped too
late it would not be profitable. Market forces would ensure that vendors
and suppliers would tool up to meet a particular need at the right time,
and even researchers understood the targets for conventional technology
and could choose areas for research that, if successful, would have the
most impact. Unlike other attempts at planning, this was not directed at a
specific technology goal, but rather at the process of continuously improv-11The 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review Report notes in its preface that the ideas and pro-posals in the report are provided as a roadmap for change. The report is available at http:
//www.comw.org/qdr/qdr2006.pdf.12Charles E. Richardson et al., ÒSensor Technology Roadmapping Efforts at iNEMI,ÓIEEE Transactions on Components and Packaging Technologies 28(2): 372-375, June 2005.13Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, Keepingthe U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the Agenda, National Academy Press, Wash-ington, D.C., 1990.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT103ing a key technology over a span of decades. Each step along the waywould have important economic and strategic value and would form the
foundation for the next important advance.Built into the creation of the roadmap was a process that drove con-tinuous updates and refinements, making it a living document with con-
tinued relevance and ensuring that it was up to date with advances in
science, technology, and market needs. By the end of the 1990s, after three
major updates and the associated strengthening of the U.S. semiconduc-
tor industry, there was a push to expand the roadmap process to a global
scale so that the vision would match the expanding scale of the industry.
Today it is a joint effort of industry, government, and academic represen-
tatives from the United States, Europe, Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. It is the
critical common view driving ongoing investment in research, develop-
ment, and manufacturing in one of the largest and most complex compo-
nents of the global economy.The roadmap for disaster management would be quite different fromthat of the semiconductor industry. Specifically, the SIA roadmap was
made possible when an entire industry needed to plan for future genera-
tions of fabrication equipment and realized that this highly capital-inten-
sive equipment was beyond the means of any one industry participantÑ
it required cooperation with other participants. This created an
environment where cooperation within a specific framework, embodied
by the SIA roadmap, was possible, while allowing continued competition
in areas outside of that framework.In contrast, disaster management organizations and the associationsthat represent them would necessarily drive the roadmapping process
envisioned here. Yet, the key element remainsÑthe need to create a frame-
work within which cooperation can happen in order to address common
goals that are otherwise unattainable or suboptimal. By joining together
to develop a roadmap, they would have a forum for speaking with a
common and consistent voice to the vendor community about technology
needs.There are also similarities from a process perspective; stakeholderscreate a living document that explicitly lays out a vision for continuous
progress based on balancing value and cost, as well as carefully consider-
ing technical and organizational feasibility. Then, investment from
all sectors can then be committed to track this vision as it evolves. A
successful roadmapping process would ultimately result in full and
active participation of the vendor community, just as the SIA roadmap
process eventually included the entire worldwide semiconductor indus-
try, including those who spurred its development as the perceived
Òadversaries.ÓImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTRESEARCH CENTERS:COUPLING TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH WITH PRACTICESuccessful development, adoption, and utilization of IT for disastermanagement require several different communities be in regular and close
contact with one another. Researchers tend to look for overarching themes,
but experience has demonstrated the importance, in the field of disaster
management, of starting with real problems faced by real practitioners,
working back from there to overarching themes. Starting with overarching
research themes will likely lead to dead ends and unimplementable tech-
nology.14 Practitioners must help define needs for new technology, thusacting as inspiration for researchers and developers. They must interact
with developers and vendors throughout the prototyping cycle and de-
velopment process to ensure that their needs are indeed addressed. IT
researchers must have opportunities to expose practitioners to novel con-
cepts in order to generate an understanding of potential new capabilities
and how they might fit into current and future operations. Public admin-
istrators, social scientists, and IT researchers all play important roles in
ensuring that IT innovations are introduced with the necessary organiza-
tional changes to enable new devices and systems to be smoothly inte-
grated into practice.Forging organizational ties is harder in disaster management than itis in sectors like defense because the vast majority of practitioners are
distributed across local agencies that are normally fairly isolated from
each other and from the research community. Nevertheless, integrating
the experiences and needs of these different agencies is crucial, since
sooner or later when a disaster of a severe enough magnitude strikes, they
are bound to have to work together. Some regional groups of organiza-
tions that have already experienced the need to work together have suc-
cessfully initiated the process of forging organizational ties, suggesting
that building from a bottom-up approach is likely to be most effective.Moreover, successful IT development is iterative. It is important toprovide practitioners with initial prototypes to bootstrap the iterative
process. Testbeds and exercises are particularly critical in the area of
disaster management because they provide opportunities for feedback
from actual users about critical requirements of responders that may not
otherwise be apparent. In some cases, large-scale testbeds are required to
understand issues that only emerge at scale. Simulations present oppor-14This point was made repeatedly by workshop participants and is reflected in thecommitteeÕs earlier workshop report; see National Research Council, Summary of a Work-shop on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disaster Management, The National Acad-emies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, p. 7.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT105tunities not only for training but also for observation and assessment ofIT capabilities such as decision support tools. Operational facilities that
permit instrumentation, experimentation, and iteration are needed.Collaborative research centers could, therefore, play a highly usefulrole in advancing the effective application of IT to disaster management.
The major goals of such centers would be sixfoldÑ(1) to develop a shared
understanding of the experiences and challenges in all phases of disaster
management from both a technological and organizational perspective,
(2) to evaluate the application of technology advances to disaster manage-
ment practice, (3) to develop a culture and processes for transitioning
knowledge and technology to the operational communities on a sustained
basis, (4) to build human capital at the intersection of information tech-
nology and disaster management, (5) to serve as repositories for data and
for lessons learned from past disasters and disaster management efforts,
and (6) to provide forward-looking analysis to inform the development of
technology capabilities, associated organizational processes, and roadmap
development.The research conducted by these centers would be multidisciplinary,combining the efforts of information scientists, engineers, and social sci-
entists. Participants would be charged with collecting knowledge and
experience from past disasters and using it to build a core set of knowl-
edge that would inform the development of technology capabilities and
associated organizational processes to enhance the management of future
events. The centers would closely partner with federal, state, and local
agencies responsible for disaster management. Indeed, experienced and
capable emergency management officials and operational units from di-
saster management organizations should be deeply involved in the work
of these centers. One approach for engaging these government agencies
could be to provide them with incremental funds specifically for working
with researchers and to develop next-generation technologies.To ensure that the work of the centers is informed by and responsiveto the needs of disaster management, centers would bring in disaster
management professionals from all levels of government as visiting fel-
lows. To inform additional researchers about the problems of disaster
management, university faculty and students would be offered intern-
ships and fellowships. Finally, to help encourage development of technol-
ogy based on the research results, the involvement of relevant industry
would be promoted through informational activities and the sharing of
expertise and results.Multiple centers for research would have several advantages over asingle research center. They would enable healthy intellectual competi-
tion and cross-fertilization of ideas and allow for specialization in spe-
cific types of disasters, specific technology capabilities, or the compre-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENThensive needs of particular geographical areas. Certain research centerscould, for example, specialize in disasters common to their locations, in
order to benefit from expertise residing in local emergency response or-
ganizations and other local government agencies. For instance, a center
near known earthquake-prone areas may focus on technology related to
improving earthquake-specific disaster management. Different centers
could specialize in practical and response-oriented work, combining core
as well as geography-specific expertise. Close coordination and sharing
of information and expertise among centers would help avoid unneces-
sary duplication.A major goal of these centers would be to develop a culture of con-tinuously transitioning knowledge and IT between researchers and op-
erational communities. This is very different from the usual academic
model of licensing technology to a third party, or creating a start-up. A
continuous process of reviewing user requirements, knowledge genera-
tion, collaboration, validation, acceptance, implementation, and incorpo-
ration of new user needs must be encouraged.Field researchÑworking on large problems outside the labsÑappearsto be particularly valuable to making progress on using IT for disaster
management. It pushes researchers in new directions. It also stresses the
technology under the extreme conditions inherent in disaster situations,
exposing issues unlikely to be discovered in a laboratory setting. Practi-
tionersÕ participation in such research gives them an opportunity to see
the potential for new information technologies. It also gives them a chance
to influence its direction. The goal is to close the gap between researchers
and practitioners and create a unified core community that can speed up
the process of delivering research results of immediate relevance to disas-
ter management. Panelists at the workshop held by the committee cited
the Disaster Management Interoperability Services (DMIS) Program and
the Biological Warning and Incidents Characterization (BWIC) projects as
successful examples of programs carrying out field research that involved
the public safety community.15 The Strong Angel exercises mentioned inChapter 2 are another example of how technologies still in the develop-
ment stage can be tested in the field and can begin to gain acceptance in
the practitioner community that is ultimately indispensable to adoption,
as well as provide researchers with feedback on the proper direction for
further research and development.Finally, as the use of advanced sensors, communication technology,and similar IT increases, it becomes ever easier to collect data about the15See National Research Council, Summary of a Workshop on Using Information Technologyto Enhance Disaster Management, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005,p. 6.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING ACQUISITION AND ADOPTION OF IT107process of dealing with a disaster in a completely unobtrusive manner.Such data ought to form a basis for studies that will ultimately lead to
improving the disaster management process, and it should be used to
help evaluate new proposed technologies and methodologies. Centers
should serve as repositories for these data.Several research centers devoted to certain aspects of disaster man-agement already exist. Some well-known centers are the Natural Hazards
Center at the University of Colorado at Boulder; the Disaster Research
Center at the University of Delaware, which investigates the social sci-
ence aspects of disasters; the Hazard Reduction and Recovery Center at
Texas A&M University; and Dartmouth CollegeÕs Institute for Security
Technology Studies.16Such centers could provide the basis for a network of research centerswhere IT researchers, hazard and disaster researchers, and disaster man-
agement practitioners can collaborate to study and evaluate the use of IT
for disaster management from both a technological and an organizational
perspective; transition knowledge and technology to those who practice
disaster management; build human capital at the intersection of IT and
disaster management; and develop future IT capabilities.16Texas A&M University provides a Web site at http://archone.tamu.edu/hrrc/related-sites/Centers.html#Domestic with links to domestic and international disasterresearch centers. The Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado at Boulderprovides links to Web sites of U.S. and international organizations dealing with hazards
and disasters, including academic research centers; see http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/resources/centers.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1084Elements of a Research Agenda
The six key information technology (IT)-enabled capabilities dis-cussed in Chapter 2 represent broad areas where there is signifi-
cant potential for the application of IT to enhance disaster manage-ment. These IT-enabled capabilities are used here to provide a framework
for organizing research and development needs and opportunities de-
scribed in this section as part of a research and development agenda. This
chapter is intended to provide an initial sketch of the kinds of items that
would ultimately appear in an IT roadmap for disaster management. The
committee sought in particular to identify technologies under investiga-
tion that may hold largely unrecognized promise for advancing disaster
management, though more apparently promising technologies are de-
scribed as well. Developers of a roadmap could use this survey as a start-
ing point for developing a fully articulated plan, including a detailed set
of research directions to be pursued.In developing this initial sketch of a research agenda for use in an ITroadmap, the committee made some assumptions about the continuation
of a number of technology trends occurring independently of the needs of
disaster management. The agenda is not aimed at influencing the direc-
tion of these trends, which the committee believes will continue regard-
less of the research agenda identified here. However, an IT roadmap
would have to assume the continuation of current trends as a necessary
foundation for the development and commercialization of major aspects
of the disaster management research agenda and should incorporate them
as base technology trends. Roadmap developers may need to account forImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA109deviations from those trends should they occur. The technology trendsassumed are as follows:¥Continued improvements in the cost and capabilities of all aspectsof computing and data processing, including computer processing power
(ÒpopularÓ form of MooreÕs law), storage capacity, energy efficiency, and
network bandwidth;¥Continuing increases in the capability in the existing commercialcellular network: more capacity for voice and data, as well as new classes
of handsets with long-battery-lifetime data capability, and increasing

functionality;¥Continued progress toward transforming communication systemsfrom vulnerable and unreliable direct links to more robust, distributed,
and self-repairing grids using new approaches in mesh networking and
adaptive radios;¥Continued progress toward universal compatibility of all commu-nication and computing technologies by basing them on the underlying
Internet technology (i.e., ÒIP everywhereÓ);¥Continued growth of open source software methodology to allowrapid creation of new, high-reliability applications built on the experience
base of existing ones;¥Increasing use of high-volume commercial technology componentsin specialized systems in order to spread component development costs
over a much larger base, to build systems more rapidly by exploiting
existing components, and to increase reliability through increased field
experience;¥Rapid spread in the availability of low-cost, ubiquitous public wire-less data networking, especially at the municipal level;¥Continued improvements in linking geographic information to ex-isting and future data applications (e.g., Google maps), and all types of
databases such as geographic, medical, building plan, toxicology, weather,
and image databases; and¥Continued rapid progress in biochemistry, electronics, micro-mechanics, and nanotechnology that can be expected to lead to cheaper,
smaller, and better-performing sensors, actuators, and other devices.Under each key IT-enabled capability, technologies are listed roughlyin order of their current position in the technology pipeline. This is neces-
sarily only an approximation, as many technologies consist of multiple
iterations and incarnations that vary in their degree of readiness (and
value) for application in the field. For each item listed, a brief description
is provided, indicating both general and specific directions for potential
advances and some example applications for disaster management.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTSome of the technologies listed with one capability area may applyacross a number of capability areas. They have been listed with the capa-
bility area that they appear most likely to advance. Similarly, many of the
technologies are interconnected. They may need to be combined to effect
improvement in a specific application, such as better assessment of struc-
tural damage. Advancement in one area may be predicated on advance-
ment in other areas: for example, improvement in energy technology to
power mobile devices is required before advances in several other tech-
nology areas can be widely exploited. This report does not make a de-
tailed assessment of these interdependencies. However, identifying and
planning for them would be a major part of the development of a technol-
ogy roadmap.MORE ROBUST, INTEROPERABLE, ANDPRIORITY-SENSITIVE COMMUNICATIONS¥Exploitation of cellular, wireless networking, and Internet Protocol (IP)-based technology. All of these commercially available technologies can beapplied more systematically in disaster management practice to improve
communications resilience by adding redundancy and standards-based
interoperability. Effective use of these technologies requires enhancing
operational procedures among public safety and emergency management
organizations. They should seek to employ alternative communications
capabilities and implement fallback communication strategies when com-
munication resources are overloaded or impaired (e.g., text messaging in
place of voice calls). The opportunities for integrating mature and matur-
ing technologies into disaster management are abundant. The struggle is
not so much the usefulness of the technologies, but the processes and
structures, which limit their implementation. Box 4.1 details characteris-
tics of cellular technology that hold potential for improving disaster
management.¥Redundant and resilient infrastructure. Many communications prob-lems are caused by the destruction of communication devices or commu-
nication lines and by the loss of power. These are often the result of
damage to physical structures (buildings, cell towers). Hardening the in-
frastructure is an obvious way to reduce failure of equipment and lines
and reduce the chances of power loss. While it is not economically infea-
sible to harden all relevant equipment for worst-case scenarios (worst-
case hurricanes and earthquakes, terrorist attacks), improvements are cer-
tainly possible.¥Mobile cellular infrastructure. Cellular system capabilities could bemodified and satellite communications links could be integrated to en-
able quickly deployable communication systems for use in disasters.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA111¥Intelligent spectrum sharing. Spectrum shared more flexibly betweencommercial and public safety users and better use of spectrum through
improved radio technologies and policy continue to receive significant
focus. It is for this reason that this report mentions spectrum issues only
in passing, though the committee views dealing with spectrum issues as
an important component of any technology roadmap.¥Multiple input/multiple output (MIMO) wireless systems. Antennas,coding, and modulation could be improved to enhance radio perfor-
mance. MIMO wireless systems take advantage of miniaturization to in-
corporate an array of radios and antennas in both the handsets and base
stations as an economical way to increase user capacity. This technology
has demonstrated a multiplicative increase in capacity and spectral effi-
ciency; dramatic reductions of signal fading thanks to diversity; increased
system capacity (number of users); and improved resistance to interfer-
ence. Fundamental research is needed to fully realize these benefits in
practical wireless systems.¥Non-voice communications for first responders. Voice is a natural com-munication medium, and first responders are trained to use it reliably
under stress. Unfortunately, even the best-trained person is limited in the
amount and kind of information he or she can process using voice com-
munication. Careful integration of voice input/output with data applica-
tions could extend usersÕ ability to process information from a broader
knowledge base while reducing cognitive overload to leverage the scarce
asset of trained operators.¥Integrated voice/data/video. Separate systems for different modes ofcommunication are inherently inefficient (although separate systems may
provide useful redundancy), and integrated communication provides
economies of scope and scale. By providing users with a more general
purpose device, new applications can be more easily introduced. Many
technologies (e.g., IP-based, cellular) naturally provide both voice and
data communications in an integrated fashion: that is, they use a single
infrastructure, set of protocols, and terminal device. Adaptation of the
technology, such as the development of special terminals that meet the
robustness requirements of first responders or that also provide access to
existing communication infrastructures, may be required.¥Policy-based access control mechanisms. Access control lists (ACLs)are used extensively today for enforcing policies governing the type of
access (e.g., read, read/write, print) a user has to information. Policies
are hard-coded into ACLs, but having the policy hard-coded causes man-
agement and security problems. Research into mechanisms for imple-
menting ACLs that eliminate these problems promises to provide the
flexibility and ability to operate in the inherently dynamic environment
of a disaster.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTBOX 4.1Opportunities to Better Apply a Maturing Technology:Commercial Cellular TechnologyCell phone technology has several salient features today for communicationsin a disaster. Cellular technology provides communication that is logically defined.
Whom one communicates with is defined by who is dialed or by logical talk groupsrather than by who happens to be within radio range. This implies that one canexclude conversations within radio range as well as communicate with users be-
yond this range via networking technology.Cellular technology communicates with other technologies, both wireless andwire-line. Cellular communication interconnects with many different cellular radio
technologies, with traditional landline phones, and with Internet-based phones.Both point-to-point communications and logical talk group communication is possi-ble. Nextel using Motorola iDen technology has led the way with walkie-talkie-like
talk group technology. Other cellular technology vendors are following suit. Cellphones send both voice and data. The data include short messaging service, Inter-net access, and communication control data used to operate the system.Applications other than voice are already available. E-911 provides a local-ization application. (Many E-911 implementations use the Global Positioning Sys-tem [GPS]; other technologies are available.) Camera phones can take pictures or
short videos and send them. Cell systems can have information services thatbroadcast local weather, traffic conditions, breaking news, and so on.The hardware cost of cellular handsets is low relative to that for land mobileradio (LMR) handsets, in part owing to the economies of scale from so widelyadopted a technology. Cellular handset battery life is quite good. A phone with lowactivity can last many days. A busy phone can have hours of talk time.Cell phones have many inherent personal digital assistant capabilities, suchas memo pads, alarms, and searchable phonebooks. Cell phones are small and
lightweight, a fraction of the equivalent LMR radio. The keyboards are small, butmany handsets include hands-free voice dialing. The handsets are designed to bequickly reprogrammed with different cell phone numbers, service provider profiles,
and network configurations. In some cases this can be done over the air. Cellphone interfaces come in packages other than handsets and can be embedded in¥Software-defined radios. Software-defined radio (SDR) technologiesprovide software-controlled configurability of radios and their incorpora-
tion into networks. Remote configuration of frequency bands, interfer-
ence management, operational and control protocols, and security op-
tions offer the promise of flexibility, easy incorporation across
heterogeneous organizations and applications, and life-cycle cost reduc-
tions through high volume. (See Box 4.2 for further discussion.)¥Delay-tolerant networking. Current communication systems that de-pend on point-to-point links are vulnerable to disruptions but have the
advantage of very low delay when they are working. Distributed systems
are inherently more robust because they can reroute traffic as needed, butImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA113equipment and other devices. For instance, a sensor might have use a cellularinterface to report data, or a tracking tag could use the cellular infrastructure.Cellular can operate robustly under high traffic loads. When the load of thesystem exceeds capacity, calls will have to be blocked. The question is whetherthe network still maintains control over who gets blocked and what kind of commu-nication can take place. This depends on the communication control mechanisms.
Most cellular standards automatically expand their communication control capacityas the demand on the network increases. They can maintain control of the networkwith network overloads that are many times the capacity of the traffic channels. To
a common user, voice calls will be blocked and the system unusable. Other userscan be given priority access to the available channel and may experience little orno blocking. Though voice calls are blocked, the common user may still be able to
send other types of communication such as short message service, a phenome-non noted after the July 2005 London bombings and after Hurricane Katrina. Thesefeatures of cellular technology can be exploited for disaster management. The
difficulty is whether this is done using commercial cellular infrastructure or buildinga parallel or supplemental infrastructure.Cellular technology is, of course, exploited for commercial purposes by cellu-lar service providers. Commercial cellular service is provided throughout most pop-ulated areas. The cellular industry expends billions of dollars per year to expandthe number of cell sites.1 The area of coverage and capacity continues to growsteadily, along with the growth of subscribers and the types of services to whichthey subscribe. Building parallel infrastructure for emergency services is clearlycost-prohibitive. Yet, both public safety communications officials and cellular infra-
structure owners have valid concerns about piggybacking disaster communica-tions on existing commercial infrastructure. Addressing these concerns and over-coming the issues with innovative policy approaches in the spirit of public/privatepartnership should be a major focus of roadmap developers.1According to the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, a total infrastructureinvestment of $25.3 billion was made in 2005 alone. Other statistics on coverage and capacity
are available at http://www.ctia.org/research_statistics/index.cfm/AID/10202.this leads unavoidably to longer and less predictable delays in transit.Delay-tolerant network (DTN) architectures and protocols are an effort to
address this problem in IP-based networks (e.g., the Internet), particu-
larly those operating in environments characterized by very long delay
paths and frequent network partitions, such as mobile or extreme envi-
ronments that lack continuous network connectivity typical in disasters.
A focus of DTN research is to provide interoperable communications in
such environments.¥Passive and active embedded links and relays. These devices hold prom-ise for enhancing communication in buildings, rubble, and underground.
Building construction has been modified and existing buildings retrofit-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTBOX 4.2Software-Defined RadiosAdvances in digital technology are making possible a new generation of com-munication devices that can be configured in software to operate on different fre-quency bands, in different modes, and to present different operational and control
options to the user. Such Òsoftware radiosÓ can be reconfigured remotely (Òover theairÓ), enabling the rapid reassignment of wireless devices among different pre-existing networks. Rapid reassignments can provide several important end-user
capabilities. First, allowing the radio to switch between many standard modes willfacilitate connectivity between incompatible networks and allow individuals to movesmoothly between task groups operating on different legacy systems.Second, adding sensing and reasoning capabilities creates so-called cogni-tive radios that can dynamically adapt to the current user traffic needs, radio con-gestion, spectrum and operational policies, and radio capabilities to optimize over-
all communication efficacy; the addition of these capabilities is a precondition forseveral novel proposals for expanding the spectrum available to first responders indisasters. Finally, in extreme conditions, such as high noise or poor propagation
through a building, the user can select radio modes and frequencies that will opti-mize their connectivity. Because of the critical importance of power and cost todisaster management communications systems, there should be a limited number
of well-regulated modes for such radios to use, as determined by both researchand current practices. This would allow mobile units to be optimized for efficientuse of each of these modes.The more attractive option of having a completely flexible radio that can pro-cess an arbitrary signal will probably remain impractical because of the energyrequirements of complex computations at gigahertz frequencies. Many challengesremain before such systems will be available, such as how various radios getinformed as to which traffic they should copy and which traffic they should ignore,
and how that gets done dynamically, in real time, and securely (if necessary).ted with technology improvements for better earthquake survivability.Similar advances are possible to improve the resilience of communica-
tions infrastructure. These advances may allow wireless communications
into and out of the building and through the rubble of a destroyed build-
ing, through passive means such as embedded tuned conductors or active
means such as embedded relay arrays, similar to the emergency lighting
systems already mandated.¥Policy-based routing and congestion management. Transmission con-gestion occurs during periods of high volumes of communication when
information arrives faster than the network can handle it. Policy-based
routing and congestion management could make it possible to prioritize
and schedule transmission according to a specified policy. A policy-based
framework would permit the behavior of the system to be modified with-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA115out having to re-implement it and would also allow automated responseto deal with congestion.¥Self-managing and repairing (autonomous and adaptive) networks. Au-tonomous and adaptive networks that are able to reconfigure and repair
themselves could improve infrastructure robustness, even when infra-
structure has been partially destroyed. These networks are envisioned to
be unattended systems, with applications relevant to disaster manage-
ment ranging from environmental sensing to structural monitoring and
emergency response. Advances may result in communication infrastruc-
ture that supports need-based connectivity without boundaries and with
minimal human intervention. Such a capability requires research not only
on low-level communication (i.e., connectivity) but also on connectivity
management and adaptive computer-based learning and management
systems.¥Location-based monitoring of communications infrastructure capacityand adaptive access to available communications channels. IT systems withthese capabilities would allow matching of the message form to the fast-est, most appropriate network environment available to each user. Auto-mated routing could allow senders to put out a message and let the sys-
tem figure out how to get it to the right recipients.¥Speech interfaces. Visual displays and input schemes that are famil-iar in the office environment are not always suited to the needs of disaster
responders. In particular, the use of visual displays in the field, particu-
larly in highly mobile and/or high-stress activities with difficult visibility
conditions, can create unwelcome distraction and even induce a form of
disorientation that can be extremely risky. As speech-recognition and
speech-synthesis capabilities improve, speech-command and audio-
output interfaces become increasingly feasible.¥Tactile interfaces. These are user interfaces that employ touch forinput and/or output. Examples of existing tactile interface technology
include a Braille reader and touch screens. In hostile and loud environ-
ments, auditory contact may be difficult. Advances in tactile interfaces,
like the vibrating ring on a cell phone, offer promise for improving com-
munications in these environments.¥Adaptive mesh networks. Although data networks are frequently de-scribed as self-healing in case of damage or disruption, many actual net-
works have been constructed more for economy than for resilience. Com-
promises have led to the creation of single points of failure and relatively
inflexible routing schemes. Wireless Òad hocÓ meshes would include the
capability of rapid provisioning of voice and data service in disaster-
stricken areas, a feature that could also enhance the reliability and capac-
ity of day-to-day networks. If wireless ad hoc mesh networks were
coupled with advanced, distributed machine-learning algorithms, theseImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTnetworks could continuously optimize their capabilities with minimalhuman intervention, minimizing the cost and delays associated with that.
Adaptive mesh networks also offer the opportunity to use distributed
computing techniques for increasing analysis and decision-making re-
sources beyond those available to any single node.¥Standards as Òmiddleware.Ó Various terms such as Òservice-orientedarchitectureÓ and Òenterprise service busÓ are used to describe a data-
interoperability strategy based not on centralized interconnection services,
but rather on direct connections between diverse IT systems using stan-
dardized data representations. This is basically how the Internet works.
Such intermediary data standards can enable interoperability among data
systems without reengineering the systems themselves or adding new
layers of technology. (See Box 4.3 for a more detailed discussion of ser-
vice-oriented architectures.)¥Advanced power sources. Improvements in power sources includingfuel cells and tritium could have profound effects on the ability to deploy
and use IT in disaster management. Often, the lack of infrastructure-based
power, the limited life of batteries, and the bulkiness of ÒportableÓ batter-
ies or generators limit the scope and range for application of IT. Any
chemical fuel generator or storage systemÑbattery, fuel cell, turbine, com-
pressed gas, flywheel, and so onÑhas basically the same fundamental
energy limit of the chemical binding energy between atoms. Battery ca-
pacity is increasing slowly as these devices are better engineered, but
major advances in chemical batteries are highly unlikely. (Box 4.4 de-
scribes these technologies in more detail.)¥Mobile power source efficiency and energy management. At least fivetechniques could be employed and advanced to improve the efficiency of
powering mobile devices: harvesting energy from the environment, using
passive radios that modulate reflected radio signals rather than generat-
ing radio signals directly, reducing interference by better traffic coordina-
tion, improving power source recovery and redundancy, and efficient
spectrum sharing. (Box 4.5 elaborates on each of these techniques.)IMPROVED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS AND ACOMMON OPERATING PICTURE¥Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology holds promise in anumber of areas critical to disaster management. Early prototypes exist of
systems for tagging victims with treatment and other information useful
to medical responders. Longer-range RFID tags and readers will make it
possible to continuously track victims as they move through the system
from evacuation to treatment centers. Tagging of assets will also aid inImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA117BOX 4.3Service-Oriented ArchitecturesService-oriented architectures (SOAs) model computing applications as net-works of Òblack boxÓ functions, each characterized by a published network inter-face based on shared technical standards. Instead of the tightly coupled integra-
tion of software modules on a single computing platform, SOAs build applicationsby selecting from among a range of services over a network in order to support aneeded function or business process. SOAs promise numerous benefits, including
several of particular interest to disaster management:¥The ability to utilize multiple sources of a single service, which can helpeliminate single points of failure due to disaster effects;¥The ability to scale up applications efficiently during sudden surges in de-mand by concentrating resources on the particular services that present bottle-
necks;¥A reduction in the Òswitching costsÓ associated with migration from one pro-viderÕs services to a competitorÕs, thus maintaining competition, reducing Òlock-inÓ
effects, and Òfuture-proofingÓ the application as a whole; and¥Enabling support of exceptional or ad hoc business processes by therapid assembly of services into new configurations (sometimes called real-time
integration).However, as SOA-based applications evolve to mirror business practicesmore closely, the actual design and evaluation of such applications become lessand less a technical problem and increasingly a direct concern for the end users.Consumers of SOAs are increasingly called on to perform rigorous analyses anddocumentation of their requirements and practices. This can create conflicts withresource-bound emergency managers, who may perceive such rigor as a threat to
their autonomy and their freedom to adapt to circumstances. A great deal of re-search remains to be done on the interface between service-oriented IT architec-tures and their users. Of particular importance is determining the most convenient
and rapid methods of collaborating with end users in the processes of SOA design,evaluation, and adjustment.resource discovery and tracking, allowing real-time views of deploymentand status that can be used for optimizing effectiveness.¥Embedded, networked sensors. As the density of a sensor networkincreases due to sensorsÕ reduced size, power, cost, and ubiquitous con-
nectivity options, the data they return change in quality as well as quan-
tity. Complex or subtle spatial and temporal patterns become visible that
could not be resolved before. At the same time, increased data processing
power and enhanced presentation techniques allow the analysis and fu-
sion of these dense data streams into usable situational awareness and
analytic products.¥Routine information fusion. Often, combining (fusing) informationImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTBOX 4.4Advanced Power SourcesThe foundation of a reliable wireless communication system, whether builtusing mobile units or remote sensors, is a reliable and long-lasting power source.The complex networks envisioned in this report will require a means to provide thatpower in a lightweight, long-lasting package that can be recharged, if necessary,
onsite. In addition, to the extent that it is desirable to move from simple voicecommunications to transmission of more complex data at higher rates, the energyrequirements will increase even further. Over the past several decades, the ag-
gressive shrinking of electronics has reduced the cost, size, and power of electron-ic devices at a rate of nearly 50 percent per year.Unfortunately, over the same time interval, chemical batteries have been im-proving only slowly, with average specific capacity increases of less than 7 percentper year. Since there are no new elements available, the ultimate performance ofchemical batteries is well understood, and the slow year-to-year improvements
come only from steady engineering advances. Many alternatives have been pro-posed, from fuel cells to flywheels, but ultimately they all depend on the strength ofchemical bonds and will not be able to provide truly dramatic improvements in
capacity.To improve the capability and reliability of portable IT equipment dramatically,there appear to be three possibilities beyond the small improvements expected
from steady engineering of existing batteries. The first is to make full use of therapid advances in the performance of electronics to reduce the power required foreach function. This is critically important for computation functions such as codingor data acquisition, but less important for the communication function where theenergy is consumed by generating a strong-enough radio signal to reach the in-
tended receiver. The second route to improvement is to design the communicationnetwork from the ground up to be energy efficient. For example, a higher density ofreadily deployed small base stations or repeaters will allow the handsets to reach
the network with a minimum of radio power. Also, changes in protocols, coding,and signal processing can make substantial improvements.Finally, abandoning chemical power sources and adopting some form of nu-clear power can provide substantial improvements, since the energy per atomavailable in a nuclear process can range from several thousand to several milliontimes that for chemical energy. The first generation of such cells has energy con-
tent greater than 10 times that of the best chemical cells, and the theoretical limitfor the useful life of these cells is at least 100 times that of chemical cells. Thistechnology is based on the use of tritium, a radioactive isotope of hydrogen that
can be easily encapsulated, is not chemically toxic, and emits only beta radiationthat cannot penetrate the skin. This technology has been in commercial use foryears to power emergency lighting and provide other specialty-task illumination
needs where an external power supply would be unacceptable. Moving to otherradioactive materials, like those already incorporated in smoke detectors, can in-crease the limiting energy densities by another factor of 1,000 or more, though the
engineering problems of gathering that energy efficiently are not yet solved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA119from several different sources can provide greatly enhanced understand-ing of a situation. An example might be a map showing both road condi-
tions and the number of people needing evacuation across a geographic
area. Unfortunately, such information sources were usually developed
independently of each other for different uses in non-emergency condi-
tions, and bringing them together is a significant, ongoing challenge in
development and applied research, depending on suitability of source.BOX 4.5Mobile Power Source Efficiency and Energy ManagementFollowing are five techniques for improving the efficiency of energy manage-ment in mobile devices:¥Harvesting energy from the environment. Energy harvesting has an im-portant place for distributed sensor or repeater networks without external powersources where energy can be collected from low-power sources such as light,vibration, pressure, and so on and stored over long periods for application during
emergencies.¥Passive radios. Passive radios are currently used for low-bit-rate, short-range sensor systems, like inventory control tags, where the base station sends a
signal to the sensor that just modulates the reflection of that signal back to thebase station. The entire operation of the sensor can be powered by the signal fromthe base station, or a battery can be used to supplement this energy, but the
battery has a very long service life because it does not need to transmit, onlymodulate, radio frequency.¥Reducing interference and noise. At the system level, there is enormouspotential to improve radio power-consumption efficiency through a properly de-signed communication system. Energy to transmit data depends on the ratio ofsignal power to noise (or interference) power. Lowering the noise or interference
by an order of magnitude reduces the signal power requirements by an equalamount. (It is easier to communicate in a room full of people if each person speaksin turn rather than all at once.) For example, a typical public service radio (e.g.,XTS5000 Motorola) has a range comparable to that of a cell phone (e.g., MotorolaV276) but a performance that is substantially different. The cell phone can be used
to talk/listen for nearly 4 hours or wait for an incoming call for nearly 300 hours, allon a battery weighing 1 1/2 oz. The public safety radio has a useful battery life ofonly 8 hours (about 30 minutes for talking, 30 minutes for listening, and 7 hours for
waiting for a call) using a battery over 4 times heavier. This is partially due to amore efficient radio and partially due to the ability of the base station to tell thehandset to lower its energy consumption dynamically to the smallest value suffi-
cient for efficient communication.¥Efficient spectrum sharing. Proper coordination and the use of narrowbandchannels could also lead to significant improvements in power requirements. The
public safety radio blocks other radios from using its channel, in contrast to the cellphone system, which is designed for highly efficient sharing of scarce spectrumresources.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT¥Publish/subscribe information dissemination. One of the great chal-lenges in a fluid situation like disaster management is to provide the right
information (and the right amount of information) to the right person at
the right time. Publish/subscribe network services enable information
dissemination across a potentially unlimited number of geographically
scattered publishers (information providers) and subscribers (informa-
tion receivers) along with the ability to customize information at the level
of the individual user. More sophisticated approaches would help to alert
users to novel information identified as potentially relevant on the basis
of those usersÕ demonstrated patterns of interests.¥Semantic routing. Traditional methods of information routing arebased on explicit designation of the recipient or recipients. In highly dy-
namic networks, this can create a Òdiscovery bottleneckÓ as new partici-
pants join and existing participants shift roles. A frequent result is that
key actors inadvertently are left out of the loop for essential information
and others are overloaded with irrelevant data. The next step beyond
publish/subscribe is to use semantic routing techniques that allow infor-
mation to be shared on the basis of the usersÕ content requirements as well
as the originatorsÕ directives. Semantic routing coupled with intelligent
workflow could offer the ability to move information proactively in order
to accelerate processes (e.g., obtaining of permissions).¥Data quality and availability. Variations in data quality and avail-ability often plague attempts to share and integrate information for deci-
sion making. Improving the completeness, timeliness, accuracy, and con-
sistency of data are all areas requiring advances. At the same time, it is
necessary to recognize that imperfect data are and always will be present.
There is thus an abiding need for methods of measuring, expressing, and
correctly interpreting ÒfuzzyÓ and intermittent and uncertain data.¥Data mining across diverse information sources. The challenge in aninformation-rich environment is the ability to extract meaningful knowl-
edge from a plethora of information sources. Data fusion across diverse
information sources has already shown its effectiveness, particularly in
geographically based applications. The next step is to create analysis sys-
tems that can extract data and automatically look for patterns using infor-
mation held in diverse, incompatible databases. An example would be to
search for patterns in hospital admissions based on information including
weather patterns and possible sources of toxin release. Data mining can
find patterns obscured by the volume or diversity of data. Intelligent
approaches can corroborate tenuous patterns by consulting multiple al-
ternative sources guided by the nature and context of the conclusion.¥User-centered situational awareness information presentation. With ad-vances in information collection, fusion, dissemination, and delivery, it
may become possible to create customized and dynamic presentations forImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA121each user with information most relevant to him or her in the most usefulformat given the userÕs location, responsibility, and changes in the situa-
tion. Research supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
AgencyÕs Improving Warfighter Information Intake Under Stress pro-
gram offers some examples of the type of advances that may be possible.1¥Optimized presentation of data. IT systems could be engineered toadapt to such things as message form or content, the receiverÕs device
form factor, or the real-time situation of the recipient and to optimize the
presentation of data accordingly. Such capability could allow adaptive
access to available communications channels, allowing matching of the
message form to the fastest, most appropriate network environment avail-
able to each user. For example, the system might not send a complete
geographic information system (GIS) file to a personal digital assistant,
but it would send the complete file to a more powerful workstation with ahigh-resolution display; it could send a voice announcement instead of a
text message to a fully garbed firefighter engaged in a rescue; and auto-
mated routing could allow users to permit the system to figure out how to
get messages to the right recipients formatted for the equipment available
to them.¥Deployable sensor networks. It is impractical to put all classes of sen-sors in all possible locations before a disaster. However, existing sensor
networks (e.g., sensors in commercial cell phones, public transportation,
or private vehicles) could be integrated with ad hoc sensors with appro-
priate capabilities distributed in response to an existing or anticipated
event. In the presence of a degraded communication infrastructure, such
ad hoc sensor networks use the ability of each node to communicate
directly with one or more other nodes in its physical vicinity, allowing
message communication to take place via multihop spreading. Because
these networks are self-organizing and decentralized, they can be highly
reliable and degrade only slowly as individual nodes fail.¥Network and information security. Traditional security requirementsalso apply to disaster management, including, for example, the need for
encryption of (some) communications, authentication of people and data
sources, and ensuring the integrity of the infrastructure and the data.
Indeed, a more Ònetwork-centricÓ approach to disaster management is
vulnerable to attacks on the network, the information it carries, and the
associated applications and processes. Because disaster management of-
ten involves collaboration among many organizations, often in ways that
cannot be anticipated beforehand, it also imposes some unique require-1The program was formerly known as Augmented Cognition. Further information onthe program is available at http://www.darpa.mil/DSO/thrust/biosci/warfighter.htm.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTments: for example, flexible policies that can be changed on the fly andinteroperability across different infrastructures. Moreover, the common
security goal of data privacy may be less important, since the goal is often
to disseminate data widely. Instead, security needs to ensure data integ-
rity, authenticate the identity and role of users, and authorize access to
different resources. The network and its applications must also be pro-
tected from denial-of-service attacks that attempt to overwhelm resources
with invalid requests so that resources are unavailable for legitimate uses.
Security research continues to make progress on these issues and has the
potential to protect against malicious adversarial attacks as well as benign
faults or loss of resources.¥Biochemical sensors. Identifying unknown substances can require along chemical analysis using bulky and expensive equipment that is not
suited to a rapidly evolving field situation. Rapid advances in electronics
and biotechnology are beginning to make possible the creation of sensors
capable of detecting specific toxins or deoxyribonucleic acid/ribonucleic
acid (DNA/RNA) patterns. Effective use of such devices would help
change chemical and biological agents from terrifying, invisible dangers
to more manageable threats. Advanced biochemical sensors show the
promise of low-cost field analysis tools. As the price of these tools de-
creases, they can be deployed widely in the environment to enable con-
tinuous in situ measurements. A toxic plume could be rapidly character-
ized as to its source and extent through sensors mounted on small,
unmanned aerial vehicles that deploy automatically from rooftops with
the first signs of the plume.¥Infrastructure instrumentation. Both disaster management and con-tinuing social functions depend critically on the status of infrastructure
for supplying water, power, communication, sewage disposal, and trans-
portation. Currently, such systems have instrumentation at major critical
points of failureÑpumping stations, for exampleÑbut do not have dis-
tributed sensing throughout the network (e.g., to indicate broken pipes).
Such sensing is critical for rapidly determining the overall status of the
system after a disaster and effectively planning repair strategies as well as
optimizing the use of the remaining assets while the repairs are being
done.¥Sensor systems. One problem is how to track a person or event as itpasses from the view of one subset of sensors to another. Multiple sensors
also pose situational awareness and interpretation issues compounded by
bandwidth limitations: what sensors should be given network priority
and how multiple, geographically separated streams of information can
be fused.¥Integrated geographic information systems. Long treated as a distinctspecialty with a strong emphasis on detailed analysis and modeling, theImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA123GIS field is merging into the mainstream of information technology. Basegeospatial information and imagery are increasingly used as a context for
real-time data in situational awareness and resource-management appli-
cations. At the same time, growing numbers of non-IT assets are becom-
ing Òlocation awareÓ by means of GPS and various wireless positioning
techniques. Integration tools are bringing these disparate sources of
geospatial information together to enable improved awareness and deci-
sion-making capabilities.¥Portable unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and (autonomous) robots.The nature of disasters may prevent the normal collection of data by
humans or require sensing capabilities beyond human capacity. Robots
and unmanned systems deploying advanced sensors may be helpful in
obtaining better and timelier information. Unmanned aerial, ground, and
sea systems being used extensively by the Department of Defense could
be adapted for use in disaster management. During the disaster preven-
tion and preparation phases, unmanned vehicles could be routinely used
as unobtrusive mobile sampling agents. During incident response and
recovery, small aerial and sea vehicles could be used on demand by field
teams to survey general damage and transportation infrastructure (espe-
cially bridges and seawalls). New underwater sensor payloads have been
developed that should enable unmanned underwater and surface vehicles
to monitor structures below the waterline. Small ground robots were in-
troduced at the World Trade Center disaster to aid in searching through
the rubble. Small UAVs were used in New Orleans and Mississippi in the
Hurricane Katrina and Rita responses.¥Epidemiological alerting systems. Much more sophisticated uses of ITare becoming possible that offer the potential for earlier warnings and a
finer degree of understanding of the spread of infection.2 These systemsalso hold promise for mitigating the effects of bioterrorism and other
emerging epidemiological threats, such as avian influenza.IMPROVED DECISION SUPPORT ANDRESOURCE TRACKING AND ALLOCATION¥Widely available collaboration software and file sharing. Collaborativeenvironments could enable information sharing to reduce duplication of2For example, the National Electronic Disease Surveillance System (NEDSS) is an initia-tive that promotes the use of data and information system standards to advance the devel-opment of efficient, integrated, and interoperable surveillance systems at federal, state, and
local levels; see http://www.cdc.gov/nedss/. See also ESSENCE, the Electronic Surveil-lance System for the Early Notification of Community-based Epidemics; available at http://www.geis.fhp.osd.mil/GEIS/SurveillanceActivities/ESSENCE/ESSENCE.asp.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTeffort. An example is distributed whiteboard applications for discussingand communicating decisions. Problems such as volume of traffic, num-
ber of sources, and data-consumption requirements must be better under-
stood. A number of fundamental questions must still be answered, such
as what happens when the volume of information on shared file sites
scales up and the number of participants grows. Experience with consor-
tia management systems also argues that further advances are needed. By
allowing people to interact more easily and more often, better collabora-
tion tools could also foster increased rapport and trust.¥Intelligent adaptive planning. Intelligent adaptive planning is theprocess of modifying a plan to adapt to changed circumstances. This
type of planning breaks down the barriers between preparation and ex-
ecution; it eliminates the dual problems of creating plans that are not
followed and following plans that do not fit. There are several key re-
quirements, each with potentially fruitful lines of research. (See Box 4.6
for further discussion.)¥Computer-assisted decision-making tools. Computer technology couldbe quite useful for decision making with tools like, for instance, online
resource directories or Òdecision sentinelsÓÑessentially a concept for
monitoring crucial processes and activities. Decision sentinels attempt to
raise warning flags when, for instance, things that are supposed to hap-
pen are not happening, when things that are not allowed for are indeed
occurring, or when decision points are slipping. However, significant tech-
nical work is necessary in analyzing dependencies and assumptions in
disaster plansÑif these are understood, plan execution may be monitored
accordingly, allowing for proactive warning of problems. Technology
tools might also be useful in decisions involving dropping constraints,
elevating conflicts for resolution, or switching to alternate plans.¥Distributed emergency operation centers. Distributed coordination,planning, and scheduling systems promise to provide tools for preparing
disaster response plans and for coordinating and monitoring the execu-
tion in a more distributed manner.¥Resource use modeling. Detailed modeling and study of differentdisaster scenarios would give disaster response managers a much better
idea of what resources might be needed, in what quantity, where and
how best to use or deploy them, and so onÑfrom items like potable
water for survivors to issues as complex as the most useful deployment
of satellites.¥Exploring similarities between transportation networks and IT networks.There is some fundamental abstract science common to moving ÒstuffÓ
between nodes in networks, whether it is messages over communica-
tions links in a telecommunications network, signals over very-large-
scale integration circuits in a computer, trucks over roads in the highwayImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA125BOX 4.6Intelligent Adaptive PlanningIntelligent adaptive planning breaks down the barriers between preparationand execution; it eliminates the dual problems of creating plans that are not fol-
lowed and following plans that do not fit. The key aspect of intelligent adaptiveplanning is the ability to gather and assess information speedily from a huge vari-ety of sources, including real-time sensors, and to package and disseminate re-
sults so that plans can be executed and changed. Intelligent adaptive execution isthe process of modifying a plan to adapt to changed circumstances. There areseveral key requirements, each with potentially fruitful lines of research.One is avoiding thrashingÑineffectiveness caused when reacting too quicklyto frequently changing situations sends too many resources toward ephemeralproblems (e.g., food shipments that chase refugees in transit and never catch up
with them). Another issue is containment of ripple effects. This is sometimes alsoreferred to as minimal disruption plan repairÑisolating parts of a plan so that theexecution of the bulk of a plan can continue without fear that it will impinge on the
part in need of repair. Minimal disruption plan repair is extremely important for tworeasons. First, there are computational and organizational costs: the larger thespan of activities that get reconsidered, the greater the time required and the great-
er the risk of expenses incurred from activities that become subject to revision orcancellation without completion. Second, there are human costs which, althoughdifficult to measure, are nevertheless a substantial concernÑwhen faced with con-
stantly changing plans, peopleÕs morale and performance suffer. In addition, theloss of organizational credibility affects overall performanceÑpeople learn to ex-pect changes and wait for their ÒrealÓ orders to come rather than acting on therequests received. For all these reasons, thrash avoidance and minimum disrup-tion plan repairs are essential issues.Three lines of research have the potential to contribute significantly to ad-dressing these issues. The first applies not at the time of response but ratherduring plan preparation. Dependency control essentially augments what good mil-itary planners have instinctively done for centuries: attempt to increase the robust-ness of plans by trying to minimize the number of dependencies among subparts.Techniques for providing computational support for this effort range from analytic
techniques that attempt to identify alternatives and change plans accordingly, tobrute-force techniques, increasingly enabled by high-performance computing, thatrapidly test alternative plans in simulation against thousands of alternative scenar-
ios in order to see which holds up best. Use of these techniques helps ensure thatthe selected plan will work in the greatest number of situations and that problems,if encountered, will be confined to a restricted portion of the plan.The second line of defense against thrashing and disruption comes back tothe topic of uncertainty reasoning. Conventional planning and scheduling tech-niques implicitly assume that the methods selected to perform tasks will succeed.
In order to deal with the reality that things often go wrong, human planners (withsome automated assistance) introduce contingency plans and decision points.These essentially attempt to predict where things might go awry, create fallback
plans for addressing these problems, and insert points in the process where activ-ities will halt to allow evaluation of the situation and a choice among the contingen-continuedImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTcy plans. Although the need for this capability will never go away, uncertainty rea-soning can make a great difference. Essentially, it allows a system to reason con-stantly about the probability of success of actions in progress and the degree of
contribution that those actions will make to the overall outcome. This enables thesystem to put in play multiple alternative methods for ensuring a desired resultÑadding more actions if the risk increases, but also cancelling or redirecting some of
them if the risk decreases. These techniques thus strike an appropriate balancebetween the risks and cost of failure versus the costs of duplicative ÒinsuranceÓtasks.The third approach to avoiding thrashing and minimizing disruption investi-gates stability-preserving planning. Essentially, much of planning and schedulingis treated as an optimization problem. Criteria (often called a utility function) are
established for defining a ÒgoodÓ schedule, and the various algorithms that the fieldhas produced all represent different approaches toward trying to maximize thatscore. In stability-preserving planning, rather than planning from scratch, the sys-
tem takes the pre-existing plan as input. Mechanisms for expressing the evalua-tion criteria are extended to permit description of the manner and extent to which auser desires retention of elements in the pre-existing plan to be weighted in the
generation of the revised plan. This is, quite obviously, a highly desirable contribu-tion to minimal-disruption plan repair.Combining dependency control, uncertainty reasoning, and stability-preserv-ing planning techniques into intelligent adaptive planning systems will greatly in-crease the power of software systems to help organizations rapidly and effectivelyadapt to changing situations with minimum costs. Adaptive capability is most effec-tive when coupled with proactive problem-identification systems based on tech-niques such as Plan Sentinels or mathematical progress indicators. These tech-
niques point the way toward early-warning systems that provide a balance betweenmaximizing the amount of time available to respond to problems with avoidance ofoverreaction to unlikely problems.Adaptation is easiest if the initial resource allocation planning is done well.New techniques offer the promise of smarter, more efficient algorithms that canproduce better solutions to larger problems. Combined with better allocation algo-
rithms, the concept of Òbest available understanding,Ó in which the system fills ingaps by combining actual information with predictions and estimates, has the po-tential to avoid Ògarbage-in/garbage-outÓ difficulties by improving the likelihood that
the problems fed to those improved algorithms best reflect the actual situation.Taken together, research in these areas has the promise of building systems5 to 10 years from now that utilize resources far more effectively, recognize and
adapt to difficulties and changed situations much earlier, and keep organizationsefficient and credible in the course of doing so.BOX 4.6 Continuedsystem, or people between cities via the air transportation system. Effec-tive utilization of transport resources is increasingly tied to effective co-
ordination of those resources using IT. Taking steps toward breaking
down barriers between IT disciplines may stimulate out-of-the-box think-
ing about how IT research could be applied to solve problems with trans-
portation logistics.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA127¥Logistics. Flexible inventory and resource management systems
would allow ad hoc and at-hand resources to be leveraged, while still
offering the ability to provide information for an accounting of resource
use, and could be based on standardized application of RFID tagging for
asset discovery and tracking.GREATER ORGANIZATIONAL AGILITYFOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT¥Computer mediated exercises. Large-scale role playing exercises me-diated by IT and involving multiple societal systems to help expose nega-
tive interactions and appropriate responses could advance response pre-
paredness by allowing responders to gain Òreal-lifeÓ experience. This
technology could also be used to incorporate disaster research into prac-
tice as well as provide an environment for testing such research.3¥Flexible, embedded, and miniature projective visual displays. The size,weight, and rigidity of existing visual displays (computer screens) can
create usability problems under field conditions. An emerging generation
of materials will permit digital display surfaces that can be flexed, folded,
or molded, as circumstances require. Possible applications may include
foldable/rollable map displays, fabric displays worn as parts of a uni-
form, and displays built into the surfaces of structures, vehicles, and road-
ways. Miniature projective displays offer a potential option when dexter-
ity is an issue, such as when wearing gloves. Projective displays are small
enough for a cell phone to project an image, such as a map or virtual
keyboard, onto a flat surface. Heads-up displays, including virtual retinal
displays using low-powered lasers, project information directly in the
userÕs field of view.¥Event replay tools. As disaster management becomes more network-centric and storage costs decrease, the evolution of disasters (and re-
sponses) can be more easily monitored and archived. These capabilities
allow ongoing replays of what just happened and post facto analysis and
documentation of lessons learned.¥Online repositories of lessons learned. Lessons learned in one region ofthe country or in one disaster management domain could be more rapidly
and broadly disseminated if a well-known searchable repository was set
up. The federal governmentÕs Lessons Learned Information Sharing
(www.llis.gov) Web site is a first step in this direction.3An example of this technology applied in practice was presented to the committee. SeeSynthetic Environment for Analysis and Simulation (SEAS) at http://www.mgmt.purdue.edu/centers/perc/html/index.htm.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT¥Integrated ad hoc data-collection tools (blogs/wikis). A variety of Webtools are available that allow a collaborative and distributed assessment
of a situation. These Web tools can potentially be viewed and augmented
by disaster management personnel and the public at and away from the
scene.¥Continuous learning tools. Web-based training can allow first re-sponders to be proficient with new information technology. The training
can be customized to individual first responders and available on de-
mand at their convenience. Adaptive training technology continuously
monitors understanding of and facility with the new knowledge, provid-
ing additional training depth or skipping material as needed.¥Computer-assisted disaster simulation training. Computer-assistedsimulations offer task-oriented training based on real-world situations.
They offer a persistent ÒworldÓ for continuous replication, verification,
validation, uncertainty quantification, and margins-of-error estimation.
They also provide an outcome-based learning experience that can lessen
the effect of affiliation goals, which may drive decision making over situ-
ation needs in early stages of disaster response. An example of the possi-
bilities in this field is the Virtual Terrorism Response Academy developed
by DartmouthÕs Interactive Media Laboratory.4¥Distributed, scalable, survivable data logging. With advances in sensortechnology, it is increasingly feasible to capture data that might be very
useful in disaster management (e.g., levee saturation levels, building or
structural stresses, and so on). Major challenges, however, involve things
like integrating such data into useful tools, making sure that such data
survive a given disaster, and archiving the data in such a way that they
can be learned from for future disasters.¥Dynamic capability profiling and credentialing. Integrated systems forregistering and credentialing people with skills required for disaster re-
sponse could improve the effectiveness and efficiency of response and
recovery operations.¥Digital identity. Disasters frequently require individuals and agen-cies to forge new working relationships with others they do not know. A
major disaster may involve responders from all over the nation or even
the world. The lack of trusted mechanisms for determining the identity,
capabilities, and privileges of new response partners can delay or even
deadlock critical information-sharing activities. Public key technology
and other techniques for digital authentication and authorization are
rapidly becoming irreplaceable elements of the emergency information
infrastructure.4See http://iml.dartmouth.edu/vtra/.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA129¥Dynamic authority mapping. Web-based command and authoritycharts to determine who is responsible for decisions as a disaster devel-
ops could improve understanding of how organizational structures map
onto communication structure requirements and could improve the effi-
ciency of response and recovery operations.BETTER ENGAGEMENT OF THE PUBLIC¥Multimodal public notification. Multiple modes of communication(e.g., e-mail, Web pages, and cell phone) and multiple types of informa-
tion (e.g., text, audio, and video) can all be employed to mobilize volun-
teers and private voluntary organizations and to provide more useful
information to the public. In addition to delivering messages in multiple
languages, such systems could incorporate visual (e.g., sign language),
sound, and tactile communications to reach different special-needs
groups.¥Multimodal public reporting systems. The best-known example of apublic reporting system is the 911 emergency calling system. It has proved
highly effective as an efficient means for the public to notify public safety
officials of a situation requiring their attention. Enhanced-911 (or E911)
extends the 911 system to wireless (cellular) devices. While valuable, the
911 system is exclusively voice-communications-based. Technology is
available and could be applied to extending public reporting systems
beyond voice to include text, data, image, video, and so on.¥Enhanced two-way communications with the public. Technology capa-bilities are now making it possible to send alerts and warning notifica-
tions and instructions to specific geographic areas or entire regions to a
range of devices, including cell phones, pagers, computers (e-mail), and
wireless PDAs. (One current capability of this sort is so-called reverse 911,
which provides an automated way of contacting citizens at risk.) This is
an important first step in improving two-way communication with the
public. Further advances may allow notices to be finely targeted, with
messages tailored to individuals on the basis of the type of risk, proximity
to the hazard, and other important factors. In addition, tools for collecting
voice (e.g., 911), text (e.g., e-mail and SMS), and image (e.g., picture phone)
may allow systematic incorporation of data reported by the public into
the process of developing a broad-based view of a disaster. Perhaps more
importantly, these systems may eventually enable true risk communica-
tions as an interactive process of information exchange between officials
and the public.55National Research Council, Improving Risk Communication, National Academy Press,Washington, D.C., 1989. This report draws a careful distinction between risk messages andthe risk communications process.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT¥Validated online information sources. During a disaster, the Internetallows information that is rapidly evolving, voluminous (e.g., missing-
persons lists), or complex (e.g., a tiered evacuation) to be disseminated
and presented efficiently. How can sources of such information be
validated?¥Volunteer mobilization systems. Directories would make it easier toidentify and use volunteers, organizations, and commercial resources

when needed. Such directories could be connected to communication sys-
tems so that these various resources can be automatically tracked down
and called on as needed.¥Game technology. Simulated disaster management training environ-ments based on gaming technology are starting to be applied to educate
the public. Further developments in this area may enable the public to
gain a much greater understanding of what to expect in disaster situa-
tions and provide insights on how they can best prepare for and partici-
pate in disaster response.ENHANCED INFRASTRUCTURE SURVIVABILITY ANDCONTINUITY OF SOCIETAL FUNCTIONS¥Mobile power generators. Extended widespread disasters stress thepower grid and backup power sources. Efficient, compact, and easily
deployed power sources can play a central role in the restoration of com-
munication, the provision of medical services, and so on. While genera-
tors are pre-deployed at many facilities, a system for tracking critical
unmet power needs and distributing power resources can facilitate more
rapid recovery.¥Communications redundancy. Different communication infrastruc-tures are susceptible to different types of failures. Having access to differ-
ent communication technologies increases the chances of being able to
communicate during or after a disaster. Certain wireless technologies
(e.g., mesh networking) are especially attractive, since they require little
or no infrastructure, can be power efficient, and can be used to extend the
reach of functioning communication infrastructure.¥Embedded sensors for non-destructive asset evaluation. One of the chal-lenges after disasters is determining what parts of the physical infrastruc-
ture (e.g., buildings, bridges) are safe to use. This often requires a physical
inspection by trained specialists. Embedded sensors can speed up the
evaluation of physical assets, thus speeding up the recovery process.¥Automated monetary disbursement. A major challenge in widespreaddisasters is providing people with financial resources to cope with imme-
diate needs. Systems are needed for entering claims, authenticating re-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A RESEARCH AGENDA131cipients, and tracking transactions. Web-based tools can enable faster andmore secure claims processing.¥Risk management tools with uncertainty modeling. Advanced model-ing that incorporates experience with risk assessment, including cost-
benefit metrics, of societal-scale systems before, during, and after disas-
ters could improve mitigation and preparedness investment decisions.¥Resilient materials and structures and deployable infrastructure betteradapted for the built environment. Building construction has been modifiedand existing buildings retrofitted with technology improvements for bet-
ter earthquake survivability. Similar advances are possible to improve the
resilience of communications infrastructure; better meet communications
needs inside buildings or other enclosed spaces, including damaged struc-
tures; and provide advanced sensing and instrumentation of structures.
Advances have implications for preparedness, response, and recovery.
Hardened repeaters in buildings, low-frequency radios, and Òbread
crumbÓ repeaters deployed by first responders as they advance through a
structure are some of the possibilities.¥Replicated and secure medical databases. Patient records should beremotely available to authorized personnel. Patients can be tracked and
medical records can automatically follow them within improvised medi-
cal facilities using RFID or other related technologies. Such capabilities
raise obvious privacy issues, including whether and how to relax privacy
constraints in a disaster situation.¥Person tracking and reporting
. Networking technology can allowfamily members a better means of connecting with one anotherÑfor ex-
ample, by enabling standardized finder databases or database schema for
collecting and disseminating peopleÕs whereabouts.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.135AIllustrative Fictional Narratives ofIT Use in Disaster ManagementThe Committee on Using Information Technology to Enhance Disas-ter Management developed three narratives describing fictional
disasters illustrative of the current and potential use of informationtechnology (IT) in disaster management practice. The purpose is to pro-
vide a realistic context for understanding and analyzing potential goals
and capabilities for the use of IT to improve disaster management now
and in the future. The committee constructed narratives representing dif-
ferent types of disasters with different proximate causes, varying lengths
of warning, different geographic scope, and different levels of responder
perspective (local/tactical, regional/strategic and tactical, national/stra-
tegic) in order to uncover both common and unique problems that they
present. The narratives draw on the experiences of disaster management
practitioners and researchers and highlight specific aspects of technology
use. Each scenario shows elements of IT use across the goal areas identi-
fied in the report, though a scenario may naturally highlight the impor-
tance of some goals more than others. Some descriptions may seem more
compelling because they are closer to the direct human impact of a disas-
ter, but gaining an understanding of and improving on disaster manage-
ment practice at all levels are critical to saving lives and reducing eco-
nomic impacts. Taken together, the scenarios build a picture of the many
moving parts that must be coordinated for an effective response.For each scenario, an introductory paragraph describes the settingand the focus for analysis of IT use. Each scenario concludes with a sum-
mary analysis that highlights some of the challenges and opportunitiesImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTfor potentially improving IT capabilities. The committee emphasizes that,although they are set in specific contexts, these scenarios are fictional and
are not intended to reflect in detail the specific response capabilities of
particular jurisdictions or agencies.INITIAL RESPONSE TO A CHEMICAL ATTACK IN THEWASHINGTON, D.C., METROThe first fictional narrative describes the exchange between respond-ers during a chemical attack in the Washington, D.C., Metro system. It
presents the use of information and communications technology from
the perspective of local and tactical first responders during the onset and
immediate aftermath of a terrorist attack. The focus of this scenario is on
the use of communications and information infrastructure by the police,
emergency medical personnel, other responding public safety personnel,
and more generally by anyone (including individual private citizens)
who can act as first responders. This scenario highlights a number of
uses to which IT is currently put in responding to situations that occur
with no warning and rapid onset. The response described here is entirely
tactical, and the technology used is what has been predeployed and is on
hand or can rapidlyÑin seconds and minutesÑbe brought to bear. The
alert reader will identify a number of technologies used: video, chemical
sensors, public safety radio, operational control systems (Metro system),
commercial cellular telephone, commercial land telephone, and text mes-
saging during the first few moments. Metro dispatch; firefighting, emer-
gency medical, and hazardous materials personnel; Metro police; emer-
gency managers; and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) units are all
rapidly engaged and seeking information.7:46:00 a.m.Metro Dispatch (Mary WilliamsÑ33 years old, 5 yearsÕ experience as adispatcher):ÒUnit 332ÑReport of person downÑlower level, Metro Center.ÓUnit 332 (John BisonÑ26 years old, former military):ÒIÕm close. IÕll respond.Ó John finishes his coffee, drops the cup in thetrash, and begins to walk quickly to the stairway leading to the lowerlevel. Metro Dispatch:Ò10-4.ÓImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A1377:46:30 a.m.Metro Dispatch:ÒUnit 332ÑWe are getting multiple reports of multiple people down.Showing Blue line due in the next minute. Orange and Red line trainsdue into the station within the next 2 minutes. Rolling paramedics andadditional units . . . all units responding to Metro Center lower levelkeep the air clear until at scene. Live feed video shows people runningin all directions.ÓUnit 332:Ò10-4Ñ10 seconds out. Lots of people screaming and running towardme.ÓUnit 337 (Billy Boyd, 53 years old, 29 years with Transit Police, 63 daysfrom retirement):ÒUnit 338 and I are close and responding.ÓMetro Dispatch:ÒUnits 300S and 300L, are you monitoring this?Ó (Unit 300S is thesergeant and 300L is the lieutenant for the shift.)Unit 300S:ÒUnit 300L is with me and we are 5 minutes out.Ó7:46:40 a.m.Metro Dispatch:ÒEmergencyÑAll unitsÕ chemical sensors going off, lower level MetroCenter. Unit 332, do you copy? Unit 332? Unit 332? Unit 337 or 338,do you copy?ÓUnit 300L:ÒMetro Dispatch, freeze all inbound trains.ÓMetro Dispatch:ÒWorking on it. IÕm unable to raise Units 332, 337, and 338.ÓUnit 340:ÒIÕm en route. IÕll check on the unitsÑwhat was their last location?ÓMetro Dispatch:ÒUnit 340, thatÕs a negativeÑwe have chemical sensors going off inthe lower level Metro Center. I need you to begin full evacuation pro-cedures for Metro Center. The last known locations of 332, 337, and338 were. . . . Unit 300SÑIÕm getting emergency signals from 332Õsand 337Õs radios.ÓUnit 300S:Ò10-4ÑLetÕs get everyone we can evacuate without entering and getthe folks with Level A suits in to help the others. IÕll need an ETA on thechemical team.ÓImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT7:47:15 a.m.Metro Dispatch:ÒUnit 300LÑOrange and Red lines both frozen 1 minute out. It lookslike the Blue line arrived and opened doors before realizing what wasgoing on. . . . They appear to be stopped at the loading area.ÓUnit 300L:ÒCommand Post will be on G St. between 11th and 12th. I need thenext four units to cover the four entrances into Metro Center. Have thehazmat team meet me at the command post. I want all units in fullMOP gear with their masks.ÓMetro Dispatch:Ò10-4. Fire should be pulling up now. Hazmat is 2 minutes out. Wehave alerted area hospitals and requested additional ambulances toyour location. The chief has ordered the EOC [Emergency OperationsCenter] opened.ÓUnit 300L:Ò10-4. D.C. Metro is with us now, but we need as many more units asyou can find in the area. We are trying to contain those exiting theCenter, but are overwhelmed. Several have exited showing signs ofchemical exposure. Possibility of off-gassing from those leaving theareaÑcan the chief advise on procedure for those refusing to stay inthe area?ÓMetro Dispatch:Ò10-4. Checking.Ó7:57:00 a.m.Unit 300L:ÒFire command is establishing the decontamination center at SW cor-ner of 11th and G St. Have all units direct those leaving Metro Centerto that location. Everyone . . . I repeat . . . everyone exiting MetroCenter must go through the decontamination center and be cleared byhazmat.ÓMetro Dispatch:Ò10-4ÑFBI is asking for your location and EOC would like an updatewhen you have a moment. Line into the EOC is 444-1234.ÓUnit 300L:ÒIÕm standing at the corner of G St.Ñhave FBI respond to this location.How about additional units? Can we get some help for Capital, D.C.Metro?ÓAs 300L makes this request, he is attempting to dial the EOC on his cellphone, a commercial network that is overloaded with traffic.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A139Metro Dispatch:ÒLots of units from different agencies are responding to your location,but many are reporting being stuck in gridlock.ÓUnit 300L:ÒDispatch, can you call the EOC and have them come up on TACFrequency 1Ñmy cell is worthless down here right nowÑIÕll brief themover the radio.ÓMetro Dispatch:Ò10-4ÑFire is requesting additional security at the decontaminationarea. They also said to let you know they are about 10 minutes fromgetting into Metro Center with Level A suits. They are suggesting thatany of our personnel on the inner perimeter get into their MOP gear ifthey arenÕt already.ÓMeanwhile at the EOCUnit 300C (Unit 300C is the captain):ÒWhere is 300L? How come he has not called in?ÓSally (staff member in EOC):ÒSir, communications is asking that we come up on TAC frequency11Ñ300L apparently canÕt get out on his cell.ÓUnit 300C:ÒThanks. Flip us over would you . . . and can you check on how we aredoing evacuating those other trains?ÓSally:ÒIÕm on it, boss.ÓUnit 300C:Ò300L, are you on TAC 1?ÓUnit 300L:ÒThatÕs affirm, boss.ÓUnit 300C:ÒHowÕs it going out thereÑwhat can we get you?ÓUnit 300L:ÒItÕs a mess right nowÑnot quite sure where everyone is . . . have nothad a chance to do a roll call. Numerous people downÑwe have atleast three units inside Metro Center that are not responding. Fire hasdecontamination set up and are washing down, but we canÕt controleveryone coming out and direct them to the decon areaÑIÕm afraid weare going to get some off-gassing exposures. HereÕs what I need. Asmany people with full MOP suits as you can get down here. I have1TAC frequency 1: Land mobile radio (LMR) 800 MHz car-to-car frequency.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTD.C. Metro with me, but I still need reps from FBI, fire, Red Cross, andmedical services so we can coordinate our response . . . it looks likethis is going to be real ugly. . . . The Blue line pulled up to the platformand has not moved . . . it had to be a full train at this time. . . . Hazmatis about 5 minutes from getting into the station in Level A suits. Anoth-er thingÑcan you get SWAT fired up just in case someone trips overa suspect?ÓUnit 300C:ÒWe will do our best to get it to youÑlet us know if you need anythingelse, and be careful.ÓUnit 300L:ÒThanks.ÓSally:ÒSir, we are getting a report of another attack at LÕEnfant PlazaÑsounds like two trains in the station at the time, chemical sensors go-ing off, and numerous people down.ÓUnit 300C:ÒCan you give me the video feed from there?ÓSally:ÒI can give you the picture, but I canÕt give you control of the camer-asÑops says they need it right now. Picture should be coming upmomentarily.ÓAs the video of LÕEnfant Plaza comes up, everyone stands motionless. Asthe camera moves, they see fellow Transit Authority workers motionless.They are deadÑof that there is no doubtÑalong with hundreds of others.Unit 300C (looking over to the Fire Battalion Chief):ÒIs there anything you can do?ÓFire Battalion Chief:ÒNot for them . . . most of my resources are at Metro Center. Capitalhazmat is en route, but . . . we canÕt even triage the people coming outand when we do the hospitals have to re-evaluate, as we canÕt passthe vital info to them. How about you?ÓUnit 300C:ÒWe are bringing in a number of people from Metro, Capital, and Ar-lington PoliceÑso staffing should be OK in a littleÑbut until we canget them in there we are stuck. Our comms are a messÑthe two inci-dents are on the same frequency and we have not been able to breakone off yet. Our patches are working with the other police agencies,but the feds donÕt have the capabilities or wonÕt let us patch with them.Video is OK, but I donÕt want anyone in the field seeing it. Cell isoverloaded and connections are intermittent. I used my GETS card onImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A141the hard-line a moment ago and that worked fine. I understand thattext messaging is working on cells, but only our command staff hasthem. One of the sergeants used his own personal computer to log inand send an e-mail over an unsecured 802 wireless networkÑtheMobile Computer Terminals all have 802.x wireless capability but itÕsturned off. Lastly, we are still having trouble tracking the people andresources responding into the area. We really need to get a handle onthat. . . .An analysis of this scenario reveals a number of notable problemswith and limitations of IT use. These include radio-frequency conflicts;
the lack of means for communicating with victims (using either voice or
text) or for obtaining information about them (through automatically
transmitted sensor data from their devices); impaired video capability;
limits of commercial cellular infrastructure; lack of access to redundant or
alternate technologies (e.g., text messaging, wireless Internet); inability to
disseminate and share information; reduced timeliness and limitations of
sensor data; absence of dissemination of sensor data to responders,
hazmat units, and hospitals; and inability to distinguish different infor-
mation needs of various responders. The ability to interpret the data rap-
idly (either by getting it to the appropriate expert or through automated
analysis) and then to issue appropriate and timely instructions to respond-
ers and affected individuals based on the analysis of the data is clearly
critical. Some of these problems and limitations could be addressed with
existing technology; others require technology advances.A striking aspect of the response described is the need to gather anddisseminate information rapidly in order to create sufficient situational
awareness for making effective response decisions in a rapidly evolving
situation. For instance, chemical sensors started going off only 40 seconds
after the initial report of a casualtyÑand yet this was already too late to
avoid dispatching responders when they could no longer provide effec-
tive aid and to keep doors from opening on entering trains. Detection of
harmful agents might, for instance, trigger automated response systems
to halt or reroute the entry of additional trains into the area. Automated
analysis of sensor data could also alert the dispatcher to take appropriate
measures to protect and direct respondersÑnot just to avoid putting them
in harmÕs way but also to make sure that they could be effective if they
were deployed. Other possibilities include automated control of heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning systems based on previous plume mod-
eling. Understanding what can be automated and striking a balance be-
tween what should be automated and what requires human decision
makers are major challenges revealed by an analysis of this scenario.
Finally, the scenario does not consider how the increasingly sophisticatedImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTmobile consumer devices that Metro employees are likely to carry couldbe used to provide better information about the unfolding incident.THE UNFOLDING RESPONSE TO A HURRICANEThe second fictional narrative describes the development and pro-gression of a major hurricane in the Gulf of Mexico and the corresponding
disaster management response that is possible now with the current level
of technology. It focuses on the use of information and communications
technology from the perspective of the regional Emergency Operations
Center. The scenario shows how emergency managers use IT during the
pre-incident onset phase, through landfall, to the early stages of post-
incident recovery. This scenario highlights a number of uses to which IT
is currently put when responding to situations with considerable warning
and slow onset. Situational awareness and a common operating picture
are a particular focus. The substantial lead time and detailed knowledge
now available prior to the onset of a hurricane are possible owing to great
advances in IT and other scientific disciplines.The response described here is a mix of tactical and strategic opera-tions. Technologies highlighted in this scenario include computer model-
ing, simulation, weather sensors, satellites, WiFi and mobile networking,
traffic cameras, and unmanned vehicles with onboard communications.
For this scenario, information and communications flows are centered
largely on the state Emergency Operations Center, with raw data flowing
in, being processed, and analyzed; actions being formulated; and instruc-
tions flowing back out.A Category 4 hurricane is churning in the Gulf of Mexico, buildingstrength. It is projected to be the worst storm surge ever experienced onthe Florida west coast. The hurricane begins to make its way toward Ce-dar Key, a sparsely populated area near Ocala, with expected landfall onSaturday at midnight. Emergency managers develop an Incident ActionPlan (IAP) for the response using previous plans and the results of a dis-tributed simulation exercise. IAPs are specific to an event. At this point inan event, the communitiesÕ and stateÕs emergency management plansform the framework of response. This approach allows each agency to seeits role in the plan and identify possible bottlenecks. Alternative plans aredeveloped for possible storm deviations.The state emergency manager activates the plan for Cedar Key basedon computerized weather models showing the highest probability of land-fall occurring there. Local and state response teams (e.g., search and res-cue, law enforcement) are prepositioned near Cedar Key, and federalteams are prepositioned along the path of the hurricane, which is project-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A143ed to cut across Florida and then up through the interior of Georgia andTennessee.The hurricane begins to be felt around 8 p.m. The entire area is undera hurricane warning issued by the National Weather Service. The WeatherService, taking advantage of a network of wind and wave sensors erectedalong the west coast, begins to see in real time that the port city of Tampais unexpectedly bearing the brunt of the storm, indicating that the storm isnot heading north but has turned slightly east, mirroring the behavior ofHurricane Charley. The state EOC dynamically switches to an alternativeIAP previously developed for this area, using simulations and drawing ona cache of plans from previous responses.Based on the alternative plan, the state EOC generates modificationsto the existing response plan, notifying all critical agencies (i.e., those des-ignated in the plans as key agencies for interagency emergency communi-cations and operations), rerouting Coast Guard flyovers and prioritizingnight flights. The broadcast media interrupts programming to saturate theairwaves with hurricane warnings, and the state communications officesets up a 511 number for information. Law enforcement officers are dis-patched to close down entertainment areas, alert the areas most at risk,inform them of how to respond, and survey the status of voluntary evacu-ations, identifying specific high-risk targets such as nursing homes thathave not been evacuated. The Department of Transportation (DOT), an-other designated critical agency, brings in crews and orange cones to helproute traffic out of the popular bayside night club district. Traffic camerasshow real-time traffic flows along designated evacuation routes, and DOTforwards assessments to the media for broadcast to the public.The hurricane makes landfall at midnight, but stalls unexpectedly.The Weather Service projects 18 inches of rain in the Tampa Bay regionby morning. The rainfall, coupled with the storm surge, could topple thelevees surrounding toxic phosphate mine tailings. The state emergencymanager calls for the deployment of pre-identified assets for the large-scale testing and monitoring of water quality and designated environmen-tal mitigation teams. EOC staff work through the night with computerprograms projecting damage to key areas, residential areas, and infra-structure; these become rapid reconnaissance plans. Intermittent reportsfrom pre-positioned recon teams and law enforcement provide some indi-cation of damage, but the winds and rain must die down before the CoastGuard can fly or reconnaissance teams can venture out. The governorand president are briefed about potential ecological and economic dam-age, based on models and the current storm path.The hurricane finally passes in the early morning hours, and the windand rain begin to subside. Electric power and cellular coverage were lostearly on due to wind damage from the leading edge of the storm, andImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTsatellite phones are waiting for the skies to clear. Recon and responseteams are set to mobilize at 4 a.m. Teams have refined their plans through-out the night, generating search grids for the area, reviewing land usemaps, and assigning teams and assets. As they begin to deploy to thefield, they find it difficult to reach designated areas due to extensive dam-age to transportation infrastructure. Limited ability to communicate difficul-ties and receive updated damage information further hinders progress.A large neighborhood near downtown is flooded, and survivors are onthe roofs, while a major senior and assisted-living development in the sub-urbs previously identified as not having been evacuated is also damagedand flooded. Rescue teams deploy miniature unmanned helicopters togeolocate survivors on roofs, remotely talk with them, and also look aroundroofs and attics for signs of survivors trapped inside. The Coast Guardsends manned helicopters to the suburbs to lift survivors from the roof-tops, while the rescue teams talk directly with the pilots and provide prior-itization and data on rooftop conditions from a portable anemometer. Themajority of the rescue teams focus on determining who in the urban areaneeds immediate evacuation. When the rescuers find a group of looters,they alert the police, who in turn dispatch the nearest law enforcementpersonnel. Boats are tasked to help the elderly and handle medical prior-ities, but routing them to appropriate care facilities is hampered by dam-age infrastructure making it impossible to regularly communicate informa-tion about the operational status of medical facilities.As operations transition slowly from response to recovery, law en-forcement agencies attempt to separate curious bystanders from returningauthorized responders, residents, and repair crews. But, due to limitedmeans to make such distinctions, they tend to deny access to some appro-priate personnelÑslowing the repair and recovery process. Utility provid-ers (e.g., electrical, water, communications) gather information about dam-age and determine how to re-establish services. Portable radio broadcasttowers are erected and by 7 a.m., news and response directions are beingtransmitted to the public in the affected areas. While the EOC has a gen-eral picture of where resources have been dispatched and has piecedtogether an overall picture of damage from information coming from fieldoperations, detailed situational awareness continues to be elusive.Information and communications technology is obviously critical tomanaging the widely distributed and massive operations described in
this scenario. Indeed, IT is used effectively from identification of the
emerging situation through to the recovery phase. Lives are saved, dam-
aged reduced, and steps toward recovery made rapidly by extensive use
of IT. Yet, there are many opportunities to extend and improve the use of
IT. A combination of existing technology, further technology advances,Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A145and organizational innovations should be able to extend the excellentsituational awareness that was available prior to onset into the response
phase, and beyond to the recovery phase. Interagency communication
and coordination are especially critical in this scenario, and the planning
operations described stress this point.However, the single global situational awareness developed at theEOC is inadequate for developing the task-specific situational awareness
needed by different participants. For instance, a search-and-rescue team
incident commander should see where search teams are, what they have
searched, and what the results are. He or she would have the ability to
report looting or unauthorized entry to law enforcement, using autho-
rized access to directly input the information into the system managing
the operational picture. The medical community should also see the
progress and projections of injuries, heatstroke, local capacity for medical
care, and so onÑand be able to send information about its situation to
other operational units for (automatic) inclusion into their operational
picture. The EOC should receive continuously updated information that
can then be used to revise its operational picture on an ongoing basis
using adaptive planning tools.While transportation officials are able to identify traffic congestionusing cameras and to communicate problems that have already devel-
oped, use of traffic sensors that measure speed and volume of traffic
could be incorporated with information about infrastructure damage and
other situational variables into decision support systems to recommend
alternate routes proactively before the transportation system bogs down.
Civilian volunteers at homes and shelters, fire departments, and police
stations could be pre-equipped with WiFi network capability and desig-
nated as an integral information source in emergency plans. Civilians in
the damaged areas with functioning IT systems (e.g., cell phones) could
have a channel for sending pictures and other information from areas to a
designated repository that can be used to build situational awareness.With technology available and on the horizon, it is possible to imag-ine rescue teams, as they drive into designated areas, receiving constant
updates from DOT reconnaissance teams on road conditions and dam-
age. A roadmap on a responder laptop could glow with red overlays on
known or suspected damaged bridges. Navigation software could attempt
to create directions for each of the teams that would get them to their
assigned grid. Driving in, a team member could use infrared and laser
cameras to videorecord the geolocated damage. As a team passed a WiFi
hot spot, the laptop could download new information from flyovers, and
the Weather Service could transmit video to the incident commander on a
priority basis and then to the EOC. Decision support tools could begin
combing emerging information, correlating and analyzing who needs
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTwhat kind of help and what the transportation conditions are. They couldalso identify areas where no information is available and target quick
reconnaissance teams to check out those blind spots. As new and better
information becomes available, adaptive planning tools could be used to
change response activities to reflect the evolving situation. Visualization
software could present task-specific views of the situation for each emer-
gency support function, and provide an integrated view of the overall
situation. Law enforcement could have access to centralized databases,
with pre-identified authorization for efficient and accurate screening of
affected areas.NATIONAL RESPONSE TO AN EARTHQUAKE IN THESAN FRANCISCO BAY AREAThe third fictional narrative describes the occurrence of a major earth-quake in the San Francisco Bay area and the resulting response. The focus
is on the use of information and communications technology from the
perspective of the federal-level emergency manager as part of a national
response. In this case onset is rapid, but such an incident has been antici-
pated, and detailed plans exist for responding to it. The blizzard of acro-
nyms blanketing this scenario is a clue to the complexity involved in
coordinating a response at this level and the degree and sophistication of
interagency interaction required. Resource allocation, logistics, tracking,
and mobilization are of particular concern in this scenario. Planning trig-
gers, such as the declaration of an Incident of National Significance, also
affect what IT resources are applied and when. Most of the technology
employed in the two fictional scenarios above would also be applied in
this scenario. However, technologies (and issues) highlighted here are
those focused primarily on strategic response: for example, collaboration
tools, modeling, information analysis and filtering tools, logistics and
tracking, system scalability, and geographic information systems (GIS).At 4:03 a.m. on a Monday in March, a magnitude 7.3 earthquake oc-curs on the Hayward fault, with an epicenter very near the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley. The Hayward fault event is not unanticipated and hasbeen studied by scientists and emergency managers for years. However,in the darkness and confusion surrounding the early hours, it is difficult toget an accurate picture about what has just occurred.State Office of Emergency Management (OEM) officials in Sacramen-to and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Departmentof Homeland Security (DHS) officials in Washington, D.C., get their initialsituational awareness from prior modeling results: the Association of BayArea Governments, FEMA, and the state of California have developedImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A147loss-estimation models for this scenario. Initial estimates are that morethan 100,000 dwelling units are severely damaged in the Bay area, pri-marily in Alameda and San Francisco counties. The models predict thatalmost 400,000 people will be displaced and will need food and water, and110,000 will need emergency shelter. Oakland and San Francisco airportsand the Port of Oakland are expected to be closed, as are major interstatehighways (I-80, I-580, I-880, Highway 13, Highway 101) and bridges (BayBridge, Dumbarton Bridge, RichmondÐSan Rafael Bridge). Models devel-oped by the University of California, Berkeley, predict severe damage tothat institution. Significant casualties are also expected.The information from the models is enough for the secretary of DHS todeclare an Incident of National Significance, to activate the CatastrophicIncident Annex of the National Response Plan, and to deploy specializedresources. Resources deployed include Rapid Needs Assessment Teams,FEMA Advance Teams, Urban Search and Rescue Teams (USART), Na-tional Disaster Medical System (NDMS) teams, and Disaster MortuaryTeams. The mobilization of government and Red Cross resources is alsobegun.The common operating picture and situational awareness problemsbegin almost immediately. Due to bridge and highway failures and com-munications problems, the Bay area has been transformed into four or fivedisconnected Òislands,Ó complicating coordinated response efforts. Initialcommunications with FEMA Region Nine are restricted to satellite phone.Although Travis Air Force Base is open, it is not clear to emergency man-agers where the greatest needs are and how to bring resources to bear tomeet them.Rain and fog impede overflights and generation of satellite imagery inthe hours immediately following the incident. Scattered reports from citi-zens, media, and responders from the area are conflicting and vague. Forexample, reports have been received that the Bay Bridge is Òdown,Ó but noone in Washington, D.C., or Sacramento knows if that means that thebridge has collapsed, a section has collapsed (as occurred during theLoma Prieta earthquake), or an on-ramp is closed. Similarly, unconfirmedreports have been received from the media that there are ÒthousandsÓ ofcasualties at the University of California, Berkeley, and that people aretrapped in collapsed buildings in Oakland.In Washington, D.C., the DHS Homeland Security Operations Center(HSOC), the FEMA National Response Coordination Center (NRCC), andthe White House Homeland Security Council (HSC) have delivered con-flicting initial assessments to the president: FEMA NRCCÕs assessment isbased on HAZUS model output; DHS HSOCÕs assessment is based oninitial reports from the media, NORTHCOM, and the State of CaliforniaOEM; HSCÕs assessment is based on conversations with the governor ofImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTCalifornia. The HSOC and the NRCC were operationally, but not physical-ly, combined after Hurricane Katrina into the National Operations Center(NOC). The Berkeley earthquake is demonstrating that the two operationscenters are still operating independently. The secretary of DHS has con-vened his interagency Incident Advisory Council (IAC) and is receivinginformation directly from senior officials in other cabinet offices. For in-stance, health and medical information, including the status of medicalassets in the region, is processed through the Department of Health andHuman Services (DHHS) EOC. The presidentÕs homeland security advisorhas convened the Domestic Readiness Group (DRG) to provide policyadvice to the president and to the secretary of DHS.Even after communications are established, the situational awarenessproblems persist. The Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN),developed to provide uniform, richer, information-sharing capabilities andcollaborative tools, has been overwhelmed. Information available throughHSIN is not quality-checked and is inconsistent, inaccurate, and incom-plete. The information available is changing rapidly, and it is difficult todetermine the source or timeliness of the information. In particular, GISimagery is available on HSIN from several sources (State of California,U.S. Geological Survey, FEMA), and different images convey different in-formation. No process exists for updating and date-stamping situationalinformation as reports from the field ground-truth initial estimates produced
by models, media, and rapid needs assessment teams. In particular, thestatus of critical infrastructure (e.g., road closures, water availability, san-itation) is difficult to determine, since reports are using non-standard, non-technical, and inconsistent language.First responders and infrastructure managers, engaged in critical lifesafety and lifeline repair tasks, cannot provide consistent or complete in-formation. Managers in the NOC are suffering from information overloadand are beginning to narrow their focus to one or two sources of situationalinformation (often CNN and one source from the field), a typical humanresponse. HSOC is relying on reports from the state OEM, and the NRCCis relying on the FEMA Advance Emergency Response Team. The pre-designated Federal Coordinating Officer has been briefed by the NRCCand has been deployed to Travis, as have the pre-designated PrimaryFederal Official (after briefings from DHS HSOC) and the pre-designatedDefense Coordinating Officer (after briefings from NORTHCOM).The White House DRG is collecting information from all availablesources. On Day 2, as a Joint Field Office (JFO) and unified federal/statecommand is established in Sacramento, it is apparent that the operatingpicture of the president, the secretary of DHS, the governor, the PFO, theFCO, and responders on the ground in the Bay area is not yet a commonone. It is also clear that even where there is a common understanding ofImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A149situational information, substantial differences exist in meaning attributedto that information depending upon the background, experience, and orga-nizational responsibilities of the manager/decision maker.For FEMA, the American Red Cross, NORTHCOM, and the U.S. ArmyCorps of Engineers, this is the largest mobilization and deployment of peo-ple and resources since Hurricane Katrina. The Corps has activated itscontracts with vendors and has ordered hundreds of truckloads of bottledwater and ice. New radio-frequency identification (RFID) systems will trackthe relief commodities from the point of manufacture, to federal warehousesites, and to state and local distribution sites. Attempts will be made by theCorps to ensure that DHS and FEMA have access to this logistics informa-tion to enable them to assess the gap between needs and supply. FEMAhas activated pre-scripted mission assignments with the National Commu-nication System (for cell on wheels and switches on wheels to restore cellphone communication systems) and with DOD (for Navy vessels for shel-ter and command support, for Army and Air Force logistics, and for troopsto assist the California National Guard).The American Red Cross is mobilizing 50,000 volunteers using itsDisaster Services Human Resource system, and FEMA has mobilized anddeployed its disaster reserve corps. NORTHCOM has established JointTask Force California to manage the influx of Department of Defense re-sources. FEMA has activated its National Emergency Management Infor-mation System (NEMIS) and its call centers to create the ability to registerdisaster victims for individual assistance. NEMIS has been dramaticallyexpanded since it collapsed during Hurricane Katrina, but it has not beentested. As Day 3 progresses, DHS, FEMA, and White House managerscontinue struggling to determine both what the situation is on the groundand to assess the adequacy of the response resources on scene andresources in the pipeline.The scenario above exposes the complexity involved in coordinatingnumerous agencies at all levels, with often widely overlapping and con-
flicting responsibilities but different perspectives. Those perspectives as
well as organizational culture and instincts affect how information is in-
terpreted, what information is trusted, and even where information is
sought. This has profound implications for decision support tools, logis-
tics, and resource allocation systems. One specific implication is how IT
systems deal with incomplete or uncertain information and how such
information is presented to disaster managers. Another is integration of
and coordination with civilians and ad hoc groups in this environment.
How can the volunteer groups that stand up be integrated and coordi-
nated? The scenario illustrates the extent to which hierarchical command
and control are assumed in organizational structures and how that isImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTreflected in the implementation of IT systems. Introducing distributednetworks and applicationsÑand the organizational and cultural innova-
tions necessary to leverage themÑconstitutes a major challenge for mak-
ing use of advances in IT.The dependence on models for rapid initial deployment is an espe-cially striking aspect of this scenario. Aggregating the status information
from FEMA, DHS, the Red Cross, DHHS, and DOD logistics and human
resource systems is particularly difficult. Without a significant level of
confidence in status information, managers cannot be sure that they know
what impacts have occurred, what resources are needed, or what re-
sources are responding. Models could also be valuable to responders and
other on-the-scene personnel whose perspective might lead to insights
not necessarily accessible to more distant emergency managers. How-
ever, this level of sharing is not typical. Also, modeling results are not
often shared with lower-level personnel, who might be able to act more
efficiently if they were. Finding ways to give more people access to mod-
eling systems could yield significant benefits.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151BReview of Interoperability Initiatives
Anumber of initiatives and programs at the federal, state, andlocal levels have worked to improve interoperability. Some 60
agencies and programs deal with various aspects of interoperablecommunications and are spread throughout the federal government, state,
regional, and local agencies as well as public safety associations.One major federal program, started in early 2001, was the NationalInstitute of JusticeÕs (NIJÕs) Advanced Generation of Interoperability for
Law Enforcement (AGILE) program, now the CommTech program.
AGILE was established as a comprehensive program to concentrate on
the need for improved public safety communications and information
sharing to address the requirement for effective coordination, communi-
cation, and sharing of information among numerous criminal justice and
public safety agencies. Three research areas identified as being of general
interest to the AGILE program reflect a focus on both data and voice
interoperability: 1¥Information sharingÑAddress technological and policy obstacles toenable effective and efficient, on-demand sharing of database informa-tion in a regional area;1National Institute of Justice, ÒCommunications Interoperability and Information Shar-ing Technologies (AGILE R&D) Program Solicitation,Ó Washington, D.C., June 2001, p. 2;available at http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/agile2001.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT¥High-bandwidth communicationsÑAbility to transmit, from station-ary and mobile platforms, high-bandwidth information, such as still im-ages and near real-time video, using common standards and open archi-
tecture techniques;¥Voice communicationsÑAbility to overcome disparate bands, fre-quencies, and waveform generation techniques to enable regional voicecommunications interoperability for day-to-day and mutual aid situa-tions.In October 2001, the NIJ sponsored the National Public Safety Wire-less Interoperability Forum. The goals of the forum were to raise public
safety wireless interoperability to the national level and to give forum
participants the opportunity to develop a list of actions that could be
taken to overcome the policy barriers to improving public safety wireless
communications.2 The forumÕs success led to the creation of the NationalTask Force on Interoperability (NTFI).In February 2003, NTFIÑa task force comprising members from 18national associations, state and local elected and appointed officials, and
public safety officialsÑissued a guide for public officials entitled ÒWhy
CanÕt We Talk?Ó that reiterated and extended the work done by the Public
Safety Wireless Advisory Committee. The NTFI guide states that the in-
ability of public safety officials to communicate with one another
Òthreatens the publicÕs safety and often results in unnecessary loss of lives
and property.Ó3 It does note the importance of data communicationsinteroperability, particularly the need for interagency planning and coor-
dination to achieve it. However, the primary focus is voice communica-
tions, and it is emphasized that a lack of adequate spectrum for public
safety communications is one of the major barriers to interoperable com-
munications.Although it continues to receive considerable attention, adequatespectrum is not the only (or even the most important) requirement for
interoperable communications. The definition of public safety wireless
communications interoperability developed by the NTFI and refined by
SAFECOM, a program of the Department of Homeland SecurityÕs (DHSÕs)
Office for Interoperability and Compatibility, describes interoperability
as Òthe ability of emergency response officials to share information via2See the National Institute of JusticeÕs information on the National Task Force on Inter-operability at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/topics/commtech/ntfi/welcome.html.3National Task Force on Interoperability, ÒWhy CanÕt We Talk?: Working Together toBridge the Communications Gap, a Guide for Public Officials,Ó February 2003, pp. 15-21;available at http://www.safecomprogram.gov/SAFECOM/library/interoperabilitybasics/1159_nationaltask.htm.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B153voice and data signals on demand, in real time, when needed, and asauthorized.Ó4The NTFI guide identifies five key barriers to public safety communi-cations interoperability:¥Incompatible and aging communications equipment,¥Limited and fragmented budget cycles and funding,¥Limited and fragmented planning and coordination,¥Limited and fragmented radio spectrum, and¥Limited equipment standards.The Summit on Interoperable Communications for Public Safety, heldin June 2003, was a joint effort among the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), DHSÕs SAFECOM program, and NIJÕs AGILE
program. The summit, which brought together a variety of participants
from federal, state, and national programs created to assist public safety
practitioners, produced a briefing book listing the various programs and
agencies at all levels of government involved in ongoing interoperability
efforts.5 The summit was intended as the initial step in familiarizing keyinteroperability players with the work being done by others so that mutu-
ally beneficial coordination and collaboration among the various techni-
cal programs could be established. The summit was also meant to provide
insight into where additional federal resources might be warranted and
to help stakeholders maximize the limited resources available across all
government levels by leveraging program successes and developing stan-
dards, approaches, products, and services for the benefit of all.One of the clear messages from the summit was that interoperabilityshould be built from the bottom up. That is, interoperation of communi-
cations must be built starting at the state, local, and regional levels with
guidance and support coming from the federal level. Under this frame-
work, federal programs such as DHSÕs SAFECOM and NIJÕs CommTech
see their role as assisting state and local law enforcement agencies to
communicate effectively and efficiently with one another across agency
and jurisdictional boundaries.64See http://www.safecomprogram.gov/SAFECOM/interoperability/default.htm.5Summit on Interoperable Communications for Public Safety, ÒBriefing Book of PublicSafety Related Groups and Programs on Interoperable Communications and InformationSharing,Ó NIST, Gaithersburg, Md., June 26-27, 2003, 85 pages. The list in the briefing bookis the basis for the estimation that more than 60 programs are involved in various aspects of
interoperability.6The CommTech Web site notes this focus, stressing its role as a facilitator; see http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/topics/commtech/welcome.html.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTThe mission of the DHS S&T DirectorateÕs Office for Interoperabilityand Compatibility (OIC) is to serve as the overarching program within
DHS to strengthen and integrate interoperability efforts that improve
public safety preparedness and response at all levels. OIC responsibilities
include the following:¥Support the creation of interoperability standards;¥Establish a comprehensive research, development, testing, andevaluation program;¥Identify and certify all DHS programs that involve interoperabilityissues;¥Integrate coordinated grant guidance;¥Oversee the development and implementation technical assistance;¥Conduct pilot demonstrations of technology;¥Create an interagency interoperability coordination council; and¥Establish an effective outreach program.OIC created the umbrella program SAFECOM to coordinate the ef-forts of public safety agencies at all levels of government in order to
improve public safety response through more effective, efficient,
interoperable wireless communications. SAFECOM has developed a num-
ber of tools and documents for public safety officials, including the
Interoperability Continuum framework for addressing critical wireless
interoperability elements; the Statewide Communications Interoperability
Planning (SCIP) methodology; grant guidance, which includes guidelines
for implementing a wireless communication system; and, in conjunction
with the NIJ, a statement of requirements (SoR) for interoperability.7Recent activity undertaken to carry out that mission includes the fol-lowing:¥Creation of the Federal Interagency Coordination Council (FICC)to coordinate funding, technical assistance, standards development, and
regulations affecting communications and interoperability across the fed-
eral government;¥Publication of a statement of requirements that defines, for the firsttime, what it will take to achieve full interoperability and provides indus-
try requirements against which to map product capabilities;¥Issuance of a request for input from the public safety community7Details on the SAFECOM program are available at http://www.safecomprogram.gov/SAFECOM.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B155in the form of a survey intended to help DHS identify and define specificprojects to improve emergency communications;¥Initiation of an effort to accelerate the development of critical stan-dards for interoperability;¥Creation of a grant guidance document that has been used byFEMA, Community Oriented Policing Services, and Office of Domestic
Preparedness state block grant programs to promote interoperability
improvement efforts;¥Establishment of a task force with the Federal CommunicationsCommission to consider spectrum and regulatory issues that can
strengthen public safety interoperability;¥Creation of the SCIP methodology for developing statewide com-munications plans;¥Release of a request for information to industry that netted morethan 150 responses; and¥Work with the public safety community todevelop a governance
document that defines both how SAFECOM will operate and how partici-
pating agencies will work within that framework.A number of states and regions have undertaken a variety of initia-tives to achieve interoperable wireless communications among agencies
in their areas. Virginia worked with SAFECOM and the NIJ to develop a
strategic plan for improving statewide interoperable communications. The
lessons from this effort were used by SAFECOM to create the SCIP meth-
odology.The NTFI identified a number of state and regional wireless voicecommunications interoperability efforts, including the Capital Wireless
Integrated Network (CapWIN), which is a partnership between the state
of Maryland, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the District of Colum-
bia to develop an interoperable first responder data communication and
information sharing network; the state of South Dakota radio system,
which includes everything from the wireless infrastructure to radios used
in state-wide communications; and the state of Indiana radio system (Hoo-
sier Safe-T), which provides statewide wireless infrastructure for voice
communications. Other initiatives include the Minnesota metropolitan
public safety radio system, public safety radio interoperability in Colo-
rado, state of North Carolina interoperability initiatives, and the Utah
communications agency network.8 The nature of these efforts varies de-pending on the unique situation of the locality, region, or state.8National Task Force on Interoperability, ÒWhy CanÕt We Talk?: Working Together toBridge the Communications Gap to Save Lives: A Guide for Public Officials, SupplementalResource,Ó February 2003, describes a number of state and regional interoperability casestudies; available at http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/211079.pdf.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTEfforts specifically addressing data communications interoperabilityhave been the focus of considerable effort within the public safety com-
munity. FEMAÕs Disaster Management e-Gov initiative and its Disaster
Management Interoperability Services (DMIS)9 provide a set of servicesand software tools to public safety agencies for enabling responders to
share information seamlessly between organizations. The Global Justice
XML Data Model (GJXDM) and the derivative DHS National Information
Exchange Model (NIEM) are intended as data reference models for the
exchange of information within the justice and public safety communi-
ties.10 Overarching efforts such as the Federal Enterprise Architectureand the e-Authentication e-Gov program also address information shar-
ing and data exchange at the federal level.11Industry-led efforts at data communications interoperability includethe IEEE 1512 Standards Program, oriented to transportation incident
management, and the IEEE 1451 Program for Sensor Integration Stan-
dards.12 International efforts that span the government, private, and open-source communities include the Organization for the Advancement of
Structured Information Standards Emergency Management Technical
Committee, developers of the Common Alerting Protocol and the Emer-
gency Data Exchange Language; and the Open GIS Consortium, creators
of Geospatial Markup Language and of the Web Map Service and Web
Feature Service specifications, among others.Two significant examples of regional cooperation to provide wirelessdata interoperability are (1) the CapWIN wireless integrated mobile data
communications network involving 41 federal, state, and local agencies
serving the U.S. Capital Region (Washington, D.C., Maryland, and Vir-
ginia);13 and (2) the Automated Regional Justice Information System(ARJIS) in the greater San Diego region, including San Diego and Imperial
Counties in California, used by 71 local, state, and federal agencies to
provide wireless data access to critical information in the field.149See http://www.cmi-services.org/.10More information on GJXDM is available at http://it.ojp.gov/jxdm; further informa-tion on NIEM is available at http://niem.gov/.11See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/a-1-fea.html.12For more information on IEEE 1512 and IEEE 1451, see http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/scc32/imwg/ and http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/1451/0/, respectively.13Additional information on CapWIN is available at http://www.capwin.org/index.cfm.14Additional information on ARJIS is available at http://www.arjis.org.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.157CWorkshop AgendaWEDNESDAY, JUNE 22, 2005WASHINGTON, D.C.10:00Ð10:30 a.m.Welcome to the WorkshopJon Eisenberg, Study Director and Senior ProgramOfficer, Computer Science andTelecommunications Board/National Research
Council (NRC)
Charles Brownstein, Director, Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board/NRC
Ramesh Rao, Chair, NRC Committee on UsingInformation Technology to Enhance Disaster
ManagementÑImproving the Use of Information
Technology in Disaster Preparedness, Response,
and Recovery; and Professor, University ofCalifornia, San Diego
Barry West, Chief Information Officer/Director ofInformation Technology Services Division, Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTTopic 1: The Critical and Evolving Role of Information andCommunication Technologies (ICTs) in Disaster Management10:30 a.mÐ12:00 p.m.Context for and Visions of the Future, GrandChallenges for ICTs in Disaster Management
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&AJohn Harrald, Director, Institute for Crisis, Disaster,and Risk Management, George Washington
University (Moderator)David G. Boyd, Director, Office for Interoperabilityand Compatibility, Science and Technology
Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security
Helen Wood, Senior Advisor, National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration Satellites and
Information Service, and Chair, National Science
and Technology CouncilÕs Subcommittee on
Disaster Reduction
Jack Potter, Director, Emergency Medical Services,Valley Health, and Vice Chair, COMCARE Board
of Directors
Peter Miller, Program Manager, Mission SupportOffice, Homeland Security Advanced Research
Project Agency, Science and Technology
Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland
SecurityHow might we better manage future crises? Whatimpact will major technology trends have on how
disaster management is handled in the future?
How can we leverage commercial technology cost-
performance curves yet meet special
requirements? What new technologies,
approaches, and policies would help, and what
research directions are promising?12:00Ð12:45 p.m.Lunch
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C15912:45Ð2:00 p.m.Perspectives on the Current State of the Art: ICTsin Disaster Management Practice
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&AEllis Stanley, General Manager, EmergencyPreparedness Department, City of Los Angeles,
California (Moderator)Mark Deputy, Senior IT Specialist and UrbanSearch and Rescue Team Assistant Task Force
Leader, Montgomery County, Maryland
William Maheu, Executive Assistant Chief of Police,San Diego Police Department
Robert Roth, Fire Technology Specialist, U.S. ForestService, U.S. Department of AgricultureWhat lessons have been learned from past crisisand exercises? What gaps in IT capabilities are
evident, and how might they be addressed? Where
is the state of the art not sufficient to meet our
needs?2:00Ð2:15 p.m.Break

2:15Ð3:30 p.m.Emerging Applications and Other Drivers forICTs in Disaster Management
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&AWilliam Maheu, Executive Assistant Chief of Police,San Diego Police Department (Moderator)William Metz, Director, Center for IntegratedEmergency Preparedness, Argonne National
Laboratory
Jaime Gomezjurado, Project Manager and VicePresident, Business Development, Medical
Emergency Response Network Research Project,
Semandex Networks, Inc.
Lois Clark McCoy, President, National Institute forUrban Search and Rescue
Peter Brooks, Institute for Defense AnalysesImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTWhat are especially demanding aspects of disastermanagement? What initiatives are underway to
address them? What specific requirements are
there from specific groups or application areas?
What general lessons can be learned?3:30Ð3:45 p.m.Break
Topic 2: Research Directions for ICTs in Disaster ManagementWhat research areas have application to disastermanagement? How might leading-edge research
be applied to disaster management? How should
the research agenda be established and evolved?
How can research results best be transitioned into
deployed capabilities? What are the commonalities
between commercial, civilian, and military
capabilities and research and development
activities, and how can technology advances and
knowledge be transferred from one to the other?3:45Ð5:00 p.m.Current ICT Research Programs Related toDisaster Management
15-minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15
minutes of Q&APeter Steenkiste, Professor, Carnegie MellonUniversity (Moderator)Larry Brandt, Program Manager, DigitalGovernment, National Science Foundation
Gary Ham, Senior Research Scientist, BattelleMemorial Institute
Earnest Paylor, Program Director, Pacific DisasterCenter and Senior Advisor for Interagency
Programs, Office of the Special Assistant and
NASA Liaison to the Assistant Secretary of
DefenseÑNetworks and Information Integration
Pamela Sydelko, LeaderÑModeling, Simulation andVisualization Group, Decision and Information
Sciences Division, Argonne National LaboratoryImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C1615:00Ð6:00 p.mICT Everywhere: Ubiquitous and PervasiveMobile (Ad Hoc) Communications and
Networking
15-minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15
minutes of Q&ATimothy Brown, Associate Professor, University ofColorado, Boulder (Moderator)Richard Howard, Research Professor, WirelessInformation Network Laboratory, Rutgers

University
Scott Midkiff, Professor, Virginia PolytechnicInstitute and State University
Mani Chandy, Simon Ramo Professor of ComputerScience, California Institute of TechnologyTHURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2005WASHINGTON, D.C.Topic 2: Research Directions for ICTs in Disaster Management(continued)8:30Ð9:45 a.m.Identifying and Aggregating Useful DataÑInformation Integration and Fusion
15-minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15
minutes of Q&AGio Wiederhold, Professor (Emeritus), StanfordUniversity (Moderator)Yigal Arens, Director, Intelligent Systems Division,Information Sciences Institute, University of
Southern California
Craig Knoblock, Research Associate Professor,University of Southern California
Peter Scott, Associate Professor, University ofBuffalo
Zachary Ives, Assistant Professor, University ofPennsylvaniaImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENT9:45Ð10:45 a.m.Information Overload: Making Useful DataActionableÑDecision Support, Collaboration,
Situational Awareness
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&ARobert Neches, Director, Distributed ScalableSystems Division, Information Sciences Institute,
University of Southern California (Moderator)David Mendon“a, Assistant Professor, New JerseyInstitute of Technology
William Wallace, Professor, Rensselaer PolytechnicInstitute10:45Ð11:00 a.m.Break

11:00 a.mÐ12:15 p.m.Sensor Networks, Autonomous Devices, andGeographic Information Systems
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&ARobin Murphy, Professor, University of SouthFlorida, and Director, Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Safety Security
Rescue (Moderator)Ayman Mosallam, Professor, Civil andEnvironmental Engineering, University of
California, Irvine
Susan McGrath, Associate Research Professor ofEngineering, Dartmouth College
David Kehrlein, Senior Consultant, EnvironmentalScience Research Institute; formerly GIS Manager,
California GovernorÕs Office of Emergency
Services12:15Ð1:00 p.m.Lunch
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C163Topic 3: Collaboration, Coordination, and Interoperability: PressingIssues in a Need-to-Share World1:00Ð3:00 p.m.Current Initiatives, Technical and OrganizationalObstacles, and Opportunities in ICT
Interoperability
15-minute presentations by each panelist, followed by
15 minutes of Q&AArt Botterell, Contra Costa County, California,Office of the Sheriff (Moderator)Ellis Kitchen, Chief Information Officer, MarylandOffice of Information Technology, and Member,
Interoperability and Integration Committee,
National Association of State Chief Information
Officers
Steve Cooper, Senior Vice President and ChiefInformation Officer, Red Cross
Lloyd (Gene) Krase, Administrator, Kansas Divisionof Emergency Management
Otto Doll, Commissioner, Bureau of Informationand Telecommunications, South Dakota
Dave Smith, Implementation Director, IndianaIntegrated Public Safety Commission
Robert Fletcher, President, Readiness ConsultingServices, LLC, and Member, National Fire
Protection Association NFPA 1600 Technical
CommitteeWhat policy and technical initiatives are currentlyunderway to improve wireless interoperability
across federal, state, and local levels? What results
are anticipated, and over what time frames? How
are data (including voice) generated, used, and
shared across organizational boundaries today?
What can be learned in terms of technology and
practice from efforts to create systems capable of
greater interoperability? How are standards
helping or not helping? What kinds of
interoperability are desired in the future? What
technical, operational, economic, and policy
challenges are likely to be unresolved, and merit
further research? How do communication systemsImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTrelate to other information management systemsrelated to disaster management? What obstacles to
technology transition must be overcome?3:00Ð3:15 p.m.Break

3:15Ð4:30 p.m.Envisioning, Enabling, and Building Networksof the Future
15-minute presentation by each panelist, followed by 15
minutes of Q&ANancy Jesuale, President, NetCity Engineering(Moderator)Nader Moayeri, Manager, WirelessCommunications Technologies Group, National
Institute of Standards and Technology
James Morentz, Vice President, Homeland SecurityTechnology, and Director, Public Safety

Integration Center, Science Applications
International Corporation
Chip Hines, Program Manager, DisasterManagement eGov Initiative, Office of the Chief
Information Officer, Emergency Preparedness and
Response/FEMA, Department of Homeland
SecurityWhat should communications and other ITcapabilities look like in the future? How do
wireless communications systems relate to the
emerging broader architecture for public safety,
national security, and disaster response? What are
the implications of major information and
communications technology trends for how we
respond to crises? How can these opportunities
better be exploited? What kinds of research,
experimentation, and pilot programs would help?4:30Ð4:45 p.m.Concluding RemarksRamesh Rao, Chair, NRC Committee on UsingInformation Technology to Enhance Disaster
ManagementImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.165DSpeakers and Participants atMeetings and Site Visits
Although the briefers listed below provided much useful informa-tion of various kinds to the Committee on Using Information
Technology to Enhance Disaster Management, they were notasked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations of this study, nor
did they see the final draft of this report before its release.SEPTEMBER 20-21, 2005WASHINGTON, D.C.Briefers at Meetings:Alok Chaturvedi, Purdue UniversityLouise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
Kenneth Mandl, Harvard Medical SchoolCharles Werner, Charlottesville (Virginia) Fire DepartmentSite Visit:Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) Public Safety Inte-gration Center, hosted by James Morentz, SAICImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTDECEMBER 12-13, 2005SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIABriefers at Meetings:Mark Koro, QualcommLeslie Lenert, University of California, San DiegoBill Owens, Nortel Networks (retired)
Pam Scanlon, Automated Regional Justice Information System
Christian Sloane, University of California, San Diego Medical CenterSite Visits:San Diego Police Department Disaster Operation CenterCity of San Diego Emergency Operation Center
San Diego County Disaster Operation Center
San Diego SWAT DemonstrationMAY 1, 2006WASHINGTON, D.C.Briefers at Meetings:Tom Coty, Homeland Security InstituteFelix Demicco, Office of Critical InfrastructureÑOffice of the Prosecutor,Morris County, New JerseyChristopher Kojm, 9/11 Public Discourse Project and Deputy Director,9/11 CommissionDereck Orr, Public Safety Communications Systems, National Institute ofStandards and TechnologyFlorence Reichenberg, Morris County, New Jersey, Chamber of Commerce
Havid⁄n Rodriguez, Disaster Research Center, University of DelawareImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.167EBiographies ofCommittee Members and Staff
COMMITTEE MEMBERSRamesh R. Rao, Chair, is currently a professor in the Department of Elec-trical and Computer Engineering and director of the San Diego Division
of the California Institute of Telecommunications and Information Tech-
nology (Calit2) at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). His
research interests include architectures, protocols, and performance analy-
sis of wireless, wire line, and photonic networks for integrated multime-
dia services. Prior to his appointment as the director of the San Diego
Division of Calit2, he served as director of the UCSD Center for Wireless

Communications (CWC) and was the vice chair of Instructional Affairs in

the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Professor Rao
did his undergraduate work at the Regional Engineering College of the
University of Madras in Tiruchirapalli, India, obtaining a B.E. (honors)
degree in electronics and communications in 1980. He did his graduate
work at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, receiving
his M.S. in 1982 and his Ph.D. in 1984.Yigal Arens is director of the Intelligent Systems Division of the Univer-sity of Southern CaliforniaÕs (USC) Information Sciences Institute. He is
also co-director of the USC/Columbia University Digital Government
Research Center (DGRC) and a research professor at USCÕs Daniel J.
Epstein Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering. His primary
research interests have been digital government, information integration,Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTplanning in the domain of information servers, knowledge representa-tion, and human-machine communication. In 1983, he joined the faculty
of USCÕs Computer Science Department. He joined USCÕs Information
Sciences Institute (USC/ISI) in 1987, where he first worked on the Inte-
grated Interfaces project, a multimedia presentation design system com-
bining text, tables, maps, and other graphics. For almost 10 years he
headed the Single Interface to Multiple Sources research group specializ-
ing in integration of heterogeneous databases and other information
sources. Dr. Arens has been director of the Intelligent Systems Division,
one of the largest artificial intelligence research laboratories in the United
States, since 1999. Also, since 1999, he has been co-director of the DGRC.
In 1999, together with two colleagues from ISI, he founded Fetch Tech-
nologies, a company that specializes in extracting data from Web sites. In
2002, he joined the Daniel J. Epstein Department of Industrial and Sys-
tems Engineering as a research professor. In 2003, Dr. Arens founded
USCÕs Center for Research on Unexpected Events, which he headed for its
first year. Dr. Arens also was a part of the National Research CouncilÕs
Committee on Planning Meeting on Information Technology and the
States: Public Policy and Public. He received his Ph.D. from the Univer-
sity of California at Berkeley.Art Botterell is community warning system manager, Contra CostaCounty (California) Office of the Sheriff. He is an internationally recog-
nized expert in emergency communications who has served on the front
lines of some of the biggest national disasters in recent U.S. history.
Former Federal Emergency Management Agency director James Lee Witt
hailed him as a Ònational asset.Ó He has served as a consultant to the
Department of Homeland Security and a number of other state, federal,
and international organizations. He led the development of the Common
Alerting Protocol (CAP)Ñthe first international standard format for all-
hazard public warning across multiple media. An experienced analyst,
broadcast and multimedia producer, writer, and manager, Mr. Botterell
studies the ways that communities use information technology to manage
the effects of sudden change.Timothy X. Brown is an associate professor at the University of Colorado,Boulder. He received his B.S. in physics from Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity and his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the California Institute of
Technology in 1990, when he also joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In
1992 he joined Bell Communications Research. Since 1995 he has held a
joint appointment with Electrical Engineering and Interdisciplinary Tele-
communications at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Dr. BrownÕs re-
search interests include adaptive network control, machine learning, andImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E169wireless communications systems. His laboratory has developed exten-sive experience in the design, implementation, and testing of wireless
networking protocols. He has published more than 50 papers in network-
ing and wireless systems, is a recipient of the National Science
FoundationÕs CAREER Award, and was named the Global Wireless Edu-
cation Consortium Wireless Educator of 2003.John R. Harrald is the director of the George Washington University(GWU) Institute for Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Management and a profes-
sor of engineering management in the GWU School of Engineering and
Applied Science. He is a founding member, director, and immediate past
president of the International Emergency Management Society. Dr.
Harrald has been actively engaged in the fields of emergency, conse-
quence, and crisis management and maritime safety and port security.
He was the former director of the Disaster Recovery Institute (DRI) and
served as the associate director of the National Ports and Waterways
Institute for 10 years. Dr. Harrald was the principal investigator for mari-
time risk and crisis management studies in Prince William Sound, Alaska,
the Port of New Orleans, and Washington state, and for earthquake vul-
nerability studies funded by the National Science Foundation and the
American Red Cross. He has studied the response to the Exxon Valdez oilspill, the Loma Prieta earthquake, Hurricane Hugo, Hurricane Andrew,
the Northridge earthquake, the 1999 Turkey earthquakes, and the Sep-
tember 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon. He has also written and published in the fields of crisis man-
agement, emergency management, management science, risk and vul-
nerability analysis, and maritime safety. He was a reviewer for the com-
mittee that produced Information Technology, Research, Innovation, andE-Government. Dr. Harrald received his B.S. in engineering from the U.S.Coast Guard Academy, an M.A.L.S. from Wesleyan University, an M.S.
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he was an Alfred
P. Sloan Fellow, and an M.B.A. and a Ph.D. from Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.Richard Howard is a researcher at Wireless Information Network Labo-ratory (WINLAB) at Rutgers University. He is also a principal at Research
Innovations, LLC, and the founder and senior vice president of technol-
ogy at PnP Networks, a start-up company focused on applying artificial
intelligence techniques to the problem of making computers and com-
puter networks truly simple for people to use. Dr. Howard was formerly
the wireless research vice president at Lucent Bell Laboratories, where he
did research on wireless technology ranging from materials, components,
packaging, antennas, modeling, analysis, communication theory, and in-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtegrated circuit design to systems-level projects such as fixed wirelessloop and advanced cellular base stations. His work has emphasized mul-
tiple antennas, signal processing, and system performance from basic
communication theory to field deployment. Dr. HowardÕs key achieve-
ments have included new theory (and practical demonstrations) for dra-
matically increasing wireless system capacities based on multiple anten-
nas. Other achievements have included algorithms and a tool suite for
optimization of cellular networks and application of advanced signal pro-
cessing to linear power amplifiers for dramatic reductions in cost and size
and improvements in efficiency. He received his Ph.D. in physics at
Stanford University in 1977.Nancy Jesuale has worked in local and state government since 1976 as atelecommunications strategic planner and has served as a director of pub-
lic safety networks, telecommunications networking, and network opera-
tions. Ms. Jesuale is the president of NetCity Engineering, Inc. (NCE), a
consulting practice dedicated to strategic planning and solution sets for
government in public safety and fiber-optic telecommunications systems.
Current clients of NCE include the city of Los Angeles; the District of
Columbia; the state of Oregon; the city of Charlotte, North Carolina; and
the Center for Wireless Network Security (WiNSeC). As program man-
ager for public safety for the Center for WiNSeC at the Stevens Institute of
Technology, Ms. Jesuale is responsible for establishing relationships, re-
search programs, and public policy support. She has been an innovator in
telecommunications strategies for local government since 1984. She is an
appointee to the National Task Force on Interoperability and the Oregon
State Interoperability Executive Committee; is a past chair of the Public
Technology, Inc., Task Force on Information Technology and Telecom-
munications; has been the director of strategic planning for telecommuni-
cations for the city of Los Angeles; and has served on the Oregon State-
wide Interoperability Executive Council.David Kehrlein, now with the Environmental Science Research Institute(ESRI), was the geographical information systems (GIS) manager for the
California GovernorÕs Office of Emergency Services (OES) for more than 9
years. Before that he worked in the Forest and Rangeland Resource As-
sessment Program (FRRAP) of the California Department of Forestry and
Fire Protection. Mr. Kehrlein was active on the governorÕs GIS task force
in 1992. He is a past director of the California Geographic Information
Association (CGIA), and he chairs the data standards committee. He was
also chair of the Firefighting Resources of California Organized for Poten-
tial Emergencies (FIRESCOPE) GIS Specialist Group. He has organized
response and recovery GIS support for 16 presidentially declared disas-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E171ters, from incident-level response to decision support at the state andfederal levels. His group at OES also deployed a response/training GIS
trailer that is equipped with large-format plotting and scanning capabili-
ties, a statewide GIS data repository, as well as satellite cell phone and a
high-speed satellite Internet downlinking capability. Mr. Kehrlein re-
ceived his B.A., graduating with honors in geography from California
State University, Sacramento.William Maheu is chief of operations of the San Diego, California, PoliceDepartment. Mr. Maheu has been a member of the police department for
23 years. He is currently in charge of Child Abuse, Domestic Violence, Sex
Crimes, Vice Operations, Mid City Division, Southeastern Division, South-
ern Division, Records, Property and various other programs. During his
tenure with the department, he has had many assignments, including
commanding officer of field operations/special resources, executive lieu-
tenant of the Special Weapons and Tactics Team, special projects/long-
range planning lieutenant and narcotics sergeant. He has also been in-
volved in several major projects, including the 2003 Super Bowl, the
Republican National Convention, the Presidential Debate, development
of the Psychiatric Emergency Response Team, and the development of the
Homeless Outreach Team. Mr. Maheu graduated from the University of
San Diego in 1983 with a B.A. in psychology.Robin R. Murphy is a professor in the Computer Science and Engineer-ing Department at the University of South Florida, with a joint appoint-
ment in cognitive and neural sciences in the Department of Psychology.
She is an associate editor for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Intelligent Systems and a member of the 1998-1999 Defense Sci-ence Study Group and is currently a member of the U.S. Air Force Scien-
tific Advisory Board and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Innovative Space-based radar Antenna Technology (ISAT). She recently
served on the Department of DefenseÕs Air Platforms FY2004 Technology
Area Review. In addition, she is also a member of the board of directors
for Continental Divide Robotics, which provides the Global Positioning
System and intelligent-agent software for tracking parolees. From 1992 to
1998, she was an assistant professor in the Department of Mathematical
and Computer Sciences at the Colorado School of Mines. Dr. Murphy
joined the University of South Florida (USF) in 1998, and in January 2002
she became director of the Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue
(CRASAR). In March 2003, she helped start the Industry/University Co-
operative Research Center on Safety Security Rescue (SSR-RC) with the
University of Minnesota and is the overall director. She leads the CRASAR
rescue robot response team, the only such team in the world, and is aImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtechnical search specialist with Florida Task Force 3. Since 1995, she hasfocused on Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) as the test domain for her
research, leading to her participation in the first known use of robots for
urban search and rescue at the World Trade Center disaster. Her USAR
robotics work has earned a National Institute for Urban Search and Res-
cue Eagle award, and she serves on the executive board of the National
Institute for Urban Search and Rescue. She has also won a USF Outstand-
ing Faculty Research Achievement Award (2003) and received the Honor
Society of Phi Kappa Phi, USF Chapter, Artist and Scholar of the Year
Award (2004). Prior to graduate work, Dr. Murphy worked in the process
control industry as a software project engineer. She served as a committee
member for the Army Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology Commit-
tee of the National Research Council. She received a B.M.E. in mechanical
engineering and an M.S. and a Ph.D. in computer science (with a minor in
computer integrated manufacturing systems) in 1980, 1989, and 1992, re-
spectively, from Georgia Institute of Technology, where she was a
Rockwell International Doctoral Fellow.Robert Neches is the director of the Information Sciences InstituteÕs Dis-tributed Scalable Systems Division and a research faculty member of the
University of Southern CaliforniaÕs Computer Science Department. He
received his Ph.D. from Carnegie Mellon University in 1981 for work in
machine learning, spent a year at the University of PittsburghÕs Learning
Research and Development Center, and has been at USC ISI since 1982
(with the exception of service at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency [DARPA] during 1994 to 1997). His personal interests span con-
trol and coordination in distributed systems, collaboration and visualiza-
tion aids for information management, and system-of-systems frame-
works for information integration. The Distributed Scalable Systems
Division looks at the full range of issues bearing on organizationsÕ gath-
ering of information, assessing it, making decisions, reconciling issues,
and effecting resulting actions. Research within the division addresses
distributed software systems engineering, information management, in-
telligent human-computer interaction, computer-supported cooperative
work, resource management, and decision support. Applications within
the division include all levels of command and control, crisis manage-
ment, intelligence analysis, logistics, design and manufacturing, and
space applications.Masanobu Shinozuka is a Distinguished Professor and chair of the De-partment of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of
California, Irvine, and Norman Sollenberger Professor Emeritus of Civil
Engineering at Princeton University. He is a member of the NationalImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E173Academy of Engineering. His research activities involve random vibra-tion, reliability of structural systems, structural dynamics, structural con-
trol, continuum mechanics, and infrastructure systems including lifeline
networks. In particular, his pioneering and original research on digital
simulation of stochastic waves is noteworthy. He has more than 500
publications in refereed journals and proceedings of national and inter-
national conferences in mechanics, structural engineering, and natural/
human-made disaster mitigation. His contribution to these areas was
recognized in terms of a number of prestigious awards, such as
Newmark, Freudenthal, and Von Karman Medals from the American
Society of Civil Engineers, of which he is an honorary member. Professor
ShinozukaÕs recent research deals with the detection of damage and its
locations within a network of utility and highway transportation sys-
tems under natural and human-made disturbances. In this regard, his
most recent effort, under the sponsorship of the National Science Foun-
dation, focuses on the development of energy-efficient and self-powered
sensor networks and wireless data transmission systems that can be ap-
plied to real-time diagnosis of these systems after serious security
breaches. He has a long history of working relationships with engineers
and management at the California Department of Transportation, the
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, and Memphis Light, Gas
and Water, and more recently with Southern California Edison to esti-
mate the seismic performance of their systems. He also served as presi-
dent and executive vice president of the International Association of
Structural Safety and Reliability. Professor Shinozuka received his Ph.D.
from Columbia University from the Department of Civil Engineering
and Engineering Mechanics in 1960 and an M.S. in civil engineering
(1955) and a B.S. (1953) from Kyoto University.Ellis Stanley is the general manager for the Emergency PreparednessDepartment for the city of Los Angeles. Currently he serves as an adviser
to the Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research and
is a member of the centerÕs Industry Advisory Board; he also chairs
theMetro EmergencyManagerÕs Forum of the International Association

of Emergency Managers. He is vice president for the public sector of the

Business and Industry Council on Emergency Preparedness and Planning
and is on the Emergency Services Committee of the American Red Cross,
Los Angeles Chapter. The City Council has also appointed him to the
Emergency Preparedness Commission for the county and city of Los An-
geles, and he is a member of the cityÕs Emergency Operations Board. Mr.
Stanley was recently appointed to the board of directors of the National
Institute of Urban Search and Rescue. He was the director of the Atlanta-

Fulton County Emergency Management Agency and has been the direc-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTtor of an emergency management program for the city of Durham andDurham County, North Carolina, and Brunswick County, North Caro-
lina. He also served as a county fire marshal, fire and rescue commis-
sioner, and county safety officer; as president of the International Asso-

ciation of Emergency Managers, the American Society of Professional
Emergency Planners, the National Defense Transportation Association,
and the Metropolitan Atlanta Chapter of the National Forum for Black
Public Administrators; and as vice chair of the Association of Contin-
gency Planners. He also chaired the Certified Emergency Managers Certi-
fication Commission. Mr. Stanley is a 1973 graduate of the University of

North Carolina at Chapel Hill with a degree in political science.Peter Steenkiste is a professor of computer science and of the Electricaland Computer Engineering Department at Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU). He is currently on the editorial board of IEEE/ACM Transactionson Networking, Cluster Computing, and the Journal of Grid Computing. Hiscurrent research is in the areas of network services and pervasive com-
puting. He is currently working on the Darwin project and is also active
in pervasive computing in the context of the CMU Aura project. Profes-
sor SteenkisteÕs other research interests are in the areas of networking
and distributed computing. While at CMU, he worked on Nectar, the
first workstation clusters built around a high-performance, switch-based
local area network. He is a member of the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) and a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He has been on a number of program com-
mittees and was co-chair for the OPENSIGÕ99 workshop and the Eighth
International Workshop on Quality of Service. He was also program
chair for HPDCÕ2000 and general co-chair for ACM SIGCOMMÕ02. He
was an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Parallel and DistributedSystems (1998-1999). He received a degree in electrical engineering fromthe University of Gent in Belgium in 1982, and his M.S. and Ph.D. de-
grees in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 1983 and 1987,

respectively.Gio Wiederhold is an emeritus professor of computer science at StanfordUniversity, with courtesy appointments in medicine and electrical engi-
neering. His current research includes privacy protection in collaborative
settings, large-scale software composition, access to simulations to aug-
ment decision-making capabilities for information systems, and develop-
ing algebra over ontologies. Prior to his academic career, he spent 16
years in the software industry. His career followed computer technolo-
gies, starting with numerical analysis applied to rocket fuel, FORTRAN
and PL/1 compilers, real-time data acquisition, and a time-oriented data-Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E175base system; eventually he became a corporate software architect. He hasbeen elected a fellow of the American College of Medical Informatics, the
IEEE, and the ACM. He spent 1991 through 1994 as the program manager
for knowledge-based systems at DARPA in Washington, D.C. He has
been an editor and editor-in-chief of several IEEE and ACM publications.
Professor Wiederhold served as a reviewer for several CSTB reports, in-
cluding Information Technology, Research, Innovation, and E-Government;Youth, Pornography, and the Internet; Technical, Business, and Legal Dimen-
sions of Protecting Children from Pornography on the Internet: Proceedings of a
Workshop; Non-technical Strategies to Reduce ChildrenÕs Exposure to Inappro-priate Material on the Internet: Summary of a Workshop; Review of the FBIÕsTrilogy Information Technology Modernization Program; and a letter report tothe FBI. He received a degree in aeronautical engineering in Holland in1957 and a Ph.D. in medical information science from the University of
California at San Francisco in 1976.STAFFJon Eisenberg is director of the Computer Science and Telecommunica-tions Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council. At CSTB, he has
been study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of
studies exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and
communications technologies. Current studies include an examination of
emerging wireless technologies and spectrum policy and a study of how
to use information technologies to enhance disaster management. From
1995 through 1997 he was an American Academy of Arts and Science,
Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International
Development, where he worked on environmental management, technol-
ogy transfer, and information and telecommunications policy issues. He
received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Washington in 1996
and a B.S. in physics with honors from the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst in 1988.Ted Schmitt is a program officer for the Computer Science and Telecom-munications Board of the National Research Council. In addition to the
present study, he is currently involved in the CSTB project on providing a
comprehensive exploration of cybersecurity. Before serving with CSTB,
Mr. Schmitt was involved in the development of the digital publishing
industry and played an active role in various related standards groups.
Prior to that, he served as technical director at a number of small technol-
ogy companies in Germany, Sweden, and the United States. He started
his career in 1984 as a software engineer for IBM, earning two patents and
several technical achievement awards. Mr. Schmitt received an M.A. inImproving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176IMPROVING DISASTER MANAGEMENTinternational science and technology policy from George WashingtonUniversity. He received a B.S. in electrical engineering in 1984 and a B.A.
in German in 1997 from Purdue University and studied at the Universit−t
Hamburg, Germany.Jennifer M. Bishop, program associate, recently left the staff of the Com-puter Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research
Council. She was involved in several studies, including Telecommunica-
tions Research and Development, Policy Consequences and Legal/Ethi-
cal Implications of Offensive Information Warfare, and Assessing the
Information Technology Research and Development Ecosystem. She also
maintained CSTBÕs databases; managed the CSTB Web site; produced
Update, the CSTB newsletter; and designed book covers and promotionalmaterials. Prior to serving with CSTB, Ms. Bishop worked for the city of
Ithaca, New York, coordinating the Police DepartmentÕs transition to a
new SQL-based time accrual and scheduling application, a project that
grew out of her experience with maintaining the police records data-
bases. Her other work experience includes designing customized hospi-
tality industry performance reports for Smith Travel Research, and
freelance publication design. She is interested in the social and cultural
impacts of information technology, including researching and develop-
ing effective information design for education and lifelong learning. In
her spare time, Ms. Bishop is a visual artist working in oil and mixed
media. She holds a B.F.A. from Cornell UniversityÕs College of Architec-
ture, Art, and Planning.David Padgham, associate program officer at the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board of the National Research Council, is currently
involved in studies investigating dependable software, health care
informatics, computing performance, and forensics. He rejoined CSTB in
the spring of 2006 following nearly 2 years as a policy analyst in the
Association for Computing MachineryÕs (ACMÕs) Washington, D.C., Of-
fice of Public Policy, where he worked closely with that organizationÕs
public policy committee, USACM. Previously, he spent nearly 6 years
with CSTB, working onÑamong other thingsÑthe studies that produced
Trust in Cyberspace; Funding a Revolution; Broadband: Bringing Home theBits; LC21: A Digital Strategy for the Library of Congress; and The InternetÕsComing of Age. He holds a masterÕs degree in library and informationscience (2001) from the Catholic University of America in Washington,
D.C., and a B.A. (1996) in English from Warren Wilson College in
Asheville, North Carolina.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E177Gloria Westbrook recently left the staff of the Computer Science andTelecommunications Board, where she was a senior project assistant. She
previously served as the executive assistant to the directors of the Office
of Youth Programs and the Youth Opportunity Grant Program at the D.C.
Department of Employment Services (DOES). In 2003, Ms. Westbrook
was selected to lead a team that successfully administered a $4 million
summer youth employment program that registered more than 5,000 Dis-
trict youth. In addition, Ms. Westbrook also served as the executive assis-
tant to the director of the DOES and served as his liaison to the District of
ColumbiaÕs mayor and his cabinet, council members, and members of
Congress. While serving in the directorÕs office Ms. Westbrook received
the Meritorious Service Award and the Workforce Development
AdministratorÕs Award of Appreciation for Dedication of Service. She
also became a member of the National Association of Executive Secretar-
ies & Administrative Assistants. Ms. Westbrook attended Duke Ellington
School of the Performing Arts in ballet and went on to further her dance
education at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia.Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and RecoveryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.