DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11852Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of aSymposium222 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-10316-9 | DOI 10.17226/11852Charles W. Wessner, Editor; Committee on Comparative Innovation Policy: BestPractice for the 21st Century; Board on Science, Technology, and EconomicPolicy; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Comparative Innovation Policy: 
Best Practice for the 21st Century
Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy
Policy and Global Affairs
Charles W. Wessner, Editor
TH
E NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.
www.nap.edu
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fifth Street, N.W.   Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute 
of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for 
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by: Contract/Grant No. SB1341-03-C-0032 between the
 National 
Academy of Sciences and the U.S. Department of Commerce; Contract/Grant No. OFED-
381989 between the National Academy of Sciences and Sandia National Laboratories; and 
Contract/Grant No. NAVY-N00014-05-G-0288, DO #2, between the National Academy of 
Sciences and the Of˜ce of Naval Research. This material is based upon work also supported 
by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Sciences Of˜ce, DARPA 
Order No. K885/00, Program Title: Materials Research and Development
 Studies, Issued 
by DARPA/CMD under Contract #MDA972-01-D-0001. Additional funding was provided 
by Intel Corporation, International Business Machines, and Google. Any
 opinions, ˜ndings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided 
support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-10316-9
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-10316-9
Limited copies are available from
 Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy, 
National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., W547, Washington, DC 20001; 
202
-334-2200.
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in 
the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2007 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the 
 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a
 mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c and technical matters. 
Dr.
 Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of 
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. 
It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with 
the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. 
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of 
 
Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of 
policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibil
-ity given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser 
to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, 
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of
 Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the 
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the
 National 
Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scien
-ti˜c and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both
 Academies 
and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCommittee on Comparative Innovation Policy: 
 Best Practice for the 21st Century*
William J. Spencer
, 
Chair
Chairman Emeritus, 
retired
SEMATECH
Kenneth Flamm
, 
Vice Chair
 Dean Rusk Chair in International 
Affairs
Lyndon B. Johnson School of 
 Public Affairs
University of Texas at Austin and 
STEP Board
Alice H. Amsden 
Professor of Political Economy
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
Gail H. Cassell 
Vice President, Scienti˜c Affairs
Distinguished Lilly Research Scholar 
for Infectious Diseases
Eli Lilly and Company
Lewis S. Edelheit 
Senior Research and Technology 
Advisor,
 retired
General Electric
Mary L. Good
, 
Vice Chair
Donaghey University Professor
Dean, Donaghey College of 
Information Science and Systems 
Engineering
University of Arkansas at Little Rock 
and STEP Board
Bronwyn Hall
Professor of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
Mark B. Myers 
Visiting Professor of Management
The Wharton School of Business
University of Pennsylvania
Alan Wm. Wolff
Managing Partner
Dewey Ballantine
*As of December 2006.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viProject Staff*
Charles W. Wessner
Study Director
Sujai J. Shivakumar 
Senior Program Of˜cer
McAlister T. Clabaugh
Program Associate
David E. Dierksheide
Program Of˜cer
Paul Fowler
Senior Research Associate
 Ken Jacobson
Consultant 
Jeffrey C. McCullough
Program Associate
*As of December 2006.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
For the National Research Council (NRC), this project was overseen by the 
Board on Science, Technology and Economic Policy (STEP), a standing board 
of the NRC established by the National Academies of Sciences and
 Engineering 
and the Institute of Medicine in 1991. The mandate of the STEP Board is to 
 
integrate understanding of scienti˜c, technological, and economic elements in the 
formulation of national policies to promote the economic well-being of the United 
States. A distinctive characteristic of STEP™s approach is its frequent interactions 
with public and private-sector decision makers. STEP bridges the disciplines of 
business management, engineering, economics, and the social sciences to bring 
diverse expertise to bear on pressing public policy questions. The members of the 
STEP Board
* and the NRC staff are listed below:
Dale Jorgenson,
 Chair
Samuel W. Morris University Professor
Harvard University
Timothy Bresnahan
Landau Professor in Technology and 
the Economy
Stanford University
Lew Coleman
President
Dreamworks Animation
Kenneth Flamm
Dean Rusk Chair in International 
Affairs
Lyndon B. Johnson School of 
 Public Affairs
University of Texas at Austin
Mary L. Good
Donaghey University Professor
Dean, Donaghey College of 
Information Science and Systems 
Engineering
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Amo Houghton
Member of Congress, 
retired
David T. Morgenthaler
Founding Partner
Morgenthaler Ventures
Joseph Newhouse
John D. MacArthur Professor of 
Health Policy and Management
Harvard University
Edward E. Penhoet
President
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
Arati Prabhakar
General Partner
U.S. Venture Partners
William J. Raduchel
Independent Director and Investor
Jack Schuler
Chairman
Ventana Medical Systems
Suzanne Scotchmer
Professor of Economics and Public 
Policy
University of California at Berkeley
*As of December 2006.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
STEP Staff*
Stephen A. Merrill
Executive Director
McAlister T. Clabaugh
Program Associate
David E. Dierksheide
Program Of˜cer
Paul Fowler
Senior Research Associate
Charles W. Wessner
Program Director
Sujai J. Shivakumar 
Senior Program Of˜cer 
Jeffrey C. McCullough
Program Associate
Mahendra Shunmoogam
Program Associate
*As of December 2006.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
PREFACE
 xiii
I. 
 INTRODUCTION
 1II. 
 PROCEEDINGS
 39
 Welcome Remarks
 41
  
Charles W. Wessner, National Research Council
 Opening Remarks
 43
  
William J. Spencer, SEMATECH, retired
 Panel I: An Overview of the Global Challenge 
 45
  
Moderator: Bradley Knox, House Committee on Small Business
  
The Innovation Challenge: Drivers of Growth in China 
  
and India
 45
   
Carl J. Dahlman, Georgetown Uni
versity and 
   
The World Bank, retired 
Contents
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x CONTENTS
 Panel II: New National Models 
 68
  
Moderators: Bradley Knox, House Committee on Small Business and
    
Charles W. Wessner, National Research Council
  
The Record and the Challenge in Germany
 68
   
Stefan Kuhlmann, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany
  
The Tekes Experience and New Initiatives 
 77
   
Heikki Kotilainen, Tekes, Finland
  
Converting Research to Innovation
 85
    
Peter J. Nicholson, Of˜ce of the Prime Minister, Canada
 Luncheon Address in the Great Hall
 99
  
John H. Marburger, White House Of˜ce of Science and 
  
Technology Policy
 Panel III: New Models in Japan, Taiwan, and China
 111
  
Moderator: Alice H. Amsden, Massachusetts Institute 
  
of Technology
  
The Taiwanese Model: Cooperation and Growth
 112
    
Hsin-Sen Chu, Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), 
   
Taiwan
  
Japanese Technology Policy: Evolution and Current Initiatives
 121
   
Da
vid K. Kahaner, Asian Technology Information Program
  
New Paradigms for Partnerships: China Grows a 
   
Semiconductor Industry
 129
   
Thomas R. Howell, Dewey Ballantine
  
Innovation Policies in Japan
 137
   
Hideo Shindo, New Energy and Industrial Technology 
    
De
velopment Organization (NEDO), Japan
 Panel IV: Evolution of Technology Partnerships in the 
 United States
 141
  
Moderator: Lewis S. Edelheit, General Electric, retired
  
U.S. Policy for a Key Sector: The Case of Supercomputers
 142
   
Kenneth Flamm, Uni
versity of Texas at Austin
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS
 xi
  
Crossing the Valley of Death: The Role and Impact of the 
   
Advanced Technology Program 
 152
   
Marc G. Stanley, National Institute of Standards and 
    
Technology
  
Sandia National Laboratories: DoE Labs and 
  
Industry Outlook
 159
   
J. Pace VanDe
vender, Sandia National Laboratories
 Panel V: Discussion Roundtable: 
 What Are the Conditions for Success?
 167
  
Moderator: Mark B. Myers, The Wharton School
  
Stefan Kuhlmann, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany
  
Hsin-Sen Chu, Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Taiwan 
  
Peter J. Nicholson, Of˜ce of the Prime Minister, Canada
  
Marc G. Stanley, National Institute of Standards and Technology
  
Lewis S. Edelheit, General Electric, retired
III. 
 APPENDIXES
 A.
 Biographies of Speakers
 179
 B.
 Participants List
 192
 C.
 Bibliography
 200
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Preface
Recognizing that a capacity to innovate and commercialize new high-
 
technology products is increasingly a part of the international competition for 
economic leadership, governments around the world have taken active steps to 
strengthen their national innovation systems. These steps underscore the belief 
that the rising costs and risks associated with new potentially high-payoff tech
-nologies, and the growing global dispersal of technical expertise, require national 
R&D programs to support new and existing high-technology ˜rms within their 
borders. 
We de˜ne innovation as the transformation of an idea into a marketable 
product or service, a new or improved manufacturing or distribution process, or 
even a new method of providing a social service. This transformation involves 
an adaptive network of institutions that encompass a variety of informal and 
formal rules and proceduresŠa national innovation ecosystemŠthat shape how 
ind
ividuals and corporate entities create knowledge and collaborate to bring new 
products and services to market. If we de˜ne competitiveness as the ability to 
gain market share by adding value better than others in the globalized economic 
environment, the ability of these actors to collaborate successfully within a given 
innovation ecosystem gains signi˜cance. Recognizing this, policymakers around 
the world are supporting a variety of initiatives to reinforce their national innova
-tion ecosystems as a way of improving their national competitiveness.
The proliferation of national initiatives to support innovation highlights the 
need for better understanding by U.S. policy makers of the objectives, structure, 
operation, funding levels, and trends characterizing some of the major programs 
around the world. These programs and associated policy measures are of great 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v PREFACE
relevance to the United States both for their potential impact on U.S. competitive
-ness and for the lessons they may hold for U.S. programs.
With these objectives in mind, the National Research Council™s Board on 
Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) has embarked on a study of 
selected foreign innovation programs in comparison with major U.S. programs. 
As such, the premise of this study is not to consider the possibility of a pure 
 laissez
-faire
 approach to fostering innovation, but rather to recognize the impor
-tance of targeted government promotional policies relative to innovation.
1 The 
analysis, carried out under the direction of an ad hoc committee, is to include a 
review of the goals, concept, structure, operation, funding levels, and evaluation 
of foreign programs designed to advance the innovation capacity of national 
economies and enhance their international competitiveness.
2 In his welcoming remarks as the chair of this study, William Spencer stated 
that the purpose of the study™s inaugural conference held on April 15, 2005, ﬁwas 
to try to gather the facts on how innovation and technology transfer were being 
funded in the various economic regions, and in particular on the roles of private 
and public funding.ﬂ In particular, the conference focused on how universities, 
laboratories, and the private sectorŠboth large companies and smallŠcan link 
together in an effective system of national innovation. This volume provides a 
summary of this conference.
THE
 C
ONTEXT
 OF
 THIS
 R
EPORT
Since 1991 the STEP Board has undertaken a program of activities to improve 
policy makers™ understanding of the interconnections among science, technology, 
and economic policy and their importance to the American economy and its inter
-national competitive position. The Board™s interest in comparative innovation 
policies derive directly from its mandate. 
This mandate has previously been re˚ected in STEP™s widely cited volume, 
U.S. Industry in 2000,
 which assesses the determinants of competitive performance 
1Government programs to promote promising technologies are a well-known and longstanding 
practice. See, for example, Vernon W. Ruttan, 
Technology, Growth, and De
velopment: An Induced 
Inno
vation Perspecti
ve. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000.
2Thus, while cognizant of the role of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), and 
more broadly the Department of Defense, in the U.S. innovation system, the focus of the conference 
was on civilian technology programs that operate closer to market than does DARPA. In addition, 
as Alic and Branscomb et al. have described in 
Beyond Spin-off
, the earlier military driven model of 
U.S. innovation is no longer as effective as it once was. DARPA funding of advanced technologies, 
particularly in Information Technology (IT), have had enormous impact, although largely on platform 
technologies that had wide and profound spillovers. Indeed the emergence of China and certainly India 
in the global economy attests to the impact of the Internet, to which DARPA made major contributions. 
See John A. Alic, Lewis M. Branscomb, Harvey Brooks, Ashton B. Carter, and Gerald L. Epstein, 
Beyond Spin-off: Military and Commercial Technologies in a Changing World
, Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1992.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xvin a wide range of manufacturing and service industries, including those relating 
to information technology.
3 The Board also undertook a major study, chaired by 
Gordon Moore of Intel, on how government-industry partnerships can support the 
growth and commercialization of productivity enhancing technologies.
4 Re˚ect
-ing a growing recognition of the importance of the surge in productivity since 
1995, the Board also launched a multifaceted assessment, exploring the sources 
of growth, measurement challenges, and the policy framework required to sustain 
the New Economy.
5 The current study on Comparative Innovation Policies builds on STEP™s 
experience to develop an international comparative analysis focused on U.S. and 
foreign innovation programs. The analysis will include a review of the goals, 
concept, structure, operation, funding levels, and evaluation of foreign programs 
similar to major U.S. programs. Among other initiatives, this study will convene 
senior of˜cials and academic analysts engaged in the operation and evaluation 
of these programs overseas to gain a ˜rst-hand understanding of the goals, chal
-lenges, and accomplishments of these programs.
The project held its opening event, ﬁInnovation Policies for the 21st Century,ﬂ 
on April 15, 2005. This international symposium drew experts from Europe, North 
America, and East Asia to provide overviews of major programs underway around 
the world to support innovation. This conference report summarizes their practi
-cal, ﬁhands-onﬂ insights concerning government and government-related programs 
that have worked. While the conference stimulated a rich and varied discussion, it 
did not (nor could it reasonably hope to) cover all facets of this
 important topic. 
For example, the issue of national treatment of intellectual
 property rights, while 
raised by some speakers, did not emerge as a focus of discussion. (The relationship 
between national innovation policies and global linkages is another issue touched 
on in this conference but not fully ampli˜ed. Similarly, the issue of national 
themes or innovation focus as practiced in different parts of the world was raised 
during the conference but not suf˜ciently articulated.) These issues are important 
and call for further attention. This report re˚ects both the strengths and limitations 
of the conference of April 15, 2005; it captures the scope and diversity of national 
programs and raises issues of direct policy interest for further research. 
3National Research Council, 
U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competiti
ve Performance,
 David C. 
Mowery, ed., Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999.
4This summary of a multivolume study provides the Moore Committee™s analysis of best
 practices 
among key U.S. public private partnerships. See National Research, 
Go
vernment-Industry Partnerships 
for the De
velopment of New Technologies: Summary Report,
 Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2003. For a list of U.S. partnership programs, see Christopher 
Coburn and Dan Berglund
, Partnerships: A Compendium of State and Federal Cooperati
ve Programs,
 Columbus, OH: Battelle Press, 1995.
5National Research Council, 
Enhancing Producti
vity Growth in the Information Age: Measuring 
and Sustaining the New Economy, 
Dale W. Jorgenson and Charles W. Wessner, eds., Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi PREFACE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the participation and the contributions of the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency, the National Institute of Standards and Tech
-nology, the National Science Foundation, and Sandia National Laboratories. 
We are indebted to Ken Jacobson for his preparation of this meeting summary. 
Several members of the STEP staff also deserve recognition for their contributions 
to the preparation of this report, including Sujai Shivakumar, McAlister Clabaugh 
and David Dierksheide for their role in preparing the conference and getting this 
report ready for publication. 
NRC R
EVIEW
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures 
 
approved by the National Academies Report Review Committee. The purpose 
of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 
assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards for quality and objectivity. The 
review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity 
of the process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: 
Vinod Goel, The World Bank; Thomas Howell, Dewey Ballantine LLP; Kent 
Hughes, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars; William Morin, 
 
Applied Materials; Dirk Pilat, Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Develo
pment; and Andrew Toole, Rutgers University.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com
-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report, 
nor did they see the ˜nal draft before its release. Responsibility for the ˜nal con
-tent of this report rests entirely with the committee and the institution.
William J. Spencer 
  
 Charles W. Wessner 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IINTRODUCTION
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3The capacity to innovate and commercialize new goods and services remains 
vital to the future competitiveness of the United States and indeed all participants in 
the global economy. Reinforcing and sustaining this capacity is particularly salient 
as research, development, manufacturing, and the delivery of services, made possible 
by new information and communications technologies, become ever more global. 
The emergence of new participants in the global economy, focused on attracting and 
developing high-technology industries within their national economies, is increas
-ingly signi˜cant. China, for example, combines the advantages of high-skill and 
low-wage knowledge workers with a strong sense of national purpose. Responding 
to these structural changes in the global economy, other advanced economies have 
already initiated major programs, often with substantial funding, that are designed to 
attract, nurture, and support innovation and high-technology industries within their 
national economies. In this new competitive paradigm, the United States cannot 
assume that its continued preeminence in science and technology is assured.
As the National Academies noted in its recent report, 
Rising Abo
ve the 
 
Gathering Storm
, ﬁthis nation must prepare with great urgency to preserve its 
strategic and economic security. Because other nations have, and probably will 
continue to have the competitive advantage of low-wage structure, the United 
States must compete by optimizing its knowledge-based resources, particularly 
in science and technology, and by sustaining the most fertile environment for new 
and revitalized industries and the well-paying jobs they bring.ﬂ
1 1National Academy of Sciences/National Academy of Engineering/Institute of Medicine, 
Rising 
Abo
ve the Gathering Strom: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Future, 
Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Responding to this challenge requires that we recognize that the nature and 
terms of economic competition are shifting as the United States cooperates and 
competes in a global economy.
2 U.S. policy makers need to be aware of the 
wide variety of innovation and competitiveness policies that many nations have 
adopted. These policies are designed to build research capacities and to acquire 
knowledge, and then to transition that knowledge directly to companies and sup
-port their development. The power of such well-˜nanced and integrated national 
programs to shift the terms of international competition is often underestimated. 
In addition, other national programs are more modest in scale, providing essen
-tially market-based incentives to encourage the transition of new technologies to 
the market. Yet, they too can have a signi˜cant impact on the terms of competi
-tion. A comparative perspective is necessary to help us understand what policies 
are succeeding and why, how selected policies might be successfully adapted in 
the U.S. context, and what existing U.S. programs might be enhanced. 
Above all, it is important to understand, as one recent report notes, that the 
pace of competition is accelerating.
3 To better understand how competition is 
evolving, the National Academies™ Board on Science, Technology and Economic 
Policy (STEP) held a symposium on April 15, 2005, which drew together leading 
academics, policy analysts, and senior policy makers from around the globe to 
describe their national innovation programs and policies, outline their objectives, 
and highlight their achievements.
This introductory essay summarizes the key issues raised at this National 
Academies symposium on Innovation Policies for the 21st Century. Contempo
-rary approaches to innovation policy draw explicitly and implicitly on the idea 
of an innovation ecosystem, and Section A introduces this concept and the role 
of intermediating institutions in delivering the fruits of research to the market
-place. Section B highlights new competitive challenges related to the emergence 
of China and India as major new participants in the global economy. Section C 
looks at innovation programs and policies adopted by several developed nations 
to innovate and commercialize knowledge in today™s global marketplace. Sec
-tion D then reviews selected U.S. policies and programs designed to spur the 
commercialization of innovation. Finally, Section E draws together the need for 
a comparative perspective that draws on best practices in the United States and 
overseas.
2Kent Hughes has argued in this regard that the challenges of the 21st century require new strate
-gies that take account of new technologies, new global competitors, as well as new national priorities 
concerning national security and the environment. See Kent Hughes, 
Building the Next American 
Century: The Past and Future of American Economic Competiti
veness, 
Washington, D.C.: Woodrow 
Wilson Center Press, 2005, Chapter 14.
3Ibid.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5UNDERSTANDING
 THE
 I
NNOVATION
 E
COS
YSTEM
How can we better capitalize on national investments in research? More spe
-ci˜cally, how can we deliver the fruits of research through products and processes 
that both enhance welfare and generate wealth? And how do we generate the types 
of output from our universities and research centers that will help our regional 
economies grow and meet the challenges of the future? Beyond merely focusing on 
increasing inputs (such as more funds for basic research) on one hand or setting out
-put targets and mandating results on the other, the innovation ecosystem approach 
examines the complex processes through which innovations emerge through a 
variety of collaborative activities to become commercially valuable products.
4Many of the speakers at the symposium drew on the idea of an innovation 
ecosystem. An 
inno
vation ecosystem
 is described below.
What Is an Innovation Ecosystem?
An innovation ecosystem captures the complex synergies among a variety 
of collective efforts involved in bringing innovation to market.
5 These efforts 
4Drawing from presentations by the STEP Board staff to the PCAST, the concept of an innovation 
ecosystem was adopted by the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology and the 
Council on Competitiveness, among others. For an early articulation of the concept, see Charles W. 
Wessner, ﬁEntrepreneurship and the Innovation Ecosystem,ﬂ in David B. Audretsch, Heike Grimm, 
and Charles W. Wessner
, Local Heroes in the Global Village: Globalization and the New Entrepre
-neurship Policies
, New York: Springer, 2005.
5Consciously drawing on this ecosystems approach, the Council of Competitiveness™ National Inno
-vation Initiative (NII) report and recommendations address the need for new forms of collaboration, 
governance and measurement that enable U.S. workers to succeed in the global economy. Council 
on Competitiveness, 
Inno
vate America: Thri
ving in a World of Challenge and Change
, Washington, 
D.C.: Council on Competitiveness, 2005.
ﬁThis symposium is about competitiveness: Some countries are tying to ˜gure out 
how to get it, others how to keep it, and still others how to get it back. And it™s all 
about learning how to move fast and win in a brutally competitive global economy, 
such as we™ve never seen.ﬂ
a Dr. Lewis Edelheit
Senior Vice President of Corporate Research, General Electric, 
retiredaSee comments by Lewis Edelheit in the proceedings section of this volume.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
include those organized within as well as collaboratively across large and small 
businesses, universities, and research institutes and laboratories, as well as ven
-ture capital ˜rms and ˜nancial markets.
6 Innovation ecosystems themselves can 
vary in size, composition, and in their impact on other ecosystems. The strength 
of the linkages across a given innovation ecosystem can also vary.
Beyond this description, the term ﬁinnovation ecosystemﬂ also captures an 
analytical approach that considers how public policies can improve innovation-led 
growth by strengthening links within the innovation ecosystem. Intermediating 
institutions (such as public-private partnerships) can play a key role in this regard 
by aligning the self-interest of venture capitalists, entrepreneurs and other partici
-pants within a complex innovation ecosystem with desired national objectives.
7 The idea of an innovation ecosystem builds on the concept of a National 
Innovation System (NIS) popularized by Richard Nelson. According to Nelson, 
a NIS is ﬁa set of institutions whose interactions determine the innovative per
-formance . . . of national ˜rms.ﬂ
8 Too often, however, analysts and policy makers 
tend to see the innovation system as a static conceptŠa historical ﬁgiven.ﬂ To 
some extent, this is true. Innovation systems, at least initially, are normally not 
consciously developed for the purpose of enhanced competitiveness; rather they 
evolve from a vast array of loosely related institutions and policies. By contrast, 
the idea of an ecosystem evokes our understanding of complex and dynamic 
interdependencies in the natural world. In biology, ecosystems refer to inter
-dependencies among particular plant and animal communities and the nonliving 
physical environment that supports them.
9 Taken together, the idea of a national 
6In his luncheon address, John Marburger noted that a recent report by the President™s Council of 
Advisors on Science and Technology identi˜ed ˜ve major categories of institutional participants. 
See President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, ﬁSustaining the Nation™s Innovation 
Ecosystem,ﬂ Washington, D.C.: Executive Of˜ce of the President, June 2004. 
7National Research Council
, Go
vernment-Industry Partnerships for the De
velopment of New Tech
-nologies: Summary Report
, Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2003.
8See Richard R. Nelson and Nathan Rosenberg, ﬁTechnical Innovation and National Systems,ﬂ in 
National Inno
vation Systems: A Comparati
ve Analysis
, Richard R. Nelson, ed., Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 1993. Nelson notes that the idea of a ﬁnational innovation systemﬂ captures ﬁa new 
spirit of what might be called ‚techno-nationalism™ . . . combining a strong belief that the technologi
-cal capabilities of national ˜rms are a key source of competitive prowess, with a belief that these 
capabilities are in a sense national, and can be built by national actionﬂ (p. 5). The National Innovation 
System model appeals to policy makers since it provides an interpretive scheme that focuses on the 
nation as a unit of analysis. For a critique of the nation as a unit of analysis, see John de la Mothe 
and Gilles Paquet, ﬁNational Innovation Systems, ‚Real Economies™ and Instituted Processes,ﬂ 
Small 
Business Economics
 11:101Œ111.
9For an early de˜nition of ﬁecosystem,ﬂ as incorporating animal and plant systems in the context of 
other inorganic and living components, see A. G. Tansley, ﬁBritish Ecology During the Past Quarter 
Century: The Plant Community and the Ecosystem,ﬂ 
The Journal of Ecology
 27(2):513Œ530. See also 
Henry Chesbrough, 
Open Inno
vation: The New Imperati
ve for Creating and Pro˜ting From Technol
-ogy
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, April 2003.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 7innovation ﬁecosystemﬂ draws particular attention to the complex processes, 
interactions, and network relations taking place within a real economy.
10
 The idea of an innovation ecosystem thus highlights the multiple institutional 
variables that shape how research ideas can ˜nd their way to the marketplace. 
These include, most generally, rules that protect property (including intellectual 
property) and the regulations and incentives that structure capital, labor, and 
˜nancial and consumer markets. A given innovation ecosystem is also shaped by 
shared social norms and value systemsŠespecially those concerning attitudes 
towards failure, social mobility, and entrepreneurship.
11
 (See Box A.) Innovation 
ecosystems are also conditioned by interest rate and exchange rate structures 
found within modern economic systems. Importantly, innovation ecosystems 
can also be strengthened by developing new institutional mechanisms that create 
new patterns of interaction, market knowledge, and incentives that motivate new 
entrepreneurship.
Fostering Local Innovation Ecosystems
A national innovation ecosystem is made up of a network of local innova
-tion ecosystems. In an economy as large and complex as that of the United 
States, these local innovation ecosystems are themselves often signi˜cant. In his 
luncheon address to symposium participants, John Marburger, the Science Advi
-sor to the President drew on his own experience in creating a university-based 
research park as president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook to 
summarize ˜ve principles that he viewed as necessary for fostering vibrant local 
innovation ecosystems.
1.
 Build competencies with attention to regional strengths. 
This consid
-eration, he noted, is important for a large country like the United States, whose 
 
markets display very strong regional differences but each of whose regions 
 
possess their own strengths and possibilities. Institutions cooperating in regional 
development must hire people whose interests enhance and complement what 
is already found in the environment, which ﬁdoesn™t happen unless somebody 
pays attention to it.ﬂ The idea is to build 
regional
 strength, not just 
institutional
 strength. When several research institutions are located in the same region, they 
10
The emerging NIS literature draws attention to the presence of interactions and ˚ows among 
public and private sector organizations in initiating, modifying, and diffusing new technologies. See 
P. Patel and K. Pavitt, ﬁNational Innovation Systems: Why They are Important and How They Might 
be Compared?ﬂ 
Economic Change and Industrial Inno
vation
, 1994. See also C. Endquist, ed., 
Systems 
of Inno
vation: Technologies, Institutions, and Organizations,
 London, UK: Pinter, 1997.
11
For a survey of attitudes towards entrepreneurship, see EOS Gallup Europe, 
Entrepreneurship, 
Flash Eurobarometer 146, January 2004. The survey shows, among other details, that Europeans have a 
greater fear of entrepreneurial failureŠincluding loss of property and bankruptcyŠthan do Americans. 
Accessed at <
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/enterprise_policy/sur
vey/eurobarometer1
46
_en.pdf
>. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
BOX A
National Attitudes and Support for 
 Innovation and National Industries
 A signi˜cant transnational comparative issue that emerges from the conference 
concerns national attitudes or ideologies affecting innovation policies.
 In the case of innovation programs, for example, Finland™s Dr. Kotilainen char
-acterizes government R&D funding, including payments to private industry, as 
ﬁinvestmentﬂ rather than ﬁexpenditure.ﬂ In contrast, Canada™s Dr. Nicholson reports 
that the public discourse of innovation programs in his country emphasize ﬁrepay
-abilityﬂ of government expenditures. As in the United States, critics in Canada often 
denounce government innovation programs as ﬁcorporate welfare,ﬂ charging that 
they interfere with the market and are too focused on large companies.
a In the case of tax policies, China and Taiwan have created tax free (and even 
negative tax) environments for some high-technology sectors. As Thomas Howell 
points out in his analysis of China™s semiconductor industry, the magnetic effect of 
such policies have been considerable. 
 In the United States, such treatment is often not politically feasible for pro˜table 
high-tech manufacturing, although state governments often make substantial tax 
concessions to attract and retain businesses.
b From a U.S. perspective, the key 
point is that in many countries, the development of high-technology industry, with 
the growth in wages and jobs it entails, has the same broad political consensus 
that U.S. policy reserves for defense expenditure. 
aWhile widespread, these views understate the role the government has often played 
in developing new high-technology industries. See Vernon Ruttan, 
Technology, Growth and 
Development: An Induced Innovation Perspective
, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
Large companies, like small ones, often face a ﬁValley of Deathﬂ for new ideas. For a perspec
-tive from a large company (General Electric) on the challenges new technologies face in large 
companies, see National Research Council, 
The Advanced Technology Program: Assessing 
Outcomes, Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2001, p. 96; 
for a discussion of ﬁpicking winners and losers,ﬂ see p. 51.
bBy comparison, extractive industries such as mineral, oil, gas, and the agricultural 
industry often do bene˜t from favorable tax treatment and multiple direct and indirect subsidies 
in the United States and elsewhere. To some extent these differing measures re˚ect historical 
events and the effort to maintain farm incomes in commodity markets
bene˜t by cooperating in recruitment and group development. Stony Brook, Cold 
Spring Harbor Lab, and Brookhaven National Lab, for example, share informa
-tion on an informal basis about areas of concentration and often collaborate on 
recruitment.
2.
 Identify a research strategy. 
Stony Brook™s conscious decision to make 
biomedical research a priority meant allocating university resources to proposals 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 9and projects that work together to build a foundation for future successesŠeven 
if, ﬁin terms of some sort of absolute measure of quality,ﬂ these were at times not 
the best proposals to come forward. While there were exceptions to this practice, 
a bias was maintained in favor of those ˜elds that could be expected to help fur
-ther the overall strategy. ﬁThat requires leadership,ﬂ Dr. Marburger declared. ﬁIt 
does not happen in a university environment unless someone is willing to push on 
it.ﬂ Faculty development and capital improvements were coordinated to enhance 
biotechnology capabilities. While other areas needed and deserved attention, 
the immediate opportunities for funding lay in the biosciences, which therefore 
received the focus.
3.
 Build a regional environment. 
In the early 1980s, Long Island business 
organizations were not aware of the rapidly growing opportunities in the biotech
-nology industry. They did not appreciate the signi˜cance of an emerging major 
tertiary health-care facility or the value of federal funding as a source of technol
-ogy. The Long Island economy was then dominated by large aerospace contrac
-torsŠprincipally, Grumman CorporationŠthat was to fall by the wayside as the 
cold war came to an end and industry shifted completely. ﬁSo it was important for 
me and my counterparts at the two laboratories to get together, pound the pave
-ment, and talk to peopleŠto take the biotechnology message to business groups, 
chambers of commerce, and state and local government agencies,ﬂ Dr.
 Marburger 
recalled. ﬁThe whole region had to cooperate in making this work, and somebody 
always has to take the ˜rst step to get others together.ﬂ Because Long Island™s 
business community was aware of the dangers of relying on a single industry, 
these efforts by the leading centers of research to work together with business 
were warmly received. 
4.
 Form regional partnerships.
 Institutional rivalries are counte
rproductive; 
cooperation and collaboration are essential for regional-scale development; and 
regional-scale development is important for a stable pattern of growth. The fact 
that companies start up, grow, then frequently either die or move elsewhere is 
not necessarily the end of the world, but it does necessitate continual start-ups. 
Some of the new companies may survive and add permanently to the economy, 
some may have to be replaced with others that are suf˜ciently similar to stabilize 
the workforce. It is because regional partnerships enhance mobility and multiply 
opportunities for workers and for businesses that a critical mass of mutually com
-patible businesses is needed to stabilize the inevitable effect of startups™ moving 
away. ﬁIn Silicon Valley in its heyday, and it is presumably still somewhat like 
this, you had the phenomenon of frequent moves of technical personnel from 
one company to another,ﬂ Dr. Marburger observed. ﬁThere was a great deal of 
 
mobilityŠcompanies came and went, started and failedŠand in general the 
makeup of the workforce was similar, which stabilized employment in the area 
despite the dynamics in the companies.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
5.
 Fund the machinery, which consists of facilities, people, and organiza
-tions.
 None of this happens without people who know that their job is to make 
it happen; neither regional development nor technology transfer can be made to 
work with volunteers. ﬁI travel around the country looking for regions that are 
succeeding,ﬂ Marburger said, ﬁand many are attempting to do it on a voluntary 
basis, but only those where there is some sort of executive center with a paid 
workforce [are having success].ﬂ In other words, whether at a state, county, or 
local government economic development of˜ce, or at an organization that is 
either freestanding or associated with a university or a business group, someone 
has to know that technology transfer is his or her job. Technology-related eco
-nomic development usually entails investing state and local government funds in 
facilities so as to reduce costs for startup tenants, and people are needed to bring 
entrepreneurs together with ˜nancial and technical support. Nearly always, such 
people are more than brokers. They are teachers and counselors, too: for entre
-preneurs, who know the technology but not business practices, and for investors, 
who are ignorant of the ways of engineers and scientists.
Concluding his address, Dr. Marburger acknowledged that while these
 lessons 
may not apply to every situation, the support for university-based research parks, 
and of research parks based around a nucleating asset other than a university, 
is growing, thriving, and becoming an important part of the U.S. innovation 
ecology. 
Complementing Marburger™s perspective on developing successful local 
innovation ecosystems, other participants described policy efforts at the national 
level to develop national innovation potential and competitiveness. As partici
-pants learned at the conference, these efforts are being undertaken by reemerg
-ing powers such as China as well as established U.S. allies and competitors like 
Germany and Japan. We look next to how selected speakers at the symposium 
characterized these challenges.
THE
 R
ISE
 OF
 N
EW
 C
OMPETITORS
In his opening address, Carl Dahlman of Georgetown University noted that, 
while the United States is the world™s preeminent economy, accounting for more 
than a quarter of the world™s gross domestic product today, ﬁother nations are 
catching up fast.ﬂ Several developing countries in Asia are investing heavily in 
education and are building world-class science and technology infrastructures. 
Some nations are also acting decisively to attract and retain important high-
 
technology industries within their borders, as seen in China.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 11
The Challenge from China: National Policy with Purpose
In particular, Dahlman noted that the technology level and the scale of Chi
-nese industry continue to grow at a very high rate, challenging strategic calcula
-tions of competitors around the world.
12
 China™s economy, he observed, grew at 
about 8 to 10 percent per year over the previous two decades.
13
 Its ﬁgiganticﬂ 
internal markets afford it a very important strategic advantage in negotiating 
externally, as evidenced by the fact that foreign investors have been willing ﬁto 
bring in not the second or third rate technology, but the very bestﬂ for application 
to their operations in China. 
China™s competitive advantages, according to Dahlman, include:

A very high savings and investment rate (about 40 percent) compared with 
the rest of the world (about 20-plus percent);

Skill in tapping into global knowledge both through direct foreign invest
-ment and the Chinese Diaspora;

A critical mass in R&D that is increasingly deployed in a very focused 
effort to increase its competitiveness;
14

A large and growing manufacturing base combined with advanced export-
trade logistics;

Continuing strong investments in education and training, endowing China 
with the world™s third-largest scienti˜c and technical work force focusing on 
R&D;

A very large supply of excess labor in the agricultural sector (some 150 
million-200 million people) that continue to keep down labor costs; 

A government with a very strong sense of national purpose, which ﬁhelps 
to coordinate things, although it creates some other kinds of problems.ﬂ
China, noted Carl Dahlman, has demonstrated the ﬁimportance of the nation-
stateﬂ not only in implementing development plans and visions but also in provid
-ing a stable macroeconomic framework. He underlined what he called the ﬁtre
-mendous pragmatismﬂ exhibited by the Chinese government in setting up needed 
12
See Carl Dahlman and Jean-Eric Aubert, 
China and the Knowledge Economy: Seizing the 21st 
Century
, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2001.
13
This trend is expected to continue in the near future. See Reuters, ﬁChina Sees No Quick End to 
Economic Boom,ﬂ February 21, 2006.
14
On February 9, 2006, China™s cabinet listed 16 key technologies to receive more support 
from
 government and private industry. These included computer software, telecommunications, 
nuclear energy and a military-managed space program. To speed progress in these areas, the cabinet 
announced that research and development spending should rise dramatically to reach 2.5 percent of 
gross domestic product by 2010. In 2004, R&D spending was 1.23 percent of GDP, according to a 
Chinese ministry of˜cial from the statistics department. 
The Washington Post
, ﬁChinese to Develop 
Sciences, Technology,ﬂ February 10, 2006, p. A16.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
incentives within the Chinese innovation system: ﬁAlthough it is supposed to be 
a communist system, they have stock incentive plans in the research institutes.ﬂ 
Similarly remarkable, he noted, is that one-third to one-half of the cost of higher 
education is paid by the students through tuition. While the Chinese have been 
focusing on technology and education for the previous two decades, the policies 
currently in development were more coordinated than those preceding them. 
ﬁThey are just really revving this up even more,ﬂ he commented. 
China Grows a Semiconductor Industry
In his presentation, Thomas Howell illustrated how the focus and coordi
-nation of China™s innovation policies has resulted in the rapid development of 
a world-class semiconductor industry. Howell noted that China™s rise in semi
-conductors is all the more signi˜cant when one considers that much of that 
nation™s science infrastructure was destroyed during the decade of the Cultural 
Revolution (1966-1976). The previous command economy model ensured that 
Chinese technology remained 10 to 15 years behind the global state of the art, 
he added.
China introduced market reforms to its command economy in the early 
1980s. However, around the beginning of its tenth Five-Year Plan in 2001 and 
concurrent with joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), China fundamen
-tally reappraised its command economy and ﬁessentially decided to jettison the 
whole system.ﬂ While retaining the economic nationalism that suffused all its ear
-lier Five-Year Plans, China has largely abandoned the command method in favor 
of a system that uses incentives permitted under the WTO, including subsidies, 
tax measures, targeted government procurement, and the like. 
Simultaneously taking place is a thorough decentralization, with most of 
the policies being implemented locally rather than at the national level; a funda
-mental rede˜nition of the industry-government relationship, with an emphasis on 
the independence of enterprises™ decision making; and liberalization of inward 
investment permitting foreign companies to establish fully owned subsidiaries. 
Tariffs were eliminated. And pressure to transfer technology eased, although that 
pressure has not ceased entirely.
These measures added up to a ﬁparadigm shiftﬂ in which Chinese planners 
abandoned their own command system and embraced Taiwan™s state-directed 
market, said Howell. He displayed a table showing that virtually every current 
Chinese policy in the semiconductor ˜eld has a Taiwanese antecedent;
15
 indeed, 
many of them were implemented with the assistance of Taiwanese advisers.
16
 The 
15
Another duplication of Taiwanese policy was to allow companies to exist in a tax-free 
environment.
16
For example, one of the leaders in setting up Hsinchu Park, Irving Ho, acted as a consultant on 
the industrial parks that have been built on the mainland in the previous 5 years.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 13function of China™s central government in policy became ﬁmostly hortatory,ﬂ he 
added, with the actual bene˜ts and promotional measures implemented largely 
by the regional governments and local governments in line with the central 
government™s intentions (see Figure 1).
According to Howell, the Chinese also acted to effectively leverage their 
large internal market.
17
 Notably, China emphasized its market™s pull by applying 
in 2000 a differential value-added tax (VAT) that gave semiconductor devices 
manufactured in domestic fabrication plants a 14 percent cost advantage over 
imports into the Chinese market. Taiwanese companies, seeing that they might be 
shut out of China™s growing market unless they invested there, rushed across the 
Strait. Although the VAT measure was subsequently withdrawn, that investment 
that rushed over remained.
18
 17
By 2004, China™s integrated circuit consumption reached $35 billion or nearly 20 percent 
of the worldwide demand. This was an increase of $10 billion from 2003. The corresponding 
2004 China integrated circuit industry revenues were $6.6 billion, up $2.4 billion from 2003. See 
 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, ﬁChina™s Impact on the Semiconductor Industry: 2005 Update, ﬂ 2006. 
18
Federal Register Notice
, ﬁ2004 WTO Dispute Settlement Proceeding Regarding China: Value-
Added Tax on Integrated Circuits,ﬂ Wednesday, April 21, 2004.
 FIGURE 1
 Microelectronics: China embraces Taiwan™s model.
SOURCE: Presentation by Thomas R. Howell, Dewey Ballantine, ﬁNew Paradigms for 
Partnerships: China Grows a Semiconductor Industry,ﬂ in Panel III of this volume.
YesYesNoGovernment promotion of venture capital sectorNoNoYesGovernment controls enterprise decision makingMajor tax benefitsMajor tax benefitsNoneMajor financial incentives to individuals1 flagship park (Zhangiiang), 2-3 others em
erging (Suzhou, Beijing)1 flagship park (Hsinchu), 2-3others emerging (Tainan, Nankang)Over 100 ﬁhig
h-tech
parksﬂIndustrial parks006-30 %Tariffs on semiconductorsGovernment passive minority equity stakeGovernment passive minority equity stake100% government ownership of semiconductor enterprisesGovernment as direct investor in leading firmsPrivatization of government research institutesFinancial assistance to private companiesPrivatization of government research institutesFinancial assistance to private companiesEmphasis on state-o
wned research institutesPromotion of IC design industryLiberalizedLiberalizedHeavily restrictedPolicy toward foreign direct investmentFoundryFoundryIntegrated device makerBusiness model of leading semiconductor firmsPrivate, government holds passive minority sharePrivate, government holds passive minority shareState-o
wned enterprisePrincipal form of leading semiconductor enterprisesChina 2002Taiwan 2000:  Partnership ModelChina 1994:  Command Economy ModePolicy/Practicefig 1, Introor this could go in Landscape viewInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
As a result of these policies, the Chinese semiconductor industry has 
expanded faster than in any of the world™s major economies. Howell noted that 
it grew at a rate of 40 percent in 2004 and is expected to achieve a compound 
annual growth rate of over 20 percent for the period 2002-2008, compared to 7.3 
percent for the United States and 13.8 percent for Taiwan. According to Howell, 
China™s semiconductor industry was valued in 2005 at about $24 billion
19
 and is 
expected to grow to something on the order of $65 billion by 2007.
20
 As the bulk of wafer-fab investment moves to ChinaŠand Howell projected 
that China will boast some 30 new fabrication plants in the ensuing 3 years com
-pared to 6 in the United StatesŠChina is likely to attract more science and engi
-neering graduates from around the world (many of Chinese descent) and develop 
into the world™s premier locus of semiconductor design and manufacturing. Given 
that semiconductors are the enabling technology of the modern information and 
communication age, this poses a major competitive as well as strategic challenge 
to the United States, he concluded.
Some Challenges Facing China
Although some believe the Chinese juggernaut to be unstoppable, Carl 
Dahlman outlined four key internal challenges to China™s continuing growth 
performance.

China™s Closed Political System.
 Although China is moving more and 
more toward a market economy, it does not have a democratic political system. 
ﬁAt some point there is tension between people™s willingness to live in a more 
constrained system as opposed to a freer one,ﬂ Dahlman observed, saying it is 
not easy to predict how this issue will play out.

Growing Economic Inequality.
 Inequality is growing in China among 
both people and regions, and it is becoming a serious concern.

A Vulnerable Financial System.
 China™s many nonperforming loans 
may not be a problem if the economy continues to grow very fast, ﬁbut if it slows 
down, then the relative size of the non-performing loans is a big problem.ﬂ

Natural Resource Constraints.
 On a per capita basis, China™s natural 
resources were quite thin. China is a highly energy-dependent nation, a problem it 
has been addressing by using its large foreign currency reserves to acquire access 
to raw materials around the world.
19
Throughout this volume all dollars are U.S. unless otherwise indicated.
20
China produced approximately 30 billion integrated circuit (IC) chips in 2005, a year-on-year 
increase of 36.7 percent. The sector recorded a sales volume of 75 billion yuan (US$9.2 billion), up 
37.5 percent over the previous year, Xinhua News Agency, January 28, 2006.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 15India™s Growing Potential
India has seen its annual growth rate rise from the 2 to 3 percent that was 
traditional prior to the past decade through the 5 to 6 percent level to around 
8 percent. It is, in Carl Dahlman™s words, ﬁpoised to do a China,ﬂ held back 
only by its own internal constraints.
21
 Chief among these, he noted, is a surfeit 
of bureaucracy sti˚ing a ˚air for entrepreneurship. Political wrangling over the 
rural-urban divide in this democracy has also stalled the development of much 
needed transportation facilities and other urban infrastructures needed to capital
-ize on current opportunities for growth.
22
 Still, India possesses major advantages, 
including a vibrant entrepreneurial class and a critical mass of capable, highly 
trained scientists and engineers, most notably in the chemical and software 
˜elds.
23
 The Indian Diaspora also maintains linkages back to the home market 
from overseas. These advantages, as well as the presence of a large English-
speaking population, have already made India a major locus for outsourcing of 
business processes as well as an attractive place for multinational corporations 
to conduct R&D.
In fact, because of India™s tremendous cost advantage in human capital, 
foreign ˜rms are increasingly locating large R&D facilities in India.
24
 In addi
-tion, Indian companies such as Wipro were beginning to do contract research in 
India on behalf of multinationals in pharmaceuticals as well as in information 
and communications technology. Dahlman added that India has relatively deep 
˜nancial markets compared to other developing countries, and, under the pressure 
of China™s liberalization, is ˜nally beginning to look not just internally but also 
outside. It is also seeking strategic alliances, aided by success in capitalizing on 
its own diasporas for access to information and markets.
Dahlman noted that one of the main lessons to be drawn from the Indian 
experience is the signi˜cance of the long term: The investments in high-level 
human capital that were now beginning to pay off for India were made as far 
back as Prime Minister Nehru™s time in the 1950s through the mid-1960s. The 
Indian Institutes of Technology and Indian Institutes of Management, world-class 
institutions that accepted only about 2 percent of applicants, have helped build 
21
Carl Dahlman and Anuja Utz, 
India and the Knowledge Economy: Le
veraging Strengths and 
Opportunities
, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2005.
22
The Financial Times
, ﬁIndia Needs Big Infrastructure Drive,ﬂ February 23, 2006.
23
For an analysis of India™s economic potential compared to China, see Yasheng Huang and Tarun 
Khanna, ﬁCan India Overtake China?ﬂ 
Foreign Policy
, JulyŒAugust, 2003. The authors argue that 
India™s development strategy, while initiated later than China™s and thus lagging China, is more sus
-tainable because it is more strongly based on fostering bottom-up entrepreneurial capacity.
24
For example, IBM has recently announced its $6 billion investment in R&D in India. Saritha Rai, 
ﬁIndia Becoming a Crucial Cog in the Machine at I.B.M.ﬂ 
The New York Times
, June 5, 2006. Other 
U.S. companies recently making large investments in Indian R&D capabilities include Microsoft, 
Qualcomm, and SAP.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
a ﬁtruly gigantic poolﬂ of world-class talent.
25
 Galvanizing this skill pool could 
yield major competitive strengths. Harnessing the Indian Diaspora, so that the 
brain drain could be turned into a ﬁbrain gain,ﬂ could also play a major role in 
India™s development.
Key reforms needed for India to sustain its growth momentum, concluded 
Dahlman, include moving away from a very autarchic system to become a 
more integrated part of the global system, which will offer signi˜cant bene˜ts 
from specialization and exchange and further reforming the legal and regulatory 
regimes, which continue to act as a brake on India™s growth.
NEW
 I
NNOVATION
 P
OLIC
Y M
ODELS
  AMONG
 E
STABLISHED
 E
CONOMIES
What are the implications for the United States? For the United States to 
remain competitive in the emerging competitive landscape, perhaps the main 
 
lesson is that it must pay attention. Important policy experiments are now under
-way in the advanced economies of Europe, Canada, and East Asia, and col
-lectively they are shaping the conditions of international competition. These 
countries face challenges in innovation policy similar to those faced by the United 
States and, in some cases, share cultural attributes that might make elements of 
their innovation policies adaptable in the United States. While these models are 
not necessarily replicable in the American context, their descriptions at the con
-ference did demonstrate the sustained, high-level policy attention that innovation 
policy receives abroad. Many of the programs have common objectives, and in 
some cases, common features. To capture the main features of these programs 
and their objectives, experts from Finland, Germany, Canada, Japan and Taiwan 
described their innovation programs and national policy initiatives. These are 
summarized below.
Finland™s Successful Innovation Model
Finland is an example of a small country whose commitment to innovation 
policy and R&D investment has enabled it to become a global leader in high 
technology. Finland™s Heikki Kotilainen
26
 began by identifying key structural 
challenges facing his country, including globalization and the movement of man
-ufacturing to Asia, serious demographic changes, and the need for environmental 
sustainability in an economy that was traditionally reliant on forestry products. 
Finland has faced the need to be innovative to overcome these challenges, he 
noted, adding that responding to the rapidly changing dynamics of innovation in 
itself constituted a challenge. 
25
Kanta Murali, ﬁThe IIT Story: Issues and Concerns.ﬂ 
Frontline
, 20(3), February 1, 2003.
26
Then, the Deputy Director-General of Tekes, the highly regarded Finnish Technology Agency.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 17During the post-cold war economic crisis of 1992, Finland made a collective 
national decision, partly as a result of real investments, investments in educa
-tion, research, and new technologies. Finland has successfully transformed its 
industrial structure from one based predominantly on natural resources to a more 
diversi˜ed portfolio that includes signi˜cant investments in the electronics and 
telecommunications sectors. Today, FinlandŠa country of 5.2 million peopleŠis 
ranked by a variety of measures as second only to the United States in science and 
technology.
27
 According to Heikki Kotilainen, this feat has been made
 possible 
through ﬁconscious and continuousﬂ investment and through the evolution of 
Finnish policy in the realm of science and technology.
Finland has increased its R&D spending as a percentage of GDP from 1.5 
percent in 1985 to nearly 3.5 percent at the beginning of the current decade. While 
private sector spending has shown the most growth over this period, accounting 
for some 70 percent of current total investment, the public sector has been a prime 
mover. A key observation: Only when the government began to increase invest
-ments in R&D and related institutions did private investment follow.
This seriousness of purpose is re˚ected in Finland™s public organizations 
in the R&D domain. The Academy of Finland is charged with funding basic 
research while Tekes (Finland™s technology agency) is charged with funding 
applied research. Public sector R&D actors also include universities; VTT, a 
large multidisciplinary research institute; and a high level government council. 
The latterŠcalled the Science and Technology CouncilŠis a key element of the 
 
Finnish innovation policy system. This Council is chaired by the prime minister 
and includes key ministers; the directors-general of the Academy, Tekes, and 
VTT; as well as representatives of universities, industry, and unions. Together, 
they set out policy recommendations, revised every 3 years, based on reevalua
-tions of Finland™s strategic challenges and opportunities. Based on this outline, 
lending organizations such as Tekes cooperate with its industry and university 
partners to develop operational plans. 
Re˚ecting national perceptions of the need for innovation and its effective
-ness, Tekes itself has enjoyed a steadily rising budget, reaching approximately 
430 million euros in 2005. Research funding in the form of grants and company 
funding in the form of both grants and loans are distributed through a variety 
of instruments. While he acknowledged these instruments themselves are not 
unique to Finland, Kotilainen added that Tekes™ strength lay in its emphasis on 
implementation. This results-oriented approach places importance on coopera
-tive networks between companies and universities so as to integrate technology 
27
Dr. Kotilainen notes that this claim is based on 2003 statistics published by the World Economic 
Forum and the IMD World Competitiveness Center and well as the 2001 UNDP Human Development 
Report. In turn, these statistics take into account measures such as per capita R&D levels, the quality 
of university and KŒ12 education, wireless and broadband penetration, and the presence of institutions 
such as SITRA and Tekes that facilitate cooperation among academia, industry, and government.
 Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
transfer into the process. Industry leadership and cost sharing, he added, are key 
elements to Tekes™ success. A major cultural advantage is the high degree of trust, 
and the resulting low administrative overhead, required to make selections and 
process funding.
The impact of Finland™s innovation institutions has been impressive, gener
-ating a remarkably sharp increase in Finland™s high-technology exportsŠfrom 
below 5 percent in 1988 to over 20 percent in 1998. Re˚ecting the results-
 
oriented perspective, Kotilainen reported that coinciding with Tekes™ investment 
of 409 million euros in 2004, 770 new products reached the market and 190 
manufacturing processes were introduced and that 720 patent applications, 2,500 
publications, and 1,000 academic degrees were fundedŠre˚ecting, perhaps, that 
some Tekes awards may well be closer to the market than others. In addition, he 
noted that the receipt of Tekes funding has often caused project goals to be reset 
higher, and has caused project implementation to be speeded up in many cases. 
Finally, he noted that Tekes plays a major role in helping entrepreneurs surmount 
risk barriers: A study by Finland™s National Audit Of˜ce in 2000 found that 57 
percent of projects would not have been undertaken without the support provided 
by Tekes. 
Germany: New Innovation Policies in a Federal Context
Despite its low growth rates, Germany remains an economic powerhouse, 
and a leading world exporter. At the same time, there are emerging vulnerabilities, 
including a high degree of dependence on its automotive cluster and an antici
-pated shortage in the supply of highly quali˜ed labor. Still, Stefan Kuhlmann of 
the Fraunhofer Institute argued that Germany continues to be highly ﬁinnovation 
oriented.ﬂ Germany™s gross R&D expenditures are about 55 billion euros, or 
around 2.5 percent of GDP, with companies accounting for two-thirds of this 
expenditure. He added that Germany™s 14.9 percent of the world market for R&D 
intensive goods placed it second to the United States and that it is in the European 
Union™s top three in share of manufacturing sales attributed to new products. With 
127 patent applications per inhabitant, Germany is the second highest among 
large countries, and ranked third among all nations in international publications, 
with 9 percent of the total.
Germany™s innovation system is complex, with major decision making at the 
federal, Länder, and regional levels, involving much overlap of programmatic 
responsibilities. At the national level, both the Federal Ministry of Economics and 
Labor (BMWA) and the Federal Ministry of Research and Education (BMBF) 
fund a broad variety of technology and innovation programsŠso broad, observed 
Stephan Kuhlman, as to be dif˜cult to track sometimes. The Länder are respon
-sible for funding and operating the nation™s universities, but are increasingly 
going beyond this traditional role to set up programs designed to spur coopera
-tive R&D, encourage partnering, develop incubators and science and technology 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 19parks, and furnish venture capital and loan guarantees. An additional source of 
R&D initiative and funding are the European Union programs although they are 
not as signi˜cant for Germany as for the smaller nations in Europe. Nonetheless, 
Kuhlmann observed that EU funding has contributed to R&D in the information 
and communications sector in Germany. 
To take two concrete examples, Kuhlman reviewed BMWA™s Pro Inno and 
BMBF™s Inno Regio programs in more detail. Pro Inno has been in operation for 
more than 10 years and has invested 630 million euros between 1999 and 2003 
with the goal of increasing R&D capability and SME (small- and medium-sized 
enterprises) competence. Subsidies under Pro Inno range between 25 and 50 
percent of the cost of R&D personnel ranging across four program linesŠcoop
-eration with ˜rms, cooperation with research organizations, R&D contracts and 
personnel exchangeŠwith multiple applications totaling up to 350,000 euros 
per ˜rm allowed. Since 1999, 4,870 ˜rms and 240 research organizations have 
participated with 4,000 R&D employees per year engaged in Pro Inno projects. 
A 2002 evaluation showed that nearly three-fourths of participating ˜rms would 
not have conducted R&D in the absence of this program. 
The Inno Regio program is designed to strengthen the endogenous innova
-tion potential of weak regions in eastern Germany by setting up sustainable 
innovation networks. The program encompasses not only SMEs, large compa
-nies, and research organizations, but also may other public and private activities 
and initiatives, funding both network management projects and projects aimed 
at developing products and services. The program is run as a three-stage com
-petitionŠa quali˜cation round (444 initiatives selected in 1999), a development 
round 25 out of 444), and a realization round where winners (23 of 25) receive 
multiyear ˜nancial support for their initiatives. An increase in innovation activi
-ties was observed under Inno RegioŠtwo-˜fths of the ˜rms selected received 
patents and almost all introduced new products and, since 2000, 50 new ˜rms 
have been founded. In Kuhlman™s judgment, the program™s main success is the 
creation of innovation networks across eastern Germany that brings together both 
public and private actors.
Finally, Kuhlman noted that Germany is trying to introduce more coordina
-tion and collaboration across agencies responsible for innovation policies. A 
ﬁPartnership for Innovationﬂ has been launched recently with the aim of improv
-ing the framework for innovation through the collaboration of public and private 
actors. A key initiative under this program has been a ﬁHigh-tech Master Planﬂ 
to ease access to venture capital through the launch in early 2005 of a 10 million 
euro fund for start-ups.
Overall, Germany continues to launch new initiatives at the national level, 
but still suffers from limited resources per program, limited access to early stage 
˜nance and, above all, structural obstacles such as labor regulations that compli
-cate the efforts of German entrepreneurs. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Canada: Strengthening Incentives to Attract Research Talent
Canada is a particularly interesting case in that it shares many social values 
with the United States. Many sectors of the Canadian economy are also highly 
integrated with those of the United States. At the same time, Canada has launched 
a wide variety of institutional and funding initiatives to encourage greater innova
-tion, with positive results. Peter Nicholson of the Of˜ce of the Prime Minister 
noted that Canada™s investments in a strong basic research capability are now pay
-ing dividends. Canada, with a population of roughly 32 million, spends around 
19 billion U.S. dollars annually on R&D. Business expense on R&D account 
for about 55 percent of the country™s total, government intramural expenditure 
on R&D is around 12 percent, with the remainder 33 percent of R&D spending 
coming from higher education. Given that Canada™s innovation system is highly 
integrated with that of the United States, Canada™s innovation programs have 
focused on building domestic capacity, largely by creating incentives to retain 
and attract scienti˜c and research talent. These policies, described below, are 
now bearing fruit.
Traditionally, Canada™s economy has been resource based, with much of its 
technical dynamism arising from its unique level of integration with the United 
States. ﬁIf we wanted to have something that was home-grown and that could 
give a degree of independence,ﬂ he explained, ﬁwe [would have] had to build 
our innovation capacity from the ground up.ﬂ The effort to build this founda
-tion has been gained strength thanks to Canada™s successful ˜scal consolidation. 
With the federal budget in surplus since 1997, a ﬁparadigm shiftﬂ in the federal 
government™s support for higher education has taken place. 
At the federal level, there are now four major innovation programs in place: 
(1) the Canada Research Chairs (CRCs), (2) the Canada Foundation for Innova
-tion, (3) Technology Partnerships Canada, and the (4) Industrial Research Assis
-tance Program (IRAP). With the exception of IRAP, these programs all started 
life in the 1990s. 
Research Chairs.
 The objectives of the 
Canada Research Chairs (CRCs)
 were to attract and develop world-class researchers. The CRCs, which are awarded 
to a variety of disciplines (from Agriculture Engineering to the Visual Arts) are 
divided into two tiers.
28
 The ˜rst is reserved for world leaders in their disciplines 
and provides an award of 7 year™s duration, renewable inde˜nitely at $170,000 
per year. These awards serve to sustain and attract world-class researchers to 
Canada. The second tier is to support ﬁexceptional young faculty.ﬂ It is renewable 
once and provides for $85,000 per year for 5 years. The program is successful, 
28
Additional information about the Canada Research Chairs can be accessed at <
http://www.chairs.
gc.ca/web/about/index_e.asp
>. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 21
Nicholson noted, moving from retaining faculty to recruiting well-quali˜ed nomi
-nees from outside Canada. Over 1600 CRCs have been ˜lled to date.
29
Infrastructure.
 The 
Canada Foundation for Inno
vation
 is designed to set 
up and cofund leading-edge research infrastructure in universities and hospitals. 
The foundation has been endowed with a $3.1 billion grant from the federal gov
-ernment and has committed $2.5 billion in funding for 4,000 projects through 
competition based awards. The program™s yearly budget is approximately $250 
million. Like the CRCs, the Foundation™s purpose is to attract and retain world-
class researchers, promote collaboration and cross-disciplinary research, and 
foster strategic research planning, with the objective of transforming research and 
technology development in Canada.
Risk Share.
 The purpose of 
Technology Partnerships Canada
 is to risk-share 
industrial research and precompetitive development across a wide spectrum. 
Designed to address what Nicholson called a ﬁpersistent and frustratingﬂ gap in 
Canadian ˜rms™ development of new technology, it covered from 25 to 30 percent 
of the costs involved in R&D, development of prototypes, and testing. In addition 
to signi˜cant co˜nancing by industry, it featured cost recovery based on results. 
Targeting ˜rms of all sizes, Technology Partnerships Canada focused its activities 
in aerospace and defense, environmental technologies, and enabling technologies 
including biotechnology and materials engineering.
Advising Services. 
The ˜nal technology program that Nicholson introduced 
is the 
Industrial Research Assistance Program
, or IRAP. Funded at US$135 mil
-lion a year, IRAP provides a range of both technical and business oriented advi
-sory services and in some cases ˜nancial support to growth-oriented Canadian 
small and medium-sized enterprises. The program is delivered by an extensive 
integrated network of 260 professionals in 100 communities across the country. 
Working directly with these clients, NRC-IRAP is designed to support innovative 
research and development and commercialization of new products and services. 
The program is competitive, with only 20 to 25 percent of 12,000 applicants, 
receiving fundingŠwith the average award at $30,000 per year with a maximum 
of $425,000 a year. Even so, Nicholson stated, the 3,000 or so funded projects 
have encouraged cooperation among subcontractors, suppliers, consultants, uni
-versities, and the Canadian National Research Council. Together, these programs 
29
The potential number of chairs allocated to each university depends on the proportion of research 
grants it wins in other national competitions, although a bonus is reserved for smaller institutions. 
Under the selection process, universities are expected to nominate candidates for the chairs in line 
with the same institution-wide strategic plan to which applications to Canada Foundation for Innova
-tion (described below) must conform. Winners are selected by a three-person review panel or, in the 
absence of a consensus among the panel members, by a standing adjudication committee.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
represent a comprehensive, yet market-oriented approach to strengthening related 
elements of the Canadian innovation system.
Japan: Restructuring for Resurgence
Despite its dif˜culties in the decade of the 1990s, Japan remains one of 
the world™s premier technology powerhouses. As David Kahaner pointed out, 
Japan faces severe challenges, including a languid economy, an aging popula
-tion, and stiff low-wage competition from China and other East Asian nations. 
Like
 Finland, Japan recognized the importance of institutional reform, leading 
to a variety of reforms aimed at reviving Japan™s technological and commercial 
leadership. A major initiative in this respect, noted by Kahaner and Hideo Shindo 
of Japan™s New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization 
(NEDO), is the S&T Basic Law of 1995, which provides a framework to improve 
economic development, social welfare, and environmental sustainability.
30
 A major outgrowth of this legislation is the founding in 2001 of Japan™s 
Council for Science and Technology Policy (CSTP). The council is chaired by 
the Prime Minister and includes six cabinet ministers, ˜ve academics, and two 
industry representatives. The council is charged with developing a ﬁgrand designﬂ 
for Japanese S&T policy. One of the CSTP™s most important duties is drafting the 
country™s 5-year S&T Basic Plan, which sets guidelines for the comprehensive 
and systematic implementation of Japan™s overall S&T promotion policy. The 
goal of the ˜rst Basic Plan, which went into effect in 1996 and thus predated 
CSTP™s creation, was to double government spending on R&D. The second 
Basic Plan, whose budget was set at $212 billion, is part of an effort to double 
the amount available for competitive funding.
Also in 2001, Japanese ministries were reorganized to streamline R&D fund
-ing and policy support. The administrative reforms include:

The former Education Ministry and Science & Technology Agency were 
merged into the new Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, Sports, and Science 
& Technology (MEXT).

A Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Tele
-communicationsŠwhose name was changed in 2004 to Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications (MIC)Šhas arisen from the combination of the pre
-vious Management & Coordination Agency, Home Affairs Ministry, and
 Ministry of Posts & Telecommunications.

The Ministry of International Trade & Industry (MITI) has been reborn 
as the Ministry of Economy, Trade & Industry (METI).
30
Access Japan™s S&T Basic Law of 1995 at 
<http://www.mext.go.jp/english/kagaku/scienc0
4.htm>.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 23Mr. Shindo also noted that Japan has in addition adopted new industrial 
policies to complement the organizational reforms set out in the Basic Science 
and Technology Plan. He cited the Nakagawa Report, published in 2004, which 
identi˜ed steps needed to establish and accelerate ﬁthe virtuous cycle of demand 
and innovation in order to bring about Japan™s economic recovery and to create 
its future industrial structure.ﬂ To this end, the Nakagawa Report draws together 
what Mr. Shindo described as a ﬁvery comprehensiveﬂ list of concrete policy 
priorities, including the identi˜cation of promising industrial areas (such as 
fuel cells and digital consumer electronics) and the development of policies for 
regional revitalization. The Nakagawa Report also considers cross-cutting policy 
issues such as the development of human resources (including continuing educa
-tion for mature workers), intellectual property rights, research and development, 
standardization, and policies to encourage the development of new businesses 
by small- and medium-sized enterprises. Within a year of publication of the 
 
Nakagawa Report, Mr. Sindo said, NEDO with METI and the National Insti
-tute for Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) has developed a
 Technology 
 
Strategy Map to implement these plans. 
Re˚ecting this increased commitment, Japan™s total 2005 S&T budget rose 
to $36 billion, re˚ecting an increase of 2.6 percent over the previous year. Of that 
about $13 billion was for research expenses including researcher salaries, with 
the remainder ˜nancing infrastructure. Japan™s R&D budget focuses on four key 
areasŠnanotechnology and materials, information technology, life sciences, and 
the environment, with aerospace technology to be added as a ˜fth area. These 
investments are signi˜cant, re˚ecting Japanese goals of creating one thousand 
biotech companies and developing leadership in nanotechnology. Japan spends 
almost as much as the United States on an absolute basis on nanotechnology. 
Other areas of research focus include fuel cells, robotics, and computing research. 
(See Figure 2.)
Universities are a key element in current Japanese policy reforms. Accord
-ing to Kahaner, Japanese policy is seeking a larger role for university research, 
including collaboration among industry, academia, and government. In a major 
step designed to foster more technology transfer from universities, national uni
-versities have been converted over the past few years into independent adminis
-trative agencies. While still funded by the government, these agencies now have 
more autonomy and ˚exibility. For example, universities can now seek private 
funds and cooperate with industry. Laws have been enacted that allow Japanese 
professors to ﬁbecome millionaires if they™re good enough and have good enough 
ideas.ﬂ
31
 Over the past 5 years, many Japanese universities have established tech
-nology transfer of˜ces, with technology management receiving unprecedented 
attention at Japanese universities. Japanese policy is also encouraging the forma
-31
See presentation by David Kahaner in the proceedings section of this volume.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
tion of regional clusters around universities, while efforts are underway to raise 
at least 30 Japanese universities to the highest standards.
Taiwan™s Transformation to a Knowledge-Intensive Economy 
Taiwan™s success re˚ects the power of state-led, market-oriented innovation 
policy. These policies have brought about a series of remarkable changes that has 
seen Taiwan grow from an agrarian economy with per capita GDP of $145 in 
1951 to a modern industrial economy with GDP at $13,529 by 2004.
32
 Notwith
-standing this success, Taiwan now faces new challenges in the global economy. 
Executive Vice President of Taiwan™s Industrial Technology Research Institute 
(IRTI), Hsin-Sen Chu, noted that Taiwan is in the process of transforming itself 
from a technology-intensive economy to a knowledge-intensive economy of the 
future. 
While remaining market-oriented, government policies have, nonetheless, 
been instrumental in shaping Taiwan™s industrial evolution. Policies enhancing 
Taiwan™s industrial development include the founding of the Industrial Technol
-32
For a review of Taiwan™s technology policies, see Alice Amsden, 
Beyond Late De
velopment: 
Taiwan™s Upgrading Policies, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
FIGURE 2
 Japan™s major R&D programs, 2005.
SOURCE: Presentation by David K. Kahaner, Asian Technology Information Program, 
ﬁJapanese Technology Policy: Evolution and Current Initiatives,ﬂ in Panel III of this 
volume.
0.800METINanotechnology: Realization Project of Nanotechnology-B
ased Advanced Devices1.416MHLWNanotechnology: Nano-M
edicine Healthcare1.450MEXTNanotechnology:Fused Emerging Field Based on Nanotechnology and Materials0.400MEXTEnvironment: Development of Environmental Technology Based on Nanotechnology1.400MAFFEnvironment: Research on Agricultural, Forestaland Fishery Bio-cycle  1.017MEXTEnvironment:Promotion of Establishing Earth Observation System0.490MLITInformation and Communication: AutonomicusMovement Assisting Project0.900METIInformation and Communication: Human-assisting Robotics Realization Project2.974MEXTInformation and Communication: R&D for the Establishment of IT Infrastructure 2.000MICInformation and Communication: Next Generation Back-bone 1.580MAFFLife Science: Efficient Breed Improvement Technology Based on Genome Breeding  4.526MHLWLife Science: Research on Aids, Hepatitis, Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Disease1.150MEXTLife Science:Molecular Imaging2005 Budget in US$ Bil.MinistryProgram, bold font means competitive research fundingfig 2introInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 25ogy Research Institute (ITRI) in 1973, the establishment of the Hsinchu Science 
Park in 1980, and the Southern Taiwan Science Park in the 1990s. These initia
-tives have been supported by major investments in basic infrastructure develop
-ment through ten large-scale public construction projects. 
Describing ITRI™s role in Taiwan™s innovation system, Chu noted that ITRI™s 
mission has been to engage in applied research and supply technical services to 
accelerate the industrial development of Taiwan. Speci˜cally, ITRI develops key, 
compatible, forward-looking technologies to meet industrial needs and helps to 
strengthen Taiwan™s industrial competitiveness. ITRI has 13 research units cover
-ing research in information and communications technology, advanced manu
-facturing and systems, biomedical technology, nanotechnology, materials and 
chemicals and energy and the environment. ITRI™s role as a hub linking science 
parks, universities, and companies in Taiwan™s north, central, and southern zones 
helps to link different parts of Taiwan™s innovation ecosystem.
In 2004, ITRI employed 6,540 people, of whom 14 percent held doctorates. 
Of ITRI™s $579 million budget in 2004, 52 percent came from the government, 
of which ITRI devoted about a quarter to the development of high-risk technolo
-gies. Another 40 percent of ITRI™s revenue came from technology transfer to 
industry, with the remainder derived from its intellectual property. Describing 
ITRI™s impact, Hsin-Sen Chu noted that, over 30 years, ITRI has helped guide 
Taiwan™s transformation into the world™s fourth-largest producer of IT hardware. 
In addition, he noted that Taiwanese ˜rms now make up 73 percent of China™s 
IT production.
Keeping in mind the competitive advantages of the mainland, Chu said that 
the Taiwanese policy makers see future opportunities in high-value manufactur
-ing, novel applications and products, and knowledge-based service industries. To 
enhance the potential of Taiwan™s national innovation system in this new era, the 
government is not only pursuing the creation of basic infrastructure and enhanced 
technological competency of Taiwanese ˜rms, it is also promoting the develop
-ment of a business environment that will promote stronger partnerships among 
industry, academic organizations, and industrial ˜rms. An effective transition to 
capture the opportunities of the 21st century requires an adjustment of mindset, 
he added, and he further observed that there was an effort to move from optimiza
-tion to exploration, from ordering work by single discipline to multidisciplinary 
integration, from conducting research in-house to collaboration and partnership, 
and from developing components to developing system solutions.
COMMERCIALI
ZING
 I
NNOVATIVE
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y  IN
 THE
 U
NITED
 S
TATES
In comparison to the preceding 
tour de la table
 of foreign initiatives, what role 
do innovation programs play in the United States? Notwithstanding the frequent 
U.S. rhetoric concerning the primacy of idealized markets, national policies in the 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
United States have long helped to foster American innovationŠoften decisively.
33
 And recent public-private partnerships have been widely credited with reviving 
the U.S. semiconductor industry and the U.S. supercomputer industry.
34
Indeed, such public-private partnerships have long played instrumental roles 
in developing new, game-changing industrial processes, products and services. 
(See Box B.) As Vernon Ruttan has observed, ﬁGovernment has played an impor
-tant role in the technology development and transfer in almost every U.S. industry 
that has become competitive on a global scale.ﬂ
35
A Comeback in Supercomputing
As a recent example of a U.S. public-private partnership, Kenneth Flamm of 
the University of Texas described the role of the superconducting partnership in 
reclaiming U.S. leadership in this strategic technology. Flamm began his narrative 
33
Contributions include the telegraph, the development and commercialization of the radio, aircraft 
engines and airframes, radar, nuclear power, satellite communications, the Global Positioning System, 
and, of course, the Internet. For a discussion of the federal government™s role, see Irwin Lebow, 
Infor
-mation Highways and Byways
, New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1995.
34See National Research Council, 
Securing the Future: Regional and National Programs to Support 
the Semiconductor Industry
, Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2003.
35
Vernon Ruttan, 
Technology, Growth and De
velopment: An Induced Inno
vation Perspecti
ve. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 301.
BOX B
Key Examples of U.S. Public-Private Partnerships
a1798
ŠU.S. grant for production of muskets with interchangeable parts, to Eli 
Whitney, who founds ˜rst machine-tool industry
1842ŠSamuel Morse receives an award to demonstrate feasibility of telegraph
1919ŠRCA is founded on the initiative of U.S. Navy with commercial and military 
rationale 
1969-1990sŠU.S. investment in forerunners of the Internet
PresentŠU.S. investments in genomic/biomedical research
aThis list was presented by Marc Stanley. See the proceedings section of this volume 
for a summary of Mr. Stanley™s presentation. For a more detailed overview of the positive 
federal role, see National Research Council, 
Government-Industry Partnerships for the 
Development of New Technologies: Summary Report
, Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washing
-ton, D.C., 2003, Chapter IV.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 27from the mid-1960s to the late 1970s, when the entire supercomputer industry 
basically resided in two American ˜rms: Control Data and Cray. The Japanese, 
he said, entered the computer market only in the mid-1980s, initially producing 
IBM compatibles. However, a focused innovation policy initiated with the Fifth 
Generation Computer Project and the Super-speed Computer Project, helped 
Japanese producers to rapidly make signi˜cant inroads into the high-performance 
mainframe computer market. 
Recognizing that superiority in information technology systems was essen
-tial to a qualitative advantage in defense systems, the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) launched its Strategic Computing Initiative in the 
1980s.
36
 Although DARPA managers originally focused on custom components 
to build new computer architectures, they gradually switched their emphasis to 
methods of lashing together relatively inexpensive commodity processors into 
massively parallel systems. This effectively shifted the ﬁterms of the battle˜eldﬂ 
rather than meet directly the threat from ﬁvery, very well doneﬂ high-performance 
processors from Japan.
The result has been the renewed ascendancy of the U.S. supercomputer 
industry. The U.S. industry share of the top 500 machines sold has grown steadily 
while the Japanese share has been shrinking. This positive picture differed little, 
Flamm added, if looked at from the point of view of total computing capability. 
Furthe
rmore, U.S. market share has been increasing not only worldwide, but 
in each individual region of the globe in terms of sales as well as computing 
capability.
Citing a ˜nding of a recent National Academies study, Flamm noted that the 
government-industry partnership formed to develop alternative methodologies 
for designing and building supercomputers successfully transformed the nature 
of the supercomputer market over the past 10 years.
37
 The policy implemented 
in the 1990s proved to be a huge success, even though the eventual outcome did 
not match the original plan. In closing, Flamm held up the resurgence of the U.S. 
supercomputing industry as ﬁan example of a government-industry partnership in 
technology development that has yielded unforeseen but impressive results as an 
industrial outcome for the United States.ﬂ 
36
The other response to the Japanese challenge of the 1980s took the form of trade-policy initia
-tives, one of those being an attempt to open up Japan™s market through forcing procurement by its 
government of U.S. supercomputers. In addition, antidumping cases were ˜led in the United States 
in the mid to late 1990s.
37
National Research Council, 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Superconducting
, Susan L. 
Graham, Marc Snir, and Cynthia A. Patterson, eds., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2005. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Early-Stage Funding and the Advanced Technology Program 
Public-private partnerships can also represent a pragmatic institutional 
response to market failures in early-stage ˜nance.
38
 Although U.S. capital mar
-kets are relatively broad and deep, private investors often ˜nd the risk levels 
associated with investments in innovations that are still in their early stages to 
be too high and are therefore (understandably) reluctant to invest in unproven 
innovations. Even when private investors see manageable risk, they may not see 
ways to capture returns from their investment due to technology ﬁleakageﬂ or 
ﬁspilloversﬂ to other ˜rms. 
The Advanced Technology Program (ATP) is designed to address this chal
-lenge. As NIST™s Marc Stanley noted at the symposium, of the roughly $20 
billion in venture capital investments in 2004, only $375 million was available 
for the initial seed rounds. This is because most private equity investors prefer to 
invest in less risky later rounds of investment. These investments also tend to con
-centrate in a limited number of geographical regions.
39
 This gap in investment at 
the seed and early stages is often called the ﬁValley of Death.ﬂ
40
 (See Figure 3.)
The mission of the ATP is to help bridge this valley between the research lab
-oratory and the marketplace. To do so, ATP provides highly competitive awards, 
largely (about 70 percent) to small companies and to joint ventures designed to 
accelerate the development and dissemination of high-risk technologies with 
potential for broad-based economic bene˜ts to the U.S. economy. (See Box C 
for a comparison of the ATP with Finland™s Tekes Program.) ATP funding is not 
a ﬁ˜re and forgetﬂ program. The awards to larger ˜rms must be matched on a 
cost-share basis. They are closely monitored and can only be directed to technical 
research and not product development. 
The program is entirely industry-driven. Companies, whether singly or 
jointly, conceive, propose, and execute all projects, often in collaboration with 
universities and federal laboratories. ATP support for project costs is limited in 
time and amount. Based on a rigorous merit-based competitive evaluation that 
38
National Research Council, 
Go
vernment-Industry Partnerships for the De
velopment of New 
Technologies: Summary Report
, Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2003.
39
As the venture capitalist David Morgenthaler has observed, ﬁIt does seem that early-stage help 
by governments in developing platform technologies and ˜nancing scienti˜c discoveries is directed 
at exactly the areas where institutional venture capitalists cannot and will not go.ﬂ See National 
Research Council, 
The Ad
vanced Technology Program: Assessing Outcomes
, Charles W. Wessner, 
ed., Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2001. 
40In his presentation, Canada™s Peter Nicholson refers to an ﬁorphaned domainﬂ in the spectrum that 
ranges from basic research to commercial markets. In this domain, it is dif˜cult to discern whether 
social returns or private returns on innovation are higher. This ambiguity leads to a lack of adequate 
funding. Similar to the concept of the Valley of Death, this orphaned domain is the focus of Canada™s 
innovation programs. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 29FIGURE 3
 The Valley of Death.
Federall
yfunded
resear
ch
creates
new ideasCapital con
ver
ts
ideas into innov
ation  No Capital
Intro fig 03
Replacement image sho
wing full trees
Innovation & Product Development admits less than 15 percent of applicants, single company awardees can receive 
up to $2 million for R&D activities, joint ventures considerably more.
41
 Stanley noted that ATP™s selection process, monitoring, and follow-up on 
projects have been recognized by the National Academy of Sciences as being 
exceptional, adding that the program has demonstrated both the ability and the 
willingness to identify unsuccessful projects and, if necessary, end them. ﬁYou 
have to terminate companies that are not successfully doing what they say,ﬂ he 
commented. ﬁAnd then you should be able to speak not only of your successes 
but of your failures, because there are lessons to be learned from both.ﬂ Based on 
a sample of 41 of the 736 projects it has funded, ATP analysis has calculated net 
societal bene˜ts of $17 billionŠrepresenting a partial return on the $2.2 billion 
investment by the federal government over the life of the program.
Improving Technology Transfer from the National Laboratories
This policy ambivalence has affected the returns from U.S. laboratories as 
well. While the United States makes signi˜cant investments in its national labo
-41
For an assessment of ATP, see National Research Council, 
The Ad
vanced Technology Program: 
Assessing Outcomes,
, op. cit. The NRC assessment found that ATP ﬁis an effective federal partnership 
programﬂ and that it is meeting its legislative goals in creating broad-based bene˜ts to society, contrib
-uting to important social goals such as improved health diagnostics, and improving the ef˜ciency and 
competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing. The NRC Committee conducting this assessment also offered 
a series of operational recommendations to make the program more effective (p. 87).
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
BOX C
Comparing the U.S. ATP Program with 
 Finland™s Tekes Program
 Several speakers at the conference compared the relative sizes of the United 
States Advanced Technology Program with Finland™s similar Tekes program. ATP™s 
impact at the cutting edge of new technologies is based on a relatively small 
 
annual budget. In 2005, the budget for ATP was $140 million, in the context of 
a $12 trillion economy and a population of 300 million. By comparison, Finland™s 
Kotilainen noted that TekesŠa program that is similar to ATPŠis ˜nanced at an 
annual level of around $550 million, supporting the innovation system of a nation 
of ˜ve
 million. 
 This relatively high level of expenditure re˚ects the strong consensus present in 
Finland regarding the need to support the technological enhancement of existing 
industries and to support the growth of promising new high-tech industries. Tekes 
awards for R&D effectively encourage partnerships between university researchers 
and small and large companies. Like the ATP, Tekes maintains a careful evaluation 
program that has recorded numerous success stories, with its early support for the 
research that contributed to the transformation of Nokia being perhaps the most 
notable example. The scale and scope of Tekes activity underscore the
 Finnish Government™s and society™s commitment to supporting the development and adop
-tion of new technologies, particularly those subject to ˜rst mover advantage in 
order to capture the bene˜ts of these innovations for the national economy. 
 In recent years, U.S. policy makers have been much more ambivalent about the 
appropriate role of government contributions to the development of new technolo
-gies, even as government supported technologies have transformed the economy.
a Support for the Advanced Technology Program has been uneven and subject to the 
vicissitudes of the political process despite a positive assessment by the National 
Academies. It appears slated for elimination perhaps re˚ecting in part longstand
-ing U.S. ambivalence about the appropriate role for government in encouraging 
innovation, as distinct from basic research.
baSee, for example, National Research Council, 
Funding a Revolution: Government 
Support for Computing Research, 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999, pp. 5-14 
and passim.
bComputer World,
 ﬁBush May End Federal Tech Funding ProgramŠProgram for High-
risk IT Projects is at High Risk of Elimination,ﬂ February 12, 2006. The Of˜ce of Management 
and Budget provides this rationale for eliminating ATP: ﬁConsistent with the Administration™s 
emphasis on shifting resources to re˚ect changing needs, the 2006 Budget proposes to 
terminate the Advanced Technology Program. This proposal is consistent with the 2005 Con
-solidated Appropriations Act which did not provide funding for new awards. The Administration 
believes that other NIST programs are more effective and important in supporting the funda
-mental scienti˜c understanding and technological needs of U.S.-based businesses, American 
workers, and the domestic economy.ﬂ Executive Of˜ce of the President, 
Budget of the United 
States Government Fiscal Year 2006, 
accessed at 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget/
fy2006/budget.html>. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 31ratories, the record of successful technology transfer to commercial applications 
has been relatively limited, according to Pace VanDevender of Sandia National 
Laboratories.
42
 This modest outcome comes despite a long series of legislative 
experiments that have repeatedly sought to create the incentives needed to spur 
technology transfer from the national laboratories. (See Box D.)
How well have these technology transfer policies worked? According to Pace 
VanDevender, DoE transfer activities in 2004 included ﬁsome respectable num
-bers.ﬂ (See Figure 4.) At the same time, he acknowledged that a single laboratory 
was responsible for approximately half of the 10,000 technology transfer initia
-tives that took place during that year; on a lab-to-lab basis, therefore, technology 
transfer activity has been ﬁfairly modest.ﬂ (He did not elaborate, however, on the 
reasons why this particular laboratory was relatively successful.)
42
These investments are expected to grow substantially. The Department of Energy™s (DoE) FY2007 
budget requests of $4.1 billion for the DoE Of˜ce of Science is a $505 million (14.1 percent) increase 
over FY2006 funding.
  This budget puts DoE™s Of˜ce of Science on the path to doubling its budget 
by FY2016.
  See Department of Energy Press Release of February 2, 2006, ﬁDepartment Requests 
$4.1 Billion Investment as Part of the American Competitiveness Initiative: Funding to Support Basic 
Scienti˜c Research.ﬂ
BOX D
Spurring Technology Transfer from the National Laboratories
 Pace VanDevender pointed out that the Department of Energy™s (DoE) involve
-ment in commercializing innovation began in 1980 with the 
Stevenson-Wydler Act
, which established technology transfer as a mission for the federal laboratories, with 
a focus on disseminating non-classi˜ed information. This was followed by a series 
of acts that attempted to spur commercialization, beginning with the 
1984 Trade
-mark Clari˜cation Act
, which gave the contractors that operated the laboratories 
licensing and royalty authority for the ˜rst time as an incentive to commercialize 
innovative ideas that were born in the laboratories. The 
1986 Technology Transfer 
Act then extended this responsibility to laboratory employees. Next, the 
National Competitiveness Technology Transfer Act 
of 1989 extended the technology transfer 
mission to the DoE™s weapons laboratories. It also allowed the contractors that ran 
the laboratories to enter into cooperative research and development agreements 
(CRADA) so that they could enter partnerships with industry in cofunding further 
R&D. This was followed by the 
1989 NIST Authorization Act
, which recognized 
intellectual property other than inventions that have been developed by CRADA, 
clarifying a legal uncertainty. Then, in 1995, the 
National Technology Transfer Act
 guaranteed to industry the ability to negotiate for rights to CRADA inventions and 
increased the royalty distribution that were placed on laboratory inventions, thereby 
increasing the motivation to invent.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Also of concern, he noted, was a signi˜cant drop-off in CRADA activity after 
a rapid increase from 1992 to 1996, when federal matching funds were no longer 
available. Similarly, the growth of invention disclosures similarly hit a plateau in 
the late 1990s. Meanwhile the growth of patent applications and patents granted 
remained modest. (See Figure 5).
43
Success at Sandia Science and Technology Park
In contrast to the CRADA, patent applications, and other tech-transfer vehi
-cles whose growth has recently ˚attened, VanDevender noted that science and 
technology parks are emerging as a new thrust for the Department of Energy™s 
technology-transfer efforts. The Sandia National Laboratories Science and Tech
-nology Park by its seventh year drew $167 million in investment (of which $146.6 
million was private) and is still growing.
44
 A campus-style 200-acre installation, 
43
An invention disclosure is a document which provides information about inventor(s), what was 
invented, circumstances leading to the invention, and facts concerning subsequent activities. See for 
example, Stanford University, 
In
ventions, Patents and Licensing: Research Policy Handbook
, Docu
-ment 5.1, July 15, 1999.
44
See National Research Council, 
A Re
view of the Sandia Science and Technology Park Initiati
ve, Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999. The Sandia report and 
consultative process it stimulated helped the Sandia National Laboratory™s decision to establish an 
S&T park and helped to
 shape its structure.
 FIGURE 4
 Technology transfer supplements the primary missions of each lab.
SOURCE: Presentation by J. Pace VanDevender, Sandia National Laboratories, ﬁSandia 
National Laboratories: DoE Labs and Industry Outreach,ﬂ in this volume.
ŁCRADAs FY 2004ŠActive CRADAs610 ŠNew CRADAs157ŁIntellectual PropertyŠInvention Disclosures                      1,617ŠPatent Applications661 ŠIssued Patents520ŁLicensesŠAll Active Licenses4,345ŁNew Licenses616ŠPatent Licenses ŠActive 1,362ŠOther IP Licenses ŠActive 2,983ŠIncome-Bearing Licenses3,236ŁActive WFO/NFE Agreements       1,884ŁActive WFO/Other Fed. Agreements 2,782ŁUser Facilities Agreements/ FY043,252ŁMore than 10,000 technology transfer actions in FY 2004ŁIncorporates activities across DOE complex of 24 national labs/facilitiesŁSupports DOE/NNSA missions by enhancing lab capabilities and commercializing technologiesIntro fig 4Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 33
Sandia Park by the spring of 2005 housed 19 organizations with 1,098 employees 
that occupied almost 500,000 square feet. Sandia and the park tenants enjoy a 
symbiotic relationship. Sandia National Laboratories provides redundant power 
and state-of-the-art connectivity to the park tenants and helps to accelerate city 
approval processes. Tenants in turn paid in $17 million to Sandia while acquiring 
contracts from the laboratory worth $85.6 million as of spring 2005. ﬁThe govern
-ment, Sandia, and industry therefore bene˜t both waysﬂ observed VanDevender. 
Comparing DoE and ITRI Technology Transfer Models
Contrasting Taiwan™s ITRI and DoE™s technology transfer models,
 VanDevender 
said that ITRI was based on a single-purpose mission of technology development 
and commercialization with relationships, while the main mission of the DoE labs 
was ﬁnational security broadly writ.ﬂ For ITRI, therefore, technology transfer was 
a dedicated mission, whereas for DoE it was a supplementary mission, not one 
central to the management™s intent. The DoE labs received about ten times as much 
annual funding as ITRI, or $6 billion versus $600 million. But industrial contribu
-tions accounted for only about $60 million of the DoE labs™ funding, or 1 percent, 
while around $200 million, or one-third, of ITRI™s funding came from industry.
FIGURE 5
 Invention disclosures and patents have plateaued under current policies and 
priorities.
SOURCE: Presentation by J. Pace VanDevender, Sandia National Laboratories, ﬁSandia 
National Laboratories: DoE Labs and Industry Outreach,ﬂ in Panel IV of this volume.
-2004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,000Invention DisclosuresPatent ApplicationsPatents198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004Intro 5NumberYearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
The DoE labs produced around 600 patents per year, half as many as ITRI™s 
1,200; this translated to 0.1 patent per $1 million for DoE against two patents per 
$1 million for ITRI, a yawning gap in the rate at which commercially valuable 
property transferred. But the gap in patents per industry dollar was far narrower, 
and the ˜gure for the DoE labs was higherŠabout 10 patents per $1 million ver
-sus six patents per $1 million for ITRIŠbecause at DoE industry was leveraging 
the huge U.S. investment in national security. But these two rates were called 
ﬁvery comparableﬂ by VanDevender, ﬁgiven the uncertainty in the value of those 
patents, [and] particularly since a whole lot more companies get spun off from 
ITRI than from DoE.ﬂ Both models have their strengths and both were valuable, 
he concluded, suggesting that the comparison raised a question worth considering 
at the next stage of policy making: ﬁwhether [the United States] should reinvigo
-rate a single-system kind of laboratory, perhaps much more like [what] ATP is 
doing with industry.ﬂ
U.S. P
OLICIES
 IN
 C
OMPARATIVE
 P
ERSPECTIVE
There is strong international interest in national measures to attract and grow 
globally competitive, high-technology industries. Perhaps what is most striking is 
the range of mechanisms, the similarity of goals, and the very substantial resources 
devoted to building the infrastructure and technological capabilitiesŠnot for 
national securityŠbut for national competitiveness in the global economy. 
With some exceptions (e.g., small business award programs, such as SBIR 
and ATP), U.S. policy is not focused on the innovation process itself; resources 
are instead concentrated on particular research challenges and national security 
missions. As technologies evolve more rapidly, often in a multidisciplinary fash
-ion, the importance of cross-disciplinary public-private partnerships seems likely 
to grow. This international comparative focus on innovation policy adds value by 
reviewing the range of these programs, underscoring the role institutions play 
in national policies and, implicitly, by reminding Americans of the accelerating 
competition for technological preeminence. 
Despite this policy lacuna, the United States does possess great strengths. 
U.S. economic leadership rests on its large, integrated domestic consumer
 markets; 
deep and ˚exible capital markets (including risk capital); and deep and ˚exible 
labor markets. The United States also enjoys the advantages of an institutional 
frameworkŠcharacterized by strong competition, the rule-of-law, and a willing
-ness and ability to adapt new technologies that facilitate the rapid deployment of 
resources to take advantage of new opportunities.
45
 45
Amar Bhidé, ﬁVenturesome Consumption, Innovation and Globalization.ﬂ Paper presented at the 
Centre on Capitalism & Society and CESifo Venice Summer Institute 2006, ﬁPerspectives on the 
Performance of the Continent™s Economies,ﬂ July 21Œ22, 2006, held at Venice International Univer
-sity, San Servolo, Italy.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 35
U.S. economic leadership is also supported by an entrepreneurial culture 
that encourages risk taking and tolerates failure. This entrepreneurial culture is 
re˚ected in and further reinforced by a supportive legal framework. This includes 
bankruptcy laws that do not excessively punish business failures and tax policies 
that permit successful entrepreneurs to retain signi˜cant portions of the wealth 
they generate. The legal regime is further reinforced by positive societal attitudes 
toward business success. This combination of mutually reinforcing attitudes and 
laws represents a unique competitive advantage for the United States, one that 
sets the U.S. apart. Calling this ﬁa very special characteristic,ﬂ Carl Dalhman 
noted that ﬁmany other countries really are trying to imitateﬂ it, but with debat
-able success. In many other countries, if you take a risk and your business fails, 
the social and economic consequences can be dire and permanent. These positive 
attitudes toward entrepreneurship represent a major U.S. advantage in the risky 
world of new technologies and high-tech start-ups. 
Resting on these foundations are a multiplicity of strong science and tech
-nology institutions, complemented (particularly in the post-war period) by strong 
investment in education. Another advantage, also noted by Dalhman, is that 
the United States is home to more multinational corporations than any other 
country.
As many of the conference speakers made clear, directly or indirectly, the 
environment in which the U.S. economy is competing has become much more 
competitive.
46
 Many countries are now investing heavily in R&D, in education, 
and in science and technology infrastructure, often with a focus on speci˜c tech
-nologies for the market. The U.S. advantage in terms of multinationals, with their 
bene˜ts of expertise, integration, and market power, is also less preeminent. Other 
countries are now hosts to signi˜cant global corporations, not only in traditional 
areas (e.g., Europe) but increasingly in Asian countries such as Korea, Taiwan, 
India, and China. 
46See also NAS/NAE/IOM, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America 
for a Brighter Economic Future
, op. cit.
Box E
Research for Competitive Advantage
ﬁBasic research has become part of the international competition of overall national 
strength.ﬂ
Strategy document of the July Chinese State Council
Quoted by the New China News Agency, February 9, 2006
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
As Sandia™s Pace Vandevender emphasized at the conference, participants 
in the global economy recognize the importance of dedicated institutions. New 
institutions such as ITRI and Tekes have made Taiwan and Finland formidable 
competitors in important markets and laid the foundation for future strength. 
Similarly, U.S. strengths in the availability and diversity of early-stage capital, 
while still unsurpassed, are nonetheless being challenged. Where other countries 
cannot emulate the private risk taking that characterizes early-stage ˜nance in 
the United States, they are taking measures to provide publicly supported capital 
and incentive schemes designed to blend private and public funds as a means of 
reducing risk and encouraging investment.
47
 Even the traditional U.S. strengths of a large, unencumbered domestic mar
-ket, while not yet matched, are no longer as unique. Emerging economic arrange
-mentsŠsuch as the European Union and ASEAN as well as large economies of 
emerging nations like China and IndiaŠhave the potential to counterbalance U.S. 
economies of scale in the long term. At the same time, a strategic approach that 
focuses on the ability of U.S. ˜rms to access other national markets, build coop
-erative relationships, and seek out expertise in a way that bene˜ts both the United 
States as well as its global partners is required for continued U.S. leadership. A 
crucial condition for U.S. competitiveness is the extent to which federal and state 
governments invest in a robust S&T infrastructure and in effective programs to 
ensure supplies of scientists and engineering graduates and to facilitate the transi
-tion of research to the market. 
Common Challenges, Diverse Approaches
The intense competition which characterizes the global economy has placed 
a premium on the capacity to innovate. Innovative companies are able to provide 
attractive new products that meet or create market demand. Companies that 
bene˜t from a supportive national innovation policies are able to compete more 
effectively. They can draw on a steady stream of well-trained graduates, increas
-ingly with practical experience, and they bene˜t from supportive ˜nancing (e.g., 
innovation awards) that enable companies to convert the fruits of research to new 
welfare-enhancing products. 
The common challenge for most participants in the global economy is the 
need to capitalize on their intellectual assets, converting government funded 
research into the innovative technologies and processes that generate improved 
welfare, create international competitiveness, and create wealth for their citizens. 
It is, perhaps, exceptional that countries as diverse as China, India, Taiwan, Japan, 
Germany, France, Finland, Canada, and the United States are all devoting sub
-stantial policy attention to the transition of research into products and processes 
47
See, for example, the presentations by Stephan Kuhlman and Finland™s Heikki Kotilainen in 
Panel II of this volume.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 37
of the future. What is equally remarkable is that, while the challenge is similar, 
the mechanisms and instruments adopted to encourage this transition show very 
considerable variation, albeit with some common features. The basic goal of this 
conference was to bring practitioners and analysts together to discuss the com
-mon goals and the diverse measures taken to achieve them.
The challenges of the twenty-˜rst
 century point to the need to reexamine 
the policies supporting and building interconnections within the U.S. innovation 
ecosystem. As described in the conference proceedings that are summarized in 
the next chapter, the many foreign programs presented at this conference pro
-vide graphic evidence of the scope and scale of national efforts to enhance their 
national prospects in the global economy. The strong cooperative element of the 
conference also merits emphasis. The conference deliberations underscored the 
opportunity and indeed the need to learn best practice from the many national 
experiments underway.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.II
PROCEEDINGS
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41Welcome Remarks
Charles W. Wessner
National Research Council
Dr. Wessner welcomed symposium participants to what he said promised to 
be an intense discussion of the innovation policies of a diverse group of countries 
with a focus on the mechanisms used to help facilitate the innovation process. He 
observed that those in attendance, many of whom were intimately involved in the 
innovation process, knew the day™s topic to be complex and, at times, to be the 
subject of proposals that were ideological or simplistic. Because many countries 
around the world have adopted effective policies, it had also become increasingly 
urgent: Realization was growing in Washington, as it had in many other world 
capitals, that innovation and the mechanisms facilitating it are a key element in 
national growth and national competitiveness.
In fact, the entire world is focused on how to deliver the fruits of research 
through products and processes that both enhance welfare and generate wealth. 
In the STEP Board™s work with other countries it had become clear, Dr.
 Wessner 
said, that the problems and challenges facing India, the People™s Republic of 
China, Canada, Finland, Germany, and the United States were essentially identi
-cal, something without precedent in his own public life.
How do we capitalize our investments in research? How do we generate the 
type of students and the type of output from our universities that will help our 
economies to grow and to meet the challenges of the environment, of health care, 
and of providing a better life for our children? To discuss such issues,
 presenters 
had traveled to Washington from the four corners of the Earth. Dr. Wessner 
extended special thanks to Stefan Kuhlmann of the Fraunhofer Gesellschaft in 
Germany, to Peter Nicholson from the Of˜ce of the Prime Minister of Canada, 
and to Hsin-Sen Chu of ITRI, Taiwan. He also expressed particular appreciation 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
to the IBM representative who was in attendance; to Intel; to Sandia National 
Laboratories; and to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
whose support made the symposium possible.
FOCUS
 ON
 THE
 ﬁN
ATIONAL
 I
NNOVATION
 E
COS
YSTEM
ﬂThe day™s main focus, would be on how to link together universities, labora
-tories, and the private sectorŠboth large companies and smallŠin an effective 
system of national innovation. A term for this, ﬁnational innovation ecosystem,ﬂ 
had emerged from previous work by the STEP Board, which was pleased to see 
that the concept had been picked up by the President™s Council of Advisors on 
Science and Technology (PCAST) and the Council on Competitiveness. Key to 
the formation and effectiveness of a national innovation ecosystem are what Dr. 
Wessner called intermediating institutions: the institutions, and with them the 
mechanisms, that can help bridge the diverse institutions that contribute to an 
innovation ecosystem.
Even as he acknowledged the challenge of creating the necessary linkages, he 
counseled that attention be directed toward incentives. ﬁI am always disheartened 
when I hear someone in France say, ‚We must reform the university system,™ﬂ he 
recounted. ﬁIt always reminds me of the Battle of Verdun: a very long, bloody 
struggle that in the end accomplished little other than the bloodshed.ﬂ While it 
is
 dif˜cult to transform organizations by ˜at, ﬁwe like to think,ﬂ he said, ﬁthat 
it
 is possible with appropriate incentives.ﬂ The pleasure of the day™s endeavor, 
said Dr. Wessner, would be in the opportunity to listen to a number of experts in 
this ˜eld engaging in what were referred to as ﬁinteresting experimentsﬂ by the 
vice-chair of the STEP Board™s Steering Committee for Government-Industry for 
the Development of New Technologies, William Spencer.
Introducing Dr. Spencer, Dr. Wessner recalled the vital role that he had played 
in leading Sematech at a time when, in the opinion of many economists, the U.S. 
semiconductor industry was on the ropes and destined to become a marginal 
player in the world market. But being too busy, as it appeared, to read such prog
-nostications, Dr. Spencer and the industry had ﬁjust kept going,ﬂ with a program 
to cooperatively improve product quality and output. As a result of the Sematech 
consortium, the trade agreement, and much hard work and inventiveness, the U.S. 
semiconductor industry is now ranked ˜rst in the world.
1 Reiterating the impor
-tance of Dr. Spencer™s contribution to the industry™s 
recovery and the industry™s 
impact on U.S. productivity and competitiveness, he asked Dr.
 Spencer to come 
to the podium.
1For a description of the factors contributing to the resurgence of the U.S. semiconductor industry, 
see National Research Council, 
Securing the Future: Regional and National Programs to Support 
the Semiconductor Industry, 
Charles W. Wessner, ed., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2003.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43
Dr. Spencer expressed his appreciation to Dr. Wessner and joined him in 
welcoming the participants to the day™s program and in thanking its sponsors. He 
singled out for thanks both Taffy Kingscott of IBM and Marc Stanley, the head of 
the Advanced Technology Program at NIST, which is housed at the U.S. Depart
-ment of Commerce, and acknowledged the contributions of Intel and
 Sandia. 
He introduced the symposium, as one of a series that will be organized by the 
STEP Board over several years. Dr. Spencer posited that a poll of those
 present 
would show relatively strong agreement that technology plays an important 
role in economic growth irrespective of region. He further suggested that there 
would be fairly uniform agreement that technology is leading to better quality of 
life, although he noted such dissenting voices as that of Bill McKibben, whose 
Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age
 raised questions about germ-cell 
engineering, and of Bill Joy, the former chief scientist at Sun Microsystems, who 
had expressed concern about nanorobotics.
2FUNDING
 I
NNOVATION
: P
RIVATE
 OR
 P
UBLIC
?There would likely be a divergence of opinion, however, if the subject was 
focused on who should fund science and technology. When it came to long-term 
research, most of us would probably agree that government should play a major 
role whether the research is ﬁcuriosity drivenﬂ or ﬁproblem drivenﬂŠthat is, 
2See William McKibben, 
Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age, 
New York: Henry Holt & 
Co., 2003, and William Joy, ﬁWhy the Future Does Not Need Us,ﬂ 
Wired
, 8.04, April 2000.
Opening Remarks
William J. Spencer
SEMATECH, retired
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
whether it dealt with things like string theory or quantum gravity that explain 
the universe, or with such questions as why some individuals have genes that 
are susceptible to disease and others do not. But when it comes to who should 
fund the innovations coming out of this long-term research, said Dr. Spencer, ﬁI 
suspect the opinions would be more divergent.ﬂ The purpose of the day™s sympo
-sium, and of any follow-on meetings for which STEP might obtain the resources, 
was to try to gather facts on how innovation and technology transfer were being 
funded in the various economic regions, and in particular on the roles of private 
and of public funding. 
Pointing out that any future meetings in the series on Comparative Innovation 
Policy would be principally organized by a steering committee, he recognized the 
members of that panel who were in attendanceŠMark Myers, Lonnie Edelheit, 
Alan William Wolff, Alice Amsden, and Kenneth Flamm.
3Dr. Spencer then turned the microphone over to Bradley Knox, a member of 
the staff of the House Committee on Small Business, who chaired the opening 
session.
3See the complete committee list in the front matter of this report.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45
Moderator:
Bradley Knox
House Committee on Small Business 
Speaking on behalf of the House Small Business Committee, Mr. Knox 
expressed excitement that the symposium was taking place and gratitude to the 
committee and Dr. Wessner for bringing to the fore the matters it was to take up. 
He then introduced Carl Dahlman of Georgetown University, saying the
 audience 
was certain to bene˜t from his experience. Dahlman™s previous career at the 
World Bank has spanned a quarter-century.
THE
 I
NNOVATION
 C
HALLENGE
:  DRIVERS
 OF
 G
ROWTH
 IN
 C
HINA
 AND
 I
NDIA
Carl J. Dahlman
Georgetown Uni
versity and The World Bank, retired
Dr. Dahlman said that he would rapidly draw a broad sketch of the world 
based on work that he has engaged in for several years. Following this, he stated 
that he would sketch out the strengths of the United States, the European Union, 
and major nations in Asia, highlighting some of the lessons their various experi
-ences might provide. Next would be a discussion of some key drivers of growth 
and competitiveness, notably education and innovationŠparticularly with respect 
Panel I
 ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
  An Overview of the Global Challenge
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
to China and India. Finally, he noted that he would make some hypothetical 
 
projections intended to stimulate discussion.
Beginning with a chart showing changes in the relative size of different 
world economic groups between 1960 and 2002 (Figure 1
4), Dr. Dahlman pointed 
out that the United States™ share of global GDP fell from 30 percent at the start 
of that period to around 27 percent by its end. Meanwhile, Japan™s share rose, 
particularly during the 1970s and 1980s, drawing the attention of its economic 
competitors. As the 1990s began, however, Japan ﬁgot stuck,ﬂ said Dr. Dahlman, 
while the United States, whose share of worldwide GDP fell below 25 percent by 
1991, began an economic recovery. In the meantime, the share of global GDP of 
the remaining OECD countries had shrunk more than that of the United States. 
Signi˜cantly, he added that the only region of the globe to record a continuous 
increase in its share of world GDP was East Asia (excluding Japan).
Rapid Growth of Chinese, Indian Economies
Dr. Dahlman™s next graph, covering the period 1990-2002, assigned per 
capita GDP to the horizontal axis and average annual growth rate per capita to the 
4Throughout this volume all dollars are U.S. unless otherwise indicated.
FIGURE 1
 Shares of world GDP, 1960-2002.
0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
East 
Asia 
& 
Pacific
OECD 
ex
. 
US 
& 
Japan
Japan
United 
States
Sub
-Saharan 
Af
ri
ca
Latin 
Amer
ica 
& 
Car
ibbean
Europe 
& 
Central 
Asi
aSouth 
Asi
aHigh 
Income:
 Non
-OECD
Percent
Year
fi
g 1High 
income:
 Middle 
East 
& 
Nor
th 
Af
ri
ca
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 47
vertical axis (Figure 2). Individual countries were represented by circles whose 
size corresponded to the size of their national economy measured in terms of 
purchasing-power parity (PPP) rather than in terms of nominal exchange rates 
(the latter, he asserted, may not always be a reliable guide.) While admitting the 
use of PPP is not beyond being questioned, Dr. Dahlman said his purpose was to 
emphasize the speed of China™s growth: Measured in PPP, China™s economy has 
for quite some time been second in size to that of the United States. According to 
his chart, Japan™s economy was third largest and India™s fourth largest, ahead of 
Germany™s in ˜fth place. Not only were China™s and India™s economies ﬁbecom
-ing big in the global sense,ﬂ both were growing very rapidly; India was growing 
at 7 percent to 8 percent per year.
Dr. Dahlman then compared the various economic groups™ shares of global 
GDP between 1990 and 2002 based on current U.S. dollars and on current PPP. 
Based on current dollars, the United States ranks number one among the world™s 
economic groups, followed by the EU. After the EU come East Asia and the 
Paci˜c (EAP), grouping the Asian Paci˜c economies including Japan, and the 
group of the Big Six developing countries: China, India, Brazil, Russia, Indone
-sia, and Mexico. But using purchasing-power parity to measure GDP, the Big Six 
constitute the largest economic group, followed by the East Asia-Paci˜c group, 
the EU
 25, the United States, and, ˜nally, the EU 15.
FIGURE 2
 Fifteen largest economies (GDP 2002). 
SOURCE: The World Bank. 
United States
$10.14t
China
$5.73t
South Korea$0.78t
India $2.69t
Indonesia
$0.66t
Me
xico $0.88t
Brazil $1.31t
Spain $0.85t
United 
Kingdom
$1.51t
Italy $1.48t
Fr
ance$1.55t
Ger
ma
ny
 $2.17t
Canada
$0.90t
Japan $3.26t
Œ3
Œ1
1357905,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
GDP per capita (Inter
national Dollars) 2002
Russia $1.41t
Av
erage RGDP per capita Growth 1990-2002 (Percent)fi
g 2Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
The Foundation of U.S. Preeminence
Dr. Dahlman then listed reasons for the preeminent economic position of 
the United States, which by itself accounted for more than one-quarter of the 
world™s GDP:

very large, integrated domestic markets;

an economic institutional framework facilitating rapid deployment and 
restructuring to take advantage of new opportunities;

strong competition;

a deep and ˚exible capital market (including risk capital);

a deep and ˚exible labor market;

good rule of law;

very strong science and technology institutions; and

very ˚exible managerial organizational structures.
Among additional advantages he cited was a very strong investment in edu
-cation, and particularly in higher education; this he attributed in part to the post-
World War II GI Bill, which has moved the United States ﬁahead of everybody 
else.ﬂ On top of this, the nation boasted strong infrastructures both for research 
and for information and communications; was home to more multinational cor
-porations than any other country; enjoyed superior military strength as the sole 
remaining superpower; and bene˜ted from an entrepreneurial culture. Calling this 
last ﬁa very special characteristic,ﬂ he noted that ﬁmany other countries really are 
trying to imitateﬂ it, but with debatable success. What was ﬁuniqueﬂ about the 
United States, he observed, was that ﬁwhen you take risk [and] you fail honestly, 
that™s even a good thingﬂ in the eyes of Americans, whereas elsewhere if ﬁyou 
take a risk [and] you fail, you™re out.ﬂ
Other Nations ﬁCatching Up Fastﬂ
Turning to the challenges that the United States is facing, he pointed out 
that ﬁother countries are catching up fast.ﬂ They are investing heavily in R&D, 
in education, and in science and technology infrastructure. Large multinationals 
have been multiplying, not only in Europe but in the developing countries of 
AsiaŠKorea, Taiwan, and ChinaŠas well. And one consequence of the growth 
of these very large, global corporations was that ﬁthere™s some confusion on ‚Who 
is us?™ﬂ Dr. Dahlman stated, posing the question: ﬁIs Nokia Finnish, or is it now 
a ‚global corporation™Šand what does that mean?ﬂ
He included among other challenges to United States preeminence:

emerging regional economic arrangements, such as the EU and ASEAN, 
with the potential to counterbalance U.S. economies of scale;
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 49

ongoing competition for global market share in PPP terms, which would 
depend on the United States™ performance relative to that of China and Japan;

ﬁgiganticﬂ ˜scal and trade imbalances, a ﬁvery strong vulnerabilityﬂ of the 
kind that normally raises red ˚ags at the World Bank, which the United States 
could sustain only because it owned the world™s reserve currency; and

some neglect of existing scienti˜c and technical infrastructure in the face 
of vigorous efforts by other nations in this area.
Regional Economic Blocs
European Union
The EU was showing more success in creating large markets for trade in 
goods than for trade in services. Hallmarks of progress include a signi˜cant 
integration to a single currency, increased regional stability, increased policy 
coordination, and the incorporation of ten new countries as of May 1, 2004.
But the signi˜cant challenges rooted in the EU™s low productivity growth and 
low economic growth remained. This challenge was compounded by EU expan
-sion, as the group of countries across which policies needed to be coordinated 
became much larger. Making productivity and growth rise would require far 
more ˚exibility in the EU™s economic institutional regime, in its labor
 markets, 
in its capital markets, and in many rules and regulations at the local level. It 
would also require strengthening those educational ˜elds most closely tied to 
research and innovation; despite having instituted programs with that objective, 
the EU was still lagging the United States in the area. The EU was also facing a 
major structural impediment in the aging of its population, which would prove 
a much larger burden there than in the United States, according to Dr. Dahlman. 
The dependence of a greatly increased number of retirees on a much smaller 
workforce would be ﬁa big dragﬂ on Europe™s economy. Finally, the adjustment 
necessary to accommodate new entrants, including modernization of institutional 
and regulatory structures, would have to continue in the context of competitive 
pressures heightened by East Asia™s joining the United States as the EU™s rival 
for global markets.
East Asia
This region™s market, although quite large to begin with, is the fastest grow
-ing regional market in the world. Intraregional trade, which accounts for half of 
its overall volume, is on the rise. Still, East Asia™s markets are not fully integrated 
and East Asian economies remain very dependent on the U.S. and European 
markets.
At the same time, Dr. Dahlman said, ﬁsome critical massﬂ was reached in 
R&D and human capital in an area covering not just Japan but now China, India, 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Korea, and Taiwan as well. Investment in education, and with it educational 
attainment, has been ﬁtremendous.ﬂ South Korea, for example, has rapidly trans
-formed itself from a very poor country to one whose workforce in 2000 ranked 
third in the world in percentage of college-educated individuals, behind only the 
United States and the Netherlands. In fact, Korea could now be considered to 
have excess capacity in higher education. For its part, China has been ramping up 
its giant system of higher education by 50 percent per year for the past 5 years; 
as of 2004, it had more people in higher education than did the United States in 
absolute numbers. Several East Asian nations have undertaken rapid increases in 
their R&D efforts as well.
Korea and Taiwan in particularŠbut also Japan and, more recently, ChinaŠ
are investing very heavily in the information and communications technology 
(ICT) revolution, ﬁrid[ing] this wave very well and [going] quite far with that.ﬂ 
Meanwhile, East Asia has become home to a growing number of multinationals 
that have the ability, Dr. Dahlman observed, to ﬁgo out and compete with the 
big boys, do strategic alliances, and cross-subsidize from cash cows to the new 
areas.ﬂ
The state™s role in coordinating development strategy has been enlarged, 
since most of these countries see science and technology (S&T) as a key to 
future growth and competitiveness. The central focus for future growth is placed 
on S&T in the eleventh Chinese 5-year planŠreleased in March 2005, a month 
before this symposiumŠbut this has in fact been the reality for a long time. The 
East Asian countries have placed emphasis on being fast followers and estab
-lished a record of being very quick in that role. More recently, however, Korea 
and India have joined Japan in efforts to be on innovation™s cutting edge, making 
signi˜cant investments and pushing back the frontier of knowledge.
Challenges for East Asia
East Asian nations nonetheless face signi˜cant challenges. They remain less 
developed than the United States, possess more rigid institutional structures, and 
continue to be dependent on the U.S. market. ﬁThis is a big risk for the whole 
world,ﬂ Dr. Dahlman warned, ﬁbecause they™re serving as the ATMs for the U.S. 
de˜cits.ﬂ Doing so had allowed them to prevent their currencies from appreci
-ating, thereby keeping them competitive and ensuring their access to the U.S. 
market. China, for example, bene˜ts from the dollar™s devaluation with respect 
to the euro. But he characterized the situation as ﬁa very delicate balance,ﬂ 
asserting that it is impossible to predict what might happen in the event of major 
disruptions. Whenever authorities in these East Asian nations talk about moving 
from U.S. treasury bonds into euros or any other currencies, the markets become 
extremely worried.
In addition, fragmentation is a problem in East Asia, not just within the 
regional market but also within the various nations. China and India, Dr. Dahlman 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 51commented, are marked by a ﬁtremendous lack of integration of the domestic 
markets.ﬂ These countries™ service sectors are less developed than that of the 
United States, as are their educational and innovation systems, although they were 
building those very rapidly. Moreover, with the exception of Japan and Korea, the 
East Asian nations have less developed value chains, marketing, and distribution 
networks. Again, however, China was beginning to build global value chains with 
its own brand names. Finally, allowing for variation from country to country, the 
region™s culture was somewhat less entrepreneurial and risk-taking than that of 
the United States.
5Growth and Competitiveness: Key Drivers
Dr. Dahlman then described the factors that prompt what he called ﬁa 
renewed interest in growthﬂ over the previous decade, running through them 
quickly because he felt the attendees were already familiar with them. The ICT 
revolution had underlined the importance of knowledge as a major competitive 
element in the ﬁNew Economy,ﬂ in which an increase in high-tech products™ 
share of exports is increasingly accompanied by managerial and organizational 
changes. During this transition, macro-level evidence of changes have appeared 
in both the patterns and nature of growth in the industrialized world: There had 
been a reversal of a previous trend toward convergence of per capita income 
among OECD countries, and the growth of the U.S. economy between 1995 and 
2002 was surprisingly strong.
The overriding development, however, is that globalization continues to 
increase. Over the previous 12 years, the share of worldwide imports and exports 
relative to total world outputs, or ﬁworld GDP,ﬂ has increased from 38 percent to 
52 percent, a fact that Dr. Dahlman attributed to a rapid reduction of transporta
-tion and communications costs. Contributing signi˜cantly to this trend are the 
biggest developers and disseminators of applied technology, the multinational or 
transnational corporations: The value-added by their production, in their home 
countries and by their af˜liates abroad combined, accounted for 27 percent of 
global GDP. That ˜gure, in fact, represents ﬁan underestimate of their in˚uence,ﬂ 
he said, ﬁbecause they have very long supply chains and also the forward link
-ages, marketing, distribution, [and] customer service.ﬂ In addition, these corpora
-tions continue to be ﬁvery important in terms of strategy.ﬂ
Changing Nature of Competitiveness
Traditionally, economists have viewed competitiveness as a function of capi
-tal and labor costs, the cost of inputs and infrastructure services, the general busi
-5Ashok Mody and Carl Dahlman, ﬁPerformance and Potential of Information Technology: An 
International Perspective,ﬂ 
World De
velopment
 20(12):1703-1719.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ness environment, and strength in technology and management. This may have 
been appropriate to a more static system, but the current economy, stirred by the 
ICT revolution and by the volume of new knowledge being created and dissemi
-nated, is very dynamic. Competitiveness is coming to be based more and more 
on the ability to keep up with rapid technological and organizational advances, 
which affects the ability to redeploy resources both at the country level and at the 
˜rm or organizational level.
In this context, the importance of ˚exibility in labor and capital markets, and 
of social safety nets that would catch those people falling between the cracks, is 
increasing. The quality and skills of the labor force are assuming greater weight 
as well: As the half-life of knowledge has grown shorter, workers™ level of formal 
education has grown relatively less important, and developing mechanisms for 
lifelong learning are relatively more important. ﬁWe are moving almost to just-
in-time learning,ﬂ observed Dr. Dahlman, stressing the need for systems capable 
of the rapid dissemination of knowledge ﬁaccording to whatever is relevant for 
whatever institution or sector we™re in.ﬂ Another source of advantage resided in 
gigantic systems, such as those used by ﬁthe Wal-Marts,ﬂ that are ﬁvery integrated 
with what the customer wants all the way to supply chains, massive economies 
of scale, and logistics.ﬂ As shown by containerization™s importance in permitting 
globalization through reducing transportation costs, it was not only ﬁhard technol
-ogyﬂ that matters. The ability to make effective use of information technologies 
to lower transaction costs across the board also looms quite large.
The Knowledge Economy™s Four Components
As a result, countries are placing added emphasis on improving their basic 
economic structure and business environment, their education skills, their innova
-tion system, and their information infrastructure. 
Dr. Dahlman then projected a graph (Figure 3) ranking world nations for 
innovation on a population-weighted basis as measured by three variables that, he 
said, had to be ﬁvery crudeﬂ because of the large number of countries included: 
scientists and engineers engaged in R&D per million population, scienti˜c and 
technical publications, and U.S. patents. Each axis presents a rank ordering of 
all the countries in the world, but at a different moment: The horizontal shows 
the countries™ positions in 1995, and the vertical shows their positions in 2002; 
the most advanced countries appear at the top right. Of importance is not only a 
country™s relative position along the diagonal but also whether it is plotted above 
or below the diagonal: In the ˜rst case its position would have improved between 
1995 and 2002, while in the second case it would have deteriorated. The graph 
indicates, therefore, that the United States has been stable, but that Korea, Brazil, 
China, and India have moved signi˜cantly in the direction of improvement.
A second graph (Figure 4), which differs only in that it is based on the 
countries™ absolute size rather than population, provides a radically revised pic
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 53
FIGURE 3
 InnovationŠWeighted by population. 
fig 3Most RecentNigeriaGhanaPakistanAfricaIndonesiaSouth AsiaTunisiaKenyaLatin AmericaIndiaChinaTurkeyBrazilEurope and Central AsiaWorldEast AsiaMiddle East and North AfricaJordanSouth AfricaArgentinaPolandFinlandUSAJapanG7CanadaAustraliaGermanyIrelandDeveloped OceaniaWesternEuropeKoreaRussia1995Mexicoture. On this chart, Russia, Brazil, India, and China are found at the upper right, 
competing with the OECD nations. The reason, according to Dr.
 Dahlman, is that 
when it comes to knowledgeŠwhich, once produced, can be used without being 
consumedŠcritical mass matters.
China™s Rapid Rise in R&D Spending
A third graph (Figure 5), placing R&D expense as share of GDP on the 
horizontal axis and scientists and engineers per one million of population on 
the vertical axis, presents a comparison of national efforts in R&D as of 2002 in 
terms of PPP. It depicts a clearly dominant United States, followed by Japan, with 
Germany, France, the UK, and China bunched behind the two leaders. But China 
has moved very quickly into third place, having increased its R&D investment 
from 0.6 percent of GDP in 2002 to 1.3 percent in 2003, a jump of 50 percent 
or, in PPP, 70 percent. It now boasts not only the world™s third-largest R&D 
expenditure, but also its third-largest scienti˜c and technical engineering work 
force focusing on R&D.
While acknowledging that there was no need to convince his present audience 
of innovation™s growing importance for competitiveness, Dr. Dahlman empha
-sized that ﬁinnovation is not just about R&D [but also] about making effective use 
of experience to improve things,ﬂ which can include imitating, copying, or buying 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 4
 InnovationŠUnweighted by population. 
fig 4Most Recent1995 KenyaNigeria GhanaAfricaTunisiaMiddle East and North AfricaJordanLatin AmericaEurope and Central AsiaSouth AsiaPakistanWorldIndonesiaEast AsiaTurkeyIrelandSouth AfricaWestern EuropePolandDeveloped OceaniaArgentinaMexicoFinlandBrazilIndiaChinaKoreaRussiaGermanyAustraliaCanadaG7USAJapanFIGURE 5
 Global R&D effort in comparative perspective (PPP, 1996).
RussiaJapanUSAustraliaDenmarkCanadaUKNetherlandsKoreaSpainItalyPolandAustriaSwitzerlandFinlandFranceGermanyTurkeyChinaIndiaBrazil01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,00000.511.522.533.5R&D expenditure as percent of GNPfig 5Scientists and Engineers (per million people)Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 55
improvements made by others. It is valuable, he stated, to distinguish between 
innovation as ﬁpushing back the global frontierﬂ and as introducing knowledge, 
in the form of a development or application, into a local context. Being able to 
tap what is available from others was important because the stock of knowledge 
was moving so quickly and because nobody can enjoy an absolute dominance 
over the domain. For countries or sectors not yet at the global frontier, acquisi
-tionŠwhether through trade, foreign investment, or technology transferŠand 
adaptation of existing knowledge are paramount. For those closer to the frontier, 
pushing it back is what counts. Dr. Dahlman offered a chart sketching an innova
-tions strategy appropriate to each of the stages (Figure 6).
Innovation™s Engines, Private and Public
Naming the innovation system™s key actors, Dr. Dahlman noted that multi
-national corporations (MNCs), as ﬁthe main generators and disseminators of 
technology,ﬂ have been its engine in the private sector. He underlined the
 utility 
of determining how MNCs integrate their efforts with national policies, and 
the utility to other companies of learning how to link up with them. In national 
systems the key players are government research laboratories; universities; the 
enterprise sector, comprising not only established companies large and small but 
also startups; government innovation programs; and public-private partnerships. 
FIGURE 6
 Differentiated strategies for innovation.
Dissemination efforts continue to be critical But also need to commercialize knowledge-technology transfer offices-tech parks/spin-offs-cluster developmentRefocus public efforts on commercially relevant researchStrengthen IPRsIncrease private R&D effortsContinue tapping global knowledge-FDI/licensing-Strategic alliances -foreign R&D as antennas to tap knowledgeCountries Nearer Frontier or with Large Critical R&D MassVery important: -extension services-technical information-metrology, standards, testing and quality control-specialized suppliers-growth of most efficient firmsLess relevant or feasible, but still need R&D capability to acquire and adaptCritical to focus limited R&D efforts on most critical needsMost critical:-a lotof knowledge in pubic domain-also large stock to be purchased Therefore need good global scanning and acquisition abilityCatch-UpDisseminatingCreatingAcquiringfig 6Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
These last are gaining in importance because, he said, ﬁwe™re moving to some 
areas even where you have club goods and clusters.ﬂ
6 He urged promoting greater 
interaction among the key players through such mechanisms as joint research 
grants, innovation awards, consortia such as Sematech, and other programs that 
rotate scientists and engineers, and government procurement of˜cials.
There is also a need to generate more effective output from all these players, 
something that depends not on competitive pressure alone but, to a great extent, 
on the incentives extended to institutions and individuals. The ﬁ˜ne tuningﬂ of 
these incentives, he said, ﬁis critical.ﬂ Science and technology policy, depend
-ing on the degree of backing it receives from government, has the potential to 
make this infrastructure work better through coordinating activities, administer
-ing public awards for innovation, and supporting high-tech parks, incubators, and 
technology transfer centers at universities.
 While noting that all nations, faced with these issues, have been trying to 
devise policies, Dr. Dahlman singled out Finland for special commendation: Even 
though it had a ﬁtinyﬂ economy and a population of only ˜ve million, that country 
had put into place a very good system for developing the kinds of institutions 
that facilitate such coordination and linkages. The last need he mentioned was 
for mechanisms of evaluation and monitoring that would provide clear de˜nition 
of goals, stipulate what was to be measured and how, and assess impactŠall 
indispensable to learning how to use resources more ef˜ciently.
Enumerating China™s Economic Strengths
7To begin a discussion of the two top competitors emerging from the develop
-ing world, China and India, Dr. Dahlman observed that the former, by growing 
at about 8 to 10 percent per year for the previous four decades, has established 
the record for the fastest economic growth over the longest period of time for 
any country in the world. Its ﬁgiganticﬂ internal market affords it a very impor
-tant strategic advantage in negotiating externally, as evidenced by the fact that 
foreign interests competing to invest in China had been willing ﬁto bring not the 
second-
 or third-weight technology but the very bestﬂ for application in their 
operations there. Based on personal observations conveyed to him by a friend, he 
reported that a Motorola plant in China had two production lines. The line using 
more traditional technology made goods for export to the United States, while 
6A club good is an impure public good whose bene˜ts are excludable (nonmembers can be denied 
access to the good) but partially non-rival (a club member™s enjoyment of a good only partially dimin
-ishes another™s enjoyment.) James M. Buchanan ˜rst developed the theory of clubs in 1963. Reprinted 
in James M. Buchanan, ﬁAn Economic Theory of Clubs,ﬂ in 
Economics: Between a Predicti
ve Science 
and Moral Philosophy,
 College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1987.
7Carl Dahlman and Jean-Eric Aubert, 
China and the Knowledge Economy: Seizing the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2001.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 57
the line using more modern technology made goods for internal consumption. 
ﬁThat™s what a big market does for you,ﬂ he declared.
He then offered a catalogue of China™s other economic strengths:

It has a very high savings and investment rate, which, at about 40 percent, 
contrasts with 20-plus percent in most of the rest of the world.

It is excellent at tapping into global knowledge through direct foreign 
investment and the Chinese Diaspora, the latter providing China and Taiwan a 
ﬁfantastic global network . . . that is very hard to replicate.ﬂ

It is becoming the world™s manufacturing base.

It has a very large supply of excess labor in the agricultural sector, 
some 150-200 million people, which could continue to provide it a labor-cost 
advantage.

It is nonetheless moving up the technology value chain very rapidly to 
become an exporter of far more than low-cost, labor-intensive goods.

Its ﬁfantasticﬂ export-trade logistics, combined with economies of scale, 
make it ﬁcheaper to ship from most ports in China to the U.S. than from most 
parts of Mexico to the U.S.ﬂ despite the greater distance involved.

It has achieved critical mass in R&D, which it is beginning to deploy in 
a highly focused effort to increase its competitiveness.

It is making very strong investments in education and training.

Its government has a very strong sense of national purpose, something that 
ﬁhelps to coordinate things, although it creates some other kinds of problems.ﬂ
Lessons from China™s Experience
Outlining lessons to be drawn from China™s experience, Dr. Dahlman pointed 
to its demonstration of the ﬁimportance of the nation-stateﬂ not only in develop
-ing long-term plans and visions but also in providing a stable macroeconomic 
framework. He underlined what he called the ﬁtremendous pragmatismﬂ exhibited 
by the Chinese: ﬁAlthough it is supposed to be a communist system, they have 
stock incentive plans in the research institutes.ﬂ Similarly remarkable, he noted, 
was that one-third to one-half of the cost of higher education was paid by the 
students through tuition. While the Chinese have been focusing on technology 
and education for the previous two decades, the policies currently in development 
are more coordinated than those that had preceded them. ﬁThey are just really 
revving this up even more,ﬂ he commented. 
Yet more lessons might be found in China™s conduct of its external rela
-tions. It has turned to ﬁtremendous advantageﬂ the realignment necessitated by 
its integration into the world economy. ﬁJoining WTO was a risky move on their 
part, but it™s given them lots of bene˜ts,ﬂ he said, counting among them not only 
the country™s dominance of world textile markets but also the pressure that had 
come upon its domestic system to improve. China has been very effective at 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
using foreign investment, ˜rst to move up the technology ladder, then to create 
home companies that have shown their strength in everything from competing 
with Cisco to buying IBM™s notebook-computer capability. ﬁAnd,ﬂ he predicted, 
ﬁthat™s just the beginning.ﬂ Strong investment in human capital complemented by 
effective use of the Chinese Diaspora, whether in acquiring technology or gaining 
access to markets, ˜lled out the picture.
India ﬁPoised To Do a Chinaﬂ
8For its part, India has seen its annual growth rate rise from the 2 to 3 percent 
that was traditional prior to the past decade through the 5- to 6-percent level to 
around 8 percent. It was, in Dr. Dahlman™s words, ﬁpoised to do a China,ﬂ held 
back only by its own internal constraints. Chief among these was the surfeit of 
bureaucracy sti˚ing a ˚air for entrepreneurship that is nonetheless very strong, 
as could be seen in the United States, particularly in California, and in linkages 
back to the home market from overseas. But the country has a critical mass of 
capable, highly trained scientists and engineers, most notably in the chemical 
and software ˜elds. In addition to playing a prominent role in the outsourcing of 
business processes, it is becoming very attractive to multinationals as a place to 
conduct R&D.
In fact, because of India™s tremendous cost advantage in human capital, 
more foreign ˜rms have located large R&D facilities there than in China. Com
-panies such as Wipro are increasingly performing contract research in India on 
behalf of multinationalsŠand in pharmaceuticals as well as in ICT, a sign of 
the ﬁtremendous strength being built up there.ﬂ The country has relatively deep 
˜nancial markets compared to other developing countries, and, under the pressure 
of China™s liberalization, is ˜nally beginning to look not just internally but also 
outside. It is also seeking strategic alliances, aided by success in capitalizing on 
its own Diaspora for access to information and markets.
India™s Human Capital Investment Pays Off
One of the main lessons to be drawn from the Indian experience is the 
signi˜cance of the long term: The investments in high-level human capital that 
were now beginning to pay off for India were made as far back as Prime Minister 
 
Nehru™s time in the 1950s through mid1960s. The Indian Institute of Technology 
and Indian Institute of Management, world-class institutions that accepted only 
about 2 percent of applicants, have helped build a truly gigantic skill pool. ﬁIf 
they were to rev this up, they could begin almost to dictate the wages for anything 
you can digitize,ﬂ said Dr. Dahlman, admitting this was an exaggeration calcu
-8Carl Dahlman and Anuja Utz, 
India and the Knowledge Economy: Le
veraging Strengths and 
Opportunities
, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2005.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 59
lated to be ﬁprovocative.ﬂ Still, he observed, ﬁthey have a large mass of people 
that can move and, in economics terms, they have the production-functional 
educational system. They just have to expand it.ﬂ
India could be expected to provide further positive lessons depending on how 
it handles other pivotal aspects of its development:

harnessing its Diaspora, so that the brain drain could be turned into a 
ﬁbrain gainﬂ;

moving away from a very autarchic system to become a more integrated 
part of the global system, which would offer signi˜cant bene˜ts from specializa
-tion and exchange; and

reforming the legal and regulatory regime, which had been what was hold
-ing the country back.
A Provocative Projection: China Atop the Heap
Reminding those in attendance that he had promised to provoke them, 
Dr.
 Dahlman then posted a graph projecting the next decade™s GDP growth in 
purchasing-power parity terms for a dozen major nations (Figure 7). The projec
-tion assumes that the world™s growth rate between 2005 and 2015 will be stable, 
and that the countries considered will grow at the rates at which they grew from 
1991 to 2003. The graph shows China™s economic size surpassing that of the 
United States by 2013 and India™s surpassing Japan™s by 2007. While admitting 
that assuming constant growth rates might be simplistic and that questions could 
be raised about the way purchasing-power parity is adjusted, he maintained that 
PPP offered ﬁa better measure of economic sizeﬂ and declared that China and 
India were ﬁgoing to become very big players.ﬂ According to a National Intel
-ligence Committee projection of the state of the world in 2020, he added, a big 
factor will be rising nationsŠmeaning China and India.
Dr. Dahlman reiterated that the key drivers of the world™s increasing competi
-tiveness are education, training, and innovation now that many of the more tradi
-tional heavy industries had faded in importance. But access to natural resources 
have, in contrast, remained critical; competition for energy resources would be 
ﬁtremendous,ﬂ and new energy technologies would be a big area to focus on. 
Different countries would face many different challenges, and how they respond 
will depend very much on their particular political, economic, historical, and 
sociological makeup: on where their strengths lie, how they can mobilize them, 
how they achieve consensus, and how they can move forward. ﬁThe countries that 
have been growing very fast generally have had good mechanisms for creating 
public-private partnerships, for consensus, and for developing a shared agenda 
and a vision,ﬂ he observed.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Concluding his presentation, Dr. Dahlman noted that China at present appears 
to be ahead on most measures of innovative potential, ﬁbut,ﬂ he cautioned, ﬁIndia 
is waking up.ﬂ
DISCUSSION
ﬁJust-in-Time Learningﬂ: A New Necessity?
According himself the privilege, as moderator, of opening the question 
period, Mr. Knox referred to Dr. Dahlman™s comments on the need for ﬁjust-in-
time learningﬂ in a highly innovative economy and observed that it was a notion 
with which actual university teaching methods clashed. ﬁWhat is going to happen 
in the university space to make this happen?ﬂ he asked.
Warning that his answer to this ﬁgood and tough questionﬂ would again be 
ﬁprovocative,ﬂ Dr. Dahlman noted that universities, in general, were founded 
by the public sector in times of less rapid technological change. Because of the 
current, very rapid technological change, the private sector had had to establish 
many institutions of its own in order to gain access to the skills needed for rapid 
response. Among them had been internal institutions dedicated to training, even 
internal universities.
FIGURE 7
 Real GDP (PPP): 2004-2015 projections using 1991-2003 average growth 
rates. 
0246810
12
14
16
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
Tr
illions of 1995 Inter
national Dollars  India
China
United States
Japan
Ger
man
yUnited 
Kingdom
Fr
ance
Italy
Canada
Me
xico
Russian
 F
ederation
Brazil
fig 7YearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 61The United States has a big advantage over the rest of the worldŠwhere, for 
the most part, the university sector was ﬁtoo isolated from the needs of the pro
-ductive sectorﬂŠin having a very dynamic higher-education sector that responded 
very rapidly to change. But even the United States is seeing tremendous growth 
in online learning, because workers were in constant need of new skills and 
have no time to return to the campus to acquire them. While not everything can 
be taught online, very specialized courses could be offered. Approximately 13 
percent of higher education in the United States is now taking place online, and 
30-40 percent of students are no longer in the age cohorts normally associated 
with the universities; they were older and are obliged to come back to learn new 
skills of all varieties.
The United States nevertheless retains many aspects of its traditional educa
-tion system, which tries to cover many different areas of knowledge. Among core 
skills, teaching how to learn, and learning how to learn are still very important 
in enabling people to go out and pursue ﬁwhatever it is that is most relevant,ﬂ 
Dr. Dahlman said, and such concerns have ﬁradical implications for designing 
education all the way from the primary through the secondary and then to the 
university level.ﬂ 
Consulting ˜rms, he noted, have begun to discover that, rather than hire 
MBAs at high salaries, they can take very bright college graduates and train them 
quite cost-effectively to perform whatever tasks are needed. ﬁThere™s going to 
be more and more competition from these new [education providers], some of 
whom will come from not the traditional university sector but even from publish
-ing or mass media,ﬂ he predicted, saying this trend is not con˜ned to the United 
States but is global. The ability to use computer-based training and other forms 
of information technology will combine with increasing competition to put great 
pressure on educational systems to restructure. Although the United States, thanks 
to its large and exceptionally dynamic market, is very much ahead in this area, 
other countries are catching on.
Potential Showstoppers for China
Dr. Wessner asked Dr. Dahlman to identify the main potential sho
wstoppers 
for the Chinese economy and to re˚ect in particular on the strength of that 
 
country™s banking system and the adequacy over time of its investment capital.
Dr. Dahlman responded by outlining four key internal challenges to the con
-tinuation of what had been very impressive economic performance by China.
Environmental Concerns
On a per capita basis, China™s natural resources are quite thin. The nation is 
very energy-dependent, a problem it has been addressing by using the very large 
foreign currency reserves it has amassed to acquire access to raw materials around 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
the world. For example, China has engaged in forward-purchase programs for oil, 
one of which enabled the Russian government to buy back Yukos. At the same 
time, China has been struggling with tremendous air and water pollution, which 
is nearing a choke point. Despite this, however, China™s leaders have opted for a 
very extensive expansion of the automotive sector without having found a way 
around the familiar environmental problems that this expansion can entail.
Economic Inequality
Inequality is growing in China both among people and regions, and it is 
becoming a serious concern. As television penetration is quite good throughout 
the country, people in the poorer parts of the west, where conditions were hard 
and the bene˜ts of growth few, are able to observe the differences in living stan
-dards, something that can stimulate unrest.
The Financial System
Although the Chinese ˜nancial system appeared at ˜rst blush to be largely 
non-performing, it cannot be assessed by customary standards. In the absence of 
a system of social security, the ˜nancial system makes up much of China™s social 
safety net. China had so many nonperforming loans because former employees of 
downsized state-owned enterprises, growing at a rate of 10 million to 15 million 
people per year, continued to receive some payment after their release. ﬁIf the 
country continues to grow very fast, this non-performing loan problem is not a 
problem,ﬂ stated Dr. Dahlman, ﬁbut if it slows down, then the relative size of the 
non-performing loans is a big problem.ﬂ
As for constraints on capital, the country™s investment rate of 40 percent 
or more indicates that capital is not being used very effectively, something the 
 
Chinese themselves see as a ﬁbig strategic weakness.ﬂ The government is setting 
up numerous venture-capital funds and other means of ˜nancing interesting busi
-ness prospects in an attempt to address this inef˜ciency while also bringing in 
foreign banks to provide more competition, better systems of risk assessment and 
quality control, and better management. The desire to force this improvement is 
part of the reason China had joined WTO.
The Political System
Although China was moving more and more toward a market economy, 
it does not have a democratic political system. ﬁAt some point there is tension 
between people™s willingness to live in a more constrained system as opposed to 
a freer one,ﬂ Dr. Dahlman observed, saying it was not easy to predict how this 
issue would play out. Having seen what had happened in the Soviet Union and 
other countries, the Chinese authorities are extremely worried about the Internet 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 63
and, in particular, the possibility it affords large numbers of unemployed from 
the industrial sector to organize rapidly. ﬁThey™re schizophrenic about it,ﬂ he said. 
ﬁThey see tremendous potential, but they also see the risk. And it™s a very hard 
economy to manage.ﬂ
Admitting his puzzlement at the country™s success in managing its economy, 
and his misplaced skepticism of 20 years before that China™s annual growth rates 
of 8 to 10 percent could be sustained, Dr. Dahlman pointed to the pragmatism 
of its leadership. He also suggested that, with the pie growing very fast and the 
bene˜ts trickling downŠsometimes to a greater, sometimes to a lesser degreeŠa 
national consensus had been achieved. ﬁThe population at large,ﬂ he believed, 
ﬁfeels that they are getting a lot of bene˜ts from the government, which is giving 
economic performance.ﬂ
Possible Impact of RMB Revaluation
Al Johnson of Corning, noting that Dr. Dahlman had shown graphs using 
purchasing-power parity calculations, asked him to comment on the possibil
-ity of revaluation of the RMB (China™s currency) and on whether a revaluation 
might bring forward the moment at which China and the United States reached 
purchasing-power parity.
Disavowing any expertise on what he regarded an important yet dif˜cult and 
complicated issue, Dr. Dahlman stated that the Chinese have been very careful 
concerning the relative strength of their currency because they fear losing control 
of the speed of the country™s economic growth and, as a consequence, experi
-encing in˚ation or a slowdown. While a slowdown, in the Chinese context, could 
mean a drop in the annual growth rate from 10 percent to 5 percent, it would still 
make a big difference in how bene˜ts will be distributed and how their distribu
-tion will be perceived; the possibility was therefore considered very risky.
But because the RMB was pegged to the dollar, it had in fact been depre
-ciating along with the dollar with respect to the yen, pound sterling, and euro. 
So, judging by a trade-weighted basket of currencies, the RMB has realigned 
considerablyŠit simply has not realigned with respect to U.S. currency. The 
United States has a particular problem in its very large trade de˜cit with China, 
with which Japan and Korea each had a trade surplus. Dr. Dahlman described, 
admittedly in ﬁexaggerated terms,ﬂ a relationship he saw as both dif˜cult and 
symbiotic based on the purchase by the Japanese and Chinese of U.S. Treasury 
bonds. While the bonds paid ﬁvirtually nothing,ﬂ they prevent Japan™s and China™s 
currencies from revaluing and keep the two nations very competitive with respect 
to U.S. markets. ﬁThey can get a hit if the U.S. devalues very rapidly because 
they then lose the stock value of these gigantic investments,ﬂ he said, and like 
other
 investors they will ﬁget nervous if the U.S. is subject to some big terrorist 
attack.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
The Most Serious U.S. Flaws
Mark Myers of the Wharton Business School, who is a member of the STEP 
Board, asked what, from the U.S. perspective, Dr. Dahlman considered the three 
most serious ˚aws in the nation™s current position.
Stressing that he was responding spontaneously, Dr. Dahlman rated the fact 
that only a limited number of Americans in higher education are focusing on 
engineering, science, and technology is a ﬁfundamental weaknessﬂ that he said 
would be very hard to correct. With high pay levels in business and the legal 
profession attracting the nation™s best and brightest, it is very important to put 
in place programs that provide ample grants and other assistance to graduate 
students in science and engineering. Enrollment in these disciplines in U.S. uni
-versities has become extremely dependent on Chinese and Indian students, and 
fewer are entering the country in the wake of September 11, ﬁsome because of 
[immigration] restrictions, some because they are now making a different choice.ﬂ 
As a result, he said, a ﬁbig strategic weakness for the whole [U.S.] innovation 
systemﬂ is being exposed.
Dr. Dahlman added that articulation and coordination of policy affecting 
innovation needs to be increased. He acknowledged that the size and dynamism 
of the U.S. economy had given it a ﬁgigantic ˜rst-mover advantage,ﬂ and he 
also praised its ˚exibility and ﬁfantastic institutional structure.ﬂ Nevertheless, he 
called for the building of consensus, saying this does not necessarily have to be 
left to the government, but that there is a signi˜cant role for the private sector in 
self-organizing and establishing consortia where consensus building could take 
place. It was because the world was becoming ﬁmuch tougherﬂ and developments 
were taking place so quickly that this capability is in need of strengthening. Even 
if not persuaded by his scenarios, he said, his listeners could certainly imagine 
East Asia™s becoming ﬁa very big dynamoﬂ spawning many large companies, 
altering the competitive landscape in the process. Europe, ﬁsitting uncomfort
-ably in betweenﬂ East Asia and the United States, also bears watching. ﬁAll this 
implies the need to think very carefully about how to do strategic alliances and 
to have a way that the world is more balanced,ﬂ he said, ﬁso that you can have a 
better chance.ﬂ
Finally, he pointed out that ﬁtremendous opportunitiesﬂ remained for U.S. 
investment in China and India. But this prospect raised the questions ﬁnational 
vs. multinationalﬂ and ﬁWho is us?ﬂ This ﬁvery tricky issue,ﬂ he said, ﬁrequires 
more thought.ﬂ
Training for Innovation: From What Age?
Jim Mallos of Heliakon, returning to the theme of just-in-time learning, 
speculated that the character traits and habits of thought that distinguish inventors 
are already formed by the time a student reaches college, so that college might 
come too late for the training of inventors. ﬁShouldn™t we have more emphasis 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 65
on funding elementary school education when we worry about innovation?ﬂ he 
asked.
While disavowing expertise in the ˜eld of pedagogy, Dr. Dahlman agreed 
that such training should start at a very early age. One signi˜cant advantage the 
United States had is its reputation for ﬁfantasticﬂ higher education, in particular at 
the graduate level, which drew people from all over the world. But fundamental 
rethinking of education is required before critical-thinking skills can be cultivated 
at the very earliest level, since the country is ﬁstuck with an obsolete structure.ﬂ 
This is a gigantic task, and one that calls not only for continued research but also 
for ﬁsome real actionﬂ in the form of experimentation on what works in which 
setting, both within the United States and in other countries. 
Remarkably, he observed, some countries have spent heavily on education 
yet done very poorly in the OECD™s Program for International Student Assess
-ment (PISA), an evaluation of learning skills among 15-year-olds. Finland, in 
contrast, has achieved very high scores on these tests with the lowest variance in 
performanceŠyet had spent far less than the average country. ﬁHow do they do 
it?ﬂ Dr. Dahlman asked. ﬁI don™t know. We should ˜nd out. Maybe we can learn.ﬂ 
While PISA might be an imperfect measure of the capacity for invention or inno
-vation, its results offered an illustration that it is not only the amount of money 
spent that counted, but the internal organization of an educational system that is 
important, including the risk and reward structure, and the incentives to be more 
creative. In fact, a premium needs to be placed on these features, he added.
Integrating Tacit Knowledge, Formal Research
Ken Jarboe of the Athena Alliance commented that Dr. Dahlman™s coinage of 
ﬁjust-in-time learningﬂ might have broken new ground, since the term described 
current reality far more accurately than the commonly used ﬁlifelong learning,ﬂ 
which was saddled with other connotations. As Dr. Jarboe understood the new 
concept, it is rooted in the fact that innovation is based not only on formal knowl
-edge but also on tacit knowledge: on learning by doing, learning through experi
-ence. He asked what implications adopting the model of just-in-time learning will 
have for the industry-university-government research endeavor. Would it imply 
ﬁsome sort of just-in-time knowledge productionﬂ? And how could learning by 
doing or learning through experience be integrated into formal research?
Dr. Dahlman began his response with a clari˜cation: He had not meant 
that very good core grounding in fundamentals could be dispensed with. Yet, he 
noted that many who studied the hard sciences end up working at administrative 
tasks where they apply very little of the deep knowledge they had acquired. That 
implied that a better system for producing scientists and engineers is needed, 
one that delivers the knowledge appropriate to the needs of the future work envi
-ronment in less time. When it came to basic research, a great deal of very deep 
knowledge is obviously required to push back the frontier; the problem is that 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ﬁtoo much of a narrow disciplinary approachﬂ still reigns at a time when many 
different disciplines are ˚owing together. Therefore, mechanisms are needed that 
can foster and capitalize on interaction among disciplines that sometimes have no 
communication with one another, and that can then support work in those ˜elds 
based on the possibilities and opportunities that might be found. Pilot projects 
are very important because of the quick response time they afforded, as are simu
-lations. Advances in ICT enables just-in-time learning to take place in greater 
quantity and on a global scale; part of globalization is that it has become possible 
to have engineers or scientists working on a problem around the clock.
Cultural Barriers to Innovation
Jongwon Park of SRI International, saying he had recently seen data col
-lected at the behest of the National Science Foundation on the science and 
technology systems of 10 Asian nations, expressed the wish to be ﬁprovocativeﬂ 
by talking not about the successes of Asian countries but about problems and 
challenges they were facing. In Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and Singapore, members 
of younger generations have for some time been turning away from science and 
engineering studies at post-secondary levels, something he called a ﬁtremendous 
problem.ﬂ Also, cultural barriers existing in these countriesŠthe ﬁConfucian, 
more traditional way of thinkingﬂ among themŠstood in the way of spawning 
creativity. He asked for Dr. Dahlman™s reaction.
Getting people interested in the science and technology area, where money is 
less easily made than in other ˜elds, is a global problem, Dr. Dahlman concurred. 
While it would demand a great deal of effort, he suggested that all countries 
could bene˜t from creating ˜nancial incentives, perhaps targeted at the cost 
of education, along with such ﬁmoral rewardsﬂ as prizes, awards, and public 
prominence. Responding to the questioner™s observations on the in˚uence of 
Confucian thought, he attributed to cultural factors the fact that very few of the 
world™s top-ranked universities are located in Asia. ﬁIt is something the Asian 
countries are going to have to face,ﬂ he stated; in this case, new approaches have 
to be developed for application not only at the higher educational levels but far 
earlier as well. In effect, these problems are generic, and the present discussion 
is directed at conditions in the United States only because the United States was 
on the leading edge.
Improving Performance Evaluation
Cerise Elliott of the National Institutes of Health, noting that Dr. Dahlman 
had posited a need for the United States to facilitate effective communication in 
its information structure, asked for his suggestions for improving the evaluation 
and measurement of performance.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL I: AN OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL CHALLENGE
 67
Dr. Dahlman replied that the United States has a very dynamic peer review 
system that works much
 better than those in other countries because of the United 
States™ large size. It is very dif˜cult to replicate this system in developing coun
-tries with very small pools of experts, where the system is subject to all kinds of 
biases. ﬁWhen you™re doing research, by de˜nition you don™t know for sure where 
you™re going to end up,ﬂ he remarked, so it is very important ﬁto set up appropri
-ate ways of identifying what you™re targeting and how you know if you™re making 
progress,ﬂ as well as what the impact of the effort might be. He was reluctant, 
however, to do more than acknowledge how dif˜cult the problem was.
Should Leadership Be a National Priority?
Shiela Ronis of the University Group, which was currently working under 
contract with the House Small Business Committee, asked Dr. Dahlman whether 
remaining the leader in science and technology should be a national priority for 
the United States, and whether it was important to remaining a superpower.
ﬁI think it™s hard to be a leader in everything: There are too many ˜elds, and 
it™s too complex,ﬂ Dr. Dahlman replied, while protesting that the question went 
beyond his ˜eld of competence. In his opinion, the United States should focus on 
how to remain the leader in selected areas, and these should be not only familiar 
areas but also areas that, although perhaps less familiar, had potential for the 
future. The linkages seen among information technology, nanotechnology, and 
bioengineering seemed to be the beginning of a new wave, one in which many 
developing countries were beginning to invest quite heavily and in a very sys
-tematic way. Consideration should be given to supporting, in addition to space 
and military technologies, some fundamental technologies that could have big 
spillover effects.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
Moderators:
Bradley Knox
House Committee on Small Business
and
Charles W. Wessner
National Research Council
Brie˚y introducing the speakers for the day™s second panel, Stefan
 Kuhlmann, 
Heikki Kotilainen, and Peter Nicholson, Mr. Knox thanked all three for traveling 
considerable distances and said those in attendance were anticipating their contri
-butions with interest and excitement. He called on Dr. Kuhlman to present ˜rst.
THE
 R
ECORD
 AND
 THE
 C
HALLENGE
 IN
 G
ERMAN
YStefan Kuhlmann
Fraunhofer ISI, Germany
Dr. Kuhlmann expressed gratitude at being offered a chance to participate 
in what he characterized as an interesting and challenging event being held in an 
environment that was impressive both institutionally and architecturally. He said 
that he had been asked to speak about the status of research in Germany and the 
country™s research innovation system, whose development is increasingly becom
-ing part of a European research system.
Panel II
 ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
  New National Models
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 69
Dr. Kuhlmann then outlined a presentation that was structured in four parts. 
Part one laid out the strengths and weaknesses of the German innovation system. 
Part two brie˚y introduced the governance structure of innovative research in 
Germany and the related institutional landscape. Part three delved into innova
-tion policy and programs, at both the level of the German federal government 
and the level of the Länder, which in the German context was the equivalent of 
the U.S. state level. Part four considered a number of current developments and 
challenges for the future.
Strengths of Germany™s Innovation System
Germany™s strength is that it has been and continues to be highly ﬁinnovation 
oriented.ﬂ Its gross R&D expenditures have been running at just under 55 billion 
euros, or around 2.5 percent of GDP. Quite strong in the 1980s, the country™s 
spending on R&D had fallen during the early 1990s in conjunction with reuni˜
-cation but has been increasing in recent years. Companies account for 66 percent 
of R&D expenditure, a considerable share in Dr. Kuhlmann™s view, and Germany 
leads the European Union (EU) in the percentage of small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) innovating in-house. Germany™s 14.9 percent of the world 
market for R&D-intensive goods places it second behind the United States, and it 
is in the EU™s top three in share of manufacturing sales attributed to new products. 
Its number of patent applications per inhabitant, 127, is second-highest among 
large countries, and it ranks third among all nations in international publications 
with 9 percent of the total.
Dr. Kuhlmann noted that in 2001, business provided the largest share of 
R&D ˜nancing by far, followed by the federal and Länder governments. A small 
amount of R&D expenditure came from abroad, from either the European Com
-mission or private-sector sources, which had been funding R&D to be performed 
in Germany with growing frequency. Business dominated performance of R&D 
as well, followed by the higher-education sector and by nonuniversity research 
institutions, the latter being a feature typical of the German system and one that 
he promised to return to later in his talk.
Germany™s Weaknesses
Calling the persistence of risk-averse behavior among banks one of the major 
weaknesses of the German research system, Dr. Kuhlman noted that ˜nancing 
innovation has become increasingly dif˜cult, especially for SMEs. He then listed 
some of Germany™s other weaknesses:

It is suffering a clear loss of momentum in some, although not all, of the 
high-tech sectors in which it had been strongŠamong them, pharmaceuticals, 
computers, electronics, and aircraft.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

Its technological performance has come to depend increasingly on the 
automotive sector.

East Germany and Berlin together eat up nearly one-quarter of the 9
 billion 
euro federal research budget while employing only 11 percent of the
 country™s 
R&D personnel and accounting for only 6 percent of its patent production. Yet, 
East Germany is ﬁnot very strong in competitive and innovation termsﬂ despite 
the amount of money invested there.

The performance of Germany™s educational system, long considered quite 
strong, has declined to the point that Dr. Kuhlmann talked of a ﬁcrisisﬂ and envis
-aged an expensive restructuring.

The growth of the public sector™s R&D spending is lagging that of the 
private sector over two decades ending in 2001. More recent data would show 
a slight increase in public and some stagnation in business R&D investment, he 
noted.
Governance Structure of the German Innovation System
Turning to the complex governance structure of Germany™s system of inno
-vative research, Dr. Kuhlmann listed three levels in descending orderŠFederal 
(National), Länder (State), and Regional (substate groupings)Šthat he said were 
overarched by an ﬁincreasingly relevantﬂ Supranational level, represented speci˜
-cally by the European Union.
Existing on the national level in Germany, exemplifying a phenomenon 
found in many European countries, is ﬁa kind of competitionﬂ between the Fed
-eral Ministry of Research and Education and the Federal Ministry of Economics 
and Labor. Although there is collaboration within the government, there is some 
duplication as well, and it is not clear who was in charge of research, tech
-nological development, and innovation. At the state level, interstate competition 
mirroring that found in the United States is on the rise. Relations between the 
federal government and the Länder are marked by ﬁcoopetition,ﬂ with initiatives 
at the two levels sometimes in con˚ict, sometimes complementary. The regional 
level depends on the federal and state levels for investment. 
While governance at the European level is gaining in importance, the role of 
EU investments is of greater relative signi˜cance in the smaller nations among 
the EU-25. Germany, Dr. Kuhlmann estimated, receives some 5 percent of the 
R&D funding that comes through EU channels. Still, there are exceptions accord
-ing to sector: In information and communications technology (ICT) in Germany, 
where national programs had not been very strong, EU funding has played a more 
important role than in other areas. Despite much discussion of ﬁsubsidiarityﬂŠas 
complementarity among initiatives at the EU, national, and state or Länder
 levels 
was called in of˜cial EU parlanceŠthere is, in practice, a great deal of both 
overlap and confusion.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 71The Institutional Landscape of German Research
Dr. Kuhlmann noted that the German research system™s institutional land
-scape varies from basic to applied research, with funding sources spanning from 
public to private organizations. While industry, which contributes the lion™s share 
of the country™s R&D investment, is mainly occupied with applied research, it 
also participates in some areas of fundamental research. Universities receive 
state and federal funding, though they increasingly receive money from industry 
and conducted applied as well as basic research. The 8 billion euros received by 
universities covers research as well as teaching.
Dr. Kuhlmann then focused speci˜cally on the nonuniversity research institu
-tions: the Max Planck Society (MPG), which does excellent basic research; the 
Helmholz-Gemeinschaft (HGF), a national organization with 15 major centers 
doing research in many ˜elds and particularly in ﬁproblem-drivenﬂ areas; and 
his own organization, the Fraunhofer Gesellschaft (FhG), which does applied 
research on a contract basis and receives a small amount of institutional funding. 
Problems beset collaboration among the actors occupying the contract-research 
area, he said. But collaboration with industry is ﬁquite well developedﬂ and, as 
such, no longer the issue it was in the 1980s and 1990s.
He next turned to the basic mechanisms of federal R&D funding in Germany. 
The leading category, at nearly 47 percent of the total, is ﬁinstitutional fund
-ing,ﬂ which goes to such nonuniversity research organizations as Max Planck, 
 
Helmholz, and Fraunhofer. Project funding, routed through programs at the fed
-eral level, represents 40 percent; its share, greater in the 1980s, decreased through 
the 1990s as institutional funding rose. The role of project and program funding 
in innovation policy is thus exhibiting some shrinkage in Germany, although not 
to the point that it has lost its relevance.
Innovation Policy Programs: BMBF
The two main providers of funds at the national level, as mentioned above, are 
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, or BMBF (Bunde
sministerium 
für Bildung und Forschung), and the Federal Ministry of Economics and Labor, 
or BMWA (Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Arbeit). The BMBF supports 
a broad variety of technology and innovation programsŠso broad, in fact, as to 
be dif˜cult to track. 
For this reason, said Dr. Kuhlmann, presenting a full list of these thematic 
programs is infeasible. Although there are of˜cial lists, none of these lists re˚ects 
a precise technology or innovation program. He and coworkers therefore assem
-bled a table (Figure 8), that encompasses 3.4 billion euros™ worth of programs. 
These range from biotechnology and nanotechnology programs to initiatives 
on new materials and electronics. Some fund technological research, but many 
contain an element of innovation support. This element, when present, owes its 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 8
 Innovation policy programs, federal level: BMBF (selection). 
SOURCE: Adapted from Federal Budget BMBF 2003, BMBF 2004. 
¸¸8 m1998-2005EXIST ŠStart
-upsfromscience¸12.5 m1992-2008AppliedR&D at universitiesof appliedsciences(FH3)¸¸¸24 m2001-2008Innovative
 regional gr
ow
th poles(Wachstumske
rne)¸¸¸65 m1999-2006InnoRegio("Enterp
rise Region")¸¸3.4 bnSince1970sThematicProgram
s, e.g.,biotechnology(109 m), nano/n
ew
materials(89 m), electronics(81 m)East Germany
Regional focusCoop. 
/ Netwo
rk
sTech. 
FocusYearProgra
mFurtherm
ore: 
support
of competencenetworksand fo
rpatentingactivities,
etc.FIG 8Funding2003 (Euro)existence in large part to the programs™ having been conceptualized as coopera
-tive; that is, as a basic precondition for getting them funded, they have to include 
some degree of collaboration between researchers from the public sector, includ
-ing academia, and industry.
The table™s remaining categories are likewise incomplete, Dr. Kuhlmann 
said, and for similar reasons. Among them was the InnoRegio program, which is 
aimed at networking in regions of eastern Germany. Also listed were: ﬁInnovative 
Regional Growth Poles,ﬂ a program similar to InnoRegio; support for research 
in the Fachhochschulen (FH3), or universities of applied sciences; and EXIST, 
which helps universities develop a startup-friendly climate. He pointed out that 
a signi˜cant feature of this admittedly incomplete table is that funding for the 
four programs aimed speci˜cally at innovation is small compared to funding for 
the thematic programs.
Innovation Policy Programs: BMWA
Next came a comparable table showing innovation-policy programs run by 
the BMWA (Figure 9), which, as mentioned earlier, is to some extent in com
-petition with the BMBF. Heading the list is a program focused on innovation in 
East Germany, followed by the largest program in monetary terms, FoKo/Pro 
Inno, which targets collaborative work in innovation by SMEs. The next two 
programs were of similar size: The Promotion of Joint Industrial Research, a 
bottom-up research funding mechanism driven by industry and cofunded by the 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 73
Loans95 mSince1996European Recov
eryInnova
tion Progra
m¸Subs.13 m1999-2005InnoNet¸¸¸Subs.6 m2000-2004NEMO¸Subs.97 mSince1954IGF -Promotion of Joint Industri
al Research¸Subs.158 m1993-1998 / 1999-2003 / 2004-2008Fo
Ko
/ Pro Inno/ Pro InnoII¸Subs.104 m1990Œ2003 / since2004 Special R&D Progra
mfo
rEast Germ
any / INNO-W
AT
TEast GermanyRegional focusCoop. / Netwo
rk
sTypeFundingYearProgra
mFurt
hermore: 
a va
ri
etyof loanand venturecapitalprogramsfig 92003 (Euro)FIGURE 9
 Innovation policy programs, federal level: BMWA (selection).
SOURCE: Adapted from Federal Budget BMBF 2003, BMBF 2004. 
ministry; and the European Recovery Innovation Program, which provides loans 
to innovating companies. Rounding out the tableŠwhich, like that for BMBA, 
is incompleteŠare a pair of very small programs, InnoNet and NEMO, the
 latter 
an acronym standing for Network Management East Germany. Critics deride this 
profusion of programs in Germany as an ﬁinnovation-policy funding jungleﬂ and 
claim that no one can understand it fully, a charge both ministries rejected. While 
acknowledging that, as a political scientist, he had his own ideas about the origin 
and development of this funding structure, Dr. Kuhlmann said that on the present 
occasion he would keep them to himself.
Programs Run by the Länder 
Conceding that it would only deepen the complexity of the policy picture, 
he then turned to the Länder, which are responsible for funding and operating the 
nation™s universities, the latter traditionally receiving most of the research money 
available to the former for distribution. But the Länder are increasingly going 
beyond supporting university research to set up programs designed to:

spur technology development by funding both single-organization and 
cooperative R&D;

foster technology transfer, including transfer of personnel;

support startup companies by providing consulting, coaching, incubation, 
and ˜nancial assistance;
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

furnish venture capital and loan guarantees;

encourage patenting activities; and

participate in technology parks and incubators.
Huge differences in investment existed from state to state. But while, for 
example, Bavaria accounts for just over one-˜fth of total nonuniversity research 
spending by the Länder and Saarland for a mere 0.5 percent, EU and other 
sources supplement funding in weaker regions.
Program Anatomy: Pro Inno
Dr. Kuhlmann chose two examples from this broad variety of programs to 
examine in detail. The BMWA™s Pro Inno, which had been running for more than 
10 years and through which 630 million euros were invested in the period 1999-
2003, has as its goal increasing the R&D capability and competences of SMEs. 
This is to be achieved through collaboration on not only a national but also an 
international level. By this he meant that German companies could receive money 
in support of efforts involving partners outside the country. Pointing this out as 
ﬁan interesting featureﬂ of the program, he said that ﬁinternationalization is now 
understood as a relevant part of future R&D policies.ﬂ Subsidies under Pro Inno 
run at between 25 and 50 percent of the cost of R&D personnel ranging across 
four program linesŠcooperation with ˜rms, cooperation with research organi
-zations, R&D contracts, and personnel exchangeŠwith multiple applications 
totaling up to 350,000 euros per ˜rm allowed.
Since 1999, 4,850 ˜rms and 240 research organizations have participated, 
with 4,000 R&D employees per year engaged in Pro Inno projects. A past evalu
-ation in 2002 had shown that some three-fourths of participating ˜rms would not 
have conducted the R&D had it not been for the program; Dr. Kuhlmann and 
colleagues were preparing an updated evaluation due later in 2005. 
Considered one of Germany™s most signi˜cant R&D programs, Pro Inno is 
widely known and accepted among its target group. Its outstanding characteristics 
are its broad, open approach, high transparency, easy access, and relative lack of 
bureaucracy. The program receives a high number of applicationsŠeven though 
there is no guarantee of funding due to budget constraints and despite signi˜cant 
problems, during market entry.
Program Anatomy: InnoRegio
The second example, BMBF™s InnoRegio program, is aimed at strengthen
-ing the endogenous innovation potential of weak regions in eastern Germany by 
setting up sustainable innovation networks. A complex, ﬁmultiactorﬂ program, it 
encompasses not only SMEs, large companies, and research organizations but 
also many other public and private activities and initiatives, funding both network 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 75
management and projects aimed at developing products and services. Run as a 
competition, the program has three stages: a quali˜cation round in which ideas 
are solicited for potential networking initiatives (444 proposals were submitted in 
1999); a development round in which the regions selected (25 of the 444) re˜ne 
their concepts and projects; and a realization round in which the winners (23 of 
the 25) receive multiyear ˜nancial support for their initiatives.
The InnoRegio program is linked to an increase in innovation activities. In 
the prior two years, two-˜fths of the ˜rms selected by the program have received 
patents and almost all have introduced new products. Since 2000, 50 new ˜rms 
have also been founded. But this last fact is less impressive in Dr. Kuhlmann™s 
judgment than, what he considered the program™s main impactŠi.e., the creation 
of innovation networks across eastern Germany that comprises both public and 
private actors. Nevertheless, he noted that ﬁin East Germany there is still a ten
-dency to expect public funding to be the main source of stimulus towards innova
-tion.ﬂ Moreover, although there is scant disagreement that networking is a basic 
precondition for innovation, the question of whether the impact of such initiatives 
will be suf˜ciently long-term, stable, and robust to justify the investment they 
require remains unanswered.
Germany™s ﬁPartnership for Innovationﬂ
Taking up a theme that Dr. Dahlman had earlier discussed in the U.S. context, 
Dr. Kuhlmann suggested that, in light of the variety of public policies affecting 
innovation, major countries may see the need to introduce some kind of coordina
-tion and collaboration across the agencies responsible for such policies. Germany™s 
current response, a federal innovation initiative, was born in October 2003, when 
Chancellor Schroeder summoned representatives of various stakeholders in the 
˜eldŠpolicy actors, public agencies, major companies, associations of SMEs, 
and major research organizationsŠto a forum where they debated challenges for 
the country™s innovation performance. In the aftermath, they created the Partner
-ship for Innovation and started some longer-term ﬁpioneeringﬂ activities. The 
ove
rarching aim of this initiative™s broad agenda is to improve the framework for 
innovation in Germany through the collaboration of public and private actors.
The Partnership for Innovation had established a number of working groups 
of stakeholders, some of which Dr. Kuhlmann and his colleagues contribute to. 
ﬁIn some areas there is just talk, and they will continue just to talk,ﬂ he said. 
But ﬁin some areas these working groups have actually started policy initiatives, 
regulatory [and institutional] reforms, and so on.ﬂ 
Under the rubric of ﬁHigh-tech Masterplan,ﬂ an effort is under way to ease 
access to venture capital; while some activities it comprised had predated it, a 
high-tech startup fund was kicked off only weeks before the symposium with 
10
 million euros, and is expected to grow in time. As the initiative grouped such 
a wide variety of activities, its ef˜cacy will not be easy to evaluate, he said.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Germany™s Future: Threats and Opportunities
To conclude, Dr. Kuhlman provided an appraisal of the threats and oppor
-tunities Germany was facing, as well as a rundown of the federal government™s 
immediate priorities. He began his enumeration of the threats by emphasizing 
Germany™s high degree of dependence on its automotive cluster. Even if it had 
not hurt the country yet, this dependence is leaving Germany open to challenge 
in the longer term, particularly from East Asian competition. Second, he cited 
an anticipated shortage in the supply of highly quali˜ed labor, especially in the 
engineering ˜eld. Like their contemporaries in the United States and East Asia, 
young people in Germany are not studying engineering and science in suf˜cient 
numbers. But Germany is also laboring under the problem of not having a big 
enough population of high-skill workers and of having had, until recently, regu
-lations restricting immigration of engineers and scientists. Third, he reiterated 
that the country™s technological performance is losing momentum in some areas. 
Finally, he noted that public ˜nancing for the national science infrastructure is 
shrinking relative to ˜nancing coming from the private sector. 
Nevertheless, Dr. Kuhlmann said, there were opportunities. The techno
-logical and marketing prowess of Germany™s automotive sector might allow it to 
turn the challenge it was facing to its bene˜t. Efforts were being made to build 
on the strong position that Germany, like other traditional EU members, enjoy 
in
 the growing markets of both Eastern Europe and East Asia. The country has 
an excellent science base in such advanced ˜elds as biotechnology, chemicals, 
and nanotechnology. And its labor force remains highly quali˜ed, at least in 
comparative terms.
The Potential of European Integration
Finally, Dr. Kuhlmann expressed his personal conviction that Europe™s inte
-gration, not in the political arena but in the area of research systems, could lend 
Germany™s national system huge potential. Possessed of the biggest research sys
-tem in Europe, Germany has in the past tended toward both a domestic orientation 
and a degree of complacency. Increasingly, however, major research organizations 
and individual researchers alike are learning that they needed not only to col
-laborate on the European level, but also to reestablish themselves institutionally 
in a European context, if they wished to avoid overlap and to create new clusters 
of strength with worldwide visibility and potential. These developments were so 
recent that, he cautioned, some of the impressions he was conveying were still 
in the realm of speculation. While the single market offered signi˜cant opportu
-nity, national governments, and particularly the German government, were yet to 
comprehend the existence of this potential and the difference between national 
and European. While this had been the source of some dif˜culties for those in 
charge, there was, he asserted, ﬁno alternative to more collaboration and integra
-tion on this level.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 77
Identifying the immediate priorities for the German federal government, 
Dr. Kuhlmann said there is recognition of a need to improve linkages within the 
country™s fragmented research system, whose existing boundaries are rigid to 
the point that horizontal professional mobility was scarcely possible. Changes 
should, he recommended, be designed to take account of European integration 
as well. Meanwhile, work needed to reform the country™s university system with 
the goal of achieving international excellence has begun, although in his own 
opinion, progress has been slow compared to that observed in other countries, 
both within and outside Europe.
THE
 T
EKES
 E
XPERIENCE
 AND
 N
EW
 I
NITIATIVES
Heikki Kotilainen
Tekes, Finland
Dr. Kotilainen expressed his appreciation for the opportunity to present 
Finland™s ﬁsmall-country approach to innovation policy.ﬂ His presentation began 
with a very brief statistical overview, and continued with descriptions of Finland™s 
innovation system. He concluded with examples of the system™s achievements. 
Before embarking on it, however, he would acknowledge a handful of
 factors 
that could be seen as drivers of change and, at the same time, challenges to be 
met. Various phenomena surrounding globalization discussed earlier are hav
-ing quite an impact on Finland, as many companies move manufacturing and 
other operations to such countries as China, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Finland is 
also undergoing a very serious demographic change of the kind affecting all of 
Europe, a problem for which solutions are not yet become apparent. Sustainable 
development is another challenge commonly faced in the industrialized world, 
as is the management of knowledge and competence; in the latter, Finland, as a 
small country with limited resources, has to exercise great prudence. 
Technology and networking are two drivers, or challenges, that Dr.
 Kotilainen 
viewed as one: When companies move, countries ˜nd themselves having to ˜nd 
new technologies to replace those that parted, while the companies, because they 
applied R&D independently of where it is performed, need to be on the lookout 
for technological and business alliances. Finally, he noted, change in the character 
and dynamics of innovation constitutes a challenge in itself.
Dr. Kotilainen noted that Finland is placed near the top of the world rank
-ings in science and technology, second only to the United States. How could a 
small country whose only true natural resource are its people accomplish this? 
What had happened, he said, was that Finland™s industrial structure changed 
tremendously over the previous four decades. The pulp-and-paper sector, which 
accounted for a little more than two-thirds of the country™s exports in the 1960s, 
saw its share fall to below one-quarter by 2004, while exports in the electronics 
sector, including telecommunications, had taken off.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
A major factor in this change, according to Dr. Kotilainen, has been ﬁcon
-scious and continuous investmentﬂ by Finland that has raised its R&D spending 
as a percentage of GDP from around 1.5 percent in 1985 to nearly 3.5 percent by 
the beginning of the current decade. Coinciding with this increase has been the 
evolution of Finnish policy in the realm of science and technology (Figure
 10). 
Even though Finland™s science policies have been in place since the 1950s, 
technology policy formulation did not happen until the mid-1980s, following the 
establishment of Finland™s Science and Technology Policy Council. It was only 
after it began to implement technology policy that innovation policy appeared on 
the agenda. While Dr. Kotilainen attributed this progression to chance rather than 
to any special wisdomŠand noted that, in fact, a similar evolution can be seen 
in other countriesŠhe said that it had turned out to be a fortunate one. For inno
-vation policy, had it made its appearance prematurely, might have been met by 
silence from the government and suffered a consequent loss of credibility. ﬁYou 
cannot,ﬂ he remarked, ﬁjump from pure science to innovation immediately.ﬂ
Dr. Kotilainen pointed out that private-sector spending has shown the most 
growth since 1985 and has accounted for some 70 percent of the current total 
investment, which has been running at around ˜ve billion euros annually. Even 
so, the public sector has been the prime mover: Only when the government began 
FIGURE 10
 R&D/GDP in Finland, 1981-2003. 
00.511.522.533.54198119831985198719891991199319951997199920012003Science PolicyTechnologyPolicyInnovationPolicyfig 10 R&D as a Percent of GDPYearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 79
to take R&D seriously and increase funding for it did private investment follow. 
Still, when it comes to public funding for R&D taking place in companies, Fin
-land is well below the Organisation for Economic and Co-operative Development 
(OECD) average at less than 5 percent of total corporate R&D spending. The 
position of some of the more highly ranked countries is, however, the result of 
heavy investment in military research, which Finland does not fund. The sector of 
the Finnish economy most active in R&D is electronics and telecommunications. 
Nokia alone accounts for something like 40 percent of Finland™s private sector, 
and while a small country can count itself lucky to have such a ﬁbehemoth,ﬂ the 
˜rm™s relative size could also be seen as a ﬁthreatening issue,ﬂ Dr. Kotilainen 
said.
Finnish Innovation System™s Institutional Structure
Turning from a quantitative to a qualitative portrait of innovation in Finland, 
Dr. Kotilainen identi˜ed the two main public organizations in the domain of 
R&D: the Academy of Finland, operating under the country™s Ministry of Educa
-tion and charged with basic research; and his own institution, Tekes, operating 
under the Ministry of Trade and Industry and charged with applied research. 
Public-sector R&D actors also included universities; VTT, a large and multidis
-ciplinary research institute under the Ministry of Trade of Industry; and other 
ministries, such as Agriculture and Forestry, that had their own research facilities. 
Providing direction to government institutions through achieving consensus on 
the growth of R&D is the Science and Technology Policy Council, which dates 
from 1986 and is, he said, ﬁa very important elementﬂ in the Finnish system.
Understanding how the game of innovation was played in Finland demands 
an acquaintance with the Science and Technology Policy Council. Chaired by the 
prime minister, the council has as members ˜ve other cabinet ministers, including 
the minister of Finance; the directors general of the Academy of Finland, Tekes, 
and the VTT; and representatives of the universities, industry, and the labor 
unions. Every three years, the council issues an outline for science and technol
-ogy; this outline takes the form of recommendations rather than regulations, 
something Dr. Kotilainen saw as strengthening Finland in comparison with the 
many countries where the government assumed an operational role. On the basis 
of the outline, institutions like Tekes work with the ministries to prepare annual 
objectives, which in turn become the basis for an agreement covering what is 
to be done over the coming year. The implementing institutions, after executing 
the plan, report to the ministries, which then report to the Council. Showing a 
schematic diagram of the process (Figure 11), Dr. Kotilainen pointed out that the 
spheres of planning and implementation were separated by a dotted line. ﬁThe 
operative part is operative and the planning is planning,ﬂ he emphasized. ﬁThey 
are not mixed.ﬂ 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Implementation is left to the ﬁexpert organizations,ﬂ as he quali˜ed Tekes, 
which might receive funding from the government but are free to act as they 
see ˜t. He then displayed a table providing details of an increase in funding for 
innovation proposed in 2002 for the ˜ve years that were to follow (Figure 12). 
While the Ministry of Finance was free to accept or reject such recommendations, 
it generally went along with those receiving strong supportŠand, as the table 
shows, the funding increase for innovation was already well under way.
For Finns R&D Is Investment, Not Expenditure
Having dealt with the system™s structure, Dr. Kotilainen took up the subject 
of its operation. In Finland, R&D funding is considered to be an investment rather 
than an expenditure. Money that goes directly from funding agencies to compa
-nies is seen as short-term investment; money that ˚ows through universities and 
research institutes, creating technology and new skills that then contribute to 
companies™ competitiveness, is seen as long-term investment. The former route 
might require a few years at most, the latter a decade or more, but both types of 
investment are considered necessary. And not only that, they are considered one 
of the best investments the government could make, since they ultimately bring 
back sums 10 to 20 times their original size in the form of taxation.
FIGURE 11
 Planning and implementation of technology and innovation policy. 
3 yearoutlinesMinistries(Education, Trade & Industry, Finance,etc.)Annualobjectivesand agreementsInstitutions(Academy of Finland, Tekes, UniversitiesVTT, SectoralInstitutes)GovernmentScience and technologypolicycouncilAnnual& semi-annualreportsand feedbackPlanningImplementingfig 11Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 81Tekes™s Funding Strategy, Operations
Tekes itself has a steadily if gradually rising budget that reached 430 million 
euros in 2005. Research funding in the form of grants and company funding in 
the form of both grants and loans is distributed through a variety of instruments, 
such as national technology programs, direct company R&D funding, direct 
research funding of universities and research institutes, as well as equity funding 
for start-up entrepreneurs. Acknowledging the instruments themselves to be ﬁvery 
standard,ﬂ he placed emphasis on Tekes™s implementation. As networking and 
cooperation takes place between the companies and universities involved from 
the very beginning, all the instruments could be regarded as technology-transfer 
instruments. In fact, with the exception of TUPAS, a ﬁlittleﬂ program designed 
exclusively for SMEs, Tekes has no separate technology-transfer procedures. 
Private-sector entities are always required to provide matching funds when par
-ticipating in university research, while companies receive credit if they invited 
universities to join research programs they had initiated.
In 2004, Tekes invested around 409 million euros, with 237 million euros 
going to companiesŠof which 31 million was in the form of reimbursable, 
reduced-rate R&D loans, 41 million was in capital loans, and 165 million was 
in R&D grantsŠand 172 million euros going to research institutions in the form 
of grants. In that year, about half of all funds were channeled through estab
-lished technology programs while the other half went to individual, ﬁbottom-upﬂ 
FIGURE 12
 Recommendations of the Science and Technology Policy Council of Finland 
relating to research and innovation funding. 
SOURCE: Tekes.
Research funding,                  Increase in other funding, million eurosmillion euros2002     increase2007     Universities-research funding37545420-other increase in basic funding105Funding organisations-Academy of Finland 18570255-National Technology Agency400120520Other research funding-research institutes23540275-ministries20525230Total-research funding14003001700-other funding105Increase, total300+105=  405fig 122007Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
projects that were presented as unsolicited proposals by industry or research 
institutions. 
Such applications are accepted at any time from either sector, but Tekes 
always considers whether they contained a component of cooperation between 
the two sectors. The established programs, seen as highly important to Finland™s 
general technology development, fund large projects featuring cooperation among 
multiple companies and universities or nonuniversity research institutions. The 
proportion of funding going through each of the two channels is not mandated 
by the government. In fact, the allocations vary year to year at Tekes™s discretion 
and depending on customer needs.
Placing a Premium on Cooperation
Although Tekes provides support on different terms under its technology 
programs (according to whether it was destined for public- or private-sector 
entities) this fact does not prevent projects from cooperating across sector lines. 
In fact, Tekes sees implementation of results from public research as dependent 
on parallel execution and networking with company projects, even to the point 
of pooling personnel. 
In 2004, Tekes funded projects under 23 existing technology programs cover
-ing a wide range of emerging technologies having an overall value of 1.2 billion 
euros; such programs typically were of 3 to 5 years long and, in any given year, 
drew 800 separate ﬁparticipationsﬂ from public research units and 2,000 from 
companies.
9 That Tekes provides no more than 60 to 80 percent of the funding for uni
-versity projects indicates that it always requires matching funds from industry, 
Dr. Kotilainen explained, adding that it generally refrains from funding projects 
at 100 percent even though it has the ability to do so. EU state-aid regulations 
limit support for private-sector projects to between 25 and 50 percent. Tekes™s 
decision-making and coordinating functions are guided by a steering committee 
chaired by a representative of industry. ﬁWe don™t let the professors be chairman,ﬂ 
he commented.
To carry out its functions, Tekes needs a facilitator in the form of national 
programs to link supply and demand, where supply is considered to be research 
and demand to be the enterprises. It is Finnish companies™ ability to articulate 
their needs, not just for the next year but over ˜ve years, that enables Tekes to 
design effective programs. ﬁWith our small resources we cannot do research for 
[the sake of] research,ﬂ Dr. Kotilainen explained. ﬁIt should be relevant to our 
economy.ﬂ Similarly, the level of the research funded is expected to be appropri
-ate: ﬁWe cannot target a Nobel Prize in each ˜eldŠthat™s not for us.ﬂ Appropriate 
9For a list of current technology programs, see <
http://www.tekes.˜/english/programmes/all/all.
html#Ongoing
>.
 Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 83
goals, furthermore, help ensure that companies have the technology appropriate 
to their purposes and have the capability to absorb new technologies for their 
use. He named ﬁthis linkage, through the national programs, between research 
and the companiesﬂ as one of the reasons that Finland places ﬁfairly high in the 
competitiveness statistics.ﬂ
Unique Features of Finland™s Innovation System
While it might depend on ﬁnormalﬂ funding instruments, the Finnish inno
-vation system boasts some unique features. First among these is 
trust
 among 
participants in the the university-government-industry ﬁtriple helix,ﬂ that by the 
early 1980s, enabled genuine and voluntary cooperation. 
Lack of corruption
 is a 
second advantage, although in Finland™s context ﬁcorruptionﬂ is likely too strong 
a word, said Dr. Kotilainen. ﬁWe don™t have to expend energy to avoid fraud in 
the system,ﬂ was how he rephrased it. A third factor is 
consensus
 and the
 Science 
and Technology Policy Council helps ensure a high degree of agreement, which 
in turn enhances implementation. A fourth factor is 
cooperation
. Tekes and the 
Academy of Finland work very closely together, helping make possible simul
-taneous funding of universities and companies, and thereby the coupling of 
research with development. Such efforts extend beyond science to the coordina
-tion of technological development with social development, a ﬁvery importantﬂ 
consideration, he said, as the country ﬁcannot leave part of the population to be 
dropouts [when it comes to] technological development.ﬂ
The small number of actors in Finland™s system, with its consequent
 simplicity 
and ﬁholisticﬂ quality, constitute another advantage. Tekes itself enjoys a very 
high degree of independence from the cabinet and the ministries in assessing 
projects and making decisions on funding, both of which it is free to do indepen
-dently in-house. Its experts working on assessments have access to industry and 
research leaders, and, like all the institution™s employees, possess knowledge of 
both the domestic and international markets suited to their responsibility over 
international cooperative efforts.
Impact of Tekes™s Activities
Besides the increase in R&D investment, the system has helped generate a 
remarkably sharp increase in high-tech exports™ share of Finland™s total exports, 
from below 5 percent in 1988 to over 20 percent beginning in 1998. To be seen 
speci˜cally among corporate R&D projects funded by Tekes is a prevalence of 
cooperation. NetworkingŠwhether with SMEs, foreign corporations, or research 
institutes and universitiesŠis occurring in around 80 percent of all efforts, as a 
result of which Finland leads the EU in intercompany cooperation.
Coinciding with Tekes™s investment of 409 million euros in 2004, 
Dr.
 Kotilaine
n stated, 770 new products have reached the market and 190 manu
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
facturing processes have been introduced. The institution also claims to have 
contributed to 720 patent applications, 2,500 publications, and 1,000 academic 
degrees at the bachelors, masters, and Ph.D. levels in that year. According to a 
1999 study of public ˜nancing™s effect on companies™ innovation activities, con
-ducted by VTT, the receipt of funding from Tekes often causes project goals to 
be reset higher than they had been initially. This study also concluded that Tekes 
funding allows for the expansion or acceleration of projects, the latter being of 
particular importance in sectors where the ˜rst company to market takes all. A 
study by Finland™s National Audit Of˜ce dating to 2000 found that Tekes fund
-ing allowed not only broader and more rapid implementation of projects, but also 
surmounting of risk barriers: 57 percent of projects considered in the study would 
simply not have been undertaken without support from Tekes. Finally, a pair of 
2003 studies by the Research Institute of the Finnish Economy (ETLA) found 
increased corporate R&D investment to result from public investment in research 
and not the other way around. 
Innovation: More than Research
Returning to the challenges accompanying globalization and other changes 
in the nature of innovation, Dr. Kotilainen observed that, while research is impor
-tant for radical or disruptive innovations, most innovation is incremental and not 
necessarily rooted in research. When it comes to user-based innovations, the 
customer is paramount. The tendency for manufacturing to merge with services 
is an important development. Smaller ˜rms are more directly engaged in innova
-tion itself, while large companies, he implied, are more involved at the level of 
application. The growth in importance of multidisciplinary research underlines 
the value of alliances and other forms of cooperation. For these reasons, the 
 
public and private sectors need to innovate together.
Dr. Kotilainen concluded with a brief assessment of the implications of these 
challenges for his own institution. The role of the innovation agency is changing 
along with the landscape, a development that requires serious thought about the 
future. No longer regulators, agencies like his have to become instructors, he said. 
ﬁWe are not a referee [but] should be a partner in this process; we are not a system 
integrator but a networker; [we are] not the ˜nance provider but [an] investor.ﬂ 
This, in turn, demands a big change in the mindset of the agency, which should 
no longer be ﬁonly an administratorﬂ but ﬁshould be innovative as well if we ask 
innovations from our customers.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 85
CONVERTING
 R
ESEARCH
 TO
 I
NNOVATION
Peter J. Nicholson
Office of the Prime Minister, Canada
Dr. Nicholson expressed his desire to clarify at the outset that, as chief of 
policy in the of˜ce of Canada™s prime minister, he is not speci˜cally charged with 
management of science and technology. Although experienced in the ˜eld as a 
former faculty member at the University of Minnesota, he had never administered 
science and technology programs in government. Much of what he was about to 
say, therefore, was distilled from large quantities of good advice he had received 
from people dealing directly in such matters.
As he judged it unnecessary to explain why Canada should be concerned 
about science-and-technology and innovation policy, Dr. Nicholson immedi
-ately began crafting a statistical portrait of the country™s R&D efforts. In this, 
he explained, he would be aided by graphics showing amounts in U.S. dollars 
that had been converted from Canadian dollars at the purchasing-power parity of 
roughly 85 U.S. cents to a Canadian dollar. On a chart tracking Canada™s gross 
domestic expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP in the 10 years from 1993, 
he pointed out a steady upswing in spending that peaked with the end of the tech 
bubble in 2001. The ensuing downturn could be attributed to a fall-off in R&D 
spending by business, particularly in the information-technology sector and more 
particularly by Nortel.
Higher Education Funding ﬁRemarkably Highﬂ
Canada™s current total R&D spending is around $19 billion a year. Busi
-ness enterprise expenditure on R&D accounts for around 55 percent of the 
country™s total, government intramural expenditure on R&D for around 12 per
-cent; the remainder comes from higher education expenditure on R&D, which, 
at a ﬁremarkably highﬂ 33 percent, places Canada atop the G-7 and third among 
OECD nations. ﬁOtherwise we™re down in the middle of the pack,ﬂ he said, ﬁnot
-withstanding the increase [in Canada™s R&D spending] over the years. The point 
is that the bar has been rising.ﬂ
Even if Canada does not post world-leading ratios of R&D expenditure to 
GDP, its overall economic performance suf˜ces to make it the second wealthiest 
among mid-sized countries in the OECD based on GDP per capita and second in 
the G-7 as well. Much of the technical dynamism in the Canadian economy is due 
to its unique level of integration with the U.S. economy. ﬁIn many, many sectors, 
there is one economy,ﬂ said Dr. Nicholson, adding that ﬁa great deal of technical 
sophistication in the Canadian economy is embodied in imported
 capital.ﬂ To 
illustrate, he noted that a North American car buyer is unlikely to know whether 
the Chevrolet, the Chrysler, or even the Toyota he or she was buying is manufac
-tured in Canada or the United States.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Fiscal Consolidation Opens Gate to Innovation
Contributing to Canada™s positive performance is a ˜scal consolidation that 
has taken place over the previous 13 years. Canada™s ˜scal problems had been 
rapidly growing out of control, but in 1995Šfor reasons that, according to 
Dr.
 Nicholson, remained ﬁa little mysteriousﬂŠCanada ﬁgot an incredible dose 
of ˜scal religion, which has continued to this very day.ﬂ The federal budget went 
into the black in 1997 and has stayed there, unlike in the other G-7 countries, 
which have all gone back into de˜cit. This turnaround has permitted the Canadian 
government to make numerous choices that up to that point it has not been able 
to make, chief among which is a determination to fortify the microeconomic 
foundations of the economy. Traditionally, Canada™s economy has been resource 
based, with a great deal of industrial power added through its integration with 
the United States. ﬁIf we wanted to have something that was home-grown and 
that could give us a degree of independence,ﬂ he explained, ﬁwe had to build our 
innovation capacity from the ground up.ﬂ It was this effort that would be treated 
in the rest of the presentation.
Dr. Nicholson projected a graph tracing the evolution of federal spending on 
R&D in Canada (Figure 13), which demonstrates the ﬁparadigm shiftﬂ in federal 
support for higher education that coincided with the federal budget™s going into 
surplus. Federal support for R&D in the business sector has trended down in real 
terms over the same period (somewhat more than indicated in Figure 13, which 
takes no account of in˚ation.) Although support for intramural R&D within the 
federal system has risen, research has been overwhelmingly outsourced to higher 
education, primarily to the university and the research hospital systems.
A Policy Conundrum: Private vs. Public Return
To help explain the public-policy rationale for supporting different kinds of 
activities related to innovation, Dr. Nicholson displayed a chart representing a 
spectrum running from basic research to such unquestionably commercial activity 
as marketing (Figure 14). The relative rate of social return declines as one moved 
rightward from the left-hand end of this chart. There is, nonetheless, some private 
return at the left-hand end, and perhaps even a great deal in the case of ideas pro
-tected by patents. Conversely, some social return occurs at the right-hand end of 
the chart owing to spillovers. But what he described as a conundrum for innova
-tion policy focused on a ﬁpotentially ‚orphaned™ domainﬂ near the middle where 
it is dif˜cult to discern which of the two types of return is higher; the ambiguity 
of their relation to one another has occasioned such policy arguments as the one, 
alluded to earlier, concerning Sematech.
Canada™s federal government is active all along this continuum through 
many dozens of programs, some of them quite large. These include the Canada 
Research Chairs (CRCs), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), Technol
-ogy Partnerships Canada (TPC), and the Industrial Research Assistance Program 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 87
FIGURE 13
 Evolution of Canada™s R&D. 
FIGURE 14
 Canada™s support programs span the innovation continuum.
05001,0001,5002,0002,500199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004IntramuralHigher EducationBusinessfig 13Year Millions of Dollars (Canadian)Basi
cResearch
AppliedResearch
Technology
De
ve
lopment
Production
Mar
ke
tin
gŁResearch
Chairs
ŁG
ranting
Councils
ŁIRAP
ŁExpor
tDe
velopment
Cor
pŁNRC
ŁBusiness
De
velop-
ment
 Bank
ŁTPC
ŁR&D 
Tax Credit
ŁCentres of
Excellence
ŁCFI
Potentially
ﬁOr
phaned
ﬂDomain
Retur
n on In
vestment (Schematic)
Social Retur
nPr
iv
ate Retur
nPr
iv
ate
Sector
Domain
Pub
lic
Sector
Domain
fig 14Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
(IRAP). But before turning to describe them, Dr. Nicholson estimated that the 
R&D tax credit generates a bene˜t of $1.5 billion to Canadian corporations con
-ducting research. In cases of companies that are not publicly traded, he speci˜ed, 
these credits are refundable, so that bene˜ts are not available only to ˜rms that 
are turning a pro˜t.
Posting a table containing data on his four selected programs (Figure 15), Dr. 
Nicholson noted that with the sole exception of IRAP, founded in 1962, they date 
from the previous decade. Still, all have enough experience that conclusions about 
their performance can be drawn. Pointing to the column that presents amounts of 
federal funding, he called attention to the fact that the Foundation for Innovation 
has invested the largest amount at $3.1 billion, and that the university research 
granting councils distribute just under $1.7 billion a year.
Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI): 
 Building Leading-Edge Infrastructure
CFI, the ˜rst of the four programs to be described, was set up to cofund 
leading-edge research infrastructure in universities and hospitals in response 
to a precipitous mid-1990s decline in the quality of research infrastructure in 
FIGURE 15
 Federal support for innovation: Examples.
NOTE: Federal funding is labeled annual in some cases and in others covers the investment 
for the full period. (*)ŠPurchasing-Power Parity estimated at USD 0.85 per CDN dollar. 
(**)ŠIncludes indirect costs of research and graduate student support.
$255 AnnualProvide targeted assistance to high-risk R&D commercialization1996Tech. Partnerships$210 InvestedSeed investment to leverage private VC in new technologies2004BDC Early-Stage Venture Capital$135 AnnualBuild innovation capacity of SMEsthru technical advice & assistance1962IRAP$765 InvestedSupport top scholars to build world-class research capacity in universities2000Research Chairs$3,100 InvestedCreate top-flight research infrastructure in Universities & Hospitals1997Foundation for Innovation$1,660 Annual**Support university researchers in Sciences, Engineering & MedicineVarious datesGranting CouncilsFED FUNDINGMISSIONCREATED***fig 15(millions of U.S. Dollars)*we  took out the dark shading in title bar so the new small type would  be more readableInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 89
Canadian universitiesŠﬁanother evil consequence,ﬂ in Dr. Nicholson™s words, 
ﬁof the ˜scal problem that the country was mired in.ﬂ This foundation, which 
is government endowed, receives a grant worth a total of $3.1 billion in two or 
three installments; of that, it commits $2.5 billion to fund 4,000 projects through 
competition-based awards that are limited to 40 percent of project costs. In addi
-tion, there are special funds to encourage ˜rst-time researchersŠa part of the 
program that has proved to be ﬁextremely popular and high-leverage.ﬂ There are 
also funds to help operate facilities, a ﬁcritically importantﬂ function because 
many advanced infrastructure components require highly technical operational 
assistance. Finally, funds are available to ˜nance international collaboration. 
CFI™s board, although it includes some government appointees, operates at arm™s 
length from the government.
The objectives of the Canada Foundation for Innovation are fourfold:

to transform research and technology development in Canada;

to foster strategic research planning in universities, which Dr. Nicholson 
called an ﬁinteresting objectiveﬂ and said had been ﬁbrilliantly achievedﬂ;

to attract and retain world-class researchers, something that was taking 
place as well, as he would demonstrate with ˜gures in a moment; and

to promote collaboration and cross-disciplinarity, which he called ﬁa huge 
successﬂ of the program.
ﬁThe bottom line,ﬂ he declared, ﬁis that if you want to work at the leading 
edge, you need to have tools at the leading edge.ﬂ
Fostering Strategic Research Planning
CFI™s selection process begins with proposals that come almost exclu
-sively from universities and research hospitals. These proposals are required to 
˜t with an institution-wide strategic research plan at the applicant institution. 
Dr.
 Nicholso
n described the evaluation criteria as ﬁfairly predictableﬂŠresearch 
quality and need for infrastructure; contribution to innovation capacity building; 
and bene˜ts to Canada. In a two-tier review, applications are grouped by subject 
matter and sent ˜rst to experts in their speci˜c ˜eld, then to a multidisciplinary 
committee with the ability to make cross-area comparisons.
This selection process has forced institutions to develop long-term research 
plans and set priorities, in some cases for the ˜rst time. Its most signi˜cant 
consequence, in Dr. Nicholson™s view, is that it has improved the quality of 
applications. Proposals worth $1.4 billion, a large percentage of them ﬁabsolutely 
top-drawer,ﬂ were presented in the latest selection round even though the funding 
available covered only one-quarter of that sum. Every round, in fact, has raised 
the bar, with projects becoming larger and more complex. ﬁWhile you would 
have expected that, once the low-hanging fruit was picked, the program might 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
start running out of energy,ﬂ he commented, but ﬁexactly the opposite has hap
-pened.ﬂ Collaboration among institutions has multiplied, research excellence has 
been stimulated at smaller universities as well as large, and most provinces have 
been led to establish similar programs at their own level. The latter are allowed 
to contribute to the 60 percent of complementary funding required by CFI, which 
has produced a ﬁhuge multiplier effectﬂ within Canada™s innovation system and 
has started to ﬁput Canadian research opportunities on the world map.ﬂ
A Virtuous Circle: Collaboration and Upgrading
CFI has ﬁtriggered a virtuous circle of collaboration and upgrading,ﬂ 
Dr.
 Nicholson said, asserting that ﬁstrength begets strength.ﬂ But, at the organi
-zational level, he added there are three other lessons:

CFI™s arm™s-length institutional structure and governance make its deci
-sions credible to the point of being virtually unassailable, ﬁnot an easy thing to 
do in modern democratic systems.ﬂ

The endowed-foundation model has enabled CTI to plan beyond annual 
budget cycles. ﬁThey know how much money they have,ﬂ he commented. ﬁThey 
always want more, but at least [they] know what [they™re] playing with.ﬂ

The incentives are right, so that if the objectives of the foundation are 
met, further government funding is expected. Such funding is ﬁnot necessary, 
because this is an endowment,ﬂ he said, ﬁbut the board and the people who run 
this program understand what they have to do.ﬂ
Still at issue, however, is the level of investment that is appropriate for CFI. 
ﬁAt what point do you stop?ﬂ he asked. ﬁOr do you keep following this boot-
strapping process to higher and higher levels?ﬂ
Canada Research Chairs: Complementing Infrastructure with Talent
A human-resource complement to CFI is the CRC, whose objective is to 
develop a cadre of world-class researchers to exploit the infrastructure built up 
under CFI. CRCs™ 2,000 chairs support all subject domains; 1,400 are ˜lled to 
date. The potential number of chairs allocated to each university depends on the 
proportion of research grants it wins in other national competitions, although a 
bonus is reserved for smaller institutions. 
The CRCs are divided into two tiers. The ˜rst, for world leaders in their dis
-ciplines, is an award of seven years™ duration, renewable inde˜nitely, at $170,000 
in support per year; winners in this category have access to numerous other kinds 
of support as well. The second, for ﬁexceptional young faculty,ﬂ provides support 
for 5 years at $85,000 per year that was renewable just once, for another 5 years. 
Under the selection process, universities are expected to nominate candidates for 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 91the CRCs in line with the same institution-wide strategic research plan to which 
CFI applications need to conform. Winners are selected by a three-person review 
panel or, in the absence of a consensus among panel members, by a standing 
interdisciplinary adjudication committee. The approval rate has been running 
at 85 to 90 percent of submissions, and acceptance by those approved has been 
around 95 percent.
CRC™s outcomes have been extremely positive. At ˜rst, universities tended to 
nominate their best faculty in hopes of keeping themŠalthough the program did 
not, as it turned out, inspire signi˜cant poaching among institutions. The focus 
has since shifted to recruitment, evidenced by the fact that, more recently, about 
40 percent of chairs have been awarded to nominees from outside Canada. The 
relationship between the winning of research grants and the potential
 number 
of chairs has increased general interest in both; more speci˜cally, the CRC pro
-gram has signi˜cantly improved the research capacity of smaller universities. 
Together, CRC and CFI have ﬁpowerfully boosted Canada™s research capacity at 
the front end,ﬂ Dr. Nicholson stated. The only cloud over CRC™s success has been 
the underrepresentation of women, who hold only around 15 percent of chairs 
reserved for world leaders and 20 percent of chairs overall. ﬁTo some extent that 
may be a factor of age demographics still,ﬂ he speculated, adding, ﬁIt™s something 
the program managers are very concerned about.ﬂ
Assistance to Industry: IRAP
Moving from support for basic research to support for industry, Dr. Nicholso
n next described the IRAP, which he called ﬁthe classic one in Canada for small-
business innovation.ﬂ Its funding, about $135 million a year, underwrites the 
activities of 260 Industrial Technology Advisors operating from 90 sites across 
the country who are available to all small businesses engaged in technology. 
About one-third of IRAP™s budget goes to consulting advice, which absorbs 
about 50 percent of these specialized advisors™ time; about two-thirds, 30 percent 
of which is subject to repayment, goes to project support. The scope of project 
support is quite broad, encompassing everything from feasibility studies and pre-
competitive R&D to international sourcing and youth hiring.
Of 12,000 clients served annually through the program, only 20 to 25 per
-cent receive funding; the average level of such support is $30,000 per year, the 
maximum $425,000. Still, those 3,000 projects have encouraged formation of a 
network of 1,800 subcontractors, among them suppliers, consultants, universi
-ties, even the National Research Council. Dr. Nicholson called project approval 
ﬁvery fastﬂŠ2 weeks for projects under $12,000, up to one month for those up 
to $85,000. While pronouncing himself cautious about accepting existing evalu
-ations of multipliers for IRAP spending, he quoted estimates as high as $12 in 
downstream investment for every dollar of spending on IRAP help, and up to 20 
to 1 in sales or an equivalent. ﬁThe main point here,ﬂ he said, ﬁis that this is a real 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
body-contact sport: These are people all over the country engaged face-to-face 
with small businesses.ﬂ
One lessons from IRAP is that cost recovery for technical advisory services 
is unlikely to work. ﬁCompanies will not pay for what they don™t know,ﬂ said 
Dr. Nicholson, relaying wisdom from the program™s director. Other noteworthy 
observations follow:

The consulting industry values IRAP advisors as prescreeners and referral 
agents and, seeing its relationship with IRAP as symbiotic, has not complained 
about the program.

The selection of sectors and topics of programs at this level needs to be 
client-driven.

Proposals are better assessed as and when they are received rather than in 
request-for-proposal batches, as the former procedure ˜ts with the ˜rm™s innova
-tion cycle and also avoids peak-load processing problems.

More focus is needed on mid-sized SMEs, those with 100-500 employees.

Increasingly, SMEs need to be connected with national and global innova
-tion networks.
TPC: Risk-Sharing and ﬁRepayabilityﬂ
The purpose of Technology Partnerships Canada, which has functioned as 
the Defense Industry Productivity Program until 1996, is to risk-share industrial 
research and precompetitive development across a wide spectrum. Designed to 
address a ﬁpersistent and frustratingﬂ gap in Canadian ˜rms™ development of 
new technology, it covers from 25 to 30 percent of the costs involved in R&D, 
development of prototypes, and testing. In addition to signi˜cant co˜nancing by 
industry, it features repayability, which depends on results. Targeting ˜rms of all 
sizes and partnering with IRAP for SMEs, TPC parses its activities into three 
rather broad sectors: aerospace/defense, which, if considered separately, raise 
the number of focus sectors to four; environmental technologies; and ﬁenablingﬂ 
technologies, including biotech, materials, and ICT.
Only the program™s budget, about $250 million per year on average, imposes 
a limit on the size of individual projects. From 1966 through 2004 about $2.3 bil
-lion has been committed, a little over one-third of that amount to SMEsŠwhich, 
however, account for 90 percent of the 673 projects supported. Three-˜fths of 
all funding goes to the aerospace and defense sector. Dr. Nicholson said that, 
according to ﬁfairly careful calculations,ﬂ private-sector recipients have matched 
TPC investments at an average ratio of 4 to 1. Project selection, which at 12 to 
18 months takes much longer than in the case of IRAP, begins with the screen
-ing of applications, usually taking the form of ﬁskeleton outlines,ﬂ by in-house 
experts. Winners at that stage are invited to submit full proposals, which become 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 93
the object of detailed due diligence. Negotiation then follow, where repayability 
and intellectual property provisions are among the major items covered.
Criticisms from Public and Participants
Dr. Nicholson then identi˜ed a number of ﬁconundrumsﬂ raised by TPC that 
he judged ﬁfairly characteristicﬂ of such programs. Chief among these, perhaps, 
are those centering on repayability. This feature has been ﬁoversold a bit,ﬂ creat
-ing expectations among the public that have not been met. ﬁOnly about 3
 percent 
of the funds out the door have actually come back so far,ﬂ he stated. ﬁBut the truth 
is that we knew there was a long lead time for the repayment to come back; and, 
in fact, the program managers claim that repayment is on schedule.ﬂ Compound
-ing the issue, designing repayment terms that properly re˚ect the program™s risk/
reward-sharing component has been very dif˜cult, since it was usually impossible 
to track what portion of a company™s returns has accrued exclusively to a project 
supported by TPC.
The selection process has been another source of criticism. For one thing, 
project approval is protracted. For another, a perception exists in the political 
arena that TPC has been too focused on large companiesŠin particular, those 
in the aerospace sectorŠalthough the great majority of awards have in reality 
gone to SMEs. In addition, program objectives are so broad that it is dif˜cult to 
maintain a consistent approachŠor, put another way, there are so many grounds 
for approval that it is sometimes dif˜cult to justify turning a project down. 
ﬁThat tends to invite a lot of objections from people who were disappointed,ﬂ 
Dr.
 Nicholso
n said, ﬁbecause someone can always ˜nd a precedent and say, ‚But 
you approved that one, so what™s wrong with me?™ﬂ
ﬁWhat Does It Mean to Capture National Bene˜ts?ﬂ
As ﬁprobably the most fundamental questionﬂ arising from the TPC experi
-ence, however, Dr. Nicholson cited the following: ﬁIn a world of global supply 
chains, what does it really mean to capture national bene˜ts with programs like 
this?ﬂ Observing that many of the program™s customers are multinationalsŠpast 
TPC recipients include IBM, Pratt & Whitney, and RIMŠhe declared that it was 
ﬁnot quite clear that one can capture the bene˜ts [for a national economy] to the 
extent that one once could.ﬂ
Summing up, Dr. Nicholson expressed the opinion that Canada has rapidly 
built a strong basic research capacity that is paying off in terms of reputation and 
reversal of the country™s brain drain. Its technology-development programs have 
evolved from subsidy-oriented to more sophisticated risk-sharing models, recall
-ing a similar evolution in Finland. Finally, the lesson of Canada™s experience, and 
one that he had seen reiterated throughout the morning™s talks, is that any national 
innovation strategy today has to be globally linked.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
DISCUSSION
Having commended the speakers for being on target in their presentations, 
and noting that he had taken over as moderator from Mr. Knox, Dr. Wessner 
called on Mark Myers to open the questioning.
The Special Demands of German Integration
Dr. Myers asked Dr. Kuhlmann to assess innovation programs in Germany 
since reuni˜cation from the time perspectives of the former East and West, as well 
as to look at economic growth in eastern Germany and to compare it with that 
seen in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary. He expressed a speci˜c interest 
in the equalization of salaries that took place right at the moment of uni˜cation 
in Germany, remarking that the other countries enjoyed, during at least part of 
their own restructuring, the ﬁadvantages of lower wages.ﬂ
Dr. Kuhlmann replied that the question had been debated in Germany as 
well, but that historical circumstances had left no alternative. The East European 
countries, having become EU members, were gradually availing themselves 
of the opportunities offered by ﬁa European research system that is growing 
together.ﬂ Salaries there had been relatively low 10 years ago but were slowly 
rising as those countries integrated with the European network. Thanks to this 
integration, he added, Eastern Europe can expect to develop advanced national 
research infrastructures in the longer term. 
Germany™s path had been different. Sudden integration caused a breakdown 
of the existing East German research system, which had not been compatible 
with that in the West. A marked brain drain resulted from salary discrepancies 
between the two regions: Especially early on, industrial researchers from eastern 
Germany found work with companies in western Germany and made their way 
there. Eastern Germany, meanwhile, was (and still is being) kept alive by huge 
public investments, without which there would be inadequate employment.
Innovation PolicyŠAlso on the Demand Side?
Egils Milbergs of the Center for Accelerating Innovation, observing that most 
of the commentary from all three panelists had concerned enhancing innovation 
inputsŠﬁmore R&D, more scientists and engineers, more capital, etc.ﬂŠsug
-gested that a full discussion of innovation policy should include the demand side 
as well as the supply side. He urged consideration of macroeconomic policy™s 
impact on innovation, speci˜cally the role of interest rates; how tax policy affects 
the demand for innovation; standards; trade policy and how nations integrate 
with global markets; procurement policy; and competition policy. ﬁIt seems like 
there™s an entire domain with huge in˚uence on innovation that people who talk 
about national innovation systems don™t really address in a meaningful way,ﬂ he 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 95
asserted. ﬁThey give recognition to these factors, but when you look at what the 
policies are, it™s all about enhancing input, not maximizing output.ﬂ
Canada: Political Obstacles on the Demand Side
Dr. Nicholson registered his agreement, saying that in his general policy role 
he probably spent more time on the demand side than on the supply side. But 
he allowed that, with the exception of tax cuts, the supply side is more visible 
politically because of the complexity of many demand-side issues, trade policy 
and competition policy being examples. Having spent most of his career in the 
private sector, he personally viewed competition as paramount: ﬁNecessity is the 
mother of invention, there™s no question about that,ﬂ he said. ﬁAt the companies 
I™ve worked in, we were at our most inventive when the competition™s breath 
was at our heels.ﬂ This reality had been particularly salient as competition, once 
largely domestic, became global; ˜nding a response to what was both a new 
source of demand and a challenge would occasion ﬁa lot more head-scratching 
in all governments.ﬂ
Against this backdrop, Canada has worked hard on its macroeconomic 
 
fundamentals, ˜rst getting control of monetary policy, then moving to ˜scal 
policy. Amid massive tax cuts, its corporate tax rate is now down to below that 
of the United States. More recently, under a ﬁsmart regulations initiativeﬂ fueled 
by recommendations from a blue-ribbon panel for improvements in such areas 
as drug approval, the country has started to eliminate ﬁthe little differences that 
don™t make a differenceﬂ but nevertheless interfered with trade across the U.S.-
Canada border. Another area ripe for streamliningŠadmittedly, ﬁa very danger
-ous wordﬂŠis environmental regulation. But while ample ﬁlow-hanging fruitﬂ in 
the regulatory area offer ways in which ﬁgovernment policy [could] be helpful on 
the demand side of the equation,ﬂ he said, ﬁnone is easy politically.ﬂ
Germany: Trying To Go Beyond Classic Recipes
Dr. Kuhlmann also pronounced himself in agreement with the statement 
that far more elements of public policy have an impact on innovation than those 
included within the ﬁnarrow notion of innovation policy.ﬂ As understanding of this 
area grew, European governments were more frequently becoming the object of 
criticism that their innovation programs did not take account of broader economic 
issues. Those formulating innovation policy, meanwhile, are ˜nding themselves 
obliged to design their initiatives in the context of other policies whose impact 
on ﬁwhat actually happens in companiesﬂ might be greater by far. Discussion of 
these questions is increasing in numerous European countries, Germany among 
them, although the debate is limited to experts rather than taking place among 
the general public.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Former Chancellor Schroeder™s Partnership for Innovation was an attempt at 
a systemic or holistic approach to in˚uencing the basic conditions of innovation 
that went far beyond classical policy instruments. But, speaking from his experi
-ence with governments at different levels in Germany, Dr. Kuhlmann saw a prob
-lem in the prevalence of competition among agencies. Unlike some competition, 
this variety is not productive; rather, being rooted in claims by each agency that 
its work was more important than that of the others, it results in gridlock, ﬁquite 
a mess from the perspective of innovating companies.ﬂ Some degree of coordi
-nation, including some effort at mutual information and collaborative design, is 
therefore necessary. 
In Finland, perhaps, designers of demand-oriented innovation policies ask 
ﬁWhat is the problem, and what can we do about it?ﬂ rather than occupying them
-selves with the borders among ministries. Only at the end of the design process 
might they ask, ﬁWho is in charge of what, and how would we have to redesign 
structures?ﬂ This sequence does not, however, represent the norm in public policy 
making in Germany.
Cross-Border Comparisons of Attitudes, Programs
Dr. Wessner then posed three questions that, although quick in the asking, 
he judged likely to demand lengthy responses. He requested that Dr. Nicholson, 
whom he complemented on a superb presentation, discuss how the Canadian 
government had dealt with what sounded like charges that some of its innova
-tion programs were vehicles for corporate welfare that funneled the majority of 
available funding to large companies. Referring to the STEP Board™s assessment 
of the U.S. Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which was in 
progress, he described himself as having been heartened to hear that someoneŠin 
this case, Dr. NicholsonŠshared his acquaintance with the dif˜culty of ascertain
-ing the consequences of a single award for the future of a company.
He then asked Dr. Kotilainen whether he regarded the budget of the United 
States™ Advanced Technology Program, which had been running at around $140 
million per year, as adequate to the U.S. economy in light of the fact that Finland, 
a nation with 5.1 million inhabitants to the United States™ 300 million, was spend
-ing between $530 million and $560 million annually on a very similar program.
Finally, Dr. Wessner said he had observed that while Europeans enthused 
over the creation of a European research space and innovation system, they 
often had barely concluded when they began speaking about their own national 
programs. He asked Dr. Kuhlman to talk about those two elements in relation to 
one another, then very brie˚y to discuss the impact of the EU programs, a subject 
Americans were very interested in, and to assess whether innovation efforts in 
Europe are primarily driven at the EU or national level.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL II: NEW NATIONAL MODELS
 97
Parrying the ﬁCorporate Welfareﬂ Charge
Dr. Nicholson said that, as charges of corporate welfare are still to be heard, 
the problem that Dr. Wessner alluded to is yet to be solved. Because subsidies to 
business have been cut ﬁpretty dramatically,ﬂ however, he felt that ﬁjust in terms 
of the gross dollarsﬂ the critics could no longer make as strong a case. Canada™s 
federal budget surpluses had also ameliorated the situation, by rendering the 
trade-offs less obvious. A more substantive change, the move to risk-sharing with 
repayability as featured in the Technology Partnerships Program, had placed a 
new obstacle before opponents of the programs, although they nonetheless took 
the line: ﬁYou haven™t gotten all your money back yet, so obviously this must 
still be corporate welfare.ﬂ Also helpful is that, increasingly, potential criticism is 
arising in the context of a local facility where a large number of jobs are at stake. 
Then, ﬁfrankly, the political shoe is sometimes on the other foot,ﬂ Dr.
 Nicholson 
said, for ﬁif there isn™t a little bit of big-company support, there™s a larger price 
to pay.ﬂ
Administering Supply-, Demand-Side Policies Separately
Dr. Kotilainen began his response by taking up the issue of demand-side 
measures in support of innovation that Drs. Nicholson and Kuhlmann had previ
-ously addressed. At Tekes, he said, innovation policy is viewed as far broader than 
most other policies implemented by the government, including science policy, 
technology policy, and industrial policy. And because it incorporates elements 
of all the others, innovation policy is dif˜cult and complex to run. ﬁTherefore, 
we think we should concentrate on that,ﬂ he said, ﬁleaving the other policies 
to the private sector or to other parts of the government to take care of.ﬂ Even 
though Tekes ˜nances research, the main focus of its awards is always industrial 
competitiveness and networking, a strategy that leaves the rest to the companies 
themselves. 
Addressing the matter of the Advanced Technology Program (ATP), Dr. 
Kotilainen emphasized its philosophical similarity to Finland™s national innova
-tion programs. Those programs have been extremely bene˜cial for the country 
because they combine the skills of its universities with those of its companies. 
Projects are planned jointly by the universities and industry from the very begin
-ning, so that both know exactly what to expect from the research, and companies 
also got acquainted with university researchers, a very good basis for subsequent 
recruiting. This, he remarked, is an essential function no matter what the size 
of a country is. On the speci˜c subject of ATP™s annual budget, Dr. Kotilainen 
recommended that, rather than being cut, it should be favored with the addition 
to the end of a zero or two.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Balancing Europeanization, National Programs
Dr. Wessner, announcing that the luncheon speaker had arrived and that the 
session would thus have to be concluded quickly, asked Dr. Kuhlmann to be brief 
in his remarks on the relationship between Europeanization and those national 
programs still in place within the EU.
Dr. Kuhlmann said he had speculated in a paper published just two weeks 
before on how ﬁthis very contradictory relationship,ﬂ so fraught with tension 
at that moment, might develop in the future.
10
 There were some government 
of˜cials who are opening up to collaboration across borders; there is, in fact, 
a program called ERA-net that funds only those intergovernmental collabora
-tions aimed at developing joint national programs on a European platform. At 
the same time, however, other of˜cials still fail to see the value of such efforts, 
whose very existence, at least partially, call into question their role as national 
policy makers.
10
J. 
EdlerandS.Kuhlmann,ﬁTowardsOneSystem?TheEuropeanResearchAreaInitiative,
Edler and S. Kuhlmann, ﬁTowards One System? The European Research Area Initiative, 
the Integration of Research Systems and the Changing Leeway of National Policies,ﬂ 
Technik
-folgenabschätzung: Theorie und Praxis
, 1(4):59-68. Accessed at <
http://www.itas.fzk.de/tatup/0
51/
edku0
5a.pdf
>.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99
Dr. Spencer, expressing his honor at introducing Dr. John Marburger, pointed 
out that the latter™s current tenure as science adviser to the President and director 
of the Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) coincides with ﬁan excit
-ing time for science in the United States.ﬂ Moving selectively through the details 
of Dr. Marburger™s extremely distinguished career, a printed summary of which 
was available to the audience, Dr. Spencer represented him as an exemplar of a 
generation that grew up believing it was physics that underlay all science. After 
earning a master™s degree at Princeton and a Ph.D. at StanfordŠﬁtwo of the
 better 
physics departments in the country,ﬂ Dr. Spencer pointed outŠDr. Marburger 
distinguished himself as a scientist in the ˜eld of nonlinear optics.
But what gained Dr. Marburger the most recognition, even before his eleva
-tion to his current position, was his leadership in the ˜eld of science. He had 
served as chairman of the Department of Physics at the University of Southern 
California, then as president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook. 
When, in 1998, Dr. Marburger moved into the post of director at Brookhaven 
National Laboratory (BNL), Dr.
 Spencer was a member of BNL™s board of direc
-tors; he therefore knew ˜rst-hand ﬁwhat a messﬂ the laboratory was in at the 
moment Dr. Marburger took it
 over.
As Dr. Marburger had consented to take questions following his address, 
Dr.
 Spencer decided, in the interest of time, to turn the podium over to him with
-out further ado.
Luncheon Address in the Great Hall
Moderator:
William J. Spencer
SEMATECH, retired
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
LUNCHEON ADDRESS
John H. Marburger
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
Registering his appreciation at having been invited to address the symposium, 
Dr. Marburger said that its agenda struck him as strongly similar in theme to that 
of a conference he had addressed a month before: ﬁInnovation as a Competitive 
Advantage: Role of the Research Park,ﬂ sponsored by the Association of Univer
-sity Research Parks (AURP). He decided, therefore, to present substantially the 
same remarks as on that previous occasion.
Research parks became a global phenomenon and, in the future, are likely 
to be signi˜cant focal points for all countries with knowledge-based economies. 
In 2002, the AURP identi˜ed and sought data from about 200 research parks 
associated with universities in the United States. Those that responded, about 
half of the 200, had a total of more than 2,900 tenants employing over 235,000 
individuals; the dominant or leading technology was, in most cases, biomedical 
or medical technology. Not-for-pro˜ts made up 83 percent of those responding, 
while 62 percent had a business-incubator component and about one-third had a 
yearly operating budget exceeding $1 million. Seventy percent had been estab
-lished using public funds, mostly during the 1980s and 1990s. Dr. Marburger 
acknowledged that these data were a few years old, but opined that they were not 
of a sort susceptible to rapid change. The statistical portrait emerging from them 
matched the characteristics of the technology park and incubator programs that he 
started at Stony Brook in the 1980s and early 1990s, when he was the institution™s 
president. His remarks, therefore, would be based on direct experience with the 
development of such parks.
Throughout his career, Dr. Marburger said, he had asked himself: What is 
the best strategic path to successful technology-based economic development? 
Although he did not give so much thought to this question while he was busy 
solving problems of quantum electrodynamics as a graduate student in the early 
1960s, it was nonetheless in the air. Everyone at Stanford in those days was aware 
of the Stanford Research Institute, soon to become SRI and SRI International; of 
the rise of nearby Silicon Valley, which was just coming together; and of how the 
university had planned to foster high-tech industry even before World War II, an 
idea ˜nally being carried through. ﬁFor those of us who worked in the Stanford 
environment, even if only brie˚y,ﬂ he recalled, ﬁthe power of linkages between 
a major research university and regional business was immediately obvious.ﬂ 
Another university-based coalition had emerged in North Carolina just a few 
years earlier to take advantage of the intellectual assets of Duke University, North 
Carolina State, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. It had an 
institute, RTI, which was similar to SRI. Also like Silicon Valley, the Research 
Triangle initiative had originated in academia and quickly engaged regional busi
-ness leaders.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LUNCHEON ADDRESS IN THE GREAT HALL
 101
In these two examples of partnerships between universities and business, 
the federal government had been an important silent partner. The expansion 
of engineering and science departments during World War II, along with rapid 
increase in federal funding for university research in the decades thereafter, 
had created centers of excellence in basic and applied research throughout the 
country. State and local governments were making important investments in 
higher
 educationŠparticularly conspicuous were those of California and New 
York, which were building new campusesŠand 2-year community colleges were 
springing up everywhere. The recruitment of an increasing percentage of high-
school graduates into new post-secondary programs, above all those of the 2-year 
colleges, was taking place. Governments helped build an infrastructure in which 
the new partnerships could succeed. ﬁMy colleagues on the President™s Council 
of Advisors on Science and Technology [PCAST] during this administration 
refer to this whole phenomenon as ‚the ecology of innovation,™ﬂ Dr. Marburger 
said, explaining that the term suggested ﬁthe notion of a ‚system™ in the innova
-tion process.ﬂ This has been a subject of much study; in fact, he reckoned that 
many attending the symposium have looked at economic development occurring 
around the nucleus of a research university or federal laboratory, where this 
development has been fostered by the investment of public funds at the federal 
and state levels.
Five categories embracing institutional participants in innovation systems 
were identi˜ed in a study prepared for PCAST, which Dr. Marburger cochaired 
with the prominent Silicon Valley venture capitalist Floyd Kvamme, by the 
Science and Technology Policy Institute (STPI), an organization attached to 
OSTP and operated by the Institute for Defense Analyses:
1.
 governments, which play a key role in setting broad policy directions and 
a primary role in funding basic scienti˜c research;
2.
 private enterprises and their research institutes, which contribute to devel
-opment and other activities that are closer to the market than governments are;
3.
 universities and related institutions that provide key knowledge and skills;
4.
 bridging institutions acting as intermediaries under such names as ﬁtech
-nology center,ﬂ ﬁtechnology brokers,ﬂ or ﬁbusiness innovation centers,ﬂ which 
play an important if understated role in closing the gaps among the other actors 
and had been important to the success of all types of research centers; and
5.
 other organizations, public and private, such as venture capital ˜rms, 
federal laboratories, and training organizations.
The STPI study also identi˜ed four contextual factors suf˜ciently important 
to the operation of innovation systems to be able to make or break them: market 
conditions, physical infrastructure, education and training, and regulatory condi
-tions. The innovation-systems approach looked at by PCAST the previous year 
identi˜ed barriers to speci˜c policy objectives and assigned functions to mitigate 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
them for each of the ˜ve categories of actors. The process, as Dr. Marburger 
summarized it, was one of sorting through the challenges, deciding which actors 
should address them, and systematically improving the environment so as to 
promote the success of research centers.
As an example, he offered the policy objective of building an innovation 
culture where none had existed; this might be addressed by removing regulatory 
or legal barriers, which is a government function, and providing incentives for 
venture-capital funding, which government and private enterprise can do together. 
Enhancing technology diffusion among the actors, then promoting extension and 
technical-assistance programs, is a role of government and bridging organiza
-tions, while government also can promote lifelong learning with the help of 
universities and private enterprises. Taking a systems approach that identi˜es the 
actors by functional categories in this way and working systematically through 
issues in the contextual factors that might be inhibiting the development of these 
centers turns out, Dr. Marburger said, to be an effective strategy. ﬁGovernment 
can play a role in most strategies,ﬂ he added, ﬁbut it is not the only actor, and 
generally government action is most effective when it responds to needs identi˜ed 
by actors that are closer to the market.ﬂ
Returning to the subject of his early exposure to regional development, 
Dr. Marburger recounted that, upon ˜nishing his graduate study at Stanford, 
he started his research career at the University of Southern California. There, 
too, he saw ˜rst-hand how the engineering and business schools, strongly com
-mitted to regional industry, were leveraging federal funding to build programs 
that supported regional development. While there, he himself started a center for 
laser study with federal and industrial cosponsors that 30 years later was still 
thriving.
He took these lessons with him when he went in 1980 to Stony Brook, where 
his ˜rst task as president was to open a 540-bed tertiary-care university hospital. 
In the process of ﬁlearn[ing] a lot more than [he had] ever wanted to know about 
the hospital business,ﬂ he saw an opportunity to leverage the resources that the 
state of New York was willing to investŠin both the hospital and expansion of 
the university™s medical schoolŠto build up bioscience research, health care, and 
regional industry all at one time.
Long Island, where Stony Brook is located, had multiple assets for develop
-ing biotechnology at that time. The director of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 
the Nobel Laureate James Watson, was concerned about his scienti˜c staff leav
-ing the region to start biotech businesses in California and elsewhere. Nearby 
Brookhaven National Laboratory also had important resources for biomedical 
research although it was almost totally disconnected from regional industry. And 
the university was about to expand its medical faculty dramatically, not only in 
the clinical departments but in the basic medical sciences as well.
Running through the highlights of what he said was a long story, Dr.
 Marburge
r related that Stony Brook established a degree program in genetics with Cold 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LUNCHEON ADDRESS IN THE GREAT HALL
 10
3Spring Harbor lab and placed one of its new hospital™s three linear accelerators 
for cancer therapy at Brookhaven. The university™s dean of medicine became a 
member of the same BNL board of directors on which Dr. Spencer was serving. 
The three institutions began joint recruitment with the aim of building comple
-mentary competencies. And Stony Brook emerged from a New York state com
-petition set up to fund centers for advanced technologies with an award for one 
specializing in medical biotechnology.
At the same time, the university began building acceptance among its faculty 
for participating with industry in cooperative research programs. ﬁThere was a lot 
of controversy at the time about whether engaging in industrial-related research 
would somehow undermine the quality of academic programs or the purity of 
the research,ﬂ Dr. Marburger recalled, adding: ﬁYou don™t need the entire faculty 
to have an attitude that™s favorable to development, but you do need a critical 
mass.ﬂ
These and related activities strengthened Stony Brook™s applications to the 
state economic development agency for low-cost ˜nancing and grants to build a 
biotechnology incubator facility next to the hospital, which became a huge suc
-cess. High occupancy rates right from the beginning made it possible to maintain 
an aggressive business plan for the incubator and led to several rounds of expan
-sion that eventually included the construction of a generic pilot manufacturing 
facility for biotechnology tenants.
The university also developed a small technology-transfer of˜ce that worked 
quite well, probably because its director, a former small businessman, had had 
direct experience with the commercialization of technology. He spent his days 
walking around to the labs, knocking on their doors, and asking people what 
they were doing. ﬁIf it sounded interesting to him,ﬂ recalled Dr. Marburger, ﬁhe 
took out the papers for patent disclosure and said, ‚Here, I™ll help you.™ And if it 
didn™t sound interesting, he said, ‚Well, it™s yours, do with it what you want.™ ﬂ His 
activities led to an exceptionally high rate of licensing per patent disclosure.
The director of the technology-transfer of˜ce was associated with a person 
outside who spent his time shopping around a list of university intellectual prop
-erty to customers throughout the world. The two helped Stony Brook develop 
a very strong and successful business in the wake of the 1980 passage of the 
Bayh-Dole Act that had remained a source of revenue for the university and 
of satisfaction to many on the faculty, who had in the meantime become much 
more comfortable in their engagement with industry. But in recognition of their 
success, both the director and his colleague were promoted into other positions, 
with the result that the university™s technology-transfer operation ﬁgot bigger, 
and much less ef˜cient and effective,ﬂ Dr. Marburger said. ﬁIt is still functioning 
today, but it never quite functioned as well as when we had only two people and 
a secretary.ﬂ
All these activities established links between the university, regional busi
-ness, and government economic-development agencies. Coordination among the 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10
4 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
major research institutions allowed them to build complementary strengths and 
present a broader interface to the business community. The creation of critical 
masses of talent in related ˜elds served to raise mutual awareness of opportuni
-ties and to reinforce the directions that the institutions had already established in 
their long-range plans.
Looking back on these experiences, Dr. Marburger isolated ˜ve principles 
that he viewed as key to success:
1.
 Build competencies with attention to regional strengths. 
This is impor
-tant for a large country like the United States, whose markets display very 
strong regional differences but each of whose regions has its strengths and its 
possibilities. Institutions cooperating in regional development must hire people 
whose interests enhance and complement what is already found in the environ
-ment, which ﬁdoesn™t happen unless somebody pays attention to it.ﬂ For the 
idea is to build 
regional
 strength, not just 
institutional
 strength. When several 
research institutions are located in the same region, they bene˜t by cooperating 
in recruitment and group development. Stony Brook, Cold Spring Harbor lab, and 
Brookhaven National Lab shared information on an informal basis about areas of 
concentration and often collaborated on recruitment.
2.
 Identify a research strategy.
 Stony Brook™s conscious decision to make 
biomedical research a priority meant allocating university resources to proposals 
and projects that worked together to build a foundation for future successesŠeven 
if, ﬁin terms of some sort of absolute measure of quality,ﬂ these were at times not 
the best proposals to come forward. While there were exceptions to this practice, 
a bias was maintained in favor of those ˜elds that could be expected to help fur
-ther the overall strategy. ﬁThat requires leadership,ﬂ Dr. Marburger declared. ﬁIt 
does not happen in a university environment unless someone is willing to push on 
it.ﬂ Faculty development and capital improvements were coordinated to enhance 
biotechnology capabilities. While other areas needed and deserved attention, 
the immediate opportunities for funding lay in the biosciences, which therefore 
received the focus.
3.
 Build a regional environment.
 In the early 1980s, Long Island business 
organizations were not aware of the rapidly growing opportunities in the biotech
-nology industry. They did not appreciate the signi˜cance of an emerging major 
tertiary health-care facility or the value of federal funding as a source of technol
-ogy. The Long Island economy was then dominated by large aerospace contrac
-torsŠprincipally, Grumman CorporationŠthat were to fall by the wayside as the 
cold war came to an end and industry shifted completely. ﬁSo it was important for 
me and my counterparts at the two laboratories to get together, pound the pave
-ment, and talk to peopleŠto take the biotechnology message to business groups, 
chambers of commerce, and state and local government agencies,ﬂ Dr.
 Marburger 
recalls. ﬁThe whole region had to cooperate in making this work, and somebody 
always has to take the ˜rst step to get others together.ﬂ Because Long Island™s 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LUNCHEON ADDRESS IN THE GREAT HALL
 10
5business community was aware of the dangers of relying on a single industry, 
these efforts by the leading centers of research to work together with business 
were warmly received. 
4.
 Form regional partnerships.
 Institutional rivalries are counte
rproductive; 
cooperation and collaboration are essential for regional-scale development; and 
regional-scale development is important for a stable pattern of growth. That 
companies start up, grow, then frequently either die or move elsewhere is not 
necessarily the end of the world, but it does necessitate continual start-ups. Some 
of the new companies may survive and add permanently to the economy, some 
may have to be replaced with others that are suf˜ciently similar to stabilize the 
workforce. It is because regional partnerships enhance mobility and multiply 
opportunities for workers and for businesses that a critical mass of mutually 
compatible businesses is needed to stabilize the inevitable effect of start-ups™ 
moving away. ﬁIn Silicon Valley in its heyday, and it is presumably still some
-what like this, you had the phenomenon of frequent moves of technical personnel 
from one company to another,ﬂ Dr. Marburger observed. ﬁThere was a great deal 
of
 mobilityŠcompanies came and went, started and failedŠand in general the 
makeup of the workforce was similar, which stabilized employment in the area 
despite the dynamics in the companies.ﬂ
5.
 Fund the machinery, which consists of facilities, people, and orga
-nizations.
 None of this happens without people who know that their job is to 
make it happen; neither regional development nor technology transfer can be 
made to work with volunteers. ﬁI travel around the country looking for regions 
that are succeeding,ﬂ Dr. Marburger said, ﬁand many are attempting to do it on a 
 
voluntary basis, but only those where there is some sort of executive center with 
a paid workforce [are having success].ﬂ In other words, whether at a state, county, 
or local-government economic-development of˜ce, or at an organization that is 
either freestanding or associated with a university or a business group, someone 
has to know that technology transfer is his or her job. Technology-related eco
-nomic development usually entails investing state- and local-government funds 
in facilities to reduce costs for start-up tenants. Also needed are people to bring 
entrepreneurs together with ˜nancial and technical support. More than brokers, 
these individuals play the role of teacher and counselor for entrepreneurs who 
know the technology but are not familiar with business practices, and for inves
-tors who are not familiar with engineering and scienti˜c mindset.
Dr. Marburger acknowledged that these lessons may be learned in other 
 
contexts and may not apply to every situation. He and his Long Island counter
-parts tried to learn from other regions as theirs grew, and they discovered national 
organizations that help to foster best practices. The movement that supports 
university-based research parks, and of research parks that are based around a 
nucleating asset other than a university, was growing, thriving, and becoming an 
important part of the U.S. innovation ecology.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10
6 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Dr. Marburger reiterated in closing that his observations were based on 
his own experience in addition to his knowledge of other research parks in the 
United States and around the world. He added that over the previous 5 years, 
he has visited over a dozen research parks in South Korea, Japan,
 Russia, and 
Europe. While ﬁimpressed with the similarities among the regions,ﬂ he noted that 
research parks abroad have a ﬁmuch stronger government componentﬂ than is 
found in the United States. However, he said that he perceived the sheer diversity 
of such enterprises found in the United States, implying both experimentation and 
potential adaptability of research parks to new realities and opportunities, to be 
a source of strength.
DISCUSSION
Dr. Spencer, thanking Dr. Marburger for his comments and concurring that 
some leadership is required to set a research strategy, asked him to provide guide
-lines for doing so, particularly in an environment where researchers are unused 
to working in accordance with a strategy, such as that of a university or national 
laboratory.
Dr. Marburger answered that among the ˜rst things to be done is to gather 
data. He had seen groups, whether they were made up of faculty or of university 
presidents, get together and have a great idea but make the mistake of not hav
-ing ﬁa look aroundﬂ to explore possibilities. They may then see their efforts to 
sell their project meet with disappointment because it does not seem to ˜t with 
anybody else™s plans, whereupon they may either attempt to implement it alone 
or get a federal grant that in the end builds up a lab or center within the university 
that grows no roots in the community. Some states, as they undertake their own 
economic-development plans, have contracted with research organizations such 
as Battelle to make surveys of the capabilities found in their regions, and have 
then based their economic-development plans on the resulting data. The state 
of New York has very consciously selected, based on actual studies of capacity 
resident in the state, a set of objectives for ˜elds of research and has promulgated 
it through its economic-development operation.
Consensus buildingŠwhich starts with procuring regional support and 
extends to creating an environment of acceptance for moving in a certain areaŠis 
never easy. But starting with an idea that doesn™t ˜t and then trying to force it is 
also very dif˜cult. ﬁYou have to take advantage of opportunities,ﬂ Dr. Marburger 
commented, ﬁand this doesn™t align very well with the values that you often ˜nd 
in research universities.ﬂ When looking for a faculty member, a research univer
-sity very often simply looks for the best person available even if his or her ˜eld 
doesn™t quite ˜t its requirements; or, conversely, it might leave a position un˜lled 
for a long time until it can ˜nd the person it really wants. ﬁYou™ve got to be a 
little bit more ˚exible than that if you™re building a capability that will ˜t with 
a lot of other partners,ﬂ he stated.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LUNCHEON ADDRESS IN THE GREAT HALL
 10
7Next, Dr. Lonnie Edelheit, former senior vice president of Corporate R&D at 
General Electric, asked Dr. Marburger what he sees as the role of government in 
such enterprises. Since the kind of undertaking Dr. Marburger proposes demands 
integration, as well as management and leadership, he asked: ﬁIs there enough of 
that in the government, and where should it be?ﬂ
In his response, Dr. Marburger noted that agencies like the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) increasingly fund theme-based programsŠalthough they con
-tinue to be peer reviewed and merit based. For example, NSF funds centers that 
conduct competitions based around particular themes, such as materials research. 
In addition to this thematic focus, NSF also often requires these centers to cooper
-ate with regional industry and state of˜ces. Re˚ecting this stipulation, proposals 
from around the country often include testimonials from regional business groups 
and state and local government of˜cials.
A tension exists within funding agencies between two desires: to have money 
in big, undifferentiated pots to respond to unsolicited proposals and, increas
-ingly, to hold out a share for fairly well-de˜ned programming in a ˜eld such as 
nanotechnology or information technology. At the agencies that fund extramural 
programs, Dr. Marburger said, a trend over the past decades of reserving more 
and more of the money for theme areas is discernible. ﬁThat™s quite reasonable,ﬂ 
he commented, ﬁthat™s the sort of thing you want.ﬂ There are currently some 27 
nanotechnology centers being sponsored by four or ˜ve federal agencies, and 
OSTP tries to coordinate this ﬁinteresting phenomenonﬂ by keeping track of what 
the centers are doing and by making sure that the agencies talk to each other 
about how the capabilities of the different centers ˜t with one another. Having 
peer-reviewed, merit-based grant awards is therefore consistent and compatible 
with the type of development that Dr. Marburger deemed effective.
Referring to the ˜ve points mentioned by Dr. Marburger, the next question 
concerned the environmental and health aspects of regional development.
Dr. Marburger explained that all such activity takes place in a societal con
-text and that responsibility for governing its different parts lies with different 
authorities. To illustrate, he noted that environmental issues are usually subject to 
a licensing process, building permits, zoning, and so on, all of which are part of 
a complex of issues that have to be managed together. Typically, it is possible to 
set up a system of licensing and regulatory control over new business, especially 
in the high-tech sector. If hazardous chemicals or operations are involved, the 
system may possess ﬁvery antigrowth, very inhibitoryﬂ features, he said, add
-ing: ﬁThat needs to be worked out with local authorities so that you can have 
responsible growth.ﬂ
One of the more interesting phenomena that Dr. Marburger had seen on 
Long Island, where a very high degree of environmental consciousness existed, 
was a coalition of environmental-advocacy groups that had been formed to work 
with developers and the business community. ﬁThey realized that if you tried to 
hold back all development, then you™d get a fragmented, irresponsible, not very 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10
8 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ef˜cient, and environmentally destructive pattern of development,ﬂ he recalled. 
ﬁSo the two sides sat down and worked out a pattern of development priorities,ﬂ 
one result of which had been the Long Island Pine Barrens Initiative.
Such achievements are, therefore, within reach, but leadership and ﬁa very 
careful weighing of the pros and consﬂ are indispensable. Some types of opera
-tions are simply not compatible with certain regions, Dr. Marburger warned: 
ﬁYou can™t just plop down a manufacturing facility that uses large amounts of 
chemicals in an environmentally sensitive region without everyone understanding 
what™s happening.ﬂ So a role for government does indeed exist, but because the 
execution of social requirements is usually very distributed, it could not be car
-ried out from the top-down. Accounting for part of the complexity is the fact that 
enterprises around the country are growing up in the context of environmental 
and health regulations administered at federal, state, and local levels.
A[n unidenti˜ed] questioner observed that size and resources afford the 
United States a very big advantage in a global economic environment that is 
growing much more competitive, but that other countries have achieved greater 
government/private-sector coordination. He asked whether Dr. Marburger thought 
that, in the new environment, it would make sense for the United States to have 
more of the kind of coordination seen elsewhere and how he thought it might be 
structured.
Dr. Marburger acknowledged ﬁthe focus that other countries are able to 
give to economic development,ﬂ along with the achievements that focusing their 
resources has produced, as a ﬁscary phenomenon.ﬂ He asserted, however, that 
opting for such a strategy presumes an ability to foresee what would add the most 
value in the future. Noting that the huge diversity that the United States has and 
will retain is one of its advantages, he stated that he hoped that, in the end, the 
U.S. approach of relying on diversity and market-based planning would provide 
the country with a number of different models in a number of different areas. 
ﬁOur size and experience in this, and the fact that we don™t constrain all [our] 
institutions to the same model, makes us an ongoing laboratory,ﬂ he said.
The fact that the country™s research parks are growing up in what 
Dr.
 Marburge
r called ﬁdifferent governmental ecologiesﬂŠunder different regu
-latory environments, in different culturesŠimpressed him, therefore, as a source 
of strength. He praised the efforts of such organizations as the AURP to com
-municate with each other and to engage in sharing best practices and similar 
activities. Conferences like the one he had addressed the previous month attract 
not only those who manage the research parks but also representatives of state and 
federal governments, who are watching developments. ﬁWe™re getting educated,ﬂ 
he stated, ﬁand we have con˜dence in our rational ability to make things work.ﬂ 
It was because no one has an economic model that forecasts what would 
work in the future, Dr. Marburger stressed, that the simple fact of the United 
States™ huge capacity place it in what would ultimately be a safer position. 
The one indicator that is always hopeful for the United States is the scale of its 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LUNCHEON ADDRESS IN THE GREAT HALL
 10
9economy and the very large number of research centers it has. ﬁBut there™s the 
rest of the world out there, and it is developing, and at some point we will just be 
a part of this developing world,ﬂ he said. 
Responding to a question from Gregory Schuckman of the University of 
 
Central Florida about forecasting future workforce needs, Dr. Marburger noted 
that, while the issue was both extremely important and interesting, there is no 
model as yet that is capable of predicting success in economic development 
or that can predict future technical workforce needs. The jobs of engineers, 
technicians, and scientists are changing just as rapidly as jobs in other sectors: 
Entire categories of technical work have disappeared during the decades of the 
information-technology revolution. In the same way that of˜ce productivity has 
increasedŠas measured, perhaps, in the number of people required to generate a 
certain number of pagesŠthe science and engineering community have become 
more productive. But as ﬁwe do not have a very good handleﬂ on the rapid 
changes in patterns of production and the relation of the workforce to production, 
he was skeptical about predictions regarding the workforce.
Trends could be observed. There was no question that every developed coun
-try in the world is concerned about its engineering workforce in light of develop
-ments in China, but the rate at which China appears to be outproducing the rest 
of the world is probably not sustainable. ﬁWe™re not working in linear systems 
here,ﬂ Dr. Marburger declared. ﬁThose rates are going to turn over eventually, and 
I don™t know what the forces are that will turn them over.ﬂ How all those being 
trained in Asia would be absorbed into the technical economy was unclear.
What is known, Dr. Marburger said, is that understanding of the natural 
world in fairly sophisticated terms, and particularly technology, will be a part of 
our way of life in the future. It will be important for people to understand how 
the world works in some quantitative detail in order to have any job in any part 
of the economy. He pointed to this recognition as ﬁone of the deep philosophical 
perspectivesﬂ behind the concept of No Child Left Behind: ﬁWe™ve got to make 
sure that our young people are adequately prepared for these futures.ﬂ Whatever 
future jobs look likeŠwhether in engineering, in a new form of business training, 
or in other ˜eldsŠbetter quantitative skills would be imperative.
There was, however, some good news. The proportion of those graduating 
high school having taken a course in physics has been going up steadily in the 
past two decades to surpass one-third, compared with about one-quarter 10 or 12 
years earlier. The same applies to precalculus: About one-fourth of current U.S. 
high school graduates took a precalculus course and the proportion has been 
rising steadily for the past 10 years. ﬁSomething is happening out there,ﬂ said 
Dr.
 Marburger. ﬁSomebody is getting the picture.ﬂ
Still, many were ˚unking their ˜rst-year college courses in math and
 science 
and were becoming discouraged. ﬁThey came wanting to be scientists and engi
-neers, and we turn them away,ﬂ remarked Dr. Marburger, recalling that he himself 
had taught freshman physics and knew how tough introductory courses could be. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
In the interest of producing more scientists, teaching methods need to be altered 
to take advantage both of the knowledge with which young people are in fact 
equipped with and of their desire to understand how the world works. 
Dr. Marburger declared himself ﬁpretty optimisticﬂ overall. While conced
-ing that one could point to quite a number of ﬁscary indicators,ﬂ he said that it 
was part of his job to worry about precisely what those indicators meant. As the 
President™s Science Adviser, he could be an advocate or a counselor. While he 
acts as the former at times, there are times when he felt obliged ﬁto sit back and 
say, ‚What does this all mean?™ﬂ He said that he is working hard on this problem, 
which is complicated by the existence of con˚icting analyses. Earlier the same 
morning, he had conferred with National Research Council staff engaged in a 
study of these questions, and they shared his concerns. All felt the need for a 
much improved framework for gathering, using, and analyzing statistics relating 
to the workforce and innovation. ﬁSo we™ll keep trying,ﬂ he concluded, ﬁand I 
think trying is one of the most important things that you can do.ﬂ
Dr. Spencer, ending the session, allowed that the news conveyed by 
Dr.
 Marburge
r about the number of high school students taking physics was the 
best thing he had heard up to that point in the day™s meeting.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111
Panel III
 ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
  New Models in Japan, Taiwan, and China
Moderator:
Alice H. Amsden
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Dr. Amsden opened the session by stating that, given the history of Japan, 
Panel III™s examination of China, Taiwan, and Japan would offer a look at how 
innovation or technology systems differ from developed to developing countries. 
She said that in listening to the previous discussion of Finland and Canada, as 
well as to Dr. Marburger™s luncheon address, she had been struck by how little 
was said about industry. In contrast, she noted, a consideration of China™s tech
-nology policy always revolves around an industry; there, the theme might be 
ﬁtechnology policy and how it develops the telecommunications industry,ﬂ or, 
in the case of its neighbor, ﬁthe technology policy in Taiwan and how it devel
-oped the computer industry.ﬂ These countries would, of course, be much more 
focused on industry because they do not yet have industry fully in place and so 
were catching up. The acquisition of technology is therefore very instrumental 
to their innovation policies, with such underpinning concerns as: How can we 
get the technology? Should we make it ourselves or buy it? How can we get the 
technology in order to make an industry competitive internationally?
Developing countries do seem to have stopped there. However, offering 
Taiwan and Korea as examples, Dr. Amsden noted that some are moving into a 
more exploratory area, where the relevant questions become:
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

How can we create new technology that spawns new industries, or that 
allows us to introduce mature high-tech industries like thin-˜lm transistor liquid-
crystal displays (TFT-LCD)?

How do we get the technology that allows us to produce these products 
and go around existing patents, or to compete in world markets, when this tech
-nology is changing so fast?
Suggesting that one of the differences between developing and developed 
countries (when it came to innovation or technology systems) might be the degree 
of emphasis on industry, she speculated that the panel™s speakers might shed some 
light on the issue. 
Dr. Amsden then introduced Dr. Hsin-Sen Chu of Taiwan™s Industrial Tech
-nology Research Institute (ITRI). She characterized the organization as one of 
that country™s very best research institutes and noted that Dr. Chu is well known 
for his clarity of vision and his interesting take on technology and development.
THE
 T
AIWANESE
 M
ODEL
: C
OOPERATION
 AND
 G
ROWTH
Hsin-Sen Chu
Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Taiwan
Dr. Chu said that it was his honor to describe Taiwan™s model of and experi
-ence with technology development and innovation. Like Finland, he said, Taiwan 
is a country that is small in population and area whose resources are suf˜ciently 
limited such that they must be used with a maximum of ef˜ciency and effective
-ness. His presentation comprised ˜ve parts:

a brief introduction to the transformation of Taiwan™s economy over the 
previous 50 years;

a discussion of the major elements in Taiwan™s industrial evolution;

a brief introduction to ITRI, covering the role it had played in that evolu
-tion and the nature of its relationship with Taiwan™s industries;

a description of the opportunities before Taiwan; and

a very brief conclusion.
To begin, Dr. Chu projected a graph illustrating the change in the composition 
of the Taiwanese economy between 1951 and 2004 (Figure 16). The country™s per 
capita GDP had grown from $145 at the start of that period to $13,529 by its end, 
a nominal increase approaching two orders of magnitude.
11
 The service-industry 
11
Adjusted for in˚ation, the growth in GDP per capita in Taiwan over the period from 1950 to 
2000 is likely to smaller, though still impressive 20-fold increase. See Angus Maddison and Donald 
Johnston, 
The World Economy: A Millennial Perspecti
ve,
 Paris, France: Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, 2001.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 11
3FIGURE 16
 Transformation of Taiwan™s economy.
As percentage of GDP195119611971198119912004AgricultureManufacturingServiceLabor-Intensive industryTechnology-Intensive IndustryCapital-Intensive
 Industry67.830.41.8462132GDP (Millions of U.S. dollars) 1,197(1950) 48,218(1980) 305,358(2004)GDP/Capita (U.S. dollars)145(1950)2,683(1980)13,529(2004)Knowledge-Intensive Industryfig 16Yearsector accounted for about 46 percent of the economy from the 1950s through the 
1970s, when a steady rise began that brought its share to 67.8 percent by 2004. 
Agriculture™s contribution had moved in the opposite direction, dwindling from 
about 32 percent in 1951 to less than 2 percent currently. Manufacturing, mean
-while, displayed two contrasting phases: Its slice of
 the economy climbed from 
21 percent in 1951 to near 40 percent by the end of the
 1970s, only to fall back 
to 30.4 percent by 200
4asitwasovershadowedbythecontinuouslygrowing
 as it was overshadowed by the continuously growing 
service sector
..Transformation of Taiwan™s Economy
If technology-based manufacturing was the engine driving Taiwan™s eco
-nomic growth over the previous half-century, the country expects services to 
act as a ﬁtwin engineﬂ in the future. Similarly, while labor-intensive industry 
characterized industrial growth in the late 1940s through the 1950s and 1960s, 
followed by capital-intensive industry the 1970s and 1980s and technology-inten
-sive industry the 1980s and early 1990s, the knowledge-intensive industry that 
came onto the scene in the mid-1990s is expected to expand further in the future. 
Describing the economic evolution in Taiwan, Dr. Chu said that the food and tex
-tile industries emerged in the 1950s and 1960s, followed by bicycles, motorcycles 
and selected basic industries in the 1970s and 1980s. It was in the late 1970s that 
Taiwan™s semiconductor and other information-technology industries started to 
take root. Optoelectronics made its appearance in Taiwan in the early 1990s.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
4 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Currently, Taiwan ranks among the top three in the world for products over 
a wide range of sectors. In the computer and peripherals category, it is the world 
leader in notebook computers, small and medium-sized TFT-LCD modules, as 
Dr. Amsden had mentioned, but also in both CD/DVD drives and disks. In net
-work products, Taiwan is a leader in wireless LANs, hubs, and SOHO routers; 
in the integrated-circuit (IC) sector, it leads in the foundry, mask, IC design, and 
DRAM areas. And it retains some world-leading products in the consumer sector, 
among them bicycles, hand tools, and textiles. 
The evolution of traditional sectors and the development of new industries 
can be illustrated by examples below.
Example One: Textiles
Charting a half-century of progress in the textile industry, Dr. Chu reported 
that, in the beginning, Taiwan simply imported such raw materials as cotton, 
wool, and silk for processing. The next step was to move from natural to arti˜
-cial ˜bers and into the apparel industry while also developing the manufacture 
of textile-fabrication machinery. Over the previous 10 years, the government 
had supported R&D efforts that he characterized as ﬁtremendousﬂ in the areas 
of functional fabrics and industrial textile fabrication technology. Encompassing 
nanotechnology, these efforts have yielded many new products in recent years, 
some of them in the ˜eld of fashion design. In 2004 Taiwan was the world™s sixth-
ranked textile exporter with export revenues of $11.9 billion.
Example Two: Electronics
Taiwan is the world™s fourth-largest IC manufacturer, having posted 2004 
revenues of $33.3 billion. Its chip industry, begun when RCA transferred 7 
micron technology in 1976, has progressed to 90 nm line-width by 2005. In 
1979, 6 years after ITRI was founded, the semiconductor maker UMC became 
the institute™s ˜rst spin-off company. ITRI spun off another chip manufacturer, 
TSMC, 8 years later, in 1987, followed by the Taiwan Mask Company in 1988. 
Today, TSMC and UMC together have 70 percent of the world™s IC foundry busi
-ness. It was ITRI™s role, Dr. Chu stated, ﬁto continuously spin off and create new 
companies in Taiwan.ﬂ Meanwhile, Taiwan™s information industry, which posted 
$67.2 billion in 2004 revenues, has developed a wide variety of industries and 
products, led by such ˜rms as Acer and BenQ.
Major Elements in Taiwan™s Industrial Evolution
Behind Taiwan™s industrial evolution, in ITRI™s analysis, were four major 
elements: government policies; industrial infrastructure; foreign investment; and 
augmentation of technology. Dr. Chu explained each element in turn. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 11
5Government Policies
Dr. Chu related a timeline showing policies aimed at enhancing industrial 
development that Taiwan™s government had implemented between 1950 and 
the present. Stressing certain points along the continuum, he said that in the 
early 1960s a duty-free export zone for manufacturing was established; around 
1980, the Hsinchu Science Park was developed, followed in the late 1990s by 
the
 Southern Taiwan Science Park and the Southern Taiwan Innovative Park. 
Also re˚ecting government policy, a Food Industry Research and Development 
Institute was established as that industry developed in the early 1960s; ITRI™s 
founding followed in 1973. The government had meanwhile built up basic infra
-structure through 10 major public construction projects, and innovative programs 
were in store for the future as well.
Narrating how the government goes about allocating research resources in 
the service of technology development, Dr. Chu said the process begins with 
investment in infrastructure through the purchase either of a common facility 
and common equipment or of tools for strengthening existing facilities. Next, a 
promising new concept may be granted a small amount of seed money within 
the framework of the innovation plan of a university or other research institution. 
If it takes root there, additional project funding may be available under one of 
numerous programs dedicated to key technologies and components; although 
resources granted at this point may scale higher by an order of magnitude, the 
effort is still considered high-risk. If this further research is successful, the emerg
-ing technology is transferred to private industry in hopes that it will bear fruit 
through commercialization.
Industrial Infrastructure
Taiwan™s industrial infrastructure is divided into four geographic zones. In 
the Northern zone are ˜ve cities, including Taipei; the country™s international 
airport; and Hsinchu Science Park, with ITRI located nearby. It is about an 
hour™s trip from Taipei to Hsinchu, which is 50 miles away. There are a number 
of universities and 38 incubators in the area. The zone has become a stronghold 
of ICT and IC sectors, owing to the industrial clusters there. Similarly, the other 
three zones have their transportation and education network, incubators, and 
industrial emphases. 
Foreign Investment
Posting a table summarizing foreign investment coming into Taiwan in the 
latter half of the 20th century (Figure17), Dr. Chu pointed out that the share of 
the
 total accounted for by the electronics and information-technology manufac
-turing sector, around 50 percent in the 1960s and 1970s, had fallen back to around 
25 percent in the two subsequent decades. In contrast, the contribution of the 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
6 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
service industries had risen signi˜cantly since 1980, as the sector accounted for 
one
-quarter of foreign investment in the 1980s and 44.6 percent in the 1990s.
Augmentation of Technology
There were three different paths to the augmentation of Taiwan™s technology, 
Dr. Chu said: indigenous R&D programs, licensing and transfer from overseas 
companies or universities, and international cooperation. He displayed a graph 
(Figure 18) charting cases of international technical cooperation from 1950 
through the end of the last century, which showed a peak in the 1980s. From 
decade to decade, it was Japan that had been Taiwan™s leading partner, with 
the United States a distant second and Europe in third place. Over the previous 
5 years, Taiwan developed numerous multinational R&D centers of various sorts 
and involving a wide variety of foreign companies.
Dr. Chu then explained the division of labor between Taiwanese academic 
institutions and industrial R&D organizations. The domain of the former, in 
addition to basic research, is the development of high-quality personnel to staff 
the country™s research institutes and industry. The mission of the latter, of which 
there were more than 10, is not only to engage in technological innovation, 
FIGURE 17
 Foreign investments.
Manufacturing Year Food, Te
xtile & Other Chemical Metals Electronic & Information Services 1950-59 
23.98 47.20 0.46 9.59 18.00 1960-69 
7.36 25.13 7.41 51.54 4.87 1970-79 
6.65 16.11 20.54 47.57 9.12 1980-89 
9.15 22.70 17.11 25.42 25.06 1990-99 
5.01 10.28 11.42 28.08 44.60 InvestmentYear  Overseas Chinese  Foreign1951-19591960-19691970-19791980-19891990-1999TotalUnit: Thousands of U.
S.
 dollarsUnit: Percentfig 179,305123,980608,817991,5632,025,5773,759,24210,874276,1751,223,2867,705,84523,983,14233,199,322Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 11
7development, and implementation, but also to facilitate the creation of new indus
-tries. Besides ITRI, which is the largest of these industrial R&D organizations, 
he named the Information Industry Institute, Food Industry Research Institute, 
 
Textile Industry Research Center, and Bicycle R&D Center from this category.
ITRI™s Role in Taiwanese Growth
Focusing on ITRI, a not-for-pro˜t R&D institute, Dr. Chu listed its tripartite 
mission: to create economic value through innovative technology and R&D; to 
spearhead the development of high-value industry in Taiwan; and to enhance the 
competitiveness of its industries in the global market. 
ITRI has 13 research unitsŠ7 research labs and 6 research centersŠdivided 
into ˜ve areas: information and communications technologies; advanced manu
-facturing and systems; biomedical technology; nanotechnology, materials, and 
chemicals; and energy and environment. In 2004, the institute employed 6,540, of 
whom 14 percent had doctorates and just over 50 percent held master™s degrees. 
Its goal for 2008 is to reach one Ph.D. for every ˜ve employees while maintaining 
the level of master™s degree holders among employees at one-half. In addition 
to its current employees, ITRI has sent 17,000 alumni into Taiwan™s workforce, 
5,000 of whom are working at the Hsinchu Science Park, and this personnel 
transfer has been responsible for the creation of many new companies. 
Of ITRI™s $579 million budget in 2004, 52 percent came in the form of 
gover
nment R&D funding; the institute devoted between 20 and 25 percent 
FIGURE 18
 International technical cooperation.
02004006008001,0001950s1960s1970s1980s1990-1995Number of CasesJapanU.S.A.EUOthersDecadefig 18Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
8 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
of
 that to the development of high-risk technologies. Another 40 percent of 
ITRI™s revenue came from technology transfer to industry, which the institute 
classi˜es as ﬁknowledge-based services,ﬂ while 6.6 percent was derived from its 
intellectual property.
ITRI™s Hsinchu Chung Hsin Campus is a large complex housing its main 
headquarters, research laboratories, library, conference rooms, classrooms, dor
-mitories, and dining, exercise, and medical facilities. Dr. Chu made special 
 
mention of the ITRI Incubation Center, known as the ﬁOpen Lab,ﬂ which is also 
on the premises. The architecture is intended to promote integration, particu
-larly among different areas of technology, as a tool for the development of new 
 
products and industries. In the previous 18 years, more than 100 new companies 
have originated there.
ITRI enjoys access to Taiwanese technological activity at every level: that 
of the universities, of other industrial R&D organizations, and of commercial 
enterprises. It engages in signi˜cant cooperation with universities and builds 
relationships to enterprises through technology transfer, international coopera
-tion, human-resource development, and spin-off. As more than 90 percent of 
Taiwanese companies fall into the small and medium-sized categories, many lack 
the funding to do research independently, and ITRI helps them meet their needs 
for both knowledge-based services and research and technology development. 
ITRI links science parks, universities, and companies throughout Taiwan.
Cooperative arrangements connect ITRI not only with such major
 Taiwanese 
entities, but also with many important research institutions in the United States 
and Europe. As examples, Dr. Chu cited cooperation with the University of 
 
California at Berkeley focusing on nanotechnology and energy-technology devel
-opment and with Carnegie Mellon University focusing on communications-
 
technology research. He also mentioned ITRI links to Stanford University and 
SRI in the United States, the Netherlands™ Organization for Applied Scienti˜c 
Research, Russia™s Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute, and Australia™s Common
-wealth Scienti˜c and Industrial Research Organisation. Cooperating with MIT™s 
Media Lab was ITRI™s ﬁCreativity Lab,ﬂ established 3 years earlier to ﬁlink tech
-nology to the lifestyleﬂ by focusing on the demand side in pursuit of new concepts 
in the consumer-applications sector.
Taiwan™s Future Opportunities
Taiwanese policy makers see the country™s future opportunities as grouped 
in three major areasŠhigh-value advanced manufacturing, novel applications 
and products, and knowledge-based service industriesŠand believe that integra
-tion and innovation will be essential to taking advantage of them. To enhance 
its national innovation system in the era of the knowledge economy, Taiwan™s 
government is pursuing the creation of basic infrastructure and an innovative 
business environment in order to strengthen relationships among the country™s 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 11
9industry, academic institutions, and industrial R&D organizations. Some of 
the numerous industrial partnerships and alliances already in existence are the 
 
Taiwan TFT
-LCD Association; Next-Generation Lighting Alliance; New Nylon & 
 
Polyester Textile R&D Alliance; Fresh Food Logistic Service Industrial
 Alliance; 
RFID System; Advanced Optical Storage Research Alliance; and Environmentally 
Friendly Manufacturing Technology Alliance. These entities™ activities include 
resource deployment, standardization, patent pooling, market development, multi
-disciplinary integration, and coordinated development. 
Still, Dr. Chu stated, Taiwan™s ﬁmindset and approachﬂ are in need of adjust
-ment in a variety of domains. When it comes to technology R&D, he said, the 
country was trying to move from optimization to exploration, from ordering work 
by single discipline to multidisciplinary integration, from conducting research 
in-house to collaborations and partnerships, and from developing components to 
developing system solutions. The value of a system solution was one to two orders 
of magnitude higher than that of a component, 
andthevalueofacomprehensive
an
dthevalueofacomprehensive
 the value of a 
comprehensive
comprehensive 
service system 
ishigherstill.Taiwan™sintentionistoproceedfromcomponents
is higher still
.Taiwan™sintentionistoproceedfromcomponents
. Taiwan™s intention is to proceed from components 
through systems to the service industries.
Summary and Conclusion
Recapping, Dr. Chu noted that Taiwan has moved from an agriculture-based 
society to an industrial economy in 50 years, creating many industries with 
signi˜cant global standing in the process. A key issue for Taiwan™s continued 
success is close cooperation among industry, the government, and the academic 
and industrial R&D institutions. For the future, Taiwan will focus on new value 
creation through innovation to upgrade industry, while also trying to unify and 
align regional resources. The aim is to form productive clusters and facilitate the 
development of new service-sector industries by implementing innovative busi
-ness models.
Dr. Chu invited those interested to seek information on ITRI at its Web site, 
www.itri.org.tw
, and thanked the audience for its attention.
Discussion
Dr. Amsden opened the question period by inquiring about the criteria 
according to which ˜rms are chosen to be admitted to Hsinchu Science Park. 
ﬁHow do you decide which ˜rms to encourage?ﬂ she asked Dr. Chu. ﬁAre you 
in˚uenced by industry [or] simply by the quality of the ˜rm?ﬂ She then invited 
a Swedish science reporter who was in the audience to step to the microphone. 
This reporter, asked Dr. Chu to describe further the innovative business model 
that he had recommended.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
New Business Models, New Service Industries
Dr. Chu began by warning that the Taiwanese government™s use of the term 
ﬁservice industryﬂ may diverge from that of individuals and entities from other 
countries: It includes such activities as logistics, ˜nance, and research consulting 
but not, for example, health care. One of the most important of ITRI™s projects 
in the ˜eld of service-industry R&D concerns the innovative business model 
referred to by the questioner. In fact, after 30 years of technology development, 
ITRI™s focus is to shift to developing new business models with the power to 
create new service industries. 
As an example, Dr. Chu offered a logistical model that covers the manu
-facture of food from the delivery of raw materials through processing and on to 
distribution. New technology has emerged in the course of work on such value 
chainsŠin this instance, equipment was developed capable of keeping multiple 
temperatures constant for more than 24 hoursŠthat in turn has led to the develop
-ment of more new service-industry business models.
Selecting Technologies to Support
Kathy McTigue of the Advanced Technology Program, referring to 
Dr.
 Amsden™
s question about how ˜rms are chosen for admission to Hsinchu 
Science Park, asked whether technology areas were chosen as well. She noted 
that Taiwanese innovation policy appeared to focus on promising technology 
areas. Research in these areas was supported through the Science Parks, and then 
transferred to private business. She asked if Taiwanese R&D is driven by the pri
-vate sector (in the sense that private business initiates the projects and then comes 
to the government with requests for funding) or if the government itself chooses 
the domains for research. She also inquired about the relationship of ITRI to the 
Taiwanese government.
Dr. Chu answered that the government does provide private companies with 
funding to ﬁencourageﬂ them to embrace research projects chosen as the result of 
an evaluation process conducted by a committee. This ﬁencouragementﬂ usually 
takes the form of granting a company 25 percent of the research budget; the com
-pany is to put up 50 percent of the ˜nancing itself, with the remaining 25 percent 
covered by a government or bank loan. Similarly, when ITRI transfers technology 
it has developed to a company so that it can undertake product development, the 
government provides around 20 to 25 percent of the research budget in recogni
-tion of the risk involved; in these cases, a committee at the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs reviews the projects and decides where to place resources.
Concluding the presentation by Dr. Chu and the discussion that followed, 
Dr. Amsden introduced the next speaker, David Kahaner of the Asian Technology 
Information Program, to speak on Japan. Japan and its neighbors have had a very 
stormy relationship, she said, recalling that Japan had once held a great deal of 
East Asia under occupation. Yet when it comes to learning, technology transfer, 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 121
and doing business in general, Japan™s relationship with her neighbors is close. 
Many regard Japan as the hub of Asia™s IT industry. Currently, Americans are 
looking very closely at Japan™s innovation policies in an effort to learn from it. 
They are also asking how competition from China and other East Asian countries 
will affect Japan and, by implication, the United States. She then relinquished 
the podium to Dr. Kahaner.
JAPANESE
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y P
OLIC
Y: 
 EVOLUTION
 AND
 C
URRENT
 I
NITIATIVES
Da
vid K. Kahaner
Asian Technology Information Program
Dr. Kahaner noted that he would begin by listing many of challenges con
-fronting Japan today. Despite this list, he said, it should be ﬁobvious to everyone 
that Japan is still a global technology powerhouse, a place where an incredible 
amount of extraordinary, world-class technology is produced and distributed.ﬂ 
The prospect for Japan, therefore, is by no means entirely negative.
According to Dr. Kahaner, Japan™s current challenges include: 

An Anemic Economy.
 Growth in the Japanese economy has been anemic 
for years. It is now showing some signs of turnaround, but the long-term trend is 
still unclear and the economy cannot be characterized as healthy.

An Aging and Shrinking Population.
 Not only is the Japanese popula
-tion aging, its growth is far from robustŠif not, in fact, in decline.

Increased Global Competition.
 Japanese ˜rms face strong competition 
from low-wage countries like China as well as from more advanced countries like 
Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore. Japanese ˜rms are engaged in outsourcing and in-
sourcing alike, and some small manufacturers have brought their manufacturing 
back to Japan from lower-wage countries because they did not feel the quality 
they were getting abroad to be adequate.

A Less Favorable Business Climate.
 Japan™s business climate is not very 
good relative to that of other countries, as benchmarked in a variety of ways.

A Perception of Low Creativity.
 A Western perception that Japan is 
suffering from a lack of creativity and from an associated lack of competi
-tion in its education system has, to a certain extent, ﬁbled over to the Japanese 
themselves.ﬂ

A Strong Currency. 
The yen is appreciating against some currencies, 
making it more dif˜cult for Japan to export. 

Less Ef˜cient Research.
 R&D is not viewed as being very ef˜cient. 

Bureaucratic Obstacles.
 Not only were there rivalries among Japan™s 
ministries, there are also walls separating them.

Regulatory Burdens. 
A large number of regulatory problems exist.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

A Lack of Openness.
 Japan is still viewed as a closed society by many 
in the United States.
Japanese Wrestle with the Role of Technology
The Japanese have long been wrestling with the questions of whether and 
how science and technology can help their country deal with some of these prob
-lems. Dr. Kahaner alluded to a variety of initiatives within Japan, ranging from 
more automation to the development of human capital from outside Japan, to new 
industry-academia-government collaboration. He called the preoccupation with 
creating knowledge-based industries ﬁa kind of mantraﬂ throughout East Asia, 
saying it could be seen in Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan as well as in Japan.
Japan™s Science & Technology Basic Law
Beginning his discussion of Japanese policy, Dr. Kahaner evoked the prom
-ulgation in November 1995 of Japan™s S&T Basic Law, which he described as 
an effort to ﬁhelp the Japanese get their hands around where they were going in 
technology.ﬂ Behind the law, he believed, is the goal not only of contributing to 
the country™s economic development and social welfare by improving its tech
-nology, but also of contributing to the sustainable development of human society 
through the progress of S&T internationally. By the early 1990s, he explained, 
Japan was perceived by the United States and, perhaps, the countries of Europe 
as simply not pulling its weight in terms of international science and technology. 
ﬁOne could argue whether that™s true or not,ﬂ he said, ﬁbut the Japanese believed 
it,ﬂ and they undertook to equalize their S&T investments with those of other 
countries relative to the size of the economy.
The Basic Law is one of the outgrowths of that effort, and it in turn resulted 
in the founding in January 2001 of Japan™s Council for Science and Technology 
Policy (CSTP), which might be loosely compared to the United States™ Of˜ce 
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP). Chaired by the prime minister, the 
council is made up of six cabinet ministers, ˜ve academics, and two representa
-tives of industry. It is, in effect, charged with developing the ﬁgrand designﬂ for 
Japanese S&T policy; among other things, CSTP discusses new types of budget 
items, and its decisions in˚uence each ministry™s budget.
One of the council™s most important duties is drafting the country™s 5-year 
S&T Basic Plan, which sets guidelines for the comprehensive and systematic 
implementation of Japan™s overall S&T promotion policy. The goal of the ˜rst 
Basic Plan, which went into effect in 1996 and thus predated CSTP™s creation, 
was to double government spending on R&D. The second Basic Plan, whose 
budget was set at $212 billion over 5 years, was a part of an effort to double the 
amount available for competitive funding through the end of 2005. The main 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 12
3thrust of the third Basic Plan, to go into effect in 2006, was still under discussion 
at the time of the conference.
Allocating the Research Budget
Japan™s total 2005 S&T budget was $36 billion, an amount 2.6 percent higher 
than in the previous year. Of that, around $13 billion was for research expenses 
including researchers™ salaries, the remainder for infrastructure. In the budget™s 
structure an umbrella function, called ﬁsystematization and integrationﬂ and 
denoted by an ﬁS,ﬂ overarched four key areas being developed for the future, each 
of which was denoted by a letter so that the whole formed the acronym ﬁSMILEﬂ: 
nanotechnology and materials, ﬁM,ﬂ allotted 4.9 percent of resources; information 
technology, ﬁI,ﬂ 10.4 percent; life sciences, ﬁL,ﬂ 22.7 percent; and environment, 
ﬁE,ﬂ 7.5 percent. Again Dr. Kahaner pointed to a similarity between the Japanese 
approach and that of Taiwan as outlined by Dr. Chu.
Most important about the third Five-Year Plan, in his opinion, is that some 
form of aerospace-technology R&D is likely to take its place beside the four key 
research ˜elds already mentioned. In addition, foreigners and womenŠthe latter 
termed by Dr. Kahaner ﬁthe incredible untapped resourceﬂ of JapanŠare to be 
sought out for a larger role in university research. 
He pointed to a ﬁnew emphasis on ef˜ciencyﬂ expected to be associated with 
a variety of policies, some involving collaboration. One locus of collaboration is 
to involve industry, academia, and government more activelyŠwhere, according 
to his personal perception, the Japanese saw the United Kingdom as more ef˜
-cient than the United States. Another locus of collaboration, which is to receive 
greater emphasis in the third Basic Plan, is situated between the national gov
-ernment and local governmentsŠonce more, ﬁquite consistentﬂ with Dr. Chu™s 
description of Taiwan. 
Also of signi˜cance is a ﬁbig jumpﬂŠamounting to a 30-percent increase 
over 2004Šin the money to be awarded through peer-reviewed competitions. To 
show the extent to which such competitions were already being employed, he 
displayed a table listing programs in the second Basic Plan™s four key areas, with 
those granting funds on a competitive basis indicated in bold type (Figure 19).
Grant Competitions Heralding Change?
Dr. Kahaner suggested that the increase in funding granted competitively is 
in line with an emphasis on better integrating universities into the innovation sys
-tem. Relatively few companies have spun out of the Japanese university system 
and relatively few patents have been produced by itŠﬁa clear indication,ﬂ he said, 
ﬁthat something was wrong.ﬂ For this reason, the national universities have been 
converted over the previous few years into ﬁindependent administrative agencies,ﬂ 
the rough equivalent of National Laboratories in the United States.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
4 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 19
 Major R&D Programs in 2005.
0.800METINanotechnology: Realization Project of Nanotechnology-B
ased Advanced Devices1.416MHLWNanotechnology: Nano-M
edicine Healthcare1.450MEXTNanotechnology:Fused Emerging Field Based on Nanotechnology and Materials0.400MEXTEnvironment: Development of Environmental Technology Based on Nanotechnology1.400MAFFEnvironment: Research on Agricultural, Forestaland Fishery Bio-cycle  1.017MEXTEnvironment:Promotion of Establishing Earth Observation System0.490MLITInformation and Communication: AutonomicusMovement Assisting Project0.900METIInformation and Communication: Human-assisting Robotics Realization Project2.974MEXTInformation and Communication: R&D for the Establishment of IT Infrastructure 2.000MICInformation and Communication: Next Generation Back-bone 1.580MAFFLife Science: Efficient Breed Improvement Technology Based on Genome Breeding  4.526MHLWLife Science: Research on Aids, Hepatitis, Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Disease1.150MEXTLife Science:Molecular Imaging2005 Budget in US$ Bil.MinistryProgram, bold font means competitive research fundingfig 19While still funded by the government, these agencies now have more auton
-omy and more ˚exibility than traditional universities, exempli˜ed by the ample 
opportunity they now have to seek competitive funds and now re˚ected in their 
increased cooperation with industry. Faculty and industry have in fact always 
cooperated, Dr. Kahaner said, but in a very informal manner; cooperation has 
recently become much more formalized. Laws have been enacted that allowed 
Japanese professors to ﬁbecome millionaires if they™re good enough and they have 
good enough ideas,ﬂ he said. 
There is also an effort to develop ﬁSilicon Valleysﬂ around the universities 
in keeping with the concept of local or regional clusters, as seen in Taiwan. In a 
development dating back only 5 years, each Japanese university has established 
a technology-licensing of˜ce; technology management as a discipline is also now 
receiving attention at a level unprecedented at Japanese universities.
Promotion of faculty based on performance has been adopted in some 
instances, although Dr. Kahaner said its full implementation in Japan ﬁwould be 
an incredible thing.ﬂ More non-Japanese faculty are receiving regular appoint
-ments, in contrast to the traditional practice of taking on foreigners almost exclu
-sively under one-year contracts. An ﬁovert goalﬂ to make 30 Japanese universities 
world-class according to objective international criteria has brought about both 
alliances and consolidations among institutions. The country, he noted in passing, 
has around half as many colleges and universities as the United States, so that on 
a per capita basis the two nations were on an equal footing.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 12
5Administering S&T at the Cabinet Level
Returning to the subject of interministerial rivalry, Dr. Kahaner noted that in 
2001 essentially all Japanese ministries were reorganized. For example:

The former Education Ministry and Science & Technology Agency are 
now merged into the new Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, Sports, and 
Science & Technology (MEXT).

A Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommu
-nications was renamed in 2004 to Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communica
-tions (MIC).

The Ministry of International Trade & Industry (MITI) is now reborn as 
the Ministry of Economy, Trade & Industry (METI).
Most signi˜cant about these mergers is that they have made Japan™s central gov
-ernment smaller. This has strengthened Japan™s Cabinet Of˜ce, which in turn both 
lends more weight to the decisions of organizations like the Council for Science 
and Technology Policy and puts more power of coordination into their hands. See 
Figure 20 for a summary.
Under the most recent Basic Plan, Japan™s ministries are being encouraged 
to collaborate on work taking place within eight speci˜c R&D groupings. These 
TAONEDOJSTCRESTPRESTOERATOICORPJSPSAgencySpecialized in telecommunicationsApplication-oriented R&D targeted for commercialization in 5-10 yearsMission-oriented basic  research targeted for commercialization in     10-20 yearsBasic researchResearch OrientationMICMETIMEXTMinistryUniversities/National labsIndustry, Universities, National labs collaborationsUniversities & National labsUniversitiesRecipientsfig 20FIGURE 20
 Funding agencies and missions in Japan.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
6 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
groupings include post-genomic research, hydrogen utilization and fuel cells, 
nano and bio technologies, and ubiquitous networks. Recent research thrusts for 
METI are fuel cells, robotics, health, IT in the home, energy, and nan
otechnology, 
the last three of which would, Dr. Kahaner predicted, be crucial in Taiwan and 
Korea as well. In another recent development, Japan has begun taking much 
the same approach as Taiwan in nurturing knowledge clusters by emphasizing 
speci˜c ˜elds of technology; CSTP is establishing more than a dozen of these 
clusters around the country over the previous several years.
Japan™s Leading Endeavors in Science
Dr. Kahaner then turned to what he termed Japan™s ﬁbig-time science 
effortsﬂ:
Biotechnology
According to a graph he projected, the government tripled its funding for 
the life sciences in the decade beginning in 1992 (Figure 21), with the goal of 
increasing the number of biotech companies in the country to 1,000 by 2010. The 
number of Japanese biotech companies has grown from 60 in the late 1990s to 
250 in September 2001.
FIGURE 21
 Life sciencesŠbiotech: Japanese government spending in life sciences.
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003fig 21Life Sciences Spending byJapanese GovernmentYearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 12
7Nanotechnology
Japan is spending almost as much in nanotechnology ($940 million) as the 
United States ($961 million) on an absolute basis in 2004 (Figure 22), and much 
of the funding is granted competitively.
Fuel cells
All Japanese electronics companies are working in this area, which is a focus 
of government funding because of the ever-growing use of portable devices. 
Dr.
 Kahaner pointed to an announcement, made only a few days before the 
conference, that IBM and Sanyo were to develop a fuel-cell power system for 
the new-generation Think Pad; it was his understanding that most of the basic 
technology development would take place at Sanyo.
Robotics
Unlike in the United States, there is a very high level of interest in AsiaŠand 
particularly in JapanŠin humanoid robots, the ˜rst of which, Honda™s Osimo, 
had come out in the late 1990s. Of interest to the Japanese, Dr. Kahaner sug
-gested, is not so much the robot as the development of capabilities associated 
with its attributes: power-source technology; recognition technology, including 
voice, tactile, vision, and translation; activator technology, pertaining to the 
robot™s mechanics; structure, of possible relevance for prosthesis technology; 
FIGURE 22
 Spending on nanotechnology.
~ 8001.924,300111.1456E.U.~ 1290 248 ~ 25~ 940~ 50961Nano Budget2004 in millions of U.S. dollars 2.22.32.7~ 0.52.9~ 1.02.8Research as a percent of GDP23,70023,00018,0002,80028,3005,00037,500Per Capita GDP in thousands of U.S. dollars8.33.031,065India9.16.451,300China3.10.8648.6Korea10.114.4Singapore3.22.73.1Growth(percent)0.5323Taiwan3.6127Japan11293U.S.A.GDP in trillions of U.S. dollarsPopulationin millions Country/ Regionfig 22Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
8 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
control-system technology; and software.
 ﬁThink about all of this as component 
technology, and about the impact that developments in these technologies can 
have across the industry spectrum,ﬂ he advised. ﬁDon™t think of it in terms of this 
walking robot.ﬂ 
Synchrotron radiation
SPring-8 was the largest synchrotron radiation facility in the world when it 
opened in 1997 and is still among the biggest. Its $1 billion price tag is compa
-rable to that of the U.S. Department of Energy™s Spallation Neutron Source at 
Oak Ridge, Tenn.
Computing
Japan™s Earth Simulator, the world™s fastest scienti˜c computer when it 
opened in 2003, required a $450 million investment and ﬁstill sends shudders 
through many people in the U.S. science community,ﬂ Dr Kahaner said.
Concluding, he said that Japan will place emphasis in the future on com
-petition within the country for research money; collaboration among Japanese 
organizations and the associated coordination of research efforts; ways of being 
more ef˜cient and of measuring ef˜ciency; and increasing internationalization 
with respect to human talent.
12
Discussion
Opening the question period, Jim Mallos of Heliakon observed that the point 
of all innovation was to make new products and that, in the 21st century, ﬁit won™t 
do us any good to come up with new products that are like the failed competitors 
of the iPod: perfectly good, but not quite magical in the way they put together 
design and technology.ﬂ His question was whether Japan™s esthetic culture and 
skill at miniaturization positions it as well as any nation to succeed at modern 
product design.
Dr. Kahaner said that the answer is ﬁobviouslyﬂ af˜rmative and that the 
 
Japanese themselves believe that they were very well positioned in this regard. 
In not only Japan but also Taiwan a vast array of products that differ only 
slightly among one another are ﬁbeing pushed out the door in very, very great 
numbers [as] a way of experimenting with what the public ˜nds suitable.ﬂ While 
such products got ﬁ˜ltered outﬂ before they reach the United States market, he 
remarked, they are greatly in evidence in Akihabara and similar places throughout 
Asia. So it was indeed likely that Japan will be a strong competitor. 
12
See the related presentation on Supercomputing by Kenneth Flamm in Panel IV of these 
proceedings.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 12
9On the speci˜c question of whether the Japanese would produce ﬁthe next-
generation iPod,ﬂ however, Dr. Kahaner declined to guess. He stated his personal 
view that devices like the iPod would lose out in the future to a telephone-based 
technology. Noting that there were hundreds of millions of cell phones in use but 
ﬁonly a handful of iPods,ﬂ he said that market pull would best be achieved by 
starting with the cell phone and innovating from there rather than by innovating 
on the basis of the iPod.
Dr. Amsden then called on the next speaker, Tom Howell, to talk on China™s 
semiconductor industry.
NEW
 P
ARADIGMS
 FOR
 P
ARTNERSHIPS
:  CHINA
 G
ROWS
 A S
EMICONDUCTOR
 I
NDUSTR
YThomas R. Howell
Dewey Ballantine
Referring to Dr. Amsden™s observation that in developing countries industry 
comes ˜rst and innovation later, Mr. Howell said he would allow that progression 
to structure his presentation.
Over the previous 5 years, China™s technology level and the scale of Chinese 
industry has grown on a very fast trajectory. In 2000, conventional wisdom had it 
that China would lag behind the world leaders in semiconductors for quite a long 
time; according to the current conventional wisdom, it has become an ﬁunstop
-pable juggernaut.ﬂ In Mr. Howell™s view the conventional wisdom is most likely 
wrong in both cases, but he acknowledged that the speed of the country™s devel
-opment has surprised almost everyone. In the course of his talk, he was going to 
examine some of the government policies that have contributed to it.
Overcoming a Legacy of Obstacles
A snapshot of China™s microelectronics industry taken in the early 1990s 
would have shown that the country had destroyed its science infrastructure dur
-ing the Cultural Revolution. The universities had been closed, many people had 
been driven out, and an entire generation was still feeling the effects of not hav
-ing received an education. All Chinese semiconductor enterprises and research 
organizations were owned by the government and administered by bureaucrats. 
They were 10 to 15 years behind the global state of the art; at that time this was 
attributed to what was called the ﬁWestern technology embargo,ﬂ but the fact was 
that Chinese ˜rms were very far behind technologically. 
Because the industry™s infrastructure was primitive, Western companies had 
very little interest in building facilities in China. The level of excellence in 
 
Chinese semiconductor manufacturing was re˚ected in a comment by a Texas 
Instruments employee: ﬁI™ve seen clean rooms with open windows.ﬂ Virtually all 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
of the integrated circuits imported into China were smuggled through ﬁvarious 
shady trading companiesﬂ in Hong Kong. To the extent that foreign investors 
were invited in, they were subjected to crude pressure from the government to 
transfer technology. In sum, ﬁit was not a very welcoming environment for for
-eign investment.ﬂ
One element of the Chinese effort, however, has been a continual study of 
successful systems abroad, particularly those in the United States, accompanied 
by constant critical self-appraisal. The analysis of what China was doing wrong 
was applied over and over again, Mr. Howell said, and ﬁmanaged to trump all the 
other disadvantages eventually.ﬂ This process is still going on.
The Structure of China™s Development Policy
Projecting a table listing domestic policies and practices that have affected 
China™s development in microelectronics (Figure 23), Mr. Howell characterized 
as ﬁall stick, no carrotﬂ the traditional Communist policies current in 1994 (cen
-ter column). ﬁYou have state-owned enterprises, and the government tells them 
what they™re supposed to do, and they™re expected to do it,ﬂ he summarized. 
Foreign investment was restricted to the point that China ﬁwas essentially a 
closed market,ﬂ and tariffs on semiconductors as well as many other electronics 
products were high. There were about 100 ﬁhigh-tech parks,ﬂ none of them very 
sophisticated.
But while China, with its billion people, was lagging technologically, nearby 
TaiwanŠa resource-poor Chinese society of 20 million peopleŠwas building 
one of the foremost semiconductor industries in the world. ﬁThat fact was not lost 
on planners across the Fujian Straits,ﬂ Mr. Howell remarked. ﬁAs they were doing 
their self-criticism, one could point out that ‚we™re doing things wrong that the 
Taiwanese are doing right; perhaps we could learn something from them.™ ﬂ
Recalling Dr. Chu™s summary of Taiwanese policies and referring to his own 
chart (right-hand column), Mr. Howell said that Taiwan™s government basically 
functioned (and continues to function) as a partner with industry. Rather than 
 
making decisions it encourages the formation of enterprises, in some cases spin
-ning them off from government research institutes. A passive equity investor in 
many enterprises, the Taiwanese government becomes involved when it is needed 
to create infrastructure or where there is some task or risk that the private sector 
can not undertake on its own, such as the pioneering of the pure-play foundry. 
Intervening at such points but not at others, Taiwan has presided over ﬁan all
-carrot 
systemﬂ in contrast to the previous Chinese system, which was ﬁall stick.ﬂ
China Adopts a New Policy System
Around the beginning of its tenth Five-Year Plan in 2001, and concurrent 
with joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), China undertook a funda
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 131FIGURE 23
 China 1994, Taiwan 2000.
Ye
sNoGovernment promotion of venture capital sectorNoYe
sGovernment contro
ls enterprise decision makingMajor tax benefitsNoneMajor financial incentives to individuals1 flagship park
 (Hsinchu), 2-3
 others emerging (Tainan, Nankang)Over 100 ﬁH
i-T
ech park
sﬂIndustrial parks06-30 percentTa
riffs on semiconductors
Gove
rnment passive
 minority equity stake
100% gov
™t o
wnership of semiconductor enterp
ri
sesGovernment as direct investor in leading firmsPrivatization of gov
™t research 
institutesFinancial assistance to pri
va
te companiesEmphasis on state-o
wned research institutesPromotion of IC design industry
Liberali
ze
dHeav
ily restri
ctedPo
licy to
ward
 fo
reign direct investmentFoundry
Integrated 
device make
rBusiness model of leading semiconductor firmsPrivate,
 gov™t holds passi
ve
 minority shareState-o
wned enterp
ri
sePrincipal fo
rm of leading semiconductor enterprisesTa
iwan 2000: 
 Pa
rt
nership ModelChina 1994: 
 Command Economy
 ModePo
licy/practic
efig 23mental reappraisal of what it was doing and ﬁessentially decided to jettison [its] 
whole system.ﬂ While retaining the economic nationalism that had suffused all its 
earlier Five-Year Plans, it largely abandoned the command method in favor of a 
system using Western promotional measures permitted under the WTO: subsidies, 
tax measures, targeted government procurement, and the like. Simultaneously 
taking place was a thorough decentralization, with most of the policies being 
implemented locally rather than at the national level; a fundamental rede˜nition 
of the industry-government relationship, with an emphasis on the independence 
of enterprises™ decision making; and liberalization of inward investment permit
-ting foreign companies to establish fully owned subsidiaries. Tariffs on semi
-conductors were eliminated. And pressure to transfer technology eased, although 
that pressure had not ceased entirely.
This added up to a ﬁparadigm shiftﬂ in which Chinese planners abandoned 
their own system and embraced Taiwan™s. Mr. Howell displayed a table show
-ing that virtually every Chinese policy current in the semiconductor ˜eld had a 
Taiwanese antecedent (Figure 24). 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 24
 Microelectronics: China embraces Taiwan™s model.
YesYesNoGovernment promotion of venture capital sectorNoNoYesGovernment controls enterprise decision makingMajor tax benefitsMajor tax benefitsNoneMajor financial incentives to individuals1 flagship park (Zhangiiang), 2-3 others em
erging (Suzhou, Beijing)1 flagship park (Hsinchu), 2-3others emerging (Tainan, Nankang)Over 100 ﬁhig
h-tech
parksﬂIndustrial parks006-30 %Tariffs on semiconductorsGovernment passive minority equity stakeGovernment passive minority equity stake100% government ownership of semiconductor enterprisesGovernment as direct investor in leading firmsPrivatization of government research institutesFinancial assistance to private companiesPrivatization of government research institutesFinancial assistance to private companiesEmphasis on state-o
wned research institutesPromotion of IC design industryLiberalizedLiberalizedHeavily restrictedPolicy toward foreign direct investmentFoundryFoundryIntegrated device makerBusiness model of leading semiconductor firmsPrivate, government holds passive minority sharePrivate, government holds passive minority shareState-o
wned enterprisePrincipal form of leading semiconductor enterprisesChina 2002Taiwan 2000:  Partnership ModelChina 1994:  Command Economy ModePolicy/Practicefig 24Many of them were implemented with the assistance of Taiwanese advisers; 
for example, one of the leaders who had set up Hsinchu Park, Irving Ho, acted 
as a consultant on the industrial parks that had been built on the Mainland in 
the previous 5 years. The function of China™s central government in policy had 
become ﬁmostly hortatory,ﬂ with the actual bene˜ts and promotional measures 
implemented largely by the regional governments and local governments in line 
with the central government™s intentions (Figure 25).
China™s Market Pull Restructures the Industry
A policy not copied from Taiwan was the leveraging of China™s market. 
When Mr. Howell spoke in 2000 with government and industry planners in 
 
Taiwan, their expectation was that 30 new semiconductor fabrication plants 
would be built in the Mainland by 2008 and that there would be no Taiwanese 
investment in semiconductor manufacturing on the Mainland. Two years later, 
the picture had changed radically: Seven Taiwan-invested fabs were envisioned 
for Taiwan, 20 for China. Two of the Mainland fabs were already operational in 
2005, the rest either under construction or planned by companies that were man
-aged and, in many cases, capitalized by Taiwanese entities.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 133
Although this shift had been attributed by some to an advantage in manu
-facturing costs that China is assumed to enjoy over Taiwan, these costsŠnot 
counting government incentivesŠare in fact very similar, even close to identical. 
Richard Chang of the Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation 
(SMIC), one of the foundries on the Mainland, places the differential at less than 
10 percent and probably closer to 5 percent. Cost considerations are not behind 
this locational shift in Taiwanese investment, Mr. Howell asserted.
Incentives Create a Cost Differential
Very strong, however, is the draw of the Chinese market, and China™s gov
-ernment has emphasized its market™s pull by putting a differential value-added 
tax (VAT) into effect in 2000 that gave devices manufactured in domestic fabs 
a 14-percent advantage over imports in the Chinese market. Taiwanese inves
-tors, seeing that they might be shut out of China™s growing market unless they 
invested there, rushed across the Strait as a result. Although the VAT measure was 
subsequently withdrawn, that Mainland investment has remainedŠproviding an 
example of China™s use of its market to leverage inward foreign investment. 
FIGURE 25
 Layering of Chinese promotional policies in microelectronics.
ŁProvide incubatorsŁOffer individual incentives (cash, facilities, housing, car)ŁGrant residencyŁProvide venture capital, incubators for returneesŁSets broad policies Attracting overseas talentŁConstructs sites providing infrastructure for semiconductor industryŁProvides funding, land, guidance for infrastructure projects, including new high-tech parksŁEncourages infrastructure projectsŁA
pproves, sets guidelines for new high-tech parksInfrastructure constructionŁProvides preferential termsUtilitiesŁProvides preferential terms (including free land) Land use feeŁOne-two pointsŁOne pointInterest rate subsidyŁEquity participation in semiconductor enterprisesŁEquity participation in semiconductor enterprisesŁO
wnership of SOEs, laboratoriesEquity investmentŁSpecial tax rates in parksŁRebates to individuals for housing/carsIndividual taxŁMay rebate local portion of tax ŁProvides exemption from local taxes/feesŁProvides tax holiday Enterprise taxŁMay rebate local portion of VAT to enterpriseŁMay apply preferences more broadlyŁDelegates authority to associations to determine enterprise eligibilityŁProvides 3-6
% VAT preference VATLocal governmentRegional governmentCentral governmentMeasurefig 25Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
That market is expanding faster than any other of the world™s major
 markets: 
It has grown at a rate of 40 percent in 2004 and is expected to achieve a com
-pound annual growth rate of more than 20 percent for the period 2002-2008, 
compared to 7.3 percent for the United States and 13.8 percent for Taiwan. 
Mr.
 Howell put its current size at around $24 billion and said it was expected to 
grow to something on the order of $65 billion by 2007.
The bulk of the country™s capital stock in semiconductor manufacturing still 
falls within the category of technologies that are ﬁessentially obsolete.ﬂ Yet, while 
8-inch fabs are predominantly being built, there is also a 12-inch fab located in 
Beijing that had gone into operation in the second quarter of 2005, and still more 
growth is to be expected at the high end of the scale.
A ﬁLeap Forwardﬂ for Chinese Technology
According to the U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce (renamed the General 
Accountability Of˜ce in 2004), China closed the wide technology gap in IC line-
width capability that had existed in 1986 and by 2001 approached the U.S. state 
of the art.
13
 The most advanced SMIC fab, in Beijing, is currently using design 
rules of 110 nm. While this is ﬁnot state of the art,ﬂ Mr. Howell said, it is ﬁnot 
that far behind,ﬂ as much of the U.S. industry is at 90 nm and moving to 65 nm. 
China has thus made ﬁquite a leap forward.ﬂ
Mr. Howell observed that while the old-style, 100-percent government-
owned companies Huajing and Hua Yue are still in existence, they are ﬁnot 
doing much that is of much interest.ﬂ China ˜rst moved to 50-50 joint ven
-tures that it still essentially controls, but are partially capitalized by (mostly) 
 
Japanese investors; while ﬁnot failures,ﬂ these ventures did not ﬁchase the state 
of the artﬂ either. However, the new-model China-based semiconductor ventures 
more closely resemble a typical multinational corporation with some government 
investment, but basically backed by a diverse array of stockholders, including 
foreign investors.
Pulling in Foreign Capital
Commenting next on the ˜nancial structure of SMIC, currently the largest 
foundry operator in China, Howell noted that, as of 2002, Chinese banks helped 
get SMIC up and running with close to $500 million in loans. The Industrial 
and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, Shanghai Pudong 
Development Bank, and Bank of Communication are policy banks and lend for 
policy reasons; the lenders were simply commercial banks. Contributing equity 
13
U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, 
Export Controls: Rapid Ad
vances in China™s Semiconductor 
Industry Underscore Need for Fundamental U.S. Policy Re
view,
 GAO-020620, Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, April 2002.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 135
along with the PRC Government and Shanghai Industrial Holdings (the invest
-ment division of the Shanghai municipal government) were the government of 
Singapore, Toshiba, Chartered Semiconductor, and a number of offshore
 venture-
capital companies, many of them with Taiwanese-sourced money. SMIC was sub
-sequently listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 2004; Mr. Howell estimated 
its current equity ownership at 58 percent American.
As for the tax rates applying to enterprises operating in China, he said ﬁthere 
is essentially no tax.ﬂ Allowing companies to exist in a tax-free environment was 
a duplication of Taiwanese policy.
Modernization of China™s High-Tech Parks
Mr. Howell then traced the evolution of high-technology parks in China. 
ﬁIn the old days,ﬂ he recalled, ﬁif you went into a [Chinese] high-tech park, you 
wouldn™t even know you were there: You™d just be in some kind of ramshackle 
urban environment that had been designated as a park and was run . . . by an 
administrative committee appointed by the municipal government.ﬂ Taking a 
˜rst step away from this, the Chinese began setting up development corporations 
that negotiated with investors and tried to start their own businesses. ﬁBut if you 
went in to meet with them,ﬂ he said, ﬁyou™d ˜nd that the person who met with 
you had two business cards: an administrative committee card and a development 
corporation card.ﬂ Because these of˜cials wore both hats, it was helpful as part of 
negotiating a deal with a corporation to get a permit approved by the administra
-tive committee, ﬁbecause it was the same guy.ﬂ Many Chinese parks are still run 
in this manner, although it is not conducive to a very dynamic, entrepreneurial 
environment.
The latest-model high-tech park is a sophisticated development corporation 
with a venture-capital arm, a real estate development corporation that sells land in 
the park, high-tech incubators, and many other support functions. The administra
-tive committee manages the park™s utilities and services. The Beijing Technical 
Development Area is an example of this genre, resembling what one might ˜nd 
in California. Mr. Howell noted that similar parks are located at Shanghai and 
Suzhou. They amount to clusters of relatively advanced semiconductor manufac
-turing facilities that incorporate all the necessary infrastructure: materials com
-panies, equipment companies, design centers, and the design houses of various 
OEMs. There is also plenty of land.
China Aims to Innovate in Microprocessors
Finally, Mr. Howell said that, having been successful in drawing industry 
in, the Chinese are now seeking ﬁvery vigorouslyﬂ to develop their domestic 
innovative capability. Chinese of˜cials have been making statements in recent 
years that Intel has a relative monopoly in semiconductors, that Microsoft has a 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
monopoly in software, and that both monopolies are bad. In addition, Chinese 
of˜cials have said that their response to the U.S. hardware monopoly is to try to 
design an indigenous microprocessor and have set in motion ˜ve projects whose 
goal it is to accomplish this capability. One of these projects is run by a govern
-ment institute that is part of the Chinese Academy of SciencesŠThe Institute 
for Computer TechnologyŠthat in 2002 spun off a microprocessor company. 
He rated its product as ﬁpretty goodŠnot as good as a Pentium, obviously, but 
they™re closing the gap.ﬂ 
The country™s end-use industries have been organized as well and are being 
encouraged by the government to buy the output through the ﬁDragon Chip 
Industrialization Alliance,ﬂ with their purchases to be complemented by military 
procurement. Since China did not sign the WTO procurement code when it joined 
the organization, the Chinese can practice discrimination in procurement when 
doing so conforms to their interest. ﬁThey feel now that buying systems that have 
Chinese-developed microprocessors in them is not in their interest,ﬂ he observed. 
ﬁBut the minute that the Chinese model gets to be as fast as an Intel model, they 
will all switch at one time to the Chinese model.ﬂ Considering the current and 
projected growth of the Chinese market, such an occurrence could be expected 
to have ﬁquite an impact.ﬂ
Assessing the Challenges Facing China
In conclusion, Mr. Howell presented a list of ﬁconcerns and challengesﬂ:

He all but dismissed oft-expressed fears of 
overcapacity
, suggesting that 
China™s government could take such demand-boosting measures as requiring 
each citizen to have an I.D. card with an embedded microprocessor if it needed 
to absorb excess output as the number of fabs in the country grew.

The use of 
preferential government procurement
 as an industrial policy 
tool is, he said, a concern.

 Intellectual property rights
, although growing, are not yet a major 
concern, because China™s technological level has not reached that of the United 
States.

Standards setting
 is a concern because it can be used to shut out Ameri
-can and other foreign designs.

Government pressure to transfer technology
, although more subtle than 
before, has not gone away.
Mr. Howell rated as the biggest challenge (what he called) the ﬁgravitational 
pullﬂ that increasingly draws all levels of semiconductor industry activity to 
China. As the bulk of wafer-fab investment moves to ChinaŠand projections 
indicate that China will boast some 30 new fabs in the ensuing 3 years compared 
to 6 new fabs in the United StatesŠscience and engineering graduates from 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 137
universities around the world would increasingly ˜nd the opportunities they 
were seeking in China. Combined with the growing location of design capacity 
in China, ﬁa tipping point has been reached that we can™t easily turn around,ﬂ he 
warned.
Discussion
While agreeing with Mr. Howell about the importance of foreign-owned 
˜rms to China™s semiconductor industry, Dr. Amsden cautioned that it would 
create the wrong impression to say that foreign ˜rms are important in all Chinese 
industries. One of the Chinese government™s major policies is to create nationally 
owned ˜rms, private or not, in virtually every major industry, including semicon
-ductors. ﬁThe idea is that you have joint ventures,ﬂ she said, ﬁbut unlike in other 
countries they have a ˜nite life span: After 10 years they™re dissolved.ﬂ China™s 
emphasis on nationally owned ˜rms as opposed to relying on multinational ˜rms 
is an extremely important element in its development, a subject on which, she 
suggested, Mr. Howell might comment later on.
Then, informing the audience of their good fortune at having him present, 
she ceded the rostrum to Mr. Shindo.
INNOVATION
 P
OLICIES
 IN
 J
APAN
Hideo Shindo
New Energy and Industrial Technology 
 De
velopment Organization (NEDO)
Japan
Mr. Shindo expressed his pleasure at having the opportunity to introduce 
some of Japan™s activities in the domain of innovation policy at the symposium. 
He began by projecting a diagram illustrating the nature of the relationship 
between NEDO and METI (Figure 26), the former being a funding agency closely 
connected to the latter, as Dr. Kahaner had explained earlier. He reported that the 
term ﬁinnovationﬂ is very popular in Japan and is regarded as highly important. 
Japan™s Basic Science and Technology Plan has addressed innovation from a sci
-ence and technology perspective. In addition, the 
Nakagawa Report: Toward a 
 
Sustainable and Competiti
ve Industrial Structure
 has addressed innovation from 
the viewpoint of industrial policy. Published in 2004, this report was named after 
Shoichi Nakagawa, Japan™s Minister of Economy, Trade & Industry.
Mr. Shindo focused on two key questions, one centering on invention, the 
other on innovation. The ˜rst concerns how new ideas are created and casts the 
spotlight on how to provide a good environment for R&D, whether at the basic 
stage or on technologies progressing through the Valley of Death. The second 
concerns how to introduce such ideas to the market. It focuses on what he called 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 26
 What is NEDO in the S&T policy system in Japan?
(1) NEDO is:-  Estab
lished in 1980, reorganiz
ed into an Independent Administrativ
e Agency in 2003
-  A non-profit, semi-go
ve
rnment funding agency to R&D activities in J
apan
-  Budget f
or R&D:
 1.6 billion 
U.
S.
 dollars
, # of 
Pe
rmanent Staff:
 around 700
-  
Target Areas:
   Adv
anced Industr
ial 
Technologies (ICT
, Biotechnology
, Nanotechnology
, Robotics
, etc.)
   Ne
w Energy and Energy Conser
vation 
Technologies (Fuel Cells
, PV & 
Ther
mal Solar
,          
Wind, Energy Efficiency
, etc.)
-  F
or more inf
or
mation:
    
http://
www
.nedo
.go
.jp/english/inde
x.html
(2) Japanese S&T P
olicy Systems and NEDO
Pr
ime 
Minister
Council fo
r Science and  T
echnology  Po
licyŁ Develop National-l
ev
el Strategy                  
 Ł CoordinationOther 
Ministr
ies
Ministry of Economy,
 Tr
ade andIndustr
yMinistry
 of Education, Culture, Sports,Science and TechnologyNEDO
Public ResearchLaborator
ie
sLoans
(Consor
tium)
Private CompaniesUnive
rsitieCouncil fo
r Science and  T
echnology  Po
licy                 
 Other 
Ministr
ies
BudgetMinistry of Economy,
 Tr
ade andIndustr
yMinistry
 of Education, Culture, Sports,Science and TechnologyNEDO
Indust
ry
Unive
rsitiesR&D ManagementGrant
sConditional Loans
(Consor
tium)
Unive
rsitiesfig 26ﬁthe virtuous cycle of demand and innovation.ﬂ He interpreted the ﬁinnovation 
ecologyﬂ referred to by Secretary Marburger as a way of thinking about the cycle 
involving innovation and the market in order to enable more sustainable growth 
for innovative technologies.
Key Questions for Japan™s Next Five-
Year Plan
After brie˚y providing background information on Japan™s Basic Science 
and Technology Plan, Mr. Shindo highlighted a number of possible key questions 
regarding the third Basic Plan:

How to develop and maintain S&T human resources?

How to establish a creative, high-quality R&D system?

How to prioritize strategic S&T areas?

How to develop a virtuous cycle of knowledge creation and application, 
through the acceleration of innovation and value creation? This virtuous cycle 
would be based on R&D results at universities and public research organizations 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL III: NEW MODELS IN JAPAN, TAIWAN, AND CHINA
 139
on the one hand, and through industry-university cooperation, the activation of 
entrepreneurs, and human resource development in management of technology 
areas on the other.
The 
Nakagawa Report
, concerned above all with the activities of METI, 
seeks to identify policies needed to establish and accelerate a virtuous cycle of 
demand and innovation in order to bring about Japan™s economic recovery and 
to create its future industrial structure. Taking a ﬁvery traditionalﬂ approach to 
drafting this report METI staff conducted rigorous interviews with over 700 
people from more than 300 companies and institutions, asking all what they felt 
to be important.
METI Looks at Japan™s Future
The report provides three key questions and as many key solutions. The 
questions center on how to ensure global competitiveness, how to respond to 
the
 demands of society, and how to encourage regional economic development. 
The potential solutions are to identify cutting-edge areas of industry that promise 
strong global competitiveness industrial areas that can meet market needs arising 
from changes to society, and industry clusters that can support regional revival.
Also contained in the report is a ﬁvery comprehensiveﬂ list of policy priori
-ties. The ˜rst identi˜es promising industrial areas, among which, as mentioned 
earlier by Dr. Kahaner, are fuel cells and digital consumer electronics. Second 
are policies for regional revitalization. A third category includes so-called cross-
 
sectional policies, pertaining to such issues as the development of industrial 
human resources, intellectual property rights, research and development, stan
-dardization, development of new businesses by small and mid-sized enterprises.
Turning to the implementation of these potential solutions and policies, 
Mr.
 Shindo said that ﬁfortunatelyﬂ several policy responses to the report have 
been initiated in the year since its publication. Notably, a ﬁTechnology Strategy 
Mapﬂ that has been developed by his organization together with METI and 
the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 
Japan™s largest public research organization.
Ending his presentation, he thanked those attending for their attention and 
offered to provide more details to all who might be interested.
DISCUSSION
Dr. Wessner opened the question period by referring to the ﬁtipping pointﬂ 
mentioned by Mr. Howell and asking whose semiconductor industry was most 
vulnerable to itŠthat of the United States, Europe, Taiwan, or Japan? While he 
was posing the question primarily to Mr. Howell, Dr. Wessner said, he would 
value the response of others on the panel as well.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Mr. Howell responded that, in his opinion, Taiwan™s semiconductor industry 
is the most vulnerable. A ﬁhuge exodusﬂ from Taiwan to the Mainland has already 
taken place, and hundreds of thousands of Taiwanese are how living in China, 
especially in the Shanghai area. Companies are springing up there that are run 
by Taiwanese managers and staffed in the main by Taiwanese engineers. The 
Chinese have ˜gured out that even if companies can not be lured to the Mainland, 
individuals can be lured there and brought together, along with investment and 
other elements needed to create companies. ﬁIt™s a very attractive environment 
if you™re Taiwanese,ﬂ he commented. ﬁYou speak the language; and Shanghai is 
pretty nice, really; and opportunities are there for many Taiwanese that they may 
not see for themselves in the long run in Taiwan.ﬂ What Taiwan™s strategy was 
for responding might be, he said, has not yet become clear.
Comparing Costs in Taiwan, on the Mainland
In answer to a question about the extent to which cost levels differed between 
Taiwan and the Mainland, Mr. Howell said that labor costs for semiconductor 
manufacturing are about 40 to 50 percent lower on the Mainland and that the cost 
of water is lower as well. But these are very small components of semiconductor 
manufacturing costs; the main expenses are equipment and other items whose 
costs are equivalent or close to equivalent in the two locations and were in some 
cases lower in Taiwan. 
In addition, the Taiwanese fabs on the Mainland have the extra costs associ
-ated with bringing in expatriates to work. Housing and education might need 
to be provided to hundreds of people coming from Taiwan, while those from 
Europe, the United States, and Japan have ﬁexpectations of a certain lifestyle,ﬂ 
and catering to these expectations raise labor costs. A 2002 Dewey Ballantine 
survey comparing costs in the United States, Taiwan, and China found manufac
-turing costs to be very similar in all three locations: ﬁa little bit lower in China 
and little bit higher in the United States, but not that much if you take incentives 
out of the picture.ﬂ
Adding incentives, however, changes everything, as demonstrated by China™s 
erstwhile VAT policy, which pushed cost signi˜cantly lower. It was thus an 
arti˜cial cost advantage created by the Chinese government that motivated com
-panies to move from Taiwan to the Mainland. ﬁRight away you got a 13-percent 
cost advantage just based on that,ﬂ Mr. Howell pointed out. ﬁAnd there was a 
sense that you would have the market to yourself if you moved over there with 
advanced technology: Nobody could export into that market and meet that cost 
advantage. It sucked in just an incredible amount of investment, and people and 
skills and everything else.ﬂ 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141 Moderator:
Lewis S. Edelheit
General Electric, retired
Dr. Edelheit, GE™s chief technology of˜cer during the 1990s, opened the 
 
session with some observations from what he described as an industry perspec
-tive. ﬁThis symposium,ﬂ he said, ﬁis about competitiveness: Some countries are 
trying to ˜gure out how to get it, others how to keep it, and still others how to 
get it back. And it™s all about learning how to move fast and win in a brutally 
competitive economy such as we™ve never seen.ﬂ 
About a quarter-century before, he recalled, industrial laboratories in the 
United States had become ﬁvery uncompetitive.ﬂ No longer relevant to their 
businesses, they were in a position of having to change, and change a great deal, 
or else die; meanwhile, the new companies that arose were not forming research 
labs. The deciding factor was not so much the issue of applied versus basic 
research, or even the issue of short-term versus long-term research, but the fact 
that the old model just was not producing results. ﬁFunding a basic researcher in a 
lab someplace to do something, then hoping that you could get it into
 production,ﬂ 
he said, ﬁstopped working. It was too slow.ﬂ
Many industrial research labs did die, but others changed, and very quickly. 
Of the numerous ways in which they changed, Dr. Edelheit named two. One 
was to start partnering with their own businesses much more closely, as the only 
way they could acquire speed was to move much closer to the marketplace. The 
second was to start partnering with other companies, with other industries, with 
Panel IV
 ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
  Evolution of Technology Partnerships in the 
United States
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
government, and with other countries, since even a company as big as GE was 
unable to move rapidly enough on its own.
UNITED STATES USING OUTDATED RESEARCH MODELS
But, in many cases, the old models remain in use in the United StatesŠwithin 
the government, industry, universities, and the National LaboratoriesŠand they 
were not moving fast enough. Other countries are wrestling with how to speed 
up the innovation process, especially in such areas as energy, job creation, health 
care, and the environment, where national needs are not being met with suf˜cient 
speed, in part because the models are too slow.
It was to consider these questions that the symposium was convened, 
Dr.
 Edelheit said, and the current panel would offer three speakers with interest
-ing perspectives on the issue of partnerships or the lack thereof, among govern
-ment, industry, and universities in the United States. The ˜rst, Ken Flamm, would 
talk about the case of supercomputers, a technology that clearly was critically 
important for a great number of industries.
U.S. P
OLIC
Y 
FOR
 A K
EY S
ECTOR
:  THE
 C
ASE
 OF
 S
UPERCOMPUTERS
Kenneth Flamm
Uni
versity of Texas at Austin
Dr. Flamm, thanking Dr. Wessner for the invitation to speak, said he would 
use his time to ﬁtell a storyﬂ about the supercomputer industry. Some of the mate
-rial he would present has already been published in an earlier version, having 
formed the basis for recommendations of a 2004 report on the future of super
-computing by a National Academies panel on which he served.
14
He would begin with the ˜eld™s early history, he said, in order to make sure that 
his listeners understood what is meant by the term ﬁsupercomputerﬂ and where the 
supercomputer came from. The machines built to decrypt code traf˜c during World 
War II were the direct precursors of the modern electronic digital computer and the 
famous ENIAC machine, built for other purposes, appeared shortly thereafter.
In the Beginning, All Computers Were ﬁSuperﬂ
At the computer industry™s very beginning in the 1940s and 1950s, all com
-puters were essentially supercomputersŠevery new model being the
 ﬁbiggest, 
14
National Research Council, 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Superconducting
, Susan L. 
 
Graham, Marc Snir and Cynthia A. Patterson, eds., Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, 2005.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 143
 
baddest, greatest computer ever builtﬂŠand a national-security application, 
whether bomb design or cryptography, was behind the funding of most com
-puter R&D. It was in the late 1950s that a commercial computer market began 
to develop, and the term ﬁsupercomputerﬂ came into use in the early 1960s. It 
was probably ˜rst applied to the IBM 7030 stretch, a special-purpose machine 
designed for two powerful government-mission customers, the National
 Security 
Agency and the Department of Energy. The Control Data 6600 was the other model 
referred to by that label, but in reality predecessors of both had merited
 it.
While all computers were supercomputers originally, as the commercial 
 
market began to develop and differentiate in the early 1950s, the gap separat
-ing the capability of the most powerful computer being produced and sold from 
that of the least powerful approached an order of magnitude. That gap grew to 
between three and four orders of magnitude by the end of the decade and, by the 
early 1970s, came to exceed the upper end of that range.
Control Data and Cray Constitute the Industry
From about the mid-1960s to the late 1970s, the entire supercomputer indus
-try basically resided in two U.S. ˜rms, Control Data and Cray, the latter company 
being a spin-off staffed by ex-employees of the former company and of its prede
-cessor, Engineering Research Associates. Very high performance supercomputers 
at that time offered very good price performance; doing an excellent job of pro
-viding raw computing capability, they were highly competitive with less powerful 
machines in cost/computing capacity. As a result, they were used by commercial 
customers after having been pioneered for government users. But in those days 
all computers were, in fact, ﬁcustomﬂ products: For each speci˜c machine, the 
manufacturer typically designed both a special-purpose processor and a propri
-etary interconnect system linking that processor to the other components.
It was not until about the mid-1980s that Japanese ˜rms entered the computer 
market, initially producing IBM-compatibles, then designs of their own, and ulti
-mately machines that were quite competitive with those of Control Data and Cray. 
Around the same time came the very ˜rst wave of technological challenge from 
microprocessors, which made very small increments of computing power avail
-able to the end user in individual personal machines. Cray machines nonetheless 
remained quite cost-competitive into the 1980s.
Japan™s Industrial Policy Creates Challenge to the United States
But what happened in that decade, a development that brought Dr. Flamm 
to the day™s theme of innovation policy, was that Japanese technology advanced 
in a number of areas, including both the semiconductor and computer industries. 
It initiated the Fifth-Generation Computer Project and the Superspeed Computer 
Project, the latter being at least as important as the former even if less publicized. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
For the very ˜rst time, Japanese producers were making signi˜cant inroads into 
the high-performance mainframe computer market. 
This occasioned some alarm in the United States, particularly within the 
military and other government agencies that had originally funded computer tech
-nology. Given that superiority in information technology was seen as essential to 
the U.S. goal of having a qualitative technological edge in defense systems, it was 
of some concern that producers elsewhere were coming on stream with products 
that were competitive in demanding, high-performance applications. 
One reaction was the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency™s 
(DARPA) launch in the 1980s of its Strategic Computing Initiative. The move 
was in part an attempt at responding to the technological challenges of the time, 
including competitive challenges from foreign companies producing systems that 
threatened to narrow the gap between U.S. information technology and IT avail
-able on the open market overseas.
Emergence of the Commodity-Based Supercomputer
Although DARPA program managers originally focused on custom com
-ponents and on ways to use parallelism as an alternative design methodology 
to create new computer architectures, they gradually switched their emphasis to 
so-called commodity processors over the course of the initiative. The reasoning 
behind this change, which coincided with the arrival of the microprocessor on 
the industrial scene, was quite simple: Supercomputers were produced in rela
-tively small quantities. Designing a custom processor to tweak the maximum 
possible performance, and producing it in relatively small scale, would result in 
a machine with an enormous price tag because all that R&D would be expensed 
over a relatively small number of units. But what if the new, microtype commod
-ity processors that were being marketed in the millions, and whose costs were 
very much lower than those of custom processors, could somehow be harnessed? 
Even if they were less ef˜cient at doing some of the calculations as individual 
processors, it might be possible to lash them together into a system and to ˜gure 
out how to split up problems so that they could be handled by a large ensemble 
of cheap microprocessors networked together. That would prove a less costly way 
of getting the problem done, and, if scalable, could be used to solve any problem 
that was properly partitioned.
As a result, there emerged a whole new methodology for competing in 
supercomputers. Instead of focusing on the very high-performance individual 
processor, which was going to be enormously expensive to produce, a generic 
technology would be developed involving massively parallel systems that could 
run on relatively cheap components. Dr. Flamm characterized the strategy as a 
ﬁkind of industrial jiu-jitsuﬂ: Rather than meeting directly the threat from ﬁvery, 
very well-doneﬂ high-performance processors coming out of Japan, the United 
States would ﬁshift the terms of the battle˜eld.ﬂ Many ultimately dismissed as 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 145
a waste of money the $1 billion spent by the Strategic Computing Initiative 
between 1983 and 1993. Although numerous new ˜rms appeared on the comput
-ing scene, many of themŠeven some that became major players, like Thinking 
MachinesŠended up going out of business.
The other response to the Japanese challenge of the 1980s took the form 
of trade-policy initiatives, one of those being an attempt to open up Japan™s 
market through forcing procurement by its government of U.S. supe
rcomputers. 
In addition, dumping cases were ˜led in the United States in the mid- to late-
1990s. Dr.
 Flamm pointed out that, between 1986 and 1992, the three major 
 
Japanese producers of noncommodity or ﬁvector computersﬂŠNEC, Hitachi, and 
FujitsuŠwhittled the U.S. share of the market from nearly 80 percent to under 
60 percent. ﬁThis threat was a very real threat,ﬂ he remarked.
Federal Investment Transforms the Industry
Having set out the background, Dr. Flamm next discussed how investment 
by the United States in experimenting with a new set of technologies has ended 
up altering the competitive dynamicsŠthe ﬁindustrial ecologyﬂŠof the super
-computer business. For it has indeed done so, and in some very signi˜cant ways 
that he did not believe to be widely appreciated, particularly in Washington. 
 As a measure of industry dynamics he would use what was referred to as ﬁTop 
500ﬂ data, which described the 500 fastest computers in the world based on the 
LINPACK
 performance benchmark.
15
 Not all computers were tested this way, 
and, he acknowledged, legitimate questions exist about whether the Linpack 
really is the best possible measurement of computer performance. Still, the 
numbers he would use were re˚ective of trends in and broader measures of the 
industry, and they were at once very easy to use and very detailed.
Arriving at the present, Dr. Flamm noted that it was with the inauguration of 
Japan™s Earth Simulator, referenced in Dr. Kahaner™s presentation, that the United 
States fell out of the world leadership in computing that it had held since about 
1950. The United States had assumed the lead at that time from the United King
-dom, which had produced the very ˜rst electronic digital computers during World 
War II and continued in the No. 1 position until it ﬁbasically blew itﬂ in the late 
1940s. And the Earth Simulator had come on line not only as fastest in the world, 
but as faster by over a factor of two or three than its closest U.S. competitor. In 
2002 many people compared the challenge this event presented to the United 
States, both technologically and in other respects, to the launch of Sputnik.
15
According to Wikipedia, The LINPACK Benchmark measures how fast a computer solves dense 
n by 
n systems of linear equations 
Ax=b
, a common task in engineering. The solution is based on 
Gaussian elimination with partial pivoting, with 
2/
3·n
3 + n2
 ˚oating point operations. The result 
is millions of ˚oating point operations per second (M˚op/s). Accessed at 
<http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/LINPACK
>. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Growth of Industry Purchases Marks a Shift
Dr. Flamm then described a ﬁmajor shift in the way the market worksﬂ that 
had taken place between June 1995 and December 2004. Historically, around 
two-thirds of supercomputers sold in the United States went to government, 
research users, or academic institutions. But, in slightly less than a decade, 
industry™s share rose to the point that it was buying more than half of the most 
powerful machines on the market.
Meanwhile, there were no signs of a letup in the pace of computer perfor
-mance improvement. Improvement was more or less continuous, with leading-
edge outputs. In fact, the Earth Simulator, after reigning as the world™s fastest 
machine for two-and-a-half years, has been displaced by an American machine, 
the Blue Gene L.
Dr. Flamm refuted the contention that there is a widening gap between the 
low and high ends of the Top 500, with the government continuing to acquire the 
truly fast machines and industry purchasing ﬁshlock.ﬂ The dispersion between 
the two ends, he said, is relatively constant with the exception of a big jump 
caused by the Earth Simulator, ﬁan exceptional machine.ﬂ Evidence does exist of 
a diminished industrial presence at the very top of the list, however: There has not 
been an industry-owned machine among the fastest 20 since about 2001.
United States Ascends, Japan Declines
Despite other trends over this period, the United States has enjoyed a ﬁhuge 
success storyﬂ in supercomputing. U.S. industry has emerged very strong, its share 
of Top 500 machines sold marching steadily upward while Japan™s share is shrink
-ing (Figure 27). Pointing to the top right-hand corner of his graph, Dr.
 Flamm 
speci˜ed that the small percentage of non-Japanese, non-U.S. machines indicated 
there represent products not from Europe but from China and India, the ﬁnew 
industrial powerhouses.ﬂ
He added that the picture differs little if looked at from the point of view 
of total computing capability, which is in fact a better proxy for value. Further
-more, U.S. market share has been increasing not only worldwide but in each 
individual region of the globe, whether measured by number of machines sold or 
by total computing capability. Finally, U.S. manufacturers™ share of the 20 fastest 
machines, after eroding during the mid-1990s, has emerged from the 1993-2004 
period only slightly below where it had been at the start. The percentage of the 
Top 20 machines installed in the United States has followed a similar trajectory.
National Trade, Investment Policies Make an Impact
Evidence exists that national trade and industrial policies have had an effect 
on market behavior. In 2005 U.S. manufacturers of Top 500 machines con
-trolled 100 percent of their home market, into which only a handful of Japanese 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 147
FIGURE 27
 U.S. makers stronger than ever: Share of Top 500 machines (numbers) by 
maker.
0102030405060708090100Jun-93Dec-93Jun-94Dec-94Jun-95Dec-95Jun-96Dec-96Jun-97Dec-97Jun-98Dec-98Jun-99Dec-99Jun-00Dec-00Jun-01Dec-01Jun-02Dec-02Jun-03Dec-03Jun-04Dec-04fig 27MonthShare of Top 500 Machines by Maker (Percent)Other MakersJapanese MakersU.S. Makersmachines in the category had been sold since 1998, and none at all since 2000. 
That contrasts with the situation prior to 1998, indicating that the dumping cases 
brought against Japanese manufacturers had made an impact. And while the U.S. 
share of Japan™s market had dipped suddenly after the ˜ling of the dumping cases, 
it popped back up again once they were settled. ﬁIt™s hard not to think there™s 
some causal connection there,ﬂ Dr. Flamm observed.
Dr. Flamm next took up the thesis that the government-industry partner
-ship formed to develop alternative methodologies for designing and building 
supercomputers has been quite a success and has transformed the nature of the 
supercomputer market over the previous decade. He noted that this is also the 
thesis of the National Academies report on which he has collaborated with a 
number of others, including computer scientists familiar with the industry.
16
 He 
divided the architectures used in making supercomputers into three categories: 
ﬁcustom,ﬂ applied to traditional machines with full-custom processors and full-
custom interconnects between those processors; ﬁcommodity,ﬂ denoting those 
16
National Research Council, 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Superconducting, 
op. cit
.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
made of microprocessors and interconnects available for purchase on the open 
market from third parties; and ﬁhybrid,ﬂ used for machines that generally had 
commodity processors but custom interconnects. ﬁThe very last segment of the 
computer industry to be transformed by the microprocessor and the PC has indeed 
been transformed,ﬂ he declared, calling this ﬁan extraordinary story.ﬂ
Commodity Supercomputers Taking Over
The system performance of the custom and hybrid machines has improved 
almost in parallel since 1993, with that of commodity architecture tracing a 
similar slope since its advent in 1997, and there are no sign of any category™s 
slowing down (Figure 28). Commodity machines™ representation among the 
Top 500 has skyrocketed; however, from a standing start in December 1998, the 
commodity sector achieved an 80-percent share of all supercomputers sold by 
the end of 2004. In this rise, the commodity machines have essentially displaced 
the hybrids, which between 1993 and 1998 were displacing the full-custom 
machines. The change is nearly identical when tracked on the basis of capacity 
FIGURE 28
 System performance by type: Mean R
max
 by system type.
1101001,00010,000Jun-93Dec-93Jun-94Dec-94Jun-95Dec-95Jun-96Dec-96Jun-97Dec-97Jun-98Dec-98Jun-99Dec-99Jun-00Dec-00Jun-01Dec-01Jun-02Dec-02Jun-03Dec-03Jun-04Dec-04Commodity    HybridCustomfig 28Mean RmaxMonthInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 149
rather than units, and differs only slightly when consideration was narrowed to 
the Top 20 machines.
Transforming a Market Restructures the Industry
This transformation of the supercomputer market has completely restructured 
the computer industry as a whole. According to a graph illustrating the composi
-tion of the market for the Top 500 by computing capacity (Figure 29), the two 
leaders as of June 1993 were Cray, with 35 percent of the market, and Thinking 
Machines, another U.S. company, with 28 percent. Japan™s NEC, Hitachi, and 
Fujitsu combined for a 22-percent share, as compared to the more than 40 per
-cent of the vector-supercomputer market by machines installed that they enjoyed 
in
 1992.
FIGURE 29
 Restructuring of product has restructured industry: Top 500 market share 
(R
max
) by company, June 1993.
Fujitsu9%Hitachi1%NEC12%Cray
35%HP2%Intel8%Kendall Square3%Thinking Machines28%MasPar1%Meiko1%nCube0%Parsytec0%fig 29Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
By June 2004, the Top 500 market was radically altered (Figure 30). IBM, 
out of the previous picture entirely, was the leader with more than half of all 
capacity sold; H-P had climbed into the No. 2 spot, its 19-percent share almost an 
order or magnitude higher than the 2 percent it had held 11 years earlier. While 
NEC was the third-largest player at 6 percent, the total share of the Japanese 
manufacturers was only 9 percent. Cray™s share of the market had plunged to 
2 percent.
Government-Only Demand for Traditional Technology
Traditional custom supercomputers, still required by government users for 
some applications, are showing signs of becoming ﬁa government-only island,ﬂ 
as illustrated by a graph which indicates that around 60 percent of custom 
machines consistently go to purchasers in the government and research sectors 
(Figure 31). From the perspective of computing capacity, the ˜gures are even 
more one-sided: Since 2001, 85 percent of the market for custom systems has 
FIGURE 30
 A whole new playing ˜eld: Top 500 market share (R
max
) by company, 
June
 2004).
Cray
2%Dell3%HP19%IBM51%Linux Networx3%Self-made1%SGI3%Sun1%Fujitsu2%Hitachi1%NEC6%All Other8%fig 30Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 151been accounted for by government and research users. ﬁA strategy started by the 
military has become so dramatically successful that some government usersŠa 
minority, fortunatelyŠare essentially cut off from this whole new development 
in computing technology,ﬂ observed Dr. Flamm, likening the current market for 
custom supercomputers to those for submarines and aircraft carriers.
He then presented a number of conclusions:

The conventional wisdom holding that the government role in computers 
is much diminished has never been true at the high end and is still not true. Criti
-cal government applications have motivated policy in that area.

The policy implemented in the 1990s in response to the challenge that 
U.S. government users faced in the previous decade have proved to be a huge 
success, even though the ultimate game plan has not matched the original. The 
technological foundations residing in ﬁthose dead companies that littered the 
landscapesﬂ have fueled new ideas and new methods that have led to industrial 
outcomes that are highly favorable to the United States.
FIGURE 31
 Custom supercomputer market becoming a government-only niche: Govern
-ment and research share, top 500 machines.
NOTE: Balance is industrial, vendor, academic.
01020304050607080Jun-93Dec-93Jun-94Dec-94Jun-95Dec-95Jun-96Dec-96Jun-97Dec-97Jun-98Dec-98Jun-99Dec-99Jun-00Dec-00Jun-01Dec-01Jun-02Dec-02Jun-03Dec-03Jun-04CommodityHybridCustomfig 31Gove
rnment and Research Share,
Top 500 Machines (Percent)MonthInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY

With considerable evidence available that the custom-supercomputer 
 
market is increasingly a government-only niche, the government might be forced 
to view it the way it views weapons systems and to pay for the full load if its need 
for the product persists. 

Spillovers from supercomputers seem to have slowed, as has super
-computer R&D, and ﬁspin-onﬂ has become as important as spin-off. This, again, 
is one of the messages of the National Academies report to which Dr. Flamm has 
contributed.

It is hard to see how trade barriers have helped either U.S. supercomputer 
producers or users.

The government™s challenge is to maintain whatever capabilities it needs 
that are outside the commercial mainstream while leveraging developments in the 
industry it has so successfully transformed in such a way as to make cost-effective 
solutions linked to the mainstream accessible to government users.
In closing, Dr. Flamm held up the history he had recounted as ﬁan exam
-ple of a government-industry partnership in technology development that has 
yielded unforeseen but impressive results as an industrial outcome for the United 
States.ﬂ
Dr. Edelheit, thanking Dr. Flamm and moving on to the next presentation, 
stated that best practice in government-industry-university collaboration was to 
be found not abroad but at the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technol
-ogy in the form of the Advanced Technology Program (ATP), whose director, 
Marc Stanley, would follow.
CROSSING
 THE
 V
ALLE
Y 
OF
 D
EATH
:  THE
 R
OLE
 AND
 I
MPACT
 OF
 THE
  ADVANCED
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y P
ROGRAM
Marc G. Stanley
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Mr. Stanley, thanking Dr. Edelheit and expressing his pleasure at attending 
the symposium, remarked that, speaking later in the day, he bene˜ted from hav
-ing heard the earlier discussion of how countries might pro˜t from public-private 
partnerships. The observations he would offer, he said, would not necessarily be 
limited to the ATP.
Conceived by two congressional staff members, one in each house, the 
ATP mission is ﬁto accelerate the development of innovative technologies for 
broad national bene˜t through partnerships with the private sector.ﬂ Mr. Stanley 
described societal bene˜t as ﬁa very interesting criterionﬂ for a public-private 
partnership to use when considering investments in high-risk technology. The key 
to the process was getting industry to lead it, he said. His answer to one of the 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 153
questions most frequently asked about ATPŠwas government actually capable of 
making this kind of investment?Šwas that more than a dozen years of observing 
the program had taught him that industry knows best where particular market 
gaps might be.
U.S. Market™s Total Autonomy a ﬁMythﬂ
While acknowledging that the U.S. market is very open and lacks the regu
-latory constraints often seen overseasŠand that these exigencies both provide 
strength and act as a motivatorŠMr. Stanley likened to a ﬁmythﬂ the belief held 
both at home and abroad that, in the United States, markets acted entirely on their 
own. Impediments to early-stage, high-risk investment remain a cause for con
-cern in the United States; at the same time, the government™s role in technology 
development is underappreciated. He would therefore devote some of his time to 
the question of whether there is a role for government to play in innovation.
To set the stage for this discussion, Mr. Stanley referred to a plaint against 
Roman rule from 
Monty Python™s
 Life of Brian
 that, for 
The Economist
 (May 1, 
2004), had evoked criticisms heard from Americans of their government™s role in 
ushering major technological innovations:
 ﬁBut what, apart from the roads, the 
sewers, the medicine, the Forum, the theater, education, public order, irrigation, 
the fresh-water system and public baths . . . what have the Romans done for us? 
(And the wine, don™t forget the wine . . . ).ﬂ Placing this debate in a U.S. context, 
he recalled that Alexander Hamilton had created the nation™s ˜rst public-private 
partnership, a planned industrial center in New Jersey called the Society for 
Establishing Useful Manufactures (SEUM), as a tool for competing with Great 
Britain.
Partnerships a Hallowed U.S. Tradition
The history of U.S. partnerships provides ample evidence of government 
involvement apart from that just supplied by Dr. Flamm in his discussion of the 
computer industry. To cite a few examples:

1798
ŠCongress provides a grant for production of muskets with inter
-changeable parts to Eli Whitney, who founds ˜rst machine-tool industry

1842
ŠSamuel Morse receives award to demonstrate feasibility of 
telegraph

1919
ŠRCA founded on initiative of U.S. Navy with commercial and 
military rationale (patent pooling, antitrust waver, equity contributions)

1969-1990s
ŠGovernment investments develop the forerunners of the 
Internet

present
ŠThe government is currently making major investments in 
genomic/biomedical research
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Mr. Stanley asked the audience to focus on two facts: 1) that deep capital 
markets exist in the United States, but 2) that some underinvestment in pre-
competitive technologies nonetheless remains. He would attempt to reconcile 
these facts and, in the process, demonstrate that, under the proper circumstances, 
public-private partnerships can play a key role in helping countries anywhere in 
the world to compete.
Private Investors Neglect Early Stage
To begin, he raised a question: If the United States has large and well-
 
developed early-stage capital marketsŠindeed, the world™s bestŠthanks to broad 
angel markets and deep venture markets, what is the issue? In answer, he noted 
that of about $20 billion in rounds of venture-capital investment in 2004, only 
$105 million represent seed rounds, a constant trend in recent years . Another 
graph (Figure 32) showed that the median deal size for early-stage seed-round 
investments had fallen to $300,000 by the end of 2004 from $1 million at the 
beginning of 2001. Much more of the private equity community™s money, there
-fore, is going into later-round investments, which typically fund such later-stage 
business activities as product development and marketing. In addition, the distri
-bution of venture capital tends to concentrate in a limited number of geographical 
regions.
Mr. Stanley listed several reasons for what he contended was underinvest
-ment in precompetitive technologies in the United States:

Markets, although powerful, are imperfect.

New ideas lack constituencies.

Venture capitalists tend to invest later in the cycle.

Firms can™t capture the entire value of some investments when acting 
alone.
ATP™s Role More Extensive Than Recognized
A review of the funding of early-stage, high-risk research conducted by 
Lewis Branscomb and Philip Auerswald of Harvard™s Kennedy School under con
-tract to ATP has produced estimates placing investments by venture-capital ˜rms, 
state governments, and universities at only 8 to 16 percent of the total funding 
applied to early-stage technology development. The federal government, through 
ATP and the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, is estimated to 
account for between 21 and 25 percent of these moneys (Figure 33). The study™s 
conclusion is that ATP plays a greater role in ˜nancing the development of pre-
competitive technology than is widely appreciated.
Outside the United States, as suggested both by some of the day™s earlier 
speakers and by Mr. Stanley™s own travels in member countries of the Organisa
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 155
FIGURE 32
 Early-stage deal size declines: Median amount invested by round class.
SOURCE: Adapted from Dow Jones Venture One/Ernst & Young.
Median Amount Invested (Millions of Dollars)9.611.58.07.95.35.10.3 1.0024681012144Q011Q022Q023Q024Q021Q032Q033Q034Q031Q042Q043Q044Q04Later RoundSecond RoundFirst RoundSeed RoundSeed RoundFirst RoundSecond RoundLater Roundsfig 32tion for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), there has been a 
ﬁclarion callﬂ for enlisting government involvement as one tool for building a 
dominant position in certain areas of technology. To illustrate, Mr. Stanley dis
-played a comment by Elizabeth Downing, an of˜cial of the ATP award winner 3D 
Technology Laboratories: ﬁWhy should the government fund the development of 
enabling technologies? Because enabling technologies have the potential to bring 
enormous bene˜ts to society as a whole, yet private investors will not adequately 
support the development of these technologies because pro˜ts are too uncertain 
or too distant.ﬂ
In a similar vein, the noted venture capitalist David Morgenthaler has 
remarked that ﬁIt does seem that early-stage help by the government in develop
-ing platform technologies and ˜nancing scienti˜c discoveries is directed exactly 
at the areas where institutional venture capitalists cannot and will not go.ﬂ And 
Jeffrey Schloss, when speaking on behalf of Dr. Francis Collins of the National 
Human Genome Research Institute of the National Institutes of Health, has said: 
ﬁThe Advanced Technology Program can stimulate certain sectors like biotech
-nology where the risk is such that the private-sector investment is ineffective or 
nonexistent. Because of its synergies across a broad range of technologies, ATP 
has advanced the research being done in DNA diagnostics tools.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 33
 Early-stage technology development: Estimated distribution of
 funding 
sources for early-stage technology development, based on restrictive and inclusive 
 
criteria.
NOTE: The proportional distribution across the main funding sources for early-stage tech
-nology development is similar regardless of the use of restrictive or inclusive de˜nitional 
criteria.
SOURCE: Lewis M. Branscomb and Philip E. Auerswald, 
Between In
vention and Inno
-vation: An Analysis of Funding for Early-Stage Technology De
velopment
, NIST GCR 
02Œ841, Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, November 
2002, p. 23.
fig 33Lower Estimate: $5.4 BillionUpper Estimate: $35.6 BillionUnivs2.8%Univs3.9%StateGov't4.7%StateGov't2.2%FederalGov't25.1%FederalGov't20.5%VCs8.0%VCs2.3%Angels27.9%Angels23.9%Industry47.2%Industry31.6%Market Inef˜ciencies Make Federal Role ﬁCriticalﬂ
On the basis of such statements, as well as other evidence, one might infer 
that the federal role in dealing with the investment gap affecting early-stage, high-
risk technologies is critical, Mr. Stanley remarked. Markets for allocating risk 
capital to early-stage technology are not ef˜cient, he asserted, due to inadequate 
information for making investment decisions, the high uncertainty of outcomes, 
and dif˜culty in appropriating the bene˜ts of early-stage enabling technologies. 
As Dr. Branscomb has said in testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation, ﬁEntrepreneurs and private equity inves
-tors alike consistently state that there exists a ˜nancial ‚gap™ facing early-stage 
technology ventures seeking funding in amounts ranging roughly from $200,000 
to $2 million.ﬂ
Foreign competitors, meanwhile, have technology-support programs larger 
than those of the United States, and those programs employ a broad range of mea
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 157
sures in such domains as trade, tax, procurement, standards, government equity 
˜nancing, and regional aids. To illustrate, Mr. Stanley offered a few details from 
programs discussed earlier in the symposium. Finland™s Tekes runs a program 
that was similar to ATP but is ˜nanced at an annual level of around 387 million 
euros as compared to ATP™s $140 million. Japan™s ASET program, one of six 
Japanese semiconductor partnerships under way, received $473 million in the 
period 1995-2000. In the European Union, JESSI was funded at $3.6 billion for 
the period 1988-1996; MEDEA+ was receiving 500 million euros annually; and 
17.5 billion euros is to be provided under the Framework Program over 5 years. 
In addition, not only Canada but other nations of the OECD are practicing many 
forms of public-private partnerships to compete with the United States.
Foreign Competitors™ Concerted Efforts in R&D
Posting a chart that traces over time a number of developed nations™ R&D 
expenditures in percentage of GDP, Mr. Stanley remarked that it should not be 
surprising that the trend has been upward. The data graphed is based on a wide 
variety of programs, including direct grants, loans, equity investments, and tax 
deferral; whether the investments represented include both civilian and dual-use 
technology, or only the former, has not been determined. ﬁClearly, other countries 
are increasing their expenditures on R&D and have taken up concerted efforts,ﬂ 
he stated.
Mr. Stanley then turned to ATP™s workings. Unlike SBIR, some of whose 
funding was agency- or mission-speci˜c, ATP has a collaborative focus and a 
˚exibility under which funding is available to all technologies, enabling indus
-try to address large problems. Cost sharing, which combines private and public 
funding, and serious commitment to commercialization are requirements. He 
supplied a list of attributes that he considers ﬁpillars to develop a good public-
private partnership,ﬂ saying each contributes to success, both within ATP and 
abroad: These are 

an emphasis on innovation for broad national economic bene˜t;

a strong industry leadership in the planning and implementation of 
projects;

project selection based on technical and economic merit;

a demonstrated need for funding;

a requirement that projects have well-de˜ned goals;

provisions limiting the funding period;

a rigorous competition based on peer review;

encouragement of collaboration among small, medium-sized, and large 
companies; universities; and clusters and industry parks; and

evaluations, to be pursued both by presenting results to the granting 
agency and by establishing a baseline as an aid to proving success.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Measuring ATP™s Success in Societal Bene˜ts
How successful has ATP been? The program was able to show net societal 
bene˜ts of $17 billion based on the analysis of only 41 of the 736 projects it 
has funded; the total cost to the federal government over the life of the program 
was about $2.2 billion. ﬁThis is just the beginning,ﬂ Mr. Stanley promised. ﬁThe 
rewards are continuing to come in.ﬂ
But success is not to be measured exclusively in return on investment. The 
White House Of˜ce of Management and Budget, following a review according 
to its Performance Assessment Rating Tool (PART) 2 years before, praised ATP™s 
assessment effort, and a National Academies review had called it ﬁone of the most 
rigorous and intensive efforts of any U.S. technology program.ﬂ
17
Evaluation Considered an Integral Component
ATP™s selection process, monitoring, and follow-up on projects is ﬁexcep
-tional,ﬂ Mr. Stanley asserted, adding that the program has the ability to identify 
unsuccessful projects and that those projects are terminated. ﬁYou have to termi
-nate companies that are not successfully doing what they say,ﬂ he commented. 
ﬁAnd then you should be able to speak not only of your successes but of your 
failures, because there are lessons to be learned from that.ﬂ
ATP used a number of methods to measure the activity of its awardees 
against the program™s mission:

Inputs:
 ATP funding; industry cost-share;

Outputs:
 R&D partnering; risky, innovative technologies; S&T knowledge;

Outcomes:
 acceleration; commercial activity; and

Impacts:
 broad national economic bene˜ts.
The program had in the previous year published a book on its measurement tools, 
and the book had ﬁbecome a very hot seller overseas.ﬂ
To conclude, Mr. Stanley provided examples of the kinds of studies ATP 
has employed in order, as he put it, ﬁto do the kind of work that we think is 
essential to maintain ˜delity to the taxpayer[s] for the investments that they™ve 
given usﬂ:

statistical pro˜ling
 of applicants, projects, participants, technologies;
17
According to the Of˜ce of Management and Budget, ﬁthe PART was developed to assess and 
improve program performance so that the federal government can achieve better results. A PART 
review helps identify a program™s strengths and weaknesses to inform funding and management 
decisions aimed at making the program more effective. The PART therefore looks at all factors that 
affect and re˚ect program performance.ﬂ Of˜ce of Management and Budget Web site, accessed at 
<http://www.whitehouse.go
v/omb/part/>.
 Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 159

status reports
 (mini case studies) for all completed projects;

econometric and statistical studies
 of innovation and portfolio impacts;

special-issue studies
;
progress tracking 
of all projects and participants (business reporting 
system, other surveys);

detailed microeconomic case studies
 of selected projects, programs;

macroeconomic impact projects
 from selected microeconomic case 
studies; and

development and testing
 of new assessment models, tools.
The program reports on these extensive studies, he said.
Dr. Edelheit thanked Mr. Stanley and introduced Pace VanDevender to 
talk about how the Department of Energy™s National Laboratories ˜t into this 
landscape.
SANDIA
 N
ATIONAL
 L
ABORATORIES
:  DOE L
ABS
 AND
 I
NDUSTR
Y O
UTLOOK
J. Pace VanDe
vender
Sandia National Laboratories
Expressing his pleasure at participating in the symposium, Dr. VanDevender 
speci˜ed that he would present the legislative basis for the national laboratories™ 
involvement in technology transfer in light of the fact that their mission was a 
governmental function (making the United States safe and secure). He said that 
he would also explain how technology partnerships support DoE in that function, 
discuss the competitive advantage to industry of collaborative research and licens
-ing and, ˜nally, proffer some closing remarks.
Dr. VanDevender explained that DoE National Laboratories are government-
owned, contractor-operated organizations (GOCO). Under this arrangement, the 
labs™ property and equipment belongs to the government, and their people and 
reputation are af˜liated with a contractor. The labs™ missions, however, are ˜xed 
by Congress and range from the pursuit of knowledge to the maintenance of 
nuclear weapons. In ˜scal year 2003, the laboratories received around $6 billion 
of DoE™s $8.5 billion R&D budget. ﬁIt is a lot of money,ﬂ he remarked, ﬁand every 
dollar has its mission.ﬂ
DoE™s Tech-Transfer History a Quarter-Century Old
Dr. VanDevender then tracked the policy basis for DoE™s involvement in 
technology transfer. This began in 1980, when the 
Ste
venson-Wydler Tec
hnology 
Inno
vations Ac
t, which established technology transfer as a mission for the 
 
federal laboratories. Each lab set up an Of˜ce of Research and Technology 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Applications to help disseminate information: ﬁIf it wasn™t classi˜ed, we were to 
publish it,ﬂ he recalled, ﬁand if it was useful, industry could use it.ﬂ This legisla
-tion also established a preference for U.S. manufacturers, something that persists 
to the present, ﬁeven though,ﬂ as he noted, ﬁglobalization has radically changed 
the nature of the industrial world.ﬂ
A second major landmark came in 1984 with the 
Trademark Clari˜cation 
Act
, which gave the GOCOs licensing and royalty authority for the ˜rst time. 
Then, in 1986, the 
Federal Technology Transfer Act
 extended the responsibility 
for technology transfer to lab employees, so that each individual™s performance 
evaluation took into consideration ful˜llment of this mission. ﬁThat did not work 
at all, as you might imagine,ﬂ Dr. VanDevender recalled. ﬁIt just didn™t engage 
the consciousness of the lab employees.ﬂ
A turning point was reached with the 
National
 Competiti
veness Tec
hnology 
Transfer Act of 1
989
. This act made technology transfer a mission of the DoE 
weapons labs. It also allowed GOCOs to enter into cooperative research and 
development agreements (CRADAs): 
i.e.,
 to make deals with industry that 
involves becoming partners and cofunding R&D activities. Also in 1989, the 
NIST Authorization Act
 recognized CRADA intellectual property other than 
inventions and, thereby, helped resolve a problem that had inhibited technology 
transfer from the labs. The 
1995
 National Technology Transfer Act
 guaranteed to 
industry the ability to negotiate for rights to CRADA inventions and increased the 
royalty distribution limit that had been placed on lab inventors, thereby increasing 
their motivation to invent.
Assessing the Ef˜cacy of Tech-Transfer Policies
How well has this policy basis for GOCOs™ participation in technology trans
-fer worked? ﬁPretty well,ﬂ Dr. VanDevender assessed, posting a tabular account 
of the DoE labs™ tech-transfer activities for ˜scal year 2004 that displayed what 
he called ﬁsome respectable numbersﬂ (Figure 34). However, the approximately 
10,000 tech-transfer actions that took place during that year across DoE™s entire 
complex of 24 National Labs and other facilities were ﬁnot at all uniformly dis
-tributed.ﬂ In fact, about half of the activity, as measured by funds coming in from 
industry, was attributable to a single laboratory out of the 24. On a lab-to-lab 
basis, therefore, tech-transfer activity had been ﬁfairly modest.ﬂ
Selecting among the ˜gures, Dr. VanDevender noted that there were 610 
active CRADAs across DoE in FY2004; based on the fact that 157 had been 
initiated in that year, he posited an average lifetime for CRADAs of 3 to 4 years. 
Whether the 520 patents issued in FY2004 amounted to ﬁa lot or a little,ﬂ he 
allowed, ﬁdepends on your perspective.ﬂ Of 4,345 licenses active in FY2004, 616 
were new and 3,236 were income bearing. Agreements classi˜ed under ﬁactive 
work for others, nonfederal entitiesﬂ (WFO/NFE), numbered 1,884, while those 
classi˜ed under ﬁactive work for others, other federal agenciesﬂ (WFO/Other 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 161FIGURE 34
 Technology transfer supplements the primary mission of each lab.
ŁCRADAsFY 2004ŠActive CRADAs610 ŠNew CRADAs157ŁIntellectual PropertyŠInvention Disclosures                      1,617ŠPatent Applications661 ŠIssued Patents520ŁLicensesŠAll Active Licenses4,345ŁNew Licenses616ŠPatent Licenses ŠActive 1,362ŠOther IP Licenses ŠActive 2,983ŠIncome-B
earing Licenses3,236ŁActive WFO/NFE Agreements       1,884ŁActive WFO/Other Fed. Agreements 2,782ŁUser Facilities Agreements/ FY043,252ŁMore than 10,000 technology transfer actions in FY 2004ŁIncorporates activities across DOE complex of 24 national labs/facilitiesŁSupports DOE/NNSA missions by enhancing lab capabilities and commercializing technologiesfig 34Fed. Agreements) numbered 2,782. User-facilities agreements came to 3,252 
in
 FY2004.
Results Plateauing in Numerous Areas
Dr. VanDevender then projected a graph showing that several measures of 
activity in the intellectual-property domain has plateauedŠi.e.,
 very little change 
with timeŠas technology-transfer policy has evolved (Figure 35). Invention dis
-closures, after growing vigorously in the decade ending in 1997, dipped sharply 
and then, around the close of the century, hit something of a plateau. Patent 
applications and patents awarded, moving almost in lockstep with one another, 
have followed a similar if somewhat steadier course.
CRADA activity shows a rapid increase from 1992 to 1996, after which it 
drops off signi˜cantly (Figure 36). Dr. VanDevender™s explanation was that when 
CRADAs came into being, they were cofunded by government and industry, 
with a 50-50 share being typical. When the government participated as a ﬁfunds-
 
producing partner,ﬂ CRADAs grew rapidly. ﬁBut when the economy recovered 
and there were other pressing needs for federal money,ﬂ he said, ﬁthe federal 
matching dollars went away, and much of the CRADA activity did also.ﬂ It has 
not, however, fallen to zero, because some robust partnerships were established 
during the years of upward growth and these industry participants provided the 
funding needed to sustain their CRADAs. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 35
 Invention disclosures and patents have plateaued under current policies and 
priorities.
-2004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,000Invention DisclosuresPatent ApplicationsPatents198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004fig 35NumberYearFIGURE 36
 Industry has preferred other vehicles over CRADAs without matching 
funds.
-5001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0001992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004Active CRADAS WFO-NFE AgreementsTotal LicensesUser Facility AgreementsNumber of Activitiesfig 36YearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 163
WFO/NFE agreements also reached a plateau in 2002 after many years of 
sustained growth. However, licenses set a pattern of swift growth that is continu
-ing, and agreements covering user facilities appear to have done likewise until 
their sharp decline in 2004. ﬁThe message from both of those,ﬂ Dr. VanDevender 
re˚ected, ﬁis that there™s been a lot of growth, a lot of deals were made and rela
-tionships built, but it has really plateaued under the current policies.ﬂ
Gauging Tech Transfer™s Bene˜t to the Taxpayer
The bene˜t of this technology-transfer activity to the U.S. taxpayer is sub
-stantial, according to Dr. VanDevender. A joint program with Goodyear Tire 
and Rubber Company in computational mechanics and predictive reliability is 
an example of a fruitful endeavor for Goodyear and for national security. How 
could research involving tires be of value to the nuclear weapons program? ﬁIf 
you think of the nose cone of a B-61 crashing into the earth, it is a highly deform
-able material problem,ﬂ he explained. ﬁTires rotating on your car are continually 
deformed. Computer codes that were developed at Sandia for the B-61 were 
extended in partnership with Goodyear.ﬂ The resulting bene˜t for the company is 
the Assurance tire, which surpassed its 2004 sales projection of one million units 
by 100 percent; the bene˜t for DoE is a better ˜nite element code for government 
applications. 
Figure 37 provides examples of CRADA projects that bene˜t a corporation 
and ﬁoften gets products into the hands of the public to protect us allﬂ conveying 
ﬁthe gist of dual-use.ﬂ 
Meanwhile, DoE™s income from licensing increased over time to $27 million 
in 2004 (Figure 38). Other DoE intellectual property income, from copyrights 
and other sources, have lagged far behind that. The extra money was ﬁhelpful,ﬂ 
Dr. VanDevender said, in that it made DoE ﬁmore agile in meeting [its] needs.ﬂ 
About 20 percent of the licensing income typically went to the inventors and the 
rest was put to a variety of uses, such as:

upgrading the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory;

establishing the Technology Maturation Fund used by many of the DoE 
labs;

supporting startups through the Center for Entrepreneurial Growth;

developing the fan airfoil for improved energy ef˜ciency; and

reinvesting in teams that had developed and licensed the intellectual 
property.
ﬁThink of [the last use] as very early-stage seed money,ﬂ he suggested, not
-ing that it was usually distributed in amounts no larger than $300,000 and often 
as small as $10,000. Still, such a ﬁmicroinvestment . . . gets teams started [and] 
makes them more credible so they can attract other teams.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
FIGURE 37
 ﬁFunds-inﬂ agreements advance DoE/NNSA objectives.
NOTE: Representative examples are cited.
ŁNational SecurityŁComputational mechanics and reliability with Goodyear Tire and Rubber CompanyŁExplosives detection with U.S. Industry Coalition (USIC)ŁSynthetic aperture radar with General AtomicsŁEnergy SecurityŁTechnologies for light-duty trucks with U.S. Advanced Battery Consortium (USABC)ŁLithium battery technologies with USABC and other industrial partnersŁRisk assessment of geologic carbon dioxide with BP AMOCOŁElectric efficiency & reliability with California Energy CommissionŁScientific Research ŁAdvances in structural biology with various industrial partnersŁEnvironmentally Sound Energy TechnologiesŁAdvanced turbine systems with Siemens Westinghouse Power Corporationfig 37Industry Bene˜ting Enough to Stay Engaged
Industry, for its part, is gaining suf˜cient competitive advantage through 
such collaborative research and licensing activities to stay engaged with DoE, 
Dr. VanDevender said. He cited a variety of outcomes:

A major manufacturing company has reduced design time and eliminated 
the need for multiple prototypes with codeveloped simulation tools.

Chemical and power companies have improved processes and plant 
designs using an advanced software toolkit.

Equipment able to detect radiation from high-speed vehiclesŠpotentially 
useful in identifying terrorists in possession of nuclear materialsŠhas become 
available to the public sector through licensed suppliers.

A new duct-sealing system that enabled home and business owners to save 
energy has been a deployed through more than 60 commercial franchises.

A company has developed cancer treatments based on licensed intellectual 
property.

Airfreight containers employing advanced materials developed through 
collaborative research has gone onto the market. 

A commercially successful family of hydrogen sensors has been licensed 
to help promote the future hydrogen energy distribution system. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL IV: EVOLUTION OF TECHNOLOGY PARTNERSHIPS IN THE UNITED STATES
 165
Sandia™s S&T Park Growing Robustly
In contrast to CRADAs, patent applications, and other tech-transfer vehicles 
whose growth has plateaued, science and technology parks are springing up as 
a new thrust. Sandia National Labs Science & Technology Park (SS&TP) in its 
seventh year, had drawn $167 million in investmentŠ$146.6 private, $20.4 mil
-lion publicŠand was still growing. A pedestrian-oriented, campus-style installa
-tion located on a tract of land exceeding 200 acres in area, SS&TP in the spring 
of 2005 housed 19 organizations with 1,098 employees that occupies almost 
500,000 square feet. Sandia National Laboratories provides redundant power 
and state-of-the-art connectivity to the park, plus it helps tenants accelerate city 
approval processes. Tenants paid in $17 million to Sandia Labs while acquir
-ing contracts from the labs worth $85.6 million; ﬁthe government, Sandia, and 
industry,ﬂ observed Dr. VanDevender, ﬁtherefore bene˜t as funds ˚ow both ways.ﬂ 
Projections put SS&TP™s ˜nal size at about 2.3 million square feet and its ˜nal 
workforce at between 6,000 and 12,000. 
Dr. VanDevender recalled visiting Dr. Chu at ITRI a few months before the 
symposium and seeing Hsinchu Science Park, which produced about 10 percent 
of Taiwan™s GDP. ﬁWe have 1,000 people, they have 100,000, but they™re 30 
years along,ﬂ he said. ﬁObviously, there™s much we can learn from them, and 
we™re interested in doing that and have begun that relationship.ﬂ Contrasting 
FIGURE 38
 Licensing income supplements the $6 billion of federal funding at labs to 
enhance mission results.
0.005.0010.0015.0020.0025.0030.00199920002001200220032004Income (Millions of Dollars)Total Income from all Licenses in FYInvention License IncomeOther IP Incomefig 38YearInnovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
ITRI™s and DoE™s
 models, he noted that the former is based on a single-purpose 
mission of technology development and commercialization with relationships, 
while the main mission of the DoE labs is ﬁnational security broadly writﬂ; for 
ITRI, therefore, technology transfer is a dedicated mission, whereas for DoE it 
is a supplementary mission.
Comparing Results of DoE, ITRI Models
The DoE labs receive about ten times as much annual funding as ITRI, or 
$6
 billion versus $600 million. But industrial contributions account for only about 
$60 million of the DoE labs™ funding, or 1 percent, while around $200 million, or 
one-third, of ITRI™s funding comes from industry. The latter is ﬁa very powerful 
statement of support consistent with their mission,ﬂ Dr. VanDevender said.
The DoE labs produce around 600 patents per year, half as many as ITRI™s 
1,200; this translates to 0.1 patent per $1 million for the DoE model and two 
patents per $1 million for the ITRI model. However, the difference in patents per 
industry dollar is far narrowerŠabout 10 patents per $1 million from industry for 
DoE versus six patents per $1 million from industry for ITRIŠbecause industry 
is leveraging the huge U.S. investment in national security in the DoE model. 
However, these two rates are ﬁvery comparable,ﬂ said Dr. VanDevender, ﬁgiven 
the uncertainty in the value of those patents, [and] particularly since many more 
companies are spun off from ITRI than from DoE labs.ﬂ Both models have their 
strengths and both were valuable, he concluded, suggesting that the comparison 
raised a question worth considering at the next stage of policy making: ﬁwhether 
or not [the United States] should experiment with a single-mission lab for indus
-trial competitiveness.ﬂ
In closing, Dr. VanDevender af˜rmed that technology partnerships add sig
-ni˜cantly to the innovation capabilities of the DoE and NNSA labs, as well 
as to the innovation capabilities of their industrial partners. They expand the 
R&D capacity for both industry and the labs and contribute to the ful˜llment of 
DoE™s mission and goals while providing competitive advantage to those industry 
partners that have long-term relationships with the laboratories. Although the 
effect is very small in percentage terms, the partnerships continue to provide 
important results for the government™s national security mission (even during 
very constrained federal budgets) and differentiating bene˜ts for the partnering 
corporation. Nevertheless, he emphasized that partnership activities have ﬁreally 
plateaued under the current policies and priorities; a wiser and bolder approach is 
needed to move partnerships to the next level of effectiveness and ef˜ciency.ﬂ
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.167
 Moderator:
Mark B. Myers, The Wharton School 
Stefan Kuhlmann, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany
Hsin-Sen Chu, Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Taiwan
Peter J. Nicholson, Office of the Prime Minister, Canada
Marc G. Stanley, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Lewis S. Edelheit, General Electric, retired
Dr. Myers explained that rather than asking the members of the ˜nal panel to 
speak, he would give the audience an opportunity to pose the questions that, he 
was sure, were accumulating as the day progressed. First, however, he turned to 
a fellow panelist, Dr. Edelheit, who indicated at the close of the previous session 
that he had numerous questions in mind.
MIGHT
 ATP S
PONSOR
 P
ROGRAMS
 IN
  FOCUSED
 R
ESEARCH
 A
REAS
?Dr. Edelheit, addressing Mr. Stanley, remarked that the presenters from other 
nations had all singled out areas that they viewed as important to their respective 
countries or companies in those countries and in which work is therefore focused. 
ATP, although the closest analogue to the foreign programs under which such 
work was taking place, did not seem to sponsor work in focused areas. He asked 
Panel V
 ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
  Discussion Roundtable: 
 What Are the Conditions for Success?
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
what Mr. Stanley thought about that issue and whether, in fact, he views it as an 
issue that should be considered.
Mr. Stanley responded that there were several ways to address the issue. The 
National Academies, in a review of ATP published 2 years or so before, recom
-mended that ATP look at the United States™ highest priorities and create oppor
-tunities for thematic competitions in sectors that are either important to national 
security or technologically relevant for the nation™s future. The program™s funding 
has, however, been held at a reduced level for a number of years, and it remains 
all but impossible to run focused competitions of this sort in the absence of ﬁa 
certain baseline of allocation.ﬂ
Nonetheless, ATP management has, in observing submittals to its regular 
competitions, seen proposals that concentrate on particular areas that industry 
feels to be both important and relevant for the research of the ensuing 8 to 
10
 years, and ATP has succeeded in fashioning ﬁvirtual focused competitionsﬂ 
in those areas. For example, ATP has received a suite of proposals indicating a 
great deal of interest in optoelectronics. Similarly, new work has been identi˜ed 
in the areas of homeland security and technologies for assisted living and care for 
the elderly. Around 7 years earlier, ATP had started receiving proposals dealing 
with how the United States could improve its position in fuel cells, hydrogen, and 
various other alternative fuels. Thus, industry is using ATP in a variety of ways, 
and the program™s management can collect this data and show where the program 
fares in terms of focused competitions.
COULD
 I
NCREASED
 F
UNDING
 C
HANGE
  ATP™
S S
ELECTION
 M
ETHODS
?Dr. Edelheit then asked whether Mr. Stanley believed that, in the event that 
its funding rose, ATP would try to use at least some of the increase to develop 
areas of focus that made sense.
Mr. Stanley said that this question was a dif˜cult one for him to answer: He 
worked for the President of the United States and so had to abide by his budget
-ary proposal to Congress, which calls for the elimination of ATP in ˜scal year 
2006 in favor of other national priorities. ﬁIn the event that were to change by 
some congressional disposition of funds, and the amounts were appropriate,ﬂ 
he acknowledged, ﬁthen certainly we could consider that. But, at this particular 
point, I have to wait and see what happens.ﬂ
CANADA
™S M
ARKET
: H
OW
 M
UCH
 P
OLIC
Y D
IRECTION
?Dr. Myers then directed a question to Dr. Nicholson. He recalled that 
Dr.
 Marburge
r had talked about the strength to be drawn from the diversity of 
the U.S. system, and he commented that that statement re˚ects what had been the 
view of the U.S. government for some time: ﬁthat we do not have an industrial 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL V: DISCUSSION ROUNDTABLE: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS?
 169
policy, we do not pick areas of winners [and] losers.ﬂ But many of the day™s pre
-sentations had indicated that China, Japan, and Europe are clearly choosing which 
industries to support and have thereby drawn a distinction between two kinds 
of policies. As Canada, in his observation, tended always to fall ﬁsomewhere in 
between,ﬂ he wished to know the Canadian thinking on the subject.
Dr. Nicholson, calling Dr. Myers™s question ﬁterri˜c,ﬂ declared that Canada 
was indisputably ﬁin the grip of schizophrenia.ﬂ The philosophy in the country, 
at its current state of development, is ﬁvery much to be guided by the marketŠin 
other words, a market pull rather than a technology push.ﬂ That said, however, 
Canada does not have as much native diversity as the United States simply 
because of the scale of its markets, and circumstances do matter in thinking 
about strategy.
If a sector orientation does exist, and Dr. Nicholson sensed that one was 
developing, it is probably in the area of energy and environmentally related 
technologies. The former is obviously of great concern to the world, and Canada 
enjoys a relative abundance of energy resources. As for the latter, any projection 
of the world™s future needs will include increasing demand for ways to lower the 
carbon content, or the pollution content, of units of GDP.
ENVIRONMENTAL
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y 
A S
PUR
 TO
 I
NNOVATION
Regarding environment as an emerging priority, Canada has created a couple 
of foundations devoted to it and has recently released a plan for meeting the 
Kyoto targets for reducing greenhouse gases sometime in the 2010-2012 period. 
Although admitting this is ﬁa very stretchy target,ﬂ Dr. Nicholson called it ﬁprob
-ably the toughest one in the world relative to the business-as-usual trajectory that 
we™ve got to cope with.ﬂ He added that whether or not the target is met, setting the 
target will generate new demands as some of the large emitters try to meet their 
speci˜c targets. In turn, this will stimulate innovation in Canada, he predicted, 
and as ﬁall kinds of smart people and entrepreneursﬂ compete for a signi˜cant 
amount of money available through the new Climate Fund.
18
This is one of numerous instances in which the bene˜t of a policy that was 
established for rather different reasons might end up having the happy, unintended 
consequence of being a big driver for innovation. It might also prove ﬁa bit of an 
equalizer vis-à-vis the [United States],ﬂ Dr. Nicholson said, suggesting that the 
incentive is about to burgeon in Canada ﬁto really work hard on producing green 
energy that can be exported in its technological form around the world.ﬂ
18
Through a new Climate Fund, the Government of Canada intends to purchase 75Œ115 Mt of 
 
reduction credits a year, up to 40 percent of the total reduction needed in 2008Œ2012. The government 
agreed to allocate CAD$1 billion per year over the next 5 years and projects funding of $4
 billio
nŒ$5
 billion 2008Œ2012. Pew Center on Global Climate Change Web site, accessed at 
<http://www.
pewclimate.org/policy_center/international_policy/canada_climate_plan.cfm
>.
 Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
BASIC
 R
ESEARCH
: H
OW
 I
MPORTANT
 TO
 I
NNOVATION
?A questioner from the audience, who identi˜ed herself as a Swedish science 
reporter temporarily working at 
Science
 Magazine
 in Washington, observed that 
most countries are experiencing a decrease in governmental funding for basic 
research and asked for assessments of what that could mean for the future of 
innovation. Is basic research important for innovation, and does it need to be 
funded by governments, or are there other possible sources?
Dr. Edelheit, while ˜rst acknowledging that complexity surrounds the issue 
of ﬁbasic research versus applied research,ﬂ stated that the answer depends on the 
country and on the economic drivers for R&D operating there. The United States 
remains the world leader in basic research by far, with other countriesŠand 
he pointed speci˜cally to developing countriesŠdoing much less ﬁreal basic 
research.ﬂ But in the end, he predicted, there will be a balance. As other coun
-tries become strong enough that they can afford it, they would in their own best 
interests start doing more basic research. What will happen in the United States, 
in contrast, is that funding for R&D will decline and some basic research will be 
converted to solving national needs more directly in the interest of speed.
Recalling that Dr. VanDevender had talked about Sandia™s changing its 
model, and adding that industry has certainly changed its model, Dr. Edelheit 
remarked that the National Institutes of Health and ATP were beginning to go 
in the other direction. This shift might go too far and eventuate in a balance, he 
conjectured, adding: ﬁThere always needs to be a balance.ﬂ He also expressed his 
belief that too much basic research is being done in the United States relative to 
the kind of work on which the day™s discussion had focused.
DO U.S. F
IRMS
 N
EGLECT
 THE
 P
UBLIC
 G
OOD
?Dr. Myers said that he, like Dr. Edelheit, was a former corporate head of 
research, in his own case at Xerox, but that he had a somewhat different concern. 
For a period of time the United States has been an important source of informa
-tion that, having come out of the private sector through ﬁquasi-national research 
laboratoriesﬂ such as Bell Labs, IBM Yorktown, GE, and Xerox PARC, ﬁwent 
into the public good.ﬂ One characteristic of that time was that all of the companies 
he had named were operating as monopolies. ﬁEvery industry loves a monopoly,ﬂ 
he remarked, saying that a ﬁsort of opennessﬂ was possible in that era.
While the corporate laboratories have not disappeared, the public-good func
-tions they performed is no longer present in any of their organizations. This 
has not happened solely because the companies have lost their monopolies, he 
contended, observing that Microsoft, Intel, Hewlett-Packard to some extent, and 
 
others have replaced them. What has in fact happened is that the country has 
moved to a knowledge economy, and the information being created in private-
sector research laboratories has become too valuable to be turned over to a public 
good. ﬁBefore, people were creating physical devices that could be protected in 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL V: DISCUSSION ROUNDTABLE: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS?
 171certain ways, through manufacturing knowledge and so forth,ﬂ he explained, and 
so the output of research organizations, having a different value, could go into 
the open literature as ﬁpure public knowledge.ﬂ
Beginning with the enactment of Bayh-Dole, which Dr. Myers regarded as ﬁa 
good idea on the whole,ﬂ there has been a continual privatization of information. 
Because of the way in which this privatization has taken place, he said, ﬁwe do 
need to worry about the balance of what I call ‚the public commons™ and what is 
privately held, [as] there is a creative balance which becomes important.ﬂ While a 
great deal of research is being conducted in both government and industry, he said 
that he was concerned that ﬁa high level of freely appropriable basic knowledge 
[remains] available to fuel the innovation process,ﬂ warning that ﬁthere has been 
a trend somewhat away from support of that.ﬂ
RESEARCH
 F
UNDING
 C
RITICAL
 TO
 T
RAINING
 S
CIENTISTS
Olwen Huxley, a staff member of the House Committee on Science, asserted 
that government funding for basic research underwrites most of the education of 
U.S. Ph.D.s and post-docs. A reduction in such funding would eventually trans
-late to fewer people coming out of labs with the background necessary to go into 
industry. And technology transfer takes place through people: No innovations 
could result from the biggest fund of knowledge, even if openly available, without 
people actually doing the work necessary to transfer a basic idea into a product. 
ﬁSo ultimately we cut our own throatsﬂ in the absence of adequate funding for 
basic research, she said, ﬁbut we™ll bleed to death over a period of several years, 
so we may not actually notice it happening.ﬂ While disavowing powers of clair
-voyance, she said that no major increases in such funding are to be anticipated 
in light of the United States™ current level of budgetary de˜cit, ﬁunless there™s 
some massive sea change that says we™re going to go into even more debt to fund 
basic research.ﬂ
IS E
UROPE
 M
OVING
 T
OWARD
 M
ORE
 B
ASIC
 R
ESEARCH
?Dr. Kuhlmann, commenting from a European perspective on the question 
of the importance of basic research to innovation, said that discussion there over 
whether basic research or innovation should receive more focus had moved back 
and forth. Many programs, at both the national and European levels, have long 
supported what he called ﬁlonger term applied research,ﬂ which has then stimu
-lated collaboration with industry. Increasingly, however, companies have begun 
to advocate taking the public-good argument voiced by Dr. Myers more into 
account. For all the reasons that others had mentioned, knowledge creation and 
open access to basic advanced knowledge are very important, in particular for 
innovation. His personal assessment was that Europe is turning in the direction of 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
more basic research, in part because of an increasing perception that the creation 
of a Europe-wide mechanism to support basic research is needed.
As a result of this sentiment, concrete plans have arisen to establish a Euro
-pean Research Council within the new Framework Program in the coming 1 to 
2 years. Although not a copy of the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), this 
new body would be modeled on NSF to some extent. The basic idea is to create in 
Europe something similar to what the United States has: a huge, single research 
area with a strong body for funding research.
A E
UROPE
-WIDE
 E
FFORT
 IN
 ﬁF
RONTIER
 R
ESEARCH
ﬂAs a member of a high-level experts group working for the European Com
-mission on this issue, Dr. Kuhlmann has contributed to a report to be released in 
the days ahead on the potential role of such a European Research Council. This 
group has argued that such a funding body would achieve the greatest impact if 
it supports not just basic research but also what is termed ﬁfrontier research.ﬂ As 
de˜ned in the report, frontier research is collaborative, problem-oriented research 
into new problems that cut across disciplinary boundaries and might entail not 
only basic scienti˜c research but also, depending upon the project, engineering, 
social science, or economics research. A European Research Council is needed 
to support such groundbreaking work because it would be only through competi
-tion for funds on a Europe-wide scale that the best projects and people could be 
identi˜ed.
COST
 PER
 P
ATENT
: N
ATIONAL
 L
ABS
 VS
. I
NDIVIDUALS
Jim Mallos of Heliakon noted that the U.S. Patent Of˜ce charges individuals 
and small businesses thousands of dollars in scheduled fees to process patents on 
their inventions, while data presented by Dr. VanDevender put at $10 million the 
per patent cost to the U.S. taxpayer for work at the National Labs. Positing that 
individuals and small businesses that hold patents were being ﬁ˜ned for doing 
what we would have paid $10 million at the National Labs to accomplish,ﬂ he 
asked whether this does not constitute ﬁa perverse incentive for innovation.ﬂ
Dr. Myers speculated that the intention of Dr. VanDevender, who had in 
the meantime departed, was to use that ˜gure as an indicator of productivity. ﬁI 
couldn™t come up with a very good rationale for the unit of analysis,ﬂ he admit
-ted, ﬁso I would not want to defend his number.ﬂ An employee of Sandia Labs, 
commenting from the audience, then said that because a great deal of money is 
spent there on activities that for a number of reasons ﬁwouldn™t possibly be pat
-ented,ﬂ the number in question is unlikely to be re˚ective of actual
 productivity. 
Mr. Mallos, however, reiterated his wonderment that fees of such magnitude 
are charged to inventors when it is national policy to promote American-owned 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL V: DISCUSSION ROUNDTABLE: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS?
 173
inventions and patents, whereupon Dr. Myers said his concern was accepted and 
would be noted.
RISK
 M
ANAGEMENT
 T
ECHNIQUES
 FOR
 P
OLIC
Y O
PTIONS
?Egils Milbergs of the Center for Accelerating Innovation then raised a ques
-tion about ﬁvaluing innovation strategy and innovation policy,ﬂ which he equated 
to ﬁvaluing what is increasingly an intangible.ﬂ According to the description 
offered earlier by Dr. Marburger, university research parks in the United States 
and abroad seem to share ﬁmany of the same thematics: bio, info, nano, and so 
on.ﬂ It was his own conviction, Mr. Milbergs said, that not all of these parks or all 
tech-led economic clusters are ﬁgoing to win,ﬂ and that innovation means taking 
risk, whether that be policy risk, investment risk, career risk, or another sort of 
risk. His question for all those involved in innovation, therefore, was: Where is 
the state of the art in what might be called ﬁrisk managementﬂ that would make 
possible taking some sensible decisions or creating a sensible portfolio of policy 
initiatives and investment issues. His motive for asking, he said, lay in his sense 
that it is enthusiasm and political emotionalism, rather than any serious analysis 
of true uncertainties and risks that drives many innovation programs.
Mr. Stanley began his response by recalling that during the Reagan Admin
-istration, the Department of Commerce, through the Economic Development 
Administration, conducted a review of what the states were establishing as their 
strategic technology assets and of how they were employing them. It found that 
fewer than ten states had either the leadership or the quali˜cations to make deci
-sions about a number of issues concerning their universities: what goals to set 
for tech transfer, how to use their assets in collaboration with industry, which 
options to pursue and which to shun, how to keep their graduate students from 
leaving the state, and so on. Battelle later became involved in such issues, as did 
several trade associations.
STATES
 L
EAVING
 L
ONG
-TERM
 C
ONSIDERATIONS
 A
SIDE
Mr. Milbergs had identi˜ed an important issue, Mr. Stanley said, one to 
which no existing formula can be applied and that needs to be reviewed. Luck is 
generally involved, but very strong leadership is also required at the level of the 
state governor. As has become clear in recent years, however, many governors are 
interested in moving into higher of˜ce and therefore, when it comes to investing 
in work for their states, see the ﬁlong termﬂ as 4 years rather than 10 or 15. 
As for universities, they were busy ˜ghting over technology transfer and 
intellectual-property issues; or ˜ghting over whether to take warrants or options 
versus taking money out right away; or ˜ghting with their state legislators for 
money. ﬁAnd we™re not utilizing the assets of retired businessmen and women that 
have worked very hard in this area and could be very helpful,ﬂ he lamented. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174
 INNOVATION POLICIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
In sum, said Mr. Stanley, the United States is a long way from understand
-ing how to develop the various techniques that promote innovation. ﬁAnd while 
university parks are good, and clusters are good, and Research Triangle Park is 
good,ﬂ he allowed, ﬁI don™t think we™ve gotten the magic potion down yet.ﬂ
Dr. Myers remarked that, as part of the National Academies study of ATP, 
he and a colleague had written a subsection about managing portfolios of R&D 
projects as portfolios of risk. ﬁYou not only have to look at the technical risk, you 
have to look at market risk, and at the interaction of market risk and the technical 
risk,ﬂ he pointed out.
ATP, P
ENTAGON
 F
EDERAL
 L
EADERS
 IN
 P
ROGRAM
 A
SSESSMENT
Dr. Edelheit added that venture capitalists know how to measure risk for the 
kinds of businesses they invest in, and that there are good examples of industry™s 
best practices in wrestling with the kind of risks it takes on. For government-
industry partnerships, such data are to be found in two places. One is in the 
assessments of ATP, which looks at rewards and risks and at measurements of 
them, and which he proposed as a good model for those undertaking similar 
efforts. The second was at the Department of Defense, which does not take a 
ﬁlaissez-faire attitudeﬂ toward funding R&D but uses some very clear measure
-ments of risk and reward. He conceded that the latter might be ﬁhard to getﬂ but 
expressed the opinion that they in fact exist.
PLUSES
 AND M
INUSES
 OF
 U.S. P
OLIC
Y F
RAGMENTATION
Larry Rausch of the National Research Foundation said that a conclusion 
might be drawn from the day™s presentations that, in the United States, national 
innovation policy is in truth a patchwork of different programs. Descriptions of the 
other countries™ more focused innovation policies have raised the following ques
-tions: whether the United States needs any more coordinated innovation policy and, 
if so, what sort of information is needed to guide it or to judge its performance.
Dr. Wessner, praising the question as very interesting, opined that the U.S. 
system is a patchwork but pointed out that its lack of coherence is both a strength 
and a weakness. The strength lies in not having a Ministry of Science or a Minis
-try of Industry that gets it completely wrong. The downside of the United States™ 
distributed system is that ﬁno one™s watching the store.ﬂ As an example of this 
lack of coherency, he noted that previous analysis by the STEP board ˜rst pointed 
out that the United States cut its R&D budgets for physics, chemistry, and engi
-neering seriously, on a sustained basis, and in real terms between 1993 and 1999 
as different agencies responded independently to the end of the cold war.
19
 On 
19
National Research Council, 
Trends in Federal Support of Research and Graduate Education
, Stephen A. Merrill, ed., Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2001.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL V: DISCUSSION ROUNDTABLE: WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESS?
 175
the other hand, Dr. Wessner stated, when OSTP was fully staffedŠwhich at that 
moment it was notŠthere were more people watching the store. That leadership 
is critical, as is the funding, and the two are related.
ﬁI would argue,ﬂ Dr. Wessner declared, ﬁthat we have some of the best 
mechanisms in the world that are inadequately fueled.ﬂ Surprisingly, he observed, 
the United States was beginning to suffer what he referred to as ﬁthe tyranny 
of small scaleﬂ: In a $10 trillion or $11 trillion economy, good programs were 
funded for $10 million, or for $20 million, or, in the case of ATP, for $140 mil
-lion. ﬁYou know it™s a good program, but you™d have scale effects that are larger,ﬂ 
he added.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.III
APPENDIXES
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.179
Appendix A
Biographies of Speakers
*ALICE
 H. A
MSDEN
Alice H. Amsden is the Barton L. Weller Professor of Political Economy at 
MIT™s Department of Urban Studies and Planning. Professor Amsden™s research 
interests focus on economic and industrial development. She has recently done 
a research project with the Asian Development Bank Institute on research and 
development by foreign ˜rms in developing countries. She is currently working 
with the ADBI on a project on the Indian software industry.
Dr. Amsden recently received the Leontief Prize for Advancing the Frontiers 
of Economic Thought, awarded by Tufts University™s Global Development and 
Environment Institute Scienti˜c American Top 50 Visionaries. Her selected recent 
publications include 
Beyond Late De
velopment: Taiwan™s Upgrading Policies
, coauthored with Wan-wen Chu (MIT Press, June 2003); 
The Rise of ﬁthe Restﬂ: 
Challenges to the West from Late-Industrializing Countries
 (Oxford University 
Press, 2001); 
The Market Meets its Match: Restructuring the Economies of 
 
Eastern Europe
, coauthored with Jacek Kochanowicz and Lance Taylor (Harvard 
University Press, 1994); and 
Asia™s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrial
-ization
 (Oxford, 1989), which won the prize of Best Book in Political Economy 
in 1992 from the American Political Science Association.
Additionally, Dr. Amsden has served as a consultant with the World Bank, 
OECD, and various United Nations organizations. She has written extensively 
on problems of industrial transformation in East Africa, East Asia, and Eastern 
Europe.
As of April 2005.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180 APPENDIX A
HSIN
-S
EN
 C
HU
Hsin-Sen Chu is the executive vice president of the Industrial Technology 
Research Institute (ITRI) in Taiwan. ITRI is a nonpro˜t R&D organization whose 
mission is to engage in applied research and technical services to accelerate the 
industrial development of Taiwan; develop key, compatible, forward-looking 
technologies to meet industrial needs and strengthen industrial competitiveness; 
disseminate research results to the industrial sector in a timely and appropriate 
manner, in accordance with the principles of fairness and openness; foster the 
technology development of small- and medium-sized businesses; and cultivate 
industrial technology human resources for the bene˜t of the nation.
Dr. Chu has served with ITRI since 2001, ˜rst as vice president and general 
director for Energy and Resources Laboratories before assuming his current 
position in 2004. He has held several R&D related positions, including serv
-ing as director of the High Ef˜ciency Energy Technology Research Center at 
National Chiao Tung University from 2000 to 2001; director of the Mechanical 
Manufacturing & Heat Flow Research Center at National Chiao Tung University 
from 1999 to 2001; chief of staff at National Chiao Tung University from 1995 to 
1998; vice dean of the College of Engineering at National Chiao Tung University 
from 1992 to 1993; chairman of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at 
National Chiao Tung University from 1991 to 1995; professor in the Department 
of Mechanical Engineering at National Chiao Tung University from 1989 to the 
present; visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley from 1985 to 
1986; and associate professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at 
National Chiao Tung University from 1984 to 1989. 
Dr. Chu has received many research awards in recognition of his contribu
-tions, including the Distinguished Research Award from the National Science 
Council of Taiwan in 1999; the Distinguished Engineering Professor Award 
from the Chinese Society of Mechanical Engineering and the Chinese Society of 
Engineers, R.O.C in 1998; the Excellent Young Engineer Award from the Chinese 
Society of Mechanical Engineering, R.O.C. in 1991; and the Excellent Research 
Award from the National Science Council, R.O.C. 1988-1993. He was named in 
the 1997 Marquis Who™s Who in the World and has published 60 technical journal 
papers, 44 conference papers, and 30 technical reports in his career. 
Dr. Chu received his B.S. in 1974, M.S. in 1977, and Ph.D. in 1982 from 
National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, R.O.C. He was named an Honorary 
Member of Phi Tau Phi in 1977 at National Cheng Kung University. 
CARL
 J. D
AHLMAN
Carl J. Dahlman, is the Luce Professor of International Affairs and Informa
-tion Technology at the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at
 Georgetown 
University. He joined Georgetown in January 2005 after more than 25 years of 
distinguished service at the World Bank. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 181At Georgetown, Dr. Dahlman™s research and teaching will explore how 
rapid advances in science, technology and information are affecting the growth 
prospects of nations and in˚uencing trade, investment, innovation, education 
and economic relations in an increasingly globalizing world. At the World Bank 
Dr. Dahlman served as senior advisor to the World Bank Institute. In this role he 
managed the Knowledge for Development (K4D) program, an initiative providing 
training on the strategic use of knowledge for economic and social development 
to business leaders and policy makers in developing countries. Prior to develop
-ing the K4D program, Dr. Dahlman served as staff director of the 1998-1999 
World Development Report,
 Knowledge for De
velopment
. In addition, he was 
the Bank™s Resident Representative and Financial Sector Leader in Mexico from 
1994 to 1997, years during which the country coped with one of the biggest 
˜nancial crises in its history. Before his position in Mexico, Dr. Dahlman had 
led divisions in the Bank™s Private Sector Development, and Industry and Energy 
Departments. He has also conducted extensive analytical work in major develop
-ing countries including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, India, 
Pakistan, China, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
Dr. Dahlman™s publications include
 India and the Knowledge Economy: 
Le
veraging Strengths and Opportunities
 (2005),
 China and the Knowledge Econ
-omy: Seizing the 21st Century 
(2001), and
 Korea and the
 Knowledge-Based 
Economy: Making the Transition
 (2000). He is currently ˜nishing a knowledge 
economy study on Mexico, working on a book on the challenge of the knowledge 
economy for education and training in China, and collaborating with research 
teams in Finland, Japan, and Korea to produce books on each country™s innova
-tion and development strategies. 
Dr. Dahlman earned a B.A. magna cum laude in international relations from 
Princeton University and a Ph.D. in economics from Yale University. He has 
also taught courses at Columbia University™s School of International and Public 
Affairs. 
LEWIS S. E
DELHEIT
Lewis S. (Lonnie) Edelheit retired in 2001 from his position as senior vice 
president, Corporate R&D, General Electric Company. Under his leadership, 
GE introduced numerous new leadership products, including digital X-ray and 
advanced ultrasound medical imagers, high-ef˜ciency turbines for power genera
-tion, advanced lighting and electronics-based appliances and weatherable plastics 
to name a few. Other highlights of his tenure include signi˜cant advances in high-
technology services and Internet applications and Corporate R&D™s leadership 
of the Design for Six Sigma quality and e-Engineering initiatives throughout the 
GE businesses. Also under his leadership, Corporate R&D vastly expanded its 
global resources with the development of new technology centers in Bangalore, 
India, and Shanghai, China. Dr. Edelheit began his professional career in 1969 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182 APPENDIX A
as a physicist at the GE R&D Center, where he made signi˜cant contributions to 
fast-scan, ﬁfan-beamﬂ computed tomography x-ray systems.
In 1976, Dr. Edelheit transferred to GE Medical Systems in Milwaukee, 
 
Wisconsin, where he rose to such positions as general manager of engineering 
and general manager of the Computed Tomography Programs Department, where 
he held marketing and pro˜t-and-loss responsibility for GE™s worldwide com
-puted tomography scanning business. In 1986, Dr. Edelheit left GE to become 
president and CEO of Quantum Medical Systems, a venture capital-backed com
-pany that pioneered color ˚ow ultrasound for vascular imaging. He continued in 
that position after Quantum was acquired by the Siemens Corporation. In 1991 
he returned to GE and assumed leadership of Corporate R&D. 
Dr. Edelheit earned a B.S. degree in engineering physics and an M.S. degree 
and Ph.D. in physics from the University of Illinois. In 1995, he received the Uni
-versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign College of Engineering Alumni Award 
for Distinguished Service. Dr. Edelheit is a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering, the Industrial Research Institute (named as the 2003 Medalist), and 
a fellow of the American Physical Society, which selected him as the recipient of 
the 2001 George E. Pake prize. He is on advisory boards of the Physics Depart
-ment and Bio Engineering Department of the University of Washington and of 
the Harvard Medical and Beth Israel Deaconess Shapiro Research and Education 
Institute in Boston. He is also on the board of directors of two public corpora
-tions, Silicon Graphics, and Sonic Innovation, two private corporate boards, and 
is chair of the Laboratory Advisory Committee of the Paci˜c Northwest National 
Laboratory.
KEN
NETH F
LAMM
Kenneth Flamm is the Dean Rusk Professor of International Affairs at 
the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas 
at
 Austin.
Dr. Flamm is a 1973 honors graduate of Stanford University and received a 
Ph.D. in economics from M.I.T. in 1979. From 1993 to 1995, Dr. Flamm served 
as principal deputy assistant secretary of Defense for Economic Security and 
special assistant to the Deputy Secretary of Defense for Dual Use Technology 
Policy. He was awarded the Department™s Distinguished Public Service Medal in 
1995 by Defense Secretary William J. Perry. Prior to his service at the Defense 
Department, he spent eleven years as a senior fellow in the Foreign Policy Studies 
Program at the Brookings Institution.
Dr. Flamm has been a professor of economics at the Instituto Tecnológico 
A. de México in Mexico City, the University of Massachusetts, and George 
 
Washington University. He has also been an adviser to the Director General 
of Income Policy in the Mexican Ministry of Finance and a consultant to the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the World Bank, 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 183
the National Academy of Sciences, the Latin American Economic System, the 
U.S. Department of Defense, the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S Agency 
for International Development, and the Of˜ce of Technology Assessment of the 
U.S. Congress.
Among Dr. Flamm™s publications are
 Mismanaged Trade? Strategic Policy 
and the Semiconductor Industry
 (1996),
 Changing the Rules: Technological 
Change, International Competition, and Regulation in Communications
 (ed., 
with Robert Crandell, 1989),
 Creating the Computer 
(1988),
 and Targeting the 
Computer (1987). He is currently working on an analytical study of the post-Cold 
War defense industrial base.
Dr. Flamm, an expert on international trade and high-technology indus
-try, teaches classes in microeconomic theory, international trade, and defense 
economics.
THOMAS
 R. H
OWELL
Thomas R. Howell is a partner with the Washington, D.C., law of˜ce of 
Dewey Ballantine LLP, where he specializes in international trade matters. Since 
1981 he has written extensively on industrial, trade, and technology polices in 
countries outside of the United States. In 2003, he prepared a report for the Semi
-conductor Industry Association, 
China™s Emerging Semiconductor Industry: The 
Impact of China™s Preferential Value-Added Tax on Current In
vestment Trends.
DAVID
 K. K
AHANER
David K. Kahaner is the founding director of the Asian Technology Infor
-mation Program (ATIP), which was established in 1994. He was formerly the 
associate director of the U.S. Of˜ce of Naval Research Asia. He also spent more 
than twenty years at the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(formerly the National Bureau of Standards) and a dozen years at the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory.
Dr. Kahaner has been examining information rich technologies in Asia for 
many years. His analyses are circulated worldwide to thousands in industry, 
government, and academia. They are reprinted in many journals as well as often 
quoted in major news media, and he consults and lectures frequently on those 
topics both in and outside of the region. In 1993, he was awarded the title of 
ﬁMr.
 Asiaﬂ by 
Computerworld
. One of his goals is to help Westerners understand 
opportunities and issues associated with science-based activities in the Asian 
region.
Dr. Kahaner has been the Asian chair for a variety of international confer
-ences and chair of the International Organizing Committees for the conference 
series HPC-Asia, which has been held seven times in as many different Asian 
cities since 1995. Separately, Dr. Kahaner also has many years of research expe
-Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184
 APPENDIX A
rience in scienti˜c computing and applications. Many of the applications he and 
his groups developed are used in scienti˜c computing centers worldwide, and he 
has received several national awards for this work. He is the author of two well 
known textbooks and more than 50 refereed research papers. He has edited a 
column on scienti˜c applications of computers, and has held numerous journal 
editorial and associate editorial positions. He has had visiting professorships at 
major universities in the U.S, Austria, Italy, and Switzerland, where he has taken 
extensive sabbaticals and still retains signi˜cant associations.
BRAD
LE
Y K
NOX
Bradley Knox is the chief counsel for the U.S. House of Representatives 
Committee on Small Business, serving in the number-three management and 
policy role under the chief of staff and deputy chief of staff/policy director. 
Mr.
 Knox joined the committee in early 2003 as oversight counsel, responsible 
for oversight of federal agencies in government procurement and other matters, 
and served as staff manager of the chairman™s initiative to revitalize the U.S. 
manufacturing base. 
During the 1990s, Mr. Knox was an Air Force JAG of˜cer for six years and 
then in active reserves, taught at the Air Force JAG School on the legal aspects of 
information warfare and homeland security for two years. He spent his last two 
years as a reservist assigned as legal counsel to the Joint Task Force on Global 
Network Attack. 
Mr. Knox began his professional career with Shell Oil as a computer pro
-grammer and analyst. He was cofounder and president of DigiTech System Solu
-tions, an info-tech services company headquartered in Montgomery, Alabama. He 
is cofounder and vice president of Knox Global Network, a business-to-business 
and business-to
-consumer e-commerce franchise. 
Mr. Knox was honored as one of the Top 40 business leaders under the age of 
40 in Central Alabama, and DigiTech was named one of Montgomery™s Emerg
-ing Businesses in 2002. He earned a B.S. in information systems at Oral Roberts 
University and a J.D. at Regent University.
HEIKKI
 K
OTILAINEN
Heikki Kotilainen is the deputy director general of Tekes, the Finnish 
National Technology Agency. He has a degree of Dr. of Techn. in mechanical 
engineering from Helsinki University of Technology. He has studied in Germany 
and Austria and worked in industry, research institutes, and public administration. 
For over 16
 years he has worked in ˜nancing R&D in industry and universities, 
participated in formulating government technology and innovation policy, coor
-dinated national technology programs and international cooperation, and served 
as a member of many domestic and international (EU, Nordic) technology and 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 185
innovation committees and boards. Serving in the United States from 1993 to 
1995 gave him a very thorough insight into the research and high-tech industry 
developments (MIT, Harvard, Boston Route 128). From 2000 to 2003, he was the 
head of the EUREKA Secretariat in Brussels, running the industrial cooperation 
platform in Europe among 31 countries and participating in the ERA discussions 
from the innovation point of view. In recent years, his duty has been the
 strategic 
planning of the National Technology Agency, Tekes, as the deputy director gen
-eral. Part of his work is to look for the best practices in leading technology and 
innovation policy countries. Lately, he has been lecturing in many countries about 
technology and innovation policy and management.
STEFAN
 K
UHLMANN
Stefan Kuhlmann, a political scientist, is director of the
 Fraunhofer Institute 
for Systems Innovation Research (ISI), Karlsruhe, Germany. He is also
 professor 
of Innovation Policy Analysis at the Copernicus Institute, Innovation Studies 
Group,
 University of Utrecht, the Netherlands. He has more than 15 years back
-ground in the assessment and analysis of research and innovation policies.
Dr. Kuhlmann has published widely in the ˜eld of research and innovation 
policy studies. He is an associate editor of the
 International Journal of Foresight 
and Inno
vation Policy (IJFIP)
, and serves on the editorial advisory board of
 Evaluation:
 The
 International Journal of Theory, Research and Practice
, edited 
in association with The Tavistock Institute, London, UK, since 2000. Recent pub
-lications include
 Changing Go
vernance of Research and Technology Policy: the 
European Research Area
, Cheltenham (E. Elgar) 2003 (coedited with J. Edler and 
M. Behrens);
 Learning from Science and Technology Policy E
valuation: Experi
-ences from the United States and Europe
, Cheltenham (E. Elgar) 2003 (co-edited 
with Ph. Shapira); ﬁEvaluation of research and innovation policies: a discussion 
of trends with examples from Germany,ﬂ
 International Journal of Technology 
Management
 (26, Nos. 2/3/4, 2003); and ﬁGovernance of Innovation Policy in 
Europe: Three Scenarios,ﬂ
 Research Policy
 (30, June 2001).
Dr. Kuhlmann is a member of many professional or academic associations 
in the area of research and innovation policy analysis, includin
gtheExecutive
 the Executive 
 
Committee European Network of Excellence PRIME (Policies for Research 
and Innovation on the Move towards the European Research Area); the Euro
-pean Commission™s High-level Expert Group on ﬁMaximising the wider bene˜ts 
of competitive basic research funding at European levelﬂ (Directorate General 
Research)
;theEuropeanRTDEvaluationNetworkoftheEuropeanCommission,
 the European RTD Evaluation Network of the European
 Commission, 
Directorate General Research; the Netherlands Graduate School of Science, Tech
-nology and Modern Culture (WTMC); the steering committee of the Six Coun
-tries ProgrammeŠThe International Innovation Netwo
rk;theScienti˜cAdvisory
rk; the Scienti˜c Advisory 
Committee of the Helsinki Institute of Science and Technology
 Studies (HIST); 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186
 APPENDIX A
and the Board of the German Evaluation Association (DeGEval), on which he 
served from 1997 to 2001.
JOHN
 H. M
ARBURGER
John H. Marburger, III, science adviser to the President and director of the 
Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy, was born on Staten Island, N.Y., grew 
up in Maryland near Washington, D.C., and attended Princeton University (B.A., 
physics, 1962) and Stanford University (Ph.D., applied physics, 1967). Before 
his appointment in the Executive Of˜ce of the President, he served as director 
of Brookhaven National Laboratory from 1998, and as the third president of the 
State University of New York at Stony Brook (1980-1994). He came to Long 
Island in 1980 from the University of Southern California where he had been a 
professor of physics and electrical engineering, serving as Physics Department 
chairman and dean of the College of Letters, Arts and Sciences in the 1970s. In 
the fall of 1994 he returned to the faculty at Stony Brook, teaching and doing 
research in optical science as a university professor. Three years later he became 
president of Brookhaven Science Associates, a partnership between the university 
and Battelle Memorial Institute that competed for and won the contract to operate 
Brookhaven National Laboratory.
While at the University of Southern California, Dr. Marburger contributed to 
the rapidly growing ˜eld of nonlinear optics, a subject created by the invention 
of the laser in 1960. He developed theory for various laser phenomena and was 
a cofounder of the University of Southern California™s Center for Laser Studies. 
His teaching activities included ﬁFrontiers of Electronics,ﬂ a series of educational 
programs on CBS television.
Dr. Marburger™s presidency at Stony Brook coincided with the opening and 
growth of University Hospital and the development of the biological sciences as a 
major strength of the university. During the 1980s, federally sponsored scienti˜c 
research at Stony Brook grew to exceed that of any other public university in 
the northeastern United States. During his presidency, Dr. Marburger served on 
numerous boards and committees, including chair of the governor™s commission 
on the Shoreham Nuclear Power facility, and chair of the 80 campus Universities 
Research Association, which operates Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory 
near Chicago. He served as a trustee of Princeton University and many other 
organizations. He also chaired the highly successful 1991-92 Long Island United 
Way campaign.
As a public spirited scientist-administrator, Dr. Marburger has served local, 
state, and federal governments in a variety of capacities. He is credited with 
bringing an open, reasoned approach to contentious issues where science inter
-sects with the needs and concerns of society. His strong leadership of Brookhaven 
National Laboratory following a series of environmental and management crises 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 187
is widely acknowledged to have won back the con˜dence and support of the com
-munity while preserving the laboratory™s record of outstanding science.
MARK
 B. MY
ERS
Mark B. Myers is visiting executive professor in the Management Department 
at the Wharton Business School, the University of Pennsylvania. His research 
interests include identifying emerging markets and technologies to enable growth 
in new and existing companies with special emphases on technology identi˜
-cation and selection, product development, and technology competencies. Dr. 
Myers serves on the Science, Technology and Economic Policy Board of the 
National Research Council and cochaired, with Richard Levin, the president 
of Yale, the National Research Council™s study of ﬁIntellectual Property in the 
Knowledge Based Economy.ﬂ 
Dr. Myers retired from the Xerox Corporation at the beginning of 2000, after 
a 36-year career in its research and development organizations. He was the senior 
vice president in charge of corporate research, advanced development, systems 
architecture, and corporate engineering from 1992 to 2000. His responsibilities 
included the corporate research centers, PARC in Palo Alto, California; Webster 
Center for Research & Technology near Rochester, New York; Xerox Research 
Centre of Canada, Mississauga, Ontario; and the Xerox Research Centre of 
Europe in Cambridge, UK, and Grenoble, France. During this period he was a 
member of the senior management committee in charge of the strategic direction 
setting of the company.
Dr. Myers is chair of the board of trustees of Earlham College and has held 
visiting faculty positions at the University of Rochester and at Stanford Univer
-sity. He holds a bachelor™s degree from Earlham College and a doctorate from 
Pennsylvania State University.
PETER J. NICHOLSO
NPeter J. Nicholson is Deputy Chief of StaffŒPolicy, Of˜ce of the Prime Min
-ister of Canada. A native of Halifax, Nova Scotia, he holds a B.Sc. and M.Sc. 
in physics from Dalhousie University and a Ph.D. in operations research from 
Stanford University, as well as honorary doctorates from Acadia University, 
Dalhousie and the Université du Québec (INRS). After post-doctoral work in 
France, Dr.
 Nicholson joined the Computer Science Department at the University 
of Minnesota in 1969 where he taught four years before joining the Government 
of Canada in 1973. There he served in a senior policy advisory role in the Depart
-ments of Urban Affairs, Transport, and Regional Economic Expansion.
In 1978, Dr. Nicholson left Ottawa and was elected to the Legislature of the 
Province of Nova Scotia. At the time, he became associated with H. B. Nickerson 
& Sons, a major ˜sheries company, and eventually left the Legislature to devote 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188
 APPENDIX A
full-time to the company as a vice president. In 1982, he joined the Taskforce 
on Atlantic Fisheries established by the federal government to restructure the 
industry, which had been ˜nancially devastated by the 1981-1982 recession. In 
1984 Dr. Nicholson joined The Bank of Nova Scotia in Toronto where he was 
senior vice president, advising the chair of the bank on a broad range of strategic 
issues, including in particular the resolution of the Latin American debt crisis in 
the late 1980s.
Between March 1994 and September 1995, Dr. Nicholson was Clifford Clark 
Visiting Economist in the federal Department of Finance under the government™s 
executive interchange program. This is a senior advisory position to Canada™s 
Minister and Deputy Minister of Finance. From September 1995 to June 2002, 
he was chief strategy of˜cer of BCE, Inc., Canada™s largest telecommunica
-tions company. Between June 2002 and July 2003, he was special adviser to the 
 
Secretary-General of the Organization for Economic Co
-operation and Devel
-opment in Paris. He joined the Prime Minister™s Of˜ce in December 2003. Dr. 
Nicholson is
 a member of the Order of Canada, in recognition of his contribution 
to business through both the public and private sectors. 
HIDEO
 S
HINDO
Hideo Shindo is the chief representative of New Energy and Industrial Tech
-nology Development Organization (NEDO) in its Washington, D.C. of˜ce, where 
he has served since July 2004. NEDO is a Japanese semigovernment nonpro˜t 
organization whose objective is to facilitate R&D activities in industries in Japan, 
in close cooperation with Japanese government agencies such as METI (Ministry 
of Economy, Trade, and Industry). Mr. Shindo entered METI in 1986 and dealt 
with a variety of policy issues such as technology development, international 
trade and investment, and codes and standards. In 2003 he was transferred to 
NEDO headquarters and assisted in its restructuring as an incorporated admin
-istrative agency.
WILLIAM
 J. S
PENCER
William J. Spencer was named chairman emeritus of the
 SEMATECH Board 
in November 2000 after serving as chairman of the
 SEMATECH and Inter
-national SEMATECH Boards since July 1996. He came to SEMATECH in 
October 1990 as president and chief executive of˜cer. He continued to serve as 
president until January 1997 and as CEO until November 1997. During this time, 
SEMATECH became totally privately funded and expanded to include non-U.S. 
members. Many analysts credit SEMATECH with making a major contribution 
to the recovery of the U.S. semiconductor industry in the 1990s and its recapture 
of market share. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 189
Dr. Spencer has held key research positions at Xerox Corporation, Bell 
 
Laboratories, and Sandia National Laboratories. Before joining SEMATECH in 
October 1990, he was group vice president and senior technical of˜cer at Xerox 
Corporation in Stamford, Connecticut, from 1986 to 1990. He established new 
research centers in Europe and developed a plan for Xerox retaining ownership in 
spinout companies from research. Prior to joining the Xerox Palo Alto Research 
Center (PARC) as manager of the Integrated Circuit Laboratory in 1981 and as 
the center manager of PARC in 1982 to 1986, Dr. Spence
r served as director of 
Systems Development from 1978 to 1981 at Sandia National Laboratories
 in 
Livermore, and director of Microelectronics at Sandia National
 Laboratories 
in Albuquerque from 1973 to 1978, where he developed a silicon processing 
facility for Department of Energy needs. He began his career in 1959 at Bell 
Laboratories.
Dr. Spencer received the Regents Meritorious Service Medal from the Uni
-versity of New Mexico in 1981; the C. B. Sawyer Award for contribution to 
ﬁThe Theory and Development of Piezoelectric Devicesﬂ in 1972; and a Citation 
for Achievement from William Jewell College in 1969, where he also received 
an doctor of science degree in 1990. He is a member of the National Academy 
of Engineering, a Fellow of IEEE, and serves on numerous advisory groups 
and boards. He was the Regents Professor at the University of California in the 
spring of l998. He has been a visiting professor at the University of California at 
 
Berkeley School of Engineering and the Haas School of Business since the fall of 
1998. He is a research professor of medicine at the University of New Mexico.
Dr. Spencer received an A.B. degree from William Jewell College in Liberty, 
Missouri, an M.S. degree in mathematics and a Ph.D. in physics from Kansas 
State University.
MARC
 G. S
TANLE
YMarc G. Stanley currently serves as director of the Advanced Technology 
Program (ATP) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 
Mr.
 Stanley served as the associate director for the program from 1993 to 2001. 
Before coming to NIST, Mr. Stanley was the Associate Deputy Secretary of 
the U.S. Department of Commerce by Presidential appointment. He has served 
as a senior policy advisor to NIST directors, as a consultant to the Department of 
Commerce™s Technology Administration, and as Assistant Secretary for Congres
-sional and Intergovernmental Affairs at the Department of Commerce. 
Mr. Stanley earned a B.A. from George Washington University and a bach
-elor of law degree from the University of Baltimore. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190 APPENDIX A
J. P
ACE
 V
AN
DEVENDER
J. Pace VanDevender is vice president of Science & Technology and Partner
-ships and chief technology of˜cer at Sandia National Laboratories. He is also 
chief scienti˜c of˜cer for the nuclear weapons program at the laboratory and is 
accountable for Sandia™s partnership program with industry and the university 
community. 
Dr. VanDevender leads and/or manages the research, development and 
engineering in nanosciences, materials and process sciences, microelectronics
/microsystems and optoelectronics, advanced manufacturing, computational 
 
sciences, modeling and simulation science, and high-energy density physics.
In 1974, he joined Sandia as a member of the technical staff. Dr. VanDevende
r became division supervisor in 1978, manager of the Fusion Department in 1982, 
and director of Pulsed Power Sciences in 1984. In the latter position, which he 
held into the 1990s, he oversaw Sandia™s pulsed power R&D, inertial con˜nement 
fusion research, nuclear weapons effects simulations, directed energy weapons 
R&D, and commercial applications of pulsed power.
In 1992, Dr. VanDevender received DoE™s prestigious E.O. Lawrence Award, 
ﬁfor his outstanding contributions to the generation of pulsed power,ﬂ becoming 
only the ˜fth Sandian to receive that award.
In 2003, he was named a fellow of the American Association for the Advance
-ment of Science. He is also a fellow of the American Physical Society and a 
senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
As director of executive staff at Sandia National Laboratories, Dr.
 VanDevende
r was in charge of governance initiatives, strategic planning, government relations, 
quality assurance, laboratory assessment, issues management, and the support of 
the Sandia Executives. 
Before becoming the executive staff director, Dr. VanDevender was the chief 
information of˜cer and was responsible for the information infrastructure, for 
cyber security, and for making information technology a compelling advantage 
for doing science, engineering, and manufacturing. He has also been the director 
of the Strategic Sciences Center, National Industrial Alliance Center, Corporate 
Communications Center, and Pulsed Power Sciences Center.
Dr. VanDevender earned a Ph.D. in physics from the Imperial College of 
Science and Technology, University of London, England in 1974, where he was 
a Marshall Scholar; an M.A. in physics from Dartmouth College in 1971; and a 
B.A. in physics from Vanderbilt University in 1969.
CHARLES
 W. W
ESSNER
Charles W. Wessner is an internationally recognized expert on innovation 
policy, serves as the National Research Council director for 
Comparati
ve Inno
va-tion Policy: Best Practice in National Technology Programs
, and is responsible 
for organizing this conference. He directs several other studies at the National 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 191Academies, notably 
Measuring and Sustaining the New Economy
 and 
Capitaliz
-ing on Science Technology, and Inno
vation: An Assessment of the Small Business 
Inno
vation Research Program. 
Dr. Wessner™s expertise centers on public-private partnerships, early-stage 
˜nancing for new ˜rms, university-industry partnerships, and high-tech clusters, 
as well as the special needs and bene˜ts of high-technology industry. Dr. Wessner 
is regularly consulted by congressional staff and testi˜es to the Congress and 
major national commissions, acts as an advisor to agencies of the U.S. Govern
-ment, international organizations such as the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), and leading technology agencies in Europe 
and Asia, and lectures at major universities in the United States and abroad. He 
previously worked in the U.S. Treasury Department, served overseas with the 
OECD and the U.S. State Department, and directed the Of˜ce of International 
Technology Policy at the Department of Commerce. 
Dr. Wessner earned an M.A., M.A.L.D., and Ph.D. from the Fletcher School 
of Law and Diplomacy. 
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192Appendix B
Participants List
*Speakers in italics.
Tabitha Benney
National Research Council
Arpad Bergh
Optoelectronics Industry 
Development Association
Richard Bissell
National Research Council
Peter Blair
National Research Council
Rochelle Blaustein
National Institutes of Health
Robert Boege
ASTRA
Jeff Bond
Association for Manufacturing 
Technology
Alice H. Amsden
Massachussets Institute of Technology
Tim Angus
Industry Canada
Martin Apple
Council of Scienti˜c Society 
Presidents
Clara Asmail
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
David Attis
Council on Competitiveness
Gary Bachula
Internet2
Robert Bell
National Science Foundation
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 193
William Bonvillian
Of˜ce of Senator Lieberman
Mark Boroush
U.S. Department of Commerce
Edsel Brown
U.S. Small Business Administration
Alphonse Buccino
Amy Burke
Semiconductor Industry Association
Dan Byers
House Committee on Science
Simon Cavenett
Detecon
Bill Chadwick
U.S. International Trade Commission
Connie Chang
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
John Chester
Hsin-Sen Chu
Industrial Technology Research 
Institute (ITRI), Taiwan
McAlister Clabaugh
National Research Council
Major Clark
U.S. Small Business Administration
William Colglazier
National Research Council
Eileen Collins
Rutgers University
Mildred Cooper
Ronald Cooper
U.S. Small Business Administration
Carol Corrado
Federal Reserve Board
Michael Czinkota
Georgetown University
Carl J. Dahlman
Georgetown Uni
versity and 
 World Bank, retired
Brian Darmody
University of Maryland
Robert Davidson
Canada Foundation for Innovation
Patrick Dennis
National Science Foundation
Doug Devereaux
U.S. Department of Commerce
Papa
nDevnani
 Devnani
Bea Droke
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Travi
sEarles
 Earles
National Cancer Institute
Lewis S
.Edelheit
 Edelheit
General Electric, retired
Giorgio Einaudi
Embassy of Italy
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194
 APPENDIX B
Cerise Elliott
National Institutes of Health
Sara Farley
Rockefeller Foundation
Lenka Fedorkova
National Institutes of Health
Brenda Fisher
U.S. Department of Commerce
Kenneth Flamm
Uni
versity of Texas at Austin
Pamela Flattau
Institute for Defense Analysis
Quind
iFranco
 Franco
SRI International
Susan Fratkin
Fratkin Associates
Marik
oFukumura
 Fukumura
Washington CORE
Edward Furtek
Univeristy of California, San Diego
James Gallup
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency
Eric Garduño
International Intellectual Property 
Institute
Robin Gaster
North Atlantic Research
Vinod Goel
The World Bank
Rich Golaszewski
GRA Inc.
Randy Goodall
SEMATECH
Jo Anne Goodnight
National Institutes of Health
Margaret Grabb
National Institutes of Health
James Hague
House Committee on Science
Gerald Hane
Globalvation
Angela Hardin
Inside Energy
John Hardin
North Carolina Board of S&T
Meg Hardon
In˜neon Technologies
David Hart
George Mason University
Christopher Hayter
NACFAM
Bill Hendrickson
Issues in Science and Technology
Bart Hendrickx
Embassy of Belgium
Robert Hershey
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 195
Mat Heyman
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Chris Hill
George Mason University
Derek Hill
National Science Foundation
Pamela Houghtaling
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Betsy Houston
Federation of Materials Societies
Thomas R. Howell
Dewey Ballantine
Virginia Hughes
Government Accountability Of˜ce
Hiroshi Ikukawa
Embassy of Japan
Ken Jacobson
Ken Jarboe
Athena Alliance
Al Johnson
Corning
George Johnson
National Cancer Institute
Richard Johnson
Arnold & Porter
Trevor Jones
BIOMEC
Teresa Jones
NACFAM Weekly
Gretchen Jordan
Sandia National Laboratories
James Kadtke
Of˜ce of Senator Warner
Da
vid K. Kahaner
Asian Technology Information 
Program
Glenn Kendall
Canadian Biotechnology Secretariat
Emily Kennedy
Embassy of Australia
Chris King
House Committee on Science
Kathleen Kingscott
International Business Machines
Bradley Knox
House Committee on Small Business
Ke
iKoizumi
 Koizumi
American Association for the 
Advancement of Science
Heikki Kotilainen
Tekes, Finland
Charlotte Kuh
National Research Council
Stefan Kuhlmann
Fraunhofer ISI, Germany
Jean-Philipp
eLagrange
 Lagrange
Embassy of France
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196
 APPENDIX B
Jerri Laine
Tekes
Bhavya Lal
Abt Associates
Jean-Jacques Lawrence
Embassy of France
Emmanuel Le Perru
Anvar
Rolf Lehming
National Science Foundation
Marc LePage
Genome Canada
Nanette Levinson
American University
Ellen Levy
Stanford University
Sira Maliphol
George Washington University
Jim Mallos
Heliakon
Christopher Mapes
U.S. International Trade Commission
John H. Marburger
White House Of˜ce of Science and 
Technology Policy
Mari
eMarcoux
 Marcoux
Cheryl Marks
National Cancer Institute
Lluan
aMcCann
 McCann
National Science Foundation
Kari McCarron
American Association for the 
Advancement of Science
Richard McCormack
Manufacturing & Technology News
Bruce McWilliams
George Washington University
Natalia Melcer
American Chemical Society
Stephen A. Merrill
National Research Council
Evan Michelson
George Washington University
Egils Milbergs
Center for Accelerating Innovation
Barbar
aMittleman
 Mittleman
National Institutes of Health
Mary Ellen Mogee
SRI International
Sushanta Mohapatra
SRI International
David T. Morgenthaler
Morgenthaler Ventures
Willia
mMorin
 Morin
Applied Materials
Francisco Moris
National Science Foundation
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 197
Massoud Moussavi
The World Bank
Kazue Muroi
Washington Core
Mark B. Myers
The Wharton School
Kesh Narayanan
National Science Foundation
Pauline Newman
Court of AppealsŒFederal Circuit
Susan Nichols
U.S. Army
Peter J. Nicholson
Of˜ce of the Prime Minister, Canada
Christopher Niebylski
George Washington University
Robert Norwood
National Science Foundation
Kim Olsen
U.S. International Trade Commission
Emmanuel Onyiriuka
Corning
Paul op den Brouw
Embassy of the Royal Netherlands
Jennife
rOzawa
 Ozawa
SRI International
Jongwon Park
SRI International
Luciano Parodi
Embassy of Chile
Lori Perine
American Forest & Paper Association
Pierre Perrolle
National Science Foundation
David Peyton
National Association of Manufacturers
Anthony Pitagno
American Chemical Society
Jean Pomeroy
National Science Foundation
Mike Quear
House Committee on Science
Lisette Ramcharan
Embassy of Canada
Samuel Rankin
American Mathematical Society
Noel Raufaste
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Larry Rausch
National Science Foundation
Kalpanna Reddy
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Leslie Reissner
Embassy of Canada
Catherin
eRenault
 Renault
RTI International
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198
 APPENDIX B
Volke
rRieke
 Rieke
Embassy of Germany
Barrett Ripin
Department of State
Deborah Rudolph
IEEE-USA
Luis Salicrup
National Institutes of Health
Ted Schlie
Lehigh University
Theodore Schmitt
National Research Council
Gregory Schuckman
University of Central Florida
Crai
gSchultz
 Schultz
National Research Council
Lyle Schwartz
Aver
ySen
 Sen
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration
Christal Sheppard
House Committee on Science
Chuck Sherman
National Institutes of Health
Hideo Shindo
New Energy and Industrial 
Technology De
velopment 
Organization (NEDO), Japan
Kathleen Shino
National Institutes of Health
Stephanie Shipp
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Sujai Shivakumar
National Research Council
Victor Shulepov
Embassy of Ukraine
Robert Sienkiewicz
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Mar
kSkinner
 Skinner
SSTI
Lana Skirboll
National Institutes of Health
Amand
aSlocum
 Slocum
National Science Foundation
Stan Sokul
White House Of˜ce of Science and 
Technology Policy
Susannah Spellman
George Washington University
William J. Spencer
SEMATECH, retired
Marc G. Stanley
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Deborah Stine
National Research Council
Miron Straf
National Research Council
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 199
Istvan Takacs
Embassy of Hungary
Greg Tassey
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Margaret Thompson
U.S. Department of Energy
Dawn Trembath
North Carolina Board of Science and 
Technology
David Trinkle
Of˜ce of Management and Budget
James Turner
House Committee on Science
J. Pace VanDe
vender
Sandia National Laboratories
David Waechter
University of North Carolina
Andrew Wang
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
Al Watkins
The World Bank
Philip Webre
Congressional Budget Of˜ce
Charles W. Wessner
National Research Council
Jeffrey Williams
George Washington University
Shane Williamson
Industry Canada
Alan Wm. Wolff
Dewey Ballantine
Patricia Wrightson
National Research Council
Falan Yinug
U.S. International Trade Commission
Obaid Younossi
RAND
Nick Zayed
U.S. Department of State
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200
Appendix C
Bibliography
Alic, John A., Lewis M. Branscomb, Harvey Brooks, Ashton B. Carter, and Gerald L. Epstein. 1992. 
Beyond Spin-off: Military and Commercial Technologies in a Changing World
. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Amsden, Alice H. 2001. 
The Rise of ﬁthe Restﬂ: Challenges to the West from Late-industrializing 
Economies
. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Amsden, Alice H. and Wan-wen Chu. 2003. 
Beyond Late De
velopment: Taiwan™s Upgrading Policies
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Amsden, Alice H., Ted Tschang, and Akira Goto. 2001. ﬁDo Foreign Companies Conduct R&D in 
Developing Countries?ﬂ Tokyo, Japan: ADB Institute.
Archibugi, Danielle, Jeremy Howells, and Jonathan Michie, eds. 1999. 
Inno
vation Policy and the 
Global Economy
. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Asheim, Bjorn T. et al, eds. 2003. 
Regional Inno
vation Policy for Small-medium Enterprises
.  
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Athreye, Suma S. 2000. ﬁTechnology Policy and Innovation: The Role of Competition Between Firms.ﬂ 
In Pedro Conceicao et al., eds. 
Science, Technology, and Inno
vation Policy: Opportunities and 
Challenges for the Knowledge Economy
. Westport, CT, and London, UK: Quorum Books.
Audretsch, David B. 2006. 
The Entrepreneurial Society
, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Audretsch, David B., Heike Grimm, and Charles W. Wessner. 2005. 
Local Heroes in the Global 
 
Village: Globalization and the New Entrepreneurship Policies.
 New York, NY: Springer.
Audretsch, David B., ed. 1998. 
Industrial Policy and Competiti
ve Ad
vantage
, Volumes 1 and 2. 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Audretsch, D. B., B. Bozeman, K. L. Combs, M. P. Feldman, A. N. Link, D. S. Siegel, P. Stephan, 
G. Tassey, and C. Wessner. 2002. ﬁThe Economics of Science and Technology.ﬂ
 Journal of 
Technology Transfer
 27:155-203.
Baldwin, John Russel, and Peter Hanel. 2003. 
Inno
vation and Knowledge Creation in an Open 
Economy: Canadian Industry and International Implications
. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Balzat, Markus and Andreas Pyka. 2006. ﬁMapping National Innovation Systems in the OECD Area.ﬂ 
International Journal of Technology and Globalisation
 2(1-2):158-176.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 201
Bartzokas, Anthony and Morris Teubal. 2002. ﬁThe Political Economy of Innovation Policy Imple
-mentation in Developing Countries.ﬂ 
Economics of Inno
vation and New Technology
 11(4-5).
Bhidé, Amar. 2006. ﬁVenturesome Consumption, Innovation and Globalization.ﬂ Paper presented at 
the Centre on Capitalism & Society and CESifo Venice Summer Institute 2006, ﬁPerspectives on 
the Performance of the Continent™s Economies,ﬂ 21-22 July 2006. Held at Venice International 
University. San Servolo, Italy.
Biegelbauer, Peter S. and Susana Borras, eds. 2003. 
Inno
vation Policies in Europe and the U.S.: The 
New Agenda
. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Blomström, Magnus, Ari Kokko, and Fredrik Sjöholm. 2002. ﬁGrowth & Innovation Policies for a 
Knowledge Economy: Experiences from Finland, Sweden, & Singapore.ﬂ EIJS Working Paper, 
Series No. 156.
Borras, Susana. 2003. 
The Inno
vation Policy of the European Union: From Go
vernment to Go
ver
-nance.
 Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Borrus, Michael and Jay Stowsky. 2000. ﬁTechnology Policy and Economic Growth.ﬂ In Charles 
Edquist and Maureen McKelvey, eds. 
Systems of Inno
vation: Growth, Competiti
veness and 
Employment, Vol. 2
. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar. 
Branscomb, Lewis M. and Philip E. Auerswald. 2002. 
Between In
vention and Inno
vation: An Analysis 
of Funding for Early-Stage Technology De
velopment
. NIST GCR 02Œ841. Gathersburg, MD: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. November.
Buchanan, James M. 1987. ﬁAn Economic Theory of Clubs.ﬂ In 
Economics: Between a Predicti
ve Science and Moral Philosophy
. College Station, TX: Texan A&M University Press, 1987
Caracostas, Paraskevas and Ugur Muldur. 2001. ﬁThe Emergence of the New European Union 
Research and Innovation Policy,ﬂ in P. Laredo and P. Mustar, eds. 
Research and Inno
vation 
Policies in the New Global Economy: An International Comparati
ve Analysis
. Cheltenham, 
UK: Edward Elgar.
Chesbrough, Henry. 2003. 
Open Inno
vation: The New Imperati
ve for Creating and Pro˜ting From 
Technology
. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press. April.
Cimoli, Mario and Marina della Giusta. 2000. ﬁThe Nature of Technological Change and its Main 
Implications on National and Local Systems of Innovation.ﬂ IIASA Interim Report IR-98-029.
Coburn, Christopher and Dan Berglund. 1995.
 Partnerships: A Compendium of State and Federal 
Cooperati
ve Programs
. Columbus, OH: Battelle Press.
Combs, Kathryn L. and Albert N. Link. 2003. Innovation Policy in Search of an Economic
 Paradigm: 
The Case of Research Partnerships in the United States. 
Technology Analysis & Strategic 
 
Management
 15(2).
Council on Competitiveness. 2005. 
Inno
vate America: Thri
ving in a World of Challenge and Change
. Washington, D.C.: Council on Competitiveness.
Dahlman, Carl J. 2005. 
India and the Knowledge Economy: Le
veraging Strengths and Opportunities
. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Publications.
Dahlman, Carl J. and Jean Eric Aubert. 2001. 
China and the Knowledge Economy: Seizing the 21st 
Century. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Dahlman, Carl and Anuja Utz. 2005. 
India and the Knowledge Economy: Le
veraging Strengths and 
Opportunities
. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Daneke, Gregory A. 1998. ﬁBeyond Schumpeter: Non-linear Economics and the Evolution of the U.S. 
Innovation System.ﬂ 
Journal of Socio-economics
 27(1):97-117.
De la Mothe and Gilles Paquet. 1998.
 ﬁNational Innovation Systems, ‚Real Economies™ and Instituted 
Processes.ﬂ 
Small Business Economics
 11:101-111.
Doloreux, David. 2004. ﬁRegional Innovation Systems in Canada: A Comparative Studyﬂ 
Regional 
Studies 
38(5):479-492.
Eaton, Jonathan, Eva Gutierrez, and Samuel Kortum. 1998. ﬁEuropean Technology Policy.ﬂ NBER 
Working Papers 6827.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202
 APPENDIX C
Edler, J. and S. Kuhlmann. 2005. ﬁTowards One System? The European Research Area Initiative, 
the Integration of Research Systems and the Changing Leeway of National Policies.
ﬂ Technik
-folgenabschätzung: Theorie und Praxis
. 1(4):59-68.
Eickelpasch, Alexander and Michael Fritsch. 
2005.ﬁContestsforCooperation:ANewApproachin
2005. ﬁContests for Cooperation: A New Approach in 
German Innovation Policy.ﬁ 
Research Policy
 34:1269-1282.
Endquist, Charles, ed. 1997. 
Systems of Inno
vation: Technologies, Institutions, and Organizations
, London, UK: Pinter.
EOS Gallup Europe. 2004. 
Entrepreneurship. 
Flash Eurobarometer 146. January. Accessed at <
http://
ec.europa.eu/enterprise/enterprise_policy/sur
vey/eurobarometer1
46
_en.pdf
>.
European Commission. 2003. ﬁInnovation in Candidate Countries: Strengthening Industrial Perfor
-mance.ﬂ May.
Fangerberg, Jan. 2002. 
Technology, Growth, and Competiti
veness: Selected Essays
. Cheltenham, UK 
and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Federal Register Notice
. 2004. ﬁ2004 WTO Dispute Settlement Proceeding Regarding China: Value-
Added Tax on Integrated Circuits.ﬂ April 21.
Feldman, Maryann and Albert N. Link. 2001. ﬁInnovation Policy in the Knowledge-based Economy.ﬂ 
Economics of Science, Technology and Inno
vation Volume 2
3. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic 
Press.
Feldman, Maryann P., Albert N. Link, and Donald S. Siegel. 
2002.TheEconomicsofScienceand
2002. The Economics of Science and 
Technology: An Overview of Initiatives to Foster Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Economic 
Growth. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Press.
The Financial Times
. 2006. ﬁIndia Needs Big Infrastructure Drive.ﬂ February 23.
Fonfria, Antonio, Carlos Diaz de la Guardia, and Isabel Alvarez. 2002. ﬁThe Role of Technol
-ogy and Competitiveness Policies: A Technology Gap Approach.ﬂ 
Journal of Interdisciplinary 
 
Economics 
13(1-2-3):223-241.
Foray, Dominique and Patrick Llerena. 1996. ﬁInformation Structure and Coordination in Technol
-ogy Policy: A Theoretical Model and Two Case Studies,ﬂ 
Journal of E
volutionary Economics
. 6(2).
Furman, Jeffrey L., Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern. 2002. ﬁThe Determinants of National Innova
-tive Capacity.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 31:899-933.
George, Gerard and Ganesh N. Prabhu. 2003. ﬁDevelopmental Financial Institutions as Technology 
Policy Instruments: Implications for Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 32(1):89-108.
Grande, Edgar. 2001. ﬁThe Erosion of State Capacity and European Innovation Policy: A Comparison 
of German and EU Information Technology Policies.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 30(6):905-921.
Hall, Bronwyn H. 2002. ﬁThe Assessment: Technology Policy.ﬂ 
Oxford Re
view of Economic Policy 
18(1):1-9.
Huang, Yasheng and Tarun Khanna. 2003. ﬁCan India Overtake China?ﬂ 
Foreign Policy
 JulyŒ
 
August. 
Hughes, Kent. 2005. 
Building the Next American Century: The Past and Future of American Eco
-nomic Competiti
veness
. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press. Chapter 14.
Hughes, Kent H. 2005. ﬁFacing the Global Competitiveness Challenge.ﬂ 
Issues in Science and Tech
-nology
. XXI(4):72Œ78.
Jaffe, Adam B, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, eds. 2003. 
Inno
vation Policy and the Economy: Volume 
3. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jasanoff, Sheila, ed. 1997. 
Comparati
ve Science and Technology Policy
. Elgar Reference Collection. 
International Library of Comparative Pubic Policy, Volume 5. Cheltenham, UK and Lyme, NH: 
Edward Elgar.
Joy, William. 2000. ﬁWhy the Future Does Not Need Us.ﬂ 
Wired
 8.04. April.
Koschatzky, Knut. 2003. ﬁThe Regionalization of Innovation Policy: New Options for Regional 
Change?ﬂ In G. Fuchs and Phil Shapira, eds. 
Rethinking Regional Inno
vation: Path Dependency 
or Regional Breakthrough?
 London, UK: Kluwer, 2003.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 20
3Kuhlmann, Stephan and Jakob Edler. 2003. ﬁScenarios of Technology and Innovation Policies in 
Europe: Investigating Future GovernanceŠGroup of 3ﬂ 
Technological Forecasting & Social 
Change
 70.
Lall, Sanjaya. 2002. ﬁLinking FDI and Technology Development for Capacity Building and Strategic 
Competitiveness.ﬂ 
Transnational Corporations
 11(3):39Œ88.
Laredo, Philippe and Philippe Mustar, eds. 2001. 
Research and Inno
vation Policies in the New Global 
Economy: An International Perspecti
ve. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Lembke, Johan. 
Competition for Technological Leadership: EU Policy for High Technology.
  
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2002.
Lemola, Tarmo. 2002. ﬁConvergence of National Science and Technology Policies: The Case of 
Finland.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 31(8Œ9):1481Œ1490.
Lewis, James A. 2005. 
Waiting for Sputnik: Basic Research and Strategic Competition
. Washington, 
D.C.: Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Lin, Otto. 1998. ﬁScience and Technology Policy and its In˚uence on the Economic Development of 
Taiwan.ﬂ In Henry S. Rowen, ed. 
Behind East Asian Growth: The Political and Social Founda
-tions of Prosperity
. London, UK and New York, NY: Routledge.
Maddison, Angus and Donald Johnston. 2001. 
The World Economy: A Millennial Perspecti
ve. Paris, 
France: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Mani, Sunil. 2004. ﬁGovernment, Innovation and Technology Policy: An International Comparative 
Analysis.ﬂ 
International Journal of Technology and Globalization
 1(1).
McKibben, William. 2003. 
Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age
. New York: Henry Holt 
& Co.
Meyer-Krahmer, Frieder. 2001. ﬁThe German Innovation System.ﬂ Pp. 205Œ252 in P. Larédo, P. 
Mustar, eds. 
Research and Inno
vation Policies in the New Global Economy: An International 
Comparati
ve Analysis
. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Meyer-Krahmer, Frieder. 2001. Industrial Innovation and SustainabilityŠCon˚icts and
 Coherence.ﬂ 
Pp. 177Œ195 in Daniele Archibugi, BengtŒAke Lundvall, eds. 
The Globalizing Learning 
 
Economy.
 NY: Oxford University Press. 
Mody, Ashok and Carl Dahlman. 1992. ﬁPerformance and Potential of Information Technology: An 
International Perspective.ﬂ 
World De
velopment
 20(12):1703-1719.
Murali, Kanta. 2003. ﬁThe IIT Story: Issues and Concerns.ﬂ 
Frontline
 20(3).
Mustar, Phillipe and Phillipe Laredo. 2002. ﬁInnovation and Research Policy in France (1980Œ2000) 
or The Disappearance of the Colbertist State.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 31:55-72.
National Academy of Sciences/National Academy of Engineering/Insitute of Medicine. 2007. 
Ris
-ing Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic 
Future
. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 
National Research Council. 1996. Con˚ict and Cooperation in National Competition for High-
 
technology Industry. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 1999. 
The Ad
vanced Technology Program: Challenges and Opportunities.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
National Research Council. 1999. 
Funding a Re
volution: Go
vernment Support for Computing 
 
Research
. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 1999. 
Industry-Laboratory Partnerships: A Re
view of the Sandia Science 
and Technology Park Initiati
ve.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy 
Press.
National Research Council. 1999. 
New Vistas in Transatlantic Science and Technology Cooperation.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 1999. 
The Small Business Inno
vation Research Program: Challenges and 
Opportunities.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2000. 
The Small Business Inno
vation Research Program: A Re
view of 
the Department of Defense Fast Track Initiati
ve.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
4 APPENDIX C
National Research Council. 2000. 
U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competiti
ve Performance
. David 
C. Mowery, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2001. 
The Ad
vanced Technology Program: Assessing Outcomes. 
Charles 
W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2001. 
Building a Workforce for the Information Economy. 
Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2001. 
Capitalizing on New Needs and New Opportunities: Go
vernment-
Industry Partnerships in Biotechnology and Information Technologies
. Charles W. Wessner, ed. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2001. 
A Re
view of the New Initiati
ves at the NASA Ames Research Center
. Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 2001. 
Trends in Federal Support of Research and Graduate Education.
 Stephen A. Merrill, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
National Research Council. 2002. 
Go
vernment-Industry Partnerships for the De
velopment of New 
Technologies: Summary Report.
 Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press.
National Research Council. 2004. 
The Small Business Inno
vation Research Program: Program 
 
Di
versity and Assessment Challenges. 
Charles W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press.
National Research Council. 2005. 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Superconducting
, Susan L. 
Graham, Marc Snir, and Cynthia A. Patterson, eds. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press.
National Research Council. 2007. 
Enhancing Producti
vity Growth in the Information Age: Measuring 
and Sustaining the New Economy
. Dale W. Jorgenson and Charles W. Wessner, eds. Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press.
National Research Council. 2007. 
SBIR and the Phase III Challenge of Commercialization. 
Charles 
W. Wessner, ed. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Nelson, Richard R. and Katherine Nelson. 2002. ﬁTechnology, Institutions, and Innovation Systems.ﬂ 
Research Policy
 31:265-272.
Nelson, Richard R. and Nathan Rosenberg. 1993. ﬁTechnical Innovation and National Systems.ﬂ In 
National Inno
vation Systems: A Comparati
ve Analysis
. Richard R. Nelson, ed. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1999. 
Boosting Inno
vation: The Cluster 
Approach
. Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1999. 
Managing National Inno
vation 
Systems
, Paris, France and Washington, D.C.: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2001. 
Social Sciences and Inno
vation
, Washington, D.C.: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2004. ﬁSummary Report: Micro-policies 
for Growth and Productivity.ﬂ DSTI/IND(2004)7 Paris, France: Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development. October.
Oughton, Christine. 1997. ﬁCompetitiveness in the 1990s.ﬂ 
The Economic Journal
 107(444):1486-
1503.
Oughton,
 Christine, Mikel
 Landabaso, and Kevin
 Morgan. 2002. ﬁ
The Regional Innovation Paradox: 
Innovation Policy and Industrial Policy.ﬂ 
The Journal of Technology Transfer 
27(1).
Patel, P. and K. Pavitt. 1994. ﬁNational Innovation Systems: Why They are Important and How They 
Might be Compared?ﬂ 
Economic Change and Industrial Inno
vation
.Posen, Adam S. 2001. ﬁJapan.ﬂ In Benn Steil, David G. Victor, and Richard R. Nelson, eds. 
Techno
-logical Inno
vation and Economic Performance
. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 20
5President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. 2004. ﬁSustaining the Nation™s Innova
-tion System: Report on Information Technology Manufacturing and Competitiveness.ﬂ Wash
-ington, D.C.: Executive Of˜ce of the President. January. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2006. ﬁChina™s Impact on the Semiconductor Industry: 2005 Update.ﬂ 
PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Rai, Saritha. 2006. ﬁIndia Becoming a Crucial Cog in the Machine at I.B.M.ﬂ 
The New York Times
. June 5.
Reuters. 2006. ﬁChina Sees No Quick End to Economic Boom.ﬂ February 21.
Romanainen, Jari. 2001. ﬁThe Cluster Approach in Finnish Technology Policy.ﬂ Pp. 377Œ388 in 
Edward M. Bergman, Pim den Hertog, and David Charles, eds. 
Inno
vati
ve Clusters: Dri
vers 
of National Inno
vation Systems
. OECD Proceedings. Washington, D.C.: Organisation for Eco
-nomic Co-operation and Development.
Ruttan, Vernon. 2002. 
Technology, Growth and De
velopment: An Induced Inno
vation Perspecti
ve. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rutten, Roel and Frans Boekema. 2005. ﬁInnovation, Policy and Economic Growth: Theory and 
Cases.ﬂ 
European Planning Studies 
13(8).
Scherer, F. M. 2001. ﬁU.S. Government Programs to Advance Technology.ﬂ
 Re
vue d™economie 
 
industrielle
 0(94):69-88.
Sheehan, Jerry and Andrew Wyckoff. 2003. ﬁTargeting R&D: Economic and Policy Implications 
of Increasing R&D Spending.ﬂ DSTI/DOC(2003)8. Paris, France: Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development.
Shin, Roy W. 1997. ﬁInteractions of Science and Technology Policies in Creating a Competitive 
Industry: Korea™s Electronics Industry.ﬂ 
Global Economic Re
view
 26(4):3-19.
Smits, Ruud and Stefan Kuhlmann. 2004. ﬁThe Rise of Systemic Instruments in Innovation Policy.ﬂ
 International Journal of Foresight and Inno
vation Policy
. 1(1/2).
Soete, Luc G. and Bastiann J. ter Weel. 1999. ﬁInnovation, Knowledge Creation and Technology 
Policy: The Case of the Netherlands.ﬂ 
De Economist
 147(3). September.
Stanford University. 1999. 
In
ventions, Patents and Licensing: Research Policy Handbook
. Document 
5.1. July 15.
Talele, Chitram J. 2003. ﬁScience and Technology Policy in Germany, India and Pakistan.ﬂ
 Indian 
Journal of Economics and Business 
2(1):87-100.
Tansley, A. G. 1939. ﬁBritish Ecology During the Past Quarter Century: The plant Community and 
the Ecosystemﬂ 
The Journal of Ecology
 27(2):513-530.
Tassey, Gregory. 2004. ﬁPolicy Issues for R&D Investment in a Knowledge-based Economy.ﬂ 
Journal 
of Technology Transfer
 29:153-185.
Teubal, Morris. 2002. What is the Systems Perspective to Innovation and Technology Policy and How 
can we Apply it to Developing and Newly Industrialized Economies? 
Journal of E
volutionary 
Economics
. 12(1-2).
U.S. Department of Energy. 2006. Press Release. ﬁDepartment Requests $4.1 Billion Investment as 
Part of the American Competitiveness Initiative: Funding to Support Basic Scienti˜c Research.ﬂ 
February 2.
U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce. 2002. 
Export Controls: Rapid Ad
vances in China™s Semiconductor 
Industry Underscore need for Fundamental U.S. Policy Re
view
. GAO-020620. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce. April.
The Washington Post
. 2006. ﬁChinese to Develop Sciences, Technology.ﬂ February 10. P. A16.
Wessner, Charles W. 2005. ﬁEntrepreneurship and the Innovation Ecosystem.ﬂ In David B. Audretsch, 
Heike Grimm and Charles W. Wessner
, 
eds.
 Local Heroes in the Global Village: Globalization 
and the New Entrepreneurship Policies
. New York: Springer.
Innovation Policies for the 21st Century: Report of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
6 APPENDIX C
Yukio, Sato. 2001. ﬁThe Structure and Perspective of Science and Technology Policy in Japan.ﬂ In 
Phillipe Laredo and Phillipe Mustar, eds. 
Research and Inno
vation Policies in the New Global 
Economy: An International Comparati
ve Analysis
. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar, 2001.
Zeigler, Nicholas J. 1997. 
Go
verning Ideas: Strategies for Inno
vation in France and Germany.
 Ithaca, 
NY and London, UK: Cornell University Press.
