DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11904Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology,and Experimentation98 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10696-2 | DOI 10.17226/11904Committee on Strategies for Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation;Board on Army Science and Technology; Division on Engineering and PhysicalSciences; National Research CouncilStrategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Strategies for 
 Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation
Board on Army Science and Technology
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute 
of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for 
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract No. W911NF-06-C0066 between the National 
Academy of Sciences and the Department of Defense. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclu
-sions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do 
not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support 
for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-10696-2
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-10696-6
Limited copies of this report are available from the Board on Army Science and Tech
-nology, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Room 940, Washington, DC 
20001, (202) 334-3118.
Additional copies are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, 
N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055, (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the 
Washington metropolitan area), Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2007 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a
 mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c and technical matters. 
Dr.
 Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of 
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. 
It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with 
the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. 
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of 
Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examina
-tion of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of 
medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute 
of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 
to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with 
general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the
 National Academy of Engineering 
in providing services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering com
-munities. The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. 
Dr.
 Ralph J. Cicerone 
and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the 
National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON STRATE
GIES FOR NETWOR
K SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, 
AND EXPERIMENTATION
VERNE L. (LARRY) LYNN,
 Chair
, Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (retired)
RAJ K. AGGARWAL, Rockwell Collins Corporation
A. MICHAEL ANDREWS II, L-3 Communications
 RICHARD L. DUNN, Consultant, Edgewater, Maryland
GERALD HARRIS, Global Business Network
JASON F. PROVIDAKES, MITRE Corporation
ZITA M. SIMUTIS, U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and 
Social Sciences (retired)
W. DAVID SINCOSKIE, Telcordia Technologies, Inc.
RONALD L. SMITH, University of Nevada School of Medicine
Staff
ROBERT
 J. L
OVE
, Study Director 
HARRISON T. PANNELLA, Senior Program Of˜cer
NIA
 D. J
OHNSON
, Senior Program Associate
ALE
XANDER R. R
EPACE
, Senior Program Assistant
SARAH E. PELLEGRIN, Senior Program Assistant
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viBOARD ON ARM
Y SCIENCE AND TECHNOLO
GYMALCOLM R. O™NEILL, 
Chair
, Lockheed Martin Corporation (retired), 
Vienna, Virginia
ALAN H. EPSTEIN, 
Vice Chair
, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge 
RAJ K. AGGARWAL, Rockwell Collins, Cedar Rapids, Iowa
SETH BONDER, The Bonder Group, Ann Arbor, Michigan
JAMES CARAFANO, The Heritage Foundation, Washington, D.C.
ROBERT L. CATTOI, Rockwell International Corporation (retired), Dallas, 
Texas
DARRELL W. COLLIER, U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command 
(retired), Leander, Texas
ROBERT R. EVERETT, MITRE Corporation (retired), New Seabury, 
Massachusetts
PATRICIA K. FALCONE, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, California
WILLIAM R. GRAHAM, National Security Research, Inc. (retired), Arlington, 
Virginia
PETER F. GREEN, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
CARL GUERRERI, Electronic Warfare Associates, Inc., Herndon, Virginia
M. FREDERICK HAWTHORNE, University of Missouri, Columbia
MARY JANE IRWIN, Pennsylvania State University, University Park
CLARENCE W. KITCHENS, Science Applications International Corporation, 
Vienna, Virginia
LARRY LEHOWICZ, Quantum Research International, Arlington, Virginia
JOHN W. LYONS, U.S. Army Research Laboratory (retired), Ellicott City, 
Maryland
EDWARD K. REEDY, Georgia Tech Research Institute (retired), Atlanta
DENNIS J. REIMER, DFI International, Washington, D.C.
W. DAVID SINCOSKIE, Telcordia Technologies, Inc., Morristown, New Jersey
JUDITH L. SWAIN, University of California, San Diego
WILLIAM R. SWARTOUT, Institute for Creative Technologies, Marina del Rey, 
California
EDWIN L. THOMAS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
ELLEN D. WILLIAMS, University of Maryland, College Park
Staff
BRUCE A. BRAUN, Director
CHRIS JONES, Financial Associate
DONNA L. RANDALL, Administrative Coordinator
DEANNA P. SPARGER, Program Administrative Coordinator
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
The 2005 NRC report 
Network Science
 developed a working de˜nition for 
network science as ﬁthe study of network representations of physical, biological, 
and social phenomena leading to predictive models of these phenomenaﬂ (NRC, 
2005, p. 2). In this light, network science can be seen as a cornerstone for future 
military operations and the conduct of network-centric warfare.
The present report, 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Tech
-nology, and Experimentation
, builds on the 
Network Science
 report by evaluating 
a possible framework for the Army to conduct research, development, test, and 
evaluation (RDTE) in areas of network science important to the future. The study 
was conducted in an environment in which changes were well underway to relo
-cate and alter signi˜cantly the network science, technology, and experimentation 
(NSTE) resources of the Army and in which there exist diverse views on effective 
ways to organize and conduct science and technology (S&T) within a military 
construct. The overall challenge for the Army is to organize its S&T resources so 
as to advance NSTE on a broad front while maintaining those relationships and 
activities that have proven productive.
The statement of task for the study was as follows:
The Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology) 
(ASAALT) has requested the NRC BAST to conduct a study to de˜ne advanced 
operating models and architectures for future Army laboratories and centers. 
The NRC will examine several representative centers, and address the follow
-ing issues: 
1. Consult with the ASAALT Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Technical 
Assessment Board to obtain data on organizational goals, functions that support 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 PR
EFACE
the goals, activities that support the functions, and the disciplines required to 
support the activities and the critical mass required for each discipline for the 
network science, technologies, and experimentation center (NSTEC). 
2. Examine the various business models, managerial architectures and man
-power needs both current and future for NSTEC, to include the assessment 
and potential utility of best practices in successful multi-disciplinary research 
consortiums.
3. Identify de˜ciencies in the Army infrastructure for conducting state-of-the-art 
S&T for network-centric warfare (NCW), and recommend how these should be 
improved.
4. Consider the establishment of a world-class user facility with state-of-the-art 
equipment within the NSTEC to engage the broad community (both civilian 
and military) doing R&D in networks, both human-engineered and biologi
-cally evolved, and situational awareness technologies and systems to further the 
Transformational goals of NCW. Include the delineation of the core competen
-cies and a detailed manpower analysis (relevant disciplines, critical mass in each 
area, etc.) for such an organization.
5. Recommend relocations within existing legal authority to better manage the 
various assets and resources and to create an improved synergy among them to 
achieve the goals of NCW.
6. Explore existing legal authorities, which will enable the Army to best exploit 
partnerships, alternative funding and sharing of resources with industry through 
various relationships.
 I would like to thank the committee for its hard work in interviewing numer
-ous experts, assessing the pertinent issues, and developing recommendations 
to address these concerns. The committee in turn is grateful to the many Army 
personnel engaged in NSTE for the useful information they provided. We also 
greatly appreciate the support and assistance of the National Research Council 
staff, which ably assisted the committee in its fact-˜nding activities and in the 
production of this report.
Lastly, this study was conducted under the auspices of the NRC Board on 
Army Science and Technology (BAST). The BAST was established in 1982 as a 
unit of the National Research Council at the request of the United States Army 
and brings broad military, industrial, and academic scienti˜c, engineering, and 
management expertise to bear on technical challenges of importance to senior 
Army leaders. The Board is not a study committee; rather, it discusses potential 
study topics, develops and frames study tasks, ensures project planning, suggests 
potential experts to serve as committee members or reviewers, and convenes 
meetings to examine strategic issues for the sponsor, the Assistant Secretary of 
the Army (Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology).
Although the Board members are listed on page vi of this report, they were 
not, with the exception of any Board members nominated and appointed to serve 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PR
EFACE 
ix
as formal members of the study committee, asked to endorse the committee™s 
conclusions or recommendations, nor did they review ˜nal drafts of the report 
before its release. 
Larry Lynn, 
Chair
Committee on Strategies for Network Science, 
Technology, and Experimentation
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures 
approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review Committee. The 
purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments 
that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible 
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evi
-dence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. 
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Frank Doyle, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Charles B. Duke, 
Xerox Innovation Group (retired),
Paul J. Kern, The Cohen Group,
Larry G. Lehowicz, Quantum Research International,
Richard M. Murray, California Institute of Technology,
Steven L. Schooner, George Washington University Law School,
George T. Singley, Science Applications International Corporation, and
Steven G. Wax, SRI International.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com
-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or rec
-ommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. 
The review of this report was overseen by Gerald E. Galloway, Jr., University of 
Maryland, College Park. Appointed by the National Research Council, he was 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 AC
KNOWL
EDGM
ENT
 OF R
EV
IEWERSresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report 
was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this 
report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION 
10
Background, 10
Statement of Task and Study Objectives, 12
Major Assumptions and Constraints, 12
Network Science, 13
Report Organization, 14
2 WHAT
 N
ETWORK
 S
CIENCE
, T
ECHNOLOGY
, 
AND
  16
 EX
PERIMENTATION
 IS
 N
EEDED
 BY
 THE
 A
RMY
?Scope of Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation, 16
Communications and Information Networks, 18
Human Performance in Networks, Adversary Understanding, and 
 Other Network Areas, 19
Priorities, 23
 NSTE S&T Investment Strategy, 24
 Proposed Mission Statement, 25
Chapter Summary, 25
3 NETWORK
 S
CIENCE
, T
ECHNOLOGY
, 
AND
  28
 EX
PERIMENTATION
 A
CROSS
 THE
 A
RMY
 T
ODAY
NSTE Organizations, 28
 Information and Communications, 29
 Human Performance in Networks, 35
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v CONTENTS
 Adversary Understanding, 36
 Efforts in Other Network Areas, 36
Chapter Summary, 37
4 INFRASTRUCTURE
 R
ESOURCES
 N
ECESSARY
 FOR
 A
RMY
  38
 NETWORK
 S
CIENCE
, T
ECHNOLOGY
, 
AND
 EX
PERIMENTATION
Infrastructure Framework, 39
 Development of Theory and Associated Technologies, 40
 Human Performance in Networks, 41
 Integration of New Technologies, 42
 Experimentation, 43
Organizational Elements of an NSTEC, 47
 Army Contributions, 47
 Academic (University) Contributions, 47
 Industry Contributions, 48
 Scope and Structure, 48
 Centralized Versus Distributed Facilities, 49
Chapter Summary, 50
5 GOALS
, M
ODELS
, 
AND
 A
LTERNATIVES
 FOR
 AN
 NSTEC
 51
Organizational Goals, 51
 Attracting and Retaining Human Talent, 52
 Partnering with Industry and Academia, 53
 Meeting Special Military Needs, 53
Operating Models for NSTEC Governance, 55
 Structure, 55
 Special Authorities, 56
 Governance and Business Attributes, 61
 Command Relationships and Leadership, 64
 Alternatives, 65
 Recommended Strategy, 65
Chapter Summary, 67
REFERENCES
 69
APPENDI
XES
A Committee Meetings
 73
B Biographical Sketches of Committee Members
 77
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvTables, Figures, and Box
TABLES
S-1
 Network Areas and Priorities, 7
2-1 
 Areas of Network Research of Interest to the Army, 17
2-2 
 Examples of Biological and Social (Non-physical) Networks, 20
2-3 
 Network Areas and Priorities, 24
3-1 
 Current Locations of Army NSTE, 31
4-1
 Elements of NSTEC Infrastructure, 46
5-1
 Comparative Analysis Adapted from RAND E-Delphi Exercise, 63
FIGURESS-1
 Recommended NSTEC organization, 5
2-1 
 Typical communications and information network topology, 22
3-1
 Current Army organizations engaged in NSTE, 30
5-1
 Recommended NSTEC organization, 67
BOX5-1 
 Key Attributes of an Army Science, Technology, and Experimentation 
Center, 56
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviAMSAA
 Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity
APG
 Aberdeen Proving Ground
API
 application program interface
ARCIC
 Army Capabilities Integration Center
ARI
 Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences
ARL
 Army Research Laboratory
ARO
 Army Research Of˜ce
ASA (ALT) 
 Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and 
Technology)
BAST
 Board on Army Science and Technology
BRAC
 base realignment and closure
C2
 command and control 
C2D
 Command and Control Directorate 
C3
 command, control, and communications
C3OTM
 command, control, and communications on-the-move
C4ISR
 command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance
CERDEC
 Communications-Electronics Research, Development, and 
Engineering Center
CIO
 Chief Information Of˜cer
CISD
 Computational and Information Sciences Directorate
COIN
 counterinsurgency
COTS
 commercial off-the-shelf
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AC
RO
NY
MS AN
D ABB
REV
IAT
IO
NS
 xvii
CRADA
 cooperative research and development agreement
CTA
 collaborative technology alliance
CTSF
 central technical support facility
DARPA
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DHS
 Department of Homeland Security
DISN
 Defense Information Systems Network
DOD
 Department of Defense
ERDC 
 Engineer Research and Development Center
FAR
 federal acquisition regulation
FCS
 Future Combat Systems
FFRDC
 federally funded research and development center
FGC
 federal government corporation
GIG
 Global Information Grid
GIG-BE
 global information grid-bandwidth expansion
GOCO
 government-owned, contractor operated
GWOT
 global war on terrorism
HLD
 high-level design
HRED
 Human Research and Engineering Directorate
I2WD
 Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate
INFOSEC
 information security
INSCOM
 U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command
IP
 Internet Protocol
IPA
 Intergovernmental Personnel Act
ISR 
 intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
IT
 information technology
ITA
 international technology alliance
LAN
 local area network
LCMC
 life cycle management center
M&S
 modeling and simulation
MANET 
 mobile ad hoc networks
MLS
 multi-level security
NACA
 National Advisory Commission on Aeronautics
NASA
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NCO
 network-centric operations
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviii
 AC
RO
NY
MS AN
D ABB
REV
IAT
IO
NS
NCW
 network-centric warfare
NDIA
 National Defense Industrial Association
NISITA
 International Technology Alliance in Network and Information 
Sciences
NRC
 National Research Council
NRL
 Naval Research Laboratory
NSA
 National Security Agency
NSC
 Natick Soldier Center
NSIF
 network science integration facility
NSPS
 national security personnel system
NSTE
 network science, technology, and experimentation 
NSTEC
 network science, technology, and experimentation center
NVESD
 Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate
OMB
 Of˜ce of Management and Budget
OSI
 open system interconnection
PEO
 program executive of˜cer
PM
 program manager
QoS
 quality of service
R&D
 research and development
RDEC
 research, development, and engineering center
RDECOM
 U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command
RDT&E
 research, development, test, and evaluation
S&T
 science and technology
S&TCD
 Space and Terrestrial Communications Directorate
SCI
 sensitive compartmented information
SCIF
 sensitive compartmented information facility
SEDD
 Sensors and Electron Devices Directorate
TRAC
 TRADOC Analysis Center
TRADOC
 Training and Doctrine Command
UARC
 university-af˜liated research center
UAV
 unmanned aerial vehicle
UGS
 unattended ground sensor
USAF
 U.S. Air Force
USN
 U.S. Navy
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The U.S. military and its allies have committed to a strategy of network-
 
centric warfare (NCW) with ever-increasing levels of investment in and depen
-dence on networked systems. As a result, the Army has become increasingly 
aware of the critical role that network science will play in achieving national 
defense goals. This report discusses a strategy for an Army center for conducting 
network science, technology, and experimentation supportive of all of the military 
services and joint operations.
The report examines, evaluates, and recommends appropriate operating 
 
models and infrastructure for an Army network science, technology, and experi
-mentation center (NSTEC). To a large extent, the study was initiated as a result 
of base realignment and closure (BRAC) decisions that are presenting the Army 
with many challenges and opportunities; a major study goal included minimizing 
the former and maximizing the latter. Although technologies for command, con
-trol, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(C4ISR) technologies, and associated concepts such as situational awareness, 
are currently the main focus for developing the ﬁnetworkﬂ in NCW, these areas 
are only part of the overall picture. The 2005 National Research Council (NRC) 
report 
Network Science
 (NRC, 2005) identi˜ed areas of research and challenges 
involving biological, social, and engineered networks that are key to advancing 
network science and technology. Future advances in NCW will be highly depen
-dent on a combination of basic and applied research, multidisciplinary concepts, 
experimentation, and the timely transition of innovative developments to usable 
applications. The challenge for the Army is to expand the present emphasis on 
C4ISR networks to incorporate the full scope of emerging developments in 
network science by taking advantage of the impending BRAC relocations of 
Summary
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
research, development, and engineering resources to Aberdeen Proving Ground 
(APG), Maryland.
At the onset of this study, the Army sponsor clari˜ed the statement of task 
(see Preface) to include a consideration of networks in a broad sense, as well as 
an examination of the needs of the Army for network science and technology 
(S&T) investment that would support its longer-term goals. These goals relate 
to network layers commonly referred to as the transport, services, information, 
and human interaction layers. The Committee on Strategies for Network Science, 
Technology, and Experimentation was asked to compare these needs with the 
current Army organization capacity for undertaking S&T, to assess the spectrum 
of practical options available to pursue long-term goals, and to recommend an 
optimized collaborative approach for Army research, technology, and experimen
-tation that would enable solutions for important real-world problems for the Army 
involving networks and network operations. 
The study addresses the functions that a world-class center for network sci
-ence, technology, and experimentation must perform. Clearly, basic and applied 
research and experimentation activities are essential,
1 but an NSTEC could also 
support acquisition program managers on a reimbursable basis to transition 
network technology, essentially spanning the gamut of funding for research, 
development, and acquisition. 
Network science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) is rapidly evolv
-ing with changing needs, emerging technology, and new capabilities. The com
-mittee acknowledged the importance of the role of the soldier in the successful 
application of network technology in warfare and recommends increased invest
-ments in behavioral and social sciences research that would consider human 
performance in networks and add to understanding of the adversary. The commit
-tee assumed that the purposes for establishing an NSTEC would be to promote 
creativity and innovation, to attract and retain intellectual talent, to establish 
partnerships that can capitalize on frontier research at universities and in industry, 
and to achieve affordable and timely network technology and system solutions 
through interactions with the war˜ghter/user.
The committee consulted directly with Army Materiel Command pe
rsonnel 
and other personnel responsible for and familiar with BRAC planning and imple
-mentation. It reviewed models of existing organizations in government and indus
-try that might possibly be used to form a basis for an Army NSTEC, including 
models envisioned in relevant past studies. The committee also reviewed the 
activities and resources of the Army and other military services that are cur
-rently engaged in NSTE. De˜ciencies or shortcomings that a new organization 
for NSTE might be required to address were identi˜ed, and a mission statement 
to overcome these was formulated.
1These are activities supported through Army budgetary classi˜cations 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 for program 
funding. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMM
ARY 
3The committee evaluated the pros and cons of centralized facilities versus 
purely distributed elements and determined that a hybrid of the two would be 
necessary based on practical limitations. It then considered the infrastructure 
resources necessary for an Army NSTEC and the physical realization of these in 
light of Army facilities planning for BRAC, and it examined legal and governance 
considerations necessary for an NSTEC to accomplish its mission and to exploit 
contemplated partnerships with industry and academia and relationships through
-out the Department of Defense (DOD). It evaluated a variety of approaches over 
the course of the study and considered options for operating models, both new 
ones and those that have been explored in other studies. 
The committee also considered where NSTE activities are situated within 
the Army, as well as elsewhere in the DOD or other government facilities, in 
academia, and in industry. The impending relocations of key Army organiza
-tions involved in NSTE from Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey, to Aberdeen Proving 
Ground, Maryland, were deemed a prime opportunity to facilitate establishment 
of a world-class organization for NSTE that the committee believes is urgently 
needed to confront the challenges of NCW. 
In brief, the report provides answers to the following questions: 

What network science, technology, and experimentation is needed by the 
Army? (Chapter 2)

What constitutes NSTE across the Army today? (Chapter 3)

What infrastructure resources are needed? (Chapter 4)

What operating and governance models are most likely to satisfy the 
creation of a world-class NSTE capability? (Chapter 5)
Network-centric operations have proven their worth in military operations 
and are a central premise for war˜ghting capabilities. NSTE must provide the 
developmental basis for network-centric operations in both conventional and 
irregular warfare. As the military increases its reliance on networks, the Army 
will be pressed to exploit NSTE to an unprecedented degree. The Army will need 
to consider a range of topics in a broad array of network science areas to translate 
its investment strategy into advances in network research and technology. 
To facilitate the identi˜cation of NSTE activities, the committee developed 
the following de˜nition:
Network science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) encompasses 
all
 information and information exchange, visualization, collaboration, 
manipulation, protection, restoration, transport, services, data storage, 
and application layers. Information sources (e.g., sensors) and the pro
-cessing inherent in them are interfaced to the network, but the sensors 
and processing per se are not included in the de˜nition, except for cases 
where the processing is necessarily integral to the network, such as for 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
distributed remote sensors. Human use of networks is a critical compo
-nent of NSTE. 
As a result of BRAC, many, if not most, of the personnel and facilities per
-forming essential NSTE activities for the Army will move to APG. The two major 
organizations involved with NSTE include the Army Research Laboratory (ARL) 
at Adelphi, Maryland, and the Communications-Electronics Research, Develop
-ment, and Engineering Center (CERDEC), now at Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey. 
Elements of other organizations are also involved with NSTE, including the 
Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences (ARI), the Army 
Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (ARIEM), the Engineer Research 
and Development Center (ERDC), and others. Without a plan to combine and 
unify NSTE activities, the Army will merely relocate and reconstruct CERDEC 
at APG in its present form and fail to capitalize on the synergies
 possible with 
network science research. 
Options for physical realization of an Army NSTEC range from a centralized 
facility in a single location to an organization using networked connectivity that is 
fully distributed in multiple locations. There are important pros and cons for each, 
but regardless of the con˜guration selected, there will be a critical requirement 
for partnerships with academia and industry that will require inte
rconnections to 
many locations. 
The magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure suggest a phased 
implementation approach to establishing an NSTEC. The BRAC timetable is 
relatively in˚exible, and the requisite talents and skills of the leadership team that 
will be needed are likely to be different for different phases of implementation. 
The content of the NSTE R&D portfolio will also change as the new organization 
assumes its mission and matures. 
Previous comparative analyses have narrowed the ˜eld of consideration 
of prospective models for Army research organizations to government-owned, 
contractor-operated (GOCO), federally funded research and development
 center 
(FFRDC), and government-owned, federal government corporation (FGC) oper
-ating models. The Army has a wealth of experience with a variation of the 
FFRDC known as the university-af˜liated research center (UARC), and this is 
the path recommended by the committee. 
A core NSTEC UARC/FFRDC could be established at any appropriate loca
-tion or locations and then be relocated at or in proximity to Aberdeen Proving 
Ground as circumstances warrant. In its early days, the UARC/FFRDC could 
perform a ﬁgap ˜llerﬂ role when (1) existing Army resources are inadequate to 
accomplish all aspects of NSTE or (2) particular Army organizations involved 
in BRAC relocation to APG are unable to retain key personnel. In the long-term 
evolution of the NSTEC, the core UARC/FFRDC could consolidate responsibility 
for S&T in network science research and applications. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMM
ARY 
5Overall coordination and implementation of NSTE for the Army will require 
extraordinary leadership at a level commensurate with the importance of network-
centric operations in the future. Besides incorporating the core UARC, the new 
NSTEC organization would alter existing boundaries of responsibility for the 
various NSTE functions that are now performed by multiple organizations. For 
this reason, a director for all NSTE activities should be assigned immediately to 
assist with planning and establishment of the recommended NSTEC organization 
with a UARC/FFRDC core. 
Figure S-1 illustrates the committee™s recommendation for how the new orga
-nization should be formed. All NSTE efforts would become the responsibility of 
S-1 and 5-1R01028Network ScienceFIGURE S-1
 Recommended NSTEC organization. (Acronyms are de˜ned on pages xvi-
xviii in the front matter.)
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
the proposed NSTEC. Within the NSTEC, the core UARC/FFRDC would begin 
by ˜lling current gaps in S&T and would take responsibility for efforts that cannot 
be performed due to quali˜ed technical staff deciding not to move to APG.
 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The following conclusions and recommendations address the complex set 
of requirements outlined in the committee™s statement of task, which is given in 
the Preface. 
Conclusion 1: 
Table S-1 provides a priority list of the network science areas and 
applications that the committee believes will be most important to the Army in 
the future. These include communications and information; human performance 
in networks; adversary understanding; and other non-physical areas of network 
science, such as systems biology, neural networks, and economic networks.
Recommendation 1a: 
The Army should base its investment strategy for network 
science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) on the priorities shown in Table 
S-1 and develop and fund a plan that:

Continues the current Army focus on information networks, expanding 
these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those 
networks;

Provides the theoretical and scienti˜c foundations for all network science 
research and applications;

Signi˜cantly increases funding and efforts in human performance in net
-works and adversary understanding; and

Invests in other disciplines, such as sociology, behavioral biology, and 
neural science, to ensure that the Army continually advances its under
-standing of network science.
Recommendation 1b:
 The Army should immediately increase funding in the 
critical areas of: 

Predictability of network performance,

Human performance in networks, and

Adversary understanding.
Moreover, the Army NSTE community should continuously consult with the 
Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), the Army Capabilities Integration 
Center (ARCIC), and the program executive of˜cer/program manager (PEO/PM) 
of programs of record to identify additional gaps for immediate emphasis.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMM
ARY 
7TABLE S-1
 Network Areas and Priorities
Priority
Network Areas
Important Applications
1Communications and 
information
Predictable performance: fundamental to 
command and control (C2) systems, logistics, 
training, etc., for both high and low levels of 
conflict, including operations at higher echelons 
down to the individual units and soldiers
2Human performance in 
networks 
Improved command decision processes, 
soldier and team interaction, training, social 
interactions, etc.
2Adversary understanding 
Social, cultural, organizational, religious, and 
economic command and control networks; 
critical counterinsurgency (COIN) interactions; 
intelligence analysis
3Non-physical areas of network 
science (see Table
 2-2)
Systems biology, neural networks, and 
economic networks
Recommendation 1c: 
In order to implement its investment strategy in NSTE, the 
Army should organize a center for NSTE (NSTEC) with a mission to:

Strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science;

Conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (non-
 
physical) networks function and determine their applications to military 
networks;

Manage activities in network science research, technology development, 
and experimentation for the Army;

Focus science and technology (S&T) investments to enable network-
 
centric operations and warfare;

Focus applied S&T to enable social networks important to Army opera
-tions; and

Enable development of network science applications and facilitate their 
transition to Army and joint operations.
Conclusion 2: 
Current responsibility for NSTE is fragmented across several 
 
organizations. As the BRAC relocations to APG occur with concomitant losses in 
personnel and facilities, the existing NSTE capabilities will be further divided and 
eroded, hindering essential progress toward improvements in the Army™s ability 
to conduct network-centric operations and warfare.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
Recommendation 2: 
The Army should change its organization and coordination 
of NSTE efforts to ensure essential support for future war˜ghting operations.
Conclusion 3a: 
The extensive infrastructure needed to support Army NSTE 
requir
ements will be developed initially from the facilities of existing organiza
-tions and will require a special planning effort to synchronize with BRAC reloca
-tions already in progress.
 Conclusion 3b: 
The magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure sug
-gest a phased implementation approach to establish an Army NSTEC. A plan to 
develop NSTE capabilities and infrastructure could be phased over multiple years, 
beginning with the reorganization of existing and relocated facilities and ending 
with the establishment of a world-class center for network science, technology, 
and experimentation. An adequate plan will involve leadership with the appropri
-ate talent and vision for all phases, especially as the content of the NSTE R&D 
portfolio matures.
 Conclusion 3c: 
Based on Army needs, the NSTEC should be a hybrid opera
-tion consisting of two or three centralized facilities having interconnectivity to a 
variety of distributed supporting elements.
Recommendation 3:
 The Army should plan and fund for NSTE infrastructure 
resources that provide for (1) ˚exible con˜gurations of network experiments 
and integration, both internally and externally; (2) facility designs that enhance 
and encourage academic and industry partnerships; and (3) an environment with 
world-class experimental capabilities and a campus-like atmosphere to attract 
truly talented people.
 Conclusion 4: 
The UARC/FFRDC operating model has emerged in recent years 
as a ˚exible and productive model capable of integrating commercial and military 
R&D development for the Army. The UARC/FFRDC is also superior to other 
operating models, because it allows ongoing access to a broad range of expertise, 
talent, and innovation while ef˜ciently using government resources.
Recommendation 4: 
The Army should establish a new UARC/FFRDC (or 
 
expand an existing UARC/FFRDC) to serve as the core of an overall Army 
NSTEC
 organization. 
Conclusion 5: 
An NSTEC organization must exhibit a high degree of ˚exibility 
in personnel policies that will enable it to become a world-class leader in network 
research and development. Establishment and evolution of the NSTEC will require 
exceptional leadership.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMM
ARY 
9Recommendation 5a: 
The Army strategy for NSTE should be to establish an 
NSTEC organization with a UARC/FFRDC core as shown in Figure S-1.
Recommendation 5b: 
The Army should immediately designate a director to 
establish an Army NSTEC at Aberdeen Proving Ground (Maryland). The NSTEC 
director should report to the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering 
Command (RDECOM) at a level equivalent to the ARL and RDEC directors. All 
NSTE funding and resources should be assigned to this individual. 
Recommendation 5c:
 For the NSTEC to be able to accomplish the mission envi
-sioned, the Army should designate at least two deputy directors: one for technol
-ogy and another for human performance/adversary understanding. This action will 
ensure that the large number of CERDEC engineers does not overwhelm research 
and development efforts in human performance and adversary understanding.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101Introduction 
The U.S. military and its allies have committed to a strategy of developing 
network-centric warfare (NCW) capabilities through ever-increasing levels of 
investment in and dependence on networked systems. As a result, the Army is 
becoming increasingly aware of the critical role that network science research, 
technology, and experimentation will play in achieving national defense goals. 
This report discusses a strategy for an Army center for conducting network 
 
science, technology, and experimentation supportive of all of the military services 
and joint operations.
This chapter provides the context for the study covered in this report, includ
-ing clari˜cations to the statement of task made by the report™s sponsor. It also 
discusses likely goals that the establishment of an Army center for network sci
-ence, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) could meet, basic assumptions of 
the study, and the environment in which the study was undertaken. It also explains 
the organization of the report.
BAC
KGROUND
The overall study requirement was to examine, evaluate, and recommend 
appropriate operating models and infrastructure for a network science, technol
-ogy, and experimentation center (NSTEC) with special attention given to includ
-ing assets currently existing within the Department of the Army. Determining 
appropriate potential relationships between such a center and existing govern
-ment, industry, and academic organizations was also important, since such rela
-tionships are critical for promoting the effective transfer of scienti˜c knowledge 
and technologies among the user community, and for furthering the development 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INT
RODU
CT
IO
N 11
and demonstration of technological innovations that will enable continuous devel
-opment of NCW capabilities. 
 NCW capabilities are highly dependent on information and communications 
network technologies and are most often associated with conventional wa
r˜ghting 
operations. However, the nature of likely future U.S. adversaries has changed. In 
the next decade, it is unlikely that any other existing military force would take 
on the U.S. military in a force-on-force conventional war. Although the Army 
must be prepared for traditional conventional war, the greater likelihood is that 
potential enemies are going to resort to asymmetrical or irregular approaches so 
they do not have to directly counter U.S. military technology. 
To be fully relevant in the future, NCW capabilities that traditionally have 
been viewed in terms of large force-on-force operations will need to apply to the 
activities of small Army units and to interface with small groups of friendly for
-eign military, paramilitary, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and civilian 
government forces. Future networks must be described not only in terms of mili
-tary operations, but also in terms of how they can integrate the social, cultural, 
economic, and political aspects of human performance, including understanding 
the adversary in irregular warfare. In recognition of this, while the traditional 
focus of Army NSTE on physical networks must continue, it must also support 
research activities that are on the cutting edge of applying network science to 
the challenges of asymmetric warfare. In this context, an Army NSTEC may 
well become the key organization setting the course for S&T in network-centric 
warfare.
Technologies for command, control, communications, computers, intelli
-gence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR), and associated concepts such 
as situational awareness, are currently the main focus for development of the 
ﬁnetworkﬂ in NCW. However, these technologies and concepts are only part of 
the overall picture. The contribution of the human dimension must be properly 
integrated within the spectrum of C4ISR technologies for the potential of NCW 
to be fully realized. This necessitates an integrated, multi-disciplinary approach 
to ensure that an NSTEC addresses human-intensive issues associated with the 
function of social and other non-physical networks. 
A challenge for the Army is to expand the present emphasis on C4ISR 
networks to incorporate the full scope of the emerging ˜eld of network science. 
The impending base realignment and closure (BRAC) relocations of research, 
development, and engineering resources to Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG), 
Maryland, provides a prime opportunity to do so.
The committee grappled with what functions should be included within 
the construct for an NSTEC. Clearly, basic and advanced Army research S&T 
activities are essential,
1 but an NSTEC could also support acquisition program 
1 
These are activities supported through Army budgetary classi˜cations 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 for program 
funding. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
managers on a reimbursable basis to transition technology, essentially spanning 
the gamut of funding for research, development, and acquisition. The committee 
evaluated a variety of existing and creative approaches that could help the Army 
overcome very dif˜cult organizational and bureaucratic barriers and considered 
options for various organizational models, both new ones and those that have 
been previously explored in other studies. 
STATEMENT OF TAS
K AND STUD
Y OBJECTIVESThe statement of task for the study is contained in the Preface. This task 
statement was further clari˜ed by the sponsor to include the speci˜c study objec
-tives outlined below:

Consider networks in the broader sense. Examine the Army needs for 
network science and technology (S&T) to support its longer-term goals, 
including network layers commonly referred to as the transport, services, 
information, and human interaction layers. Compare these needs with the 
current Army organization to undertake S&T and assess the spectrum of 
practical options available to pursue them. These options should include 
physical locations, organizational models, and required infrastructure. 

Recommend an optimized collaborative approach for Army research, 
technology, and experimentation to solve important real-world Army 
problems involving network science and technology and network opera
-tions. Collaboration in this sense means developing a multi-disciplinary 
approach within the Army and also collaborating or partnering with aca
-demia, industry, and other relevant organizations to bring their expertise 
and intellectual capital to bear on relevant problems of mutual interest. 
Existing Army organizations, current plans, and legal authorities need to 
be considered. If changes are recommended, they need to be practical and 
capable of being executed in a timely and resource-constrained manner.

Recommend how to relocate organizations currently involved with net
-work science and technology at Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey, and other 
facilities to Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland, to facilitate establish
-ment of a world-class center of NSTE activity for the Army. 
MAJOR A
SSUMPTIONS A
ND CONSTRAINTSNSTE is rapidly evolving with changing needs, emerging technologies, and 
new capabilities. Flexibility is an essential characteristic for any organizational 
structure that will engage in NSTE in the future. The committee assumed that the 
purpose of establishing an NSTEC would be to promote creativity and innovation, 
to attract and retain intellectual talent, to establish partnerships that can capitalize 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INT
RODU
CT
IO
N 13
on frontier research at universities and in industry, and to develop affordable and 
timely solutions to issues concerning network technology and systems through 
interactions with the war˜ghter/user.
The committee made other key assumptions focused on the uncertainties of 
need and the practicalities of resource constraints in recognition that the Army 
cannot undertake everything that it deems important. These include:

Base realignment and closure (BRAC) decisions are faits accomplis, but 
the individual personnel who will physically relocate to Aberdeen Proving 
Ground (APG) remain to be determined.

The location of APG could limit the ability to recruit and retain personnel 
with the highest quali˜cations and desired levels of expertise.

Army compromises between the ideal and the practical are going to be 
necessary and should be carefully balanced.

Study recommendations should be based on practical and realistic 
approaches.

Recommendations should not require new enabling legislation.

The proposed NSTEC would be capable of serving the needs of both 
Army and joint operational requirements.
Of necessity, the committee took a high-level approach to its analyses of both 
personnel and infrastructure. Detailed data on current and projected levels of per
-sonnel resources and investments in all of the network-related activities were not 
available for all organizations, making a detailed manpower analysis impossible. 
S&T funding for an NSTEC was estimated by extrapolating amounts provided 
for Fiscal Year 2006 network-related activities. 
 NETWOR
K SCIENCEAs a starting point, the committee reviewed ˜ndings and recommendations of 
the 2005 National Research Council (NRC) report 
Network Science
, which iden
-ti˜ed for the Army key research challenges, speci˜c research areas, and the scope 
of facilities and equipment necessary to conduct world-class research in network 
science (NRC, 2005). Although that report was focused on basic research, it pro
-vided ˜ndings that had considerable relevance to the establishment of an NSTEC. 
These ˜ndings can be brie˚y summarized as follows:

Networks are pervasive in all aspects of life (biological, physical, and 
social).

Fundamental knowledge about the prediction of the properties of complex 
networks is primitive.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE

Current funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate 
fundamental knowledge.

Network science is an emerging ˜eld, and there is consensus on the
 topics 
appropriate to a network science curriculum among practitioners of net
-work research in diverse disciplines.

The high value attached to the ef˜cient and failure-free operation of 
global, engineered networks makes their design, scaling, operation, and 
protection a national priority.
The 2005 report also identi˜ed seven major research challenges for network 
science (pp. 36-37):

Dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks.
  
Better understanding of the relationship between architecture and function 
is
 needed.

Modeling and analysis of 
very large networks.
 Tools, abstractions, and 
 
approximations are needed that allow reasoning about large-scale networks 
as well as techniques for modeling networks characterized by noisy, incom
-plete data.

Design and synthesis of networks.
 Suf˜cient understanding and adequate 
techniques are needed to design or modify a network to obtain the desired 
properties.

Increasing le
vel of rigor and mathematical structure in characterizing 
networks. 

Abstracting common concepts across ˜elds.
 Practitioners of network science 
in disparate disciplines need uniform de˜nitions for common concepts.

Better experiments and measurements of network structure.
 Current data sets 
on large-scale networks tend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their 
structure and functions are limited.

Robustness and security of networks.
 A clear need exists to better understand 
and design networked systems that are both robust to component variations 
and secure against hostile intent.
REPORT
 ORGANIZATION
The logic of the study and the organization of this report are represented by 
the following sequence of questions:

What network science, technology, and experimentation is needed by the 
Army?

What constitutes NSTE across the Army today?

What infrastructure resources are needed?

What operating and governance models are most likely to satisfy the 
creation of a world-class NSTE capability?
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INT
RODU
CT
IO
N 15
Chapter 2 discusses the scope of what a center for NSTE should do.
 Chapter
 3 describes what constitutes NSTE in the Army today. Chapter 4 considers infra
-structure requirements and the physical realization of an NSTEC, pre- and post-
BRAC. Chapter 5 describes basic organizational goals, compares operating mod
-els, and evaluates alternatives. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
2What Network Science, Technology, and 
Experimentation Is Needed by the Army?
This chapter discusses what constitutes network science, technology, and 
experimentation (NSTE) in the Army; proposes a mission statement for an Army 
center of NSTE activities, an Army NSTEC; and identi˜es science and technol
-ogy research areas that such a center might undertake.
SCOPE OF NETWOR
K SCIENCE,  TECHNOLOGY, 
AND EXPERIMENTATION
Discussions of network science, its elements, and its criticality to military 
applications vary widely depending on how network science is de˜ned. The com
-mittee chose to adopt the de˜nition from the 2005 National Research Council 
report 
Network Science
, which de˜ned basic network science as ﬁthe study of 
network representations of physical, biological and social phenomena leading 
to predictive models of these phenomenaﬂ (NRC, 2005, p. 2). This de˜nition is 
intentionally very broad and includes interactions between complex, multi-dis
-ciplinary nodes. The 
Network Science
 report also summarized various areas of 
network research that are of interest to the Army (Table 2-1). 
As currently used by the Army and within the greater military establish
-ment, the word ﬁnetworkﬂ is used in terms such as ﬁnetwork-centric operations,ﬂ 
ﬁnetwork-centric warfare,ﬂ or just ﬁthe networkﬂ to refer to information or com
-munications networks and the humans that use them. Such networks play an 
increasingly important role in modern warfare in enabling command and control 
and providing information on force locations and activities. This is true for both 
conventional high-intensity warfare (e.g., Desert Storm and the more recent ﬁrun 
to Baghdadﬂ) and counterinsurgency (COIN) warfare. The former application is 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT NSTE 
IS NEE
DED BY THE A
RM
Y?
 17
TABLE 2-1
 Areas of Network Research of Interest to the Army
Research Area
Key Objective
Modeling, simulating, testing, and 
prototyping very large networks
Practical deployment tool sets 
Command and control of joint/combined 
networked forces
Networked properties of connected 
heterogeneous systems
Impact of network structure on 
organizational behavior
Dynamics of networked organizational 
behavior
Security and information assurance of 
networks
Properties of networks that enhance survival
Relationship of network structure to 
scalability and reliability
Characteristics of robust or dominant networks
Managing network complexity
Properties of networks that promote simplicity 
and connectivity
Improving shared situational awareness of 
networked elements
Self-synchronization of networks
Enhanced network-centric mission 
effectiveness
Individual and organizational training designs
Advanced network-based sensor fusion
Impact of control systems theory 
Hunter-prey relationships
Algorithms and models for adversary 
behaviors
Swarming behavior 
Self-organizing unmanned aerial and ground 
vehicles; self-healing
Metabolic and gene expression networks
Soldier performance enhancement
SOURCE: NRC, 2005.
obvious and widely accepted, but the importance of communications networks 
applies equally to the latter; consider, for example, the physically smaller network 
involving an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) supporting a squad of soldiers who 
need to know what is around the next corner.
It is clear that the use of communications and information networks will 
continue to be critically important to the Army, and major investments are cur
-rently being made in systems to support such networks. However, at this time the 
largest fraction of these investments is being devoted to developing and acquiring 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
technology for operational systems, while support for research into the theoretical 
foundations for networks is lacking. Basic research in network science is needed 
to expand understanding of the fundamentals of network structure, performance, 
and predictability, along with the corresponding strengths and weaknesses of net
-works. This knowledge can ultimately be applied to the creation and management 
of functional networks of various types important to Army and joint operations.
In addition to physical networks, such as communications and information 
networks, a wide variety of biological and social (non-physical) networks can 
be identi˜ed. As listed in Table 2-2, these non-physical networks range in nature 
and scale from the molecular to the intercultural. The structure and functional 
characteristics of these networks are worthy of study in terms of their potential 
for application to Army operations. Nonetheless, essential basic and applied 
research in many of these areas has been neglected by the Army. Future advances 
in NCW are highly dependent on a combination of basic and applied research, 
multi-disciplinary concepts, experimentation, and timely transition of innovative 
developments to usable applications.
Coordinated efforts to expand awareness and understanding of diverse net
-works are among several appropriate goals for Army NSTE. All of the networks 
in Table 2-2 are relevant to Army and joint military operations; this fact provides 
a strong motivation for the Army to take the lead in NSTE collaboration across 
the military services. 
COMMUNICATIONS
 AND INFORMATION
 NETWOR
KSThe Army™s vision of a network-centric capable force is for one that is 
robustly networked by means of a communications and information infrastructure 
that is global, secure, real-time, reliable, Internet-based, and user-driven. For this 
reason, the Army™s highest priority for NSTE should be ensuring the predictable 
performance of communications and information networks. 
A typical communications and information network topology is shown in 
Figure 2-1. It consists of network nodes that are interconnected by network infra
-structure. The nodes themselves may have their own sub-networks. As depicted 
in Figure 2-1, the Defense Information Systems Network (DISN) Global Infor
-mation Grid (GIG) is the central focus for NCW operations, with various sub-
 
networks (including homes, of˜ces, and other military-af˜liated networks with 
GIG interfaces). The technical scope for an Army NSTEC would include science 
and technology for both the network infrastructure and the nodes.
The principal areas of research that are most important to the requirements 
of communications and information infrastructure and networks for military 
operations are as follows:

Network infrastructure, architecture, and topology to ensure
 Š Suf˜cient bandwidth to allow acceptable levels of quality of service,
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT NSTE 
IS NEE
DED BY THE A
RM
Y?
 19
 Š Capacity to be self-forming to be effective in highly dynamic situa
-tions, and
 Š Flexibility to support all Army-projected missions.

Network connectivity robustness to enable
 Š Rapid recovery,
 Š Scalable routing protocols, and
 Š Support of multiple network structures. 

Network security to ensure
 Š Network availability throughput under cyberattack,
 Š Wired and wireless distribution of cryptographic keys, and
 Š Multi-level security (MLS) to provide for secure transmission of dif
-ferent levels of classi˜ed information.

Network management capabilities to
 Š Minimize bandwidth overhead,
 Š Minimize requirements for hands-on operation, and
 Š Enable operations by all military personnel.
Other focus areas include:

Cognitive capabilities to activate network management functions during 
set-up, operation, maintenance, and monitoring of networks. 

Leveraging commercial off-the-shelf technologies (COTS) for military 
networking requirements. COTS-based networking technologies could 
help lower the cost and power requirements of network components.

Standardizing interfaces to the GIG and applications (such as Internet 
Protocol [IP]-based commercial applications) to help interoperability. 
Standards that apply across the Army, Navy, and Air Force will be key to 
fostering re-usability, global connectivity, and interoperability.

Training researchers on methodologies for experimentation and validation 
of conceptual network designs in terms of a systems perspective. Training 
on speci˜c military requirements (e.g., information assurance, mobile ad 
hoc networks, UAV networks) and to evolve solutions for networking is 
key to overall system performance and effectiveness.
HUMAN PERFORMANCE IN NETWOR
KS, A
DVERSAR
Y UNDERSTANDIN
G, AND OTHER NETWOR
K A
REASBehavioral and social science research in human factors, leader development, 
personnel, training, and social networks has much to contribute to improving 
human performance in networked systems. Soldiers and leaders alike will be 
critical nodes extracting and using information from networks to gain information 
and make decisions. Human performance research will be critical to designing 
the information and communications aspects of networks so that the needs of 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 TABLE 2-2
 Examples of Biological and Social (Non-physical) Networks
Network Type
Functional 
 Elements
Node Components
Challenges
Threats to Soldiers
Operational 
Implications
Neural
Sensory inputs: 
visual, aural, tactile
Communications 
systems, ﬁsoldier as a 
sensorﬂ
Input capacity, mental 
awareness
Sensory overload, 
non-optimal cognition, 
differences in individual 
comprehension
Confusion, 
incapacitation, no 
common operating 
picture of the 
battlefield
Autonomic/visceral
Brain, nerves, heart, 
glands
Involuntary/
uncontrollable
Physical illness, 
incapacitation, death
Physical performance 
degradation
Motor function
Brain, nerves, muscles
Training conditioned 
responses
Inadequate training, 
injury
Physical performance 
degradation
Metabolic
Nutrition/hydration
Water and food 
supplies
Maintaining health 
and energy output
Interruption of supplies
Physical and 
psychological 
performance 
degradation
Personal and 
Personnel support
Health maintenance, 
medical care
Health maintenance/
medical treatment 
systems
Seamless from 
battlefield to hospitals
Lack of expertise, 
supplies, transportation, 
facilities
Loss of troops to 
injury or illness
Physical protection
Personal protection 
equipment
Effective versus 
obstructive
Impediments to 
movement, exposure to 
elements or enemy
Physical performance
degradation, injury or 
loss of troops
Mobility
Transportation
Transportation system
Availability and 
quality
Inadequate availability
Isolation, impaired 
troop movement, 
vulnerability to attack
Disease 
transmitting
Infectious agents
Viruses, bacteria, 
vectors of transmission
Contagious illnesses
Spread among troops, 
biological warfare
Incapacitation, injury 
or loss of troops
Human
Inter-personal, inter-
unit, inter-service, 
and inter-cultural 
relationships
ﬁBattlefield buddies,ﬂ 
squads, platoons, rank 
hierarchy, and native 
peoples
Interdependence, 
efficacy of group 
performance, barriers 
due to differences in 
rank, language and 
cultural differences
Individual versus group 
goals and function; 
lack of cooperation; 
impediments to 
communication, verbal 
and otherwise
Conflict, confusion,
functional degradation 
of performance of 
individuals or groups, 
offensive/threatening 
behavior by troops or 
enemy 
Economic
Use of natural, 
human, and financial 
resources in financial 
infrastructure to 
produce products 
and services
Capital and 
operational budgets, 
human resource 
management systems, 
physical plants and 
equipment
Creation of value-
added products and 
services, successfully 
competing with other 
business networks
Competition, 
waste, inefficiency, 
mismanagement, 
technical obsolescence, 
governmental regulation 
effects
Inadequacy of funding; 
personnel supply, 
support, management, 
and retention; research 
budget; facilities and 
maintenance
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
TABLE 2-2
 Examples of Biological and Social (Non-physical) Networks
Network Type
Functional 
 Elements
Node Components
Challenges
Threats to Soldiers
Operational 
Implications
Neural
Sensory inputs: 
visual, aural, tactile
Communications 
systems, ﬁsoldier as a 
sensorﬂ
Input capacity, mental 
awareness
Sensory overload, 
non-optimal cognition, 
differences in individual 
comprehension
Confusion, 
incapacitation, no 
common operating 
picture of the 
battlefield
Autonomic/visceral
Brain, nerves, heart, 
glands
Involuntary/
uncontrollable
Physical illness, 
incapacitation, death
Physical performance 
degradation
Motor function
Brain, nerves, muscles
Training conditioned 
responses
Inadequate training, 
injury
Physical performance 
degradation
Metabolic
Nutrition/hydration
Water and food 
supplies
Maintaining health 
and energy output
Interruption of supplies
Physical and 
psychological 
performance 
degradation
Personal and 
Personnel support
Health maintenance, 
medical care
Health maintenance/
medical treatment 
systems
Seamless from 
battlefield to hospitals
Lack of expertise, 
supplies, transportation, 
facilities
Loss of troops to 
injury or illness
Physical protection
Personal protection 
equipment
Effective versus 
obstructive
Impediments to 
movement, exposure to 
elements or enemy
Physical performance
degradation, injury or 
loss of troops
Mobility
Transportation
Transportation system
Availability and 
quality
Inadequate availability
Isolation, impaired 
troop movement, 
vulnerability to attack
Disease 
transmitting
Infectious agents
Viruses, bacteria, 
vectors of transmission
Contagious illnesses
Spread among troops, 
biological warfare
Incapacitation, injury 
or loss of troops
Human
Inter-personal, inter-
unit, inter-service, 
and inter-cultural 
relationships
ﬁBattlefield buddies,ﬂ 
squads, platoons, rank 
hierarchy, and native 
peoples
Interdependence, 
efficacy of group 
performance, barriers 
due to differences in 
rank, language and 
cultural differences
Individual versus group 
goals and function; 
lack of cooperation; 
impediments to 
communication, verbal 
and otherwise
Conflict, confusion,
functional degradation 
of performance of 
individuals or groups, 
offensive/threatening 
behavior by troops or 
enemy 
Economic
Use of natural, 
human, and financial 
resources in financial 
infrastructure to 
produce products 
and services
Capital and 
operational budgets, 
human resource 
management systems, 
physical plants and 
equipment
Creation of value-
added products and 
services, successfully 
competing with other 
business networks
Competition, 
waste, inefficiency, 
mismanagement, 
technical obsolescence, 
governmental regulation 
effects
Inadequacy of funding; 
personnel supply, 
support, management, 
and retention; research 
budget; facilities and 
maintenance
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
NodesWiredWirelessOffice/Enterprise NetworkHome NetworkGIG/InternetMilitary Edge Networksfig 2-1FIGURE 2-1
 Typical communications and information network topology.
users for timely and useful information are met in a manner that is compatible 
with human cognition. 
Cognitive psychology can contribute to understanding the processes of situ
-ational awareness and decision making in networked environments. Leaders will 
direct others via networks, communicating information and their decisions and 
providing support remotely. Therefore, research on social networks and leader
-ship development for the purpose of understanding and optimizing team and 
leader behaviors in a networked environment (e.g., collaboration) will be critical 
to the operational success of a networked Army. Research in social networks 
can also help the Army to identify the skills in personnel that will be necessary 
for soldiers and leaders to operate in the networked environments of the future, 
as well as the types and structures of organizations needed. Such research will 
help improve not only the operation of networked systems, but also how to train 
soldiers to use the systems most effectively in future battle˜eld scenarios. 
Knowledge of social networks is critical to understanding interactions 
between and among personnel who are integral to military operations
in units 
of U.S. and coalition forces, and in indigenous populations. It will also be impor
-tant for understanding how adversary networks and cells work at the ethnic, 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT NSTE 
IS NEE
DED BY THE A
RM
Y?
 23
religious, familial, tribal, and economic levels. Detailed understanding of the 
social structure and communications patterns of adversary forces is essential to 
intelligence acquisition and analysis, and to the ability to disrupt enemy assets 
and objectives. Analysis of ˜nancial and social as well as command and control 
(C2) linkages can provide powerful information and tools in counterinsurgency 
(COIN) operations. Social network and behavioral modeling research is particu
-larly critical to understanding and predicting the behavior of adversaries under a 
variety of situations.
Speci˜c applications of biological and other non-physicals networks, such 
as those identi˜ed in Table 2-2, are less predictable, but many are likely to have 
signi˜cance to the Army in the longer term. The Army should invest selectively in 
areas that will ensure awareness and understanding of emerging network develop
-ments and applications.
PRIORITIESCommunications and information network areas continue to represent the 
highest priority for the Army, as they are necessary for the linkage of multiple 
infrastructure nodes and cover a wide range of military applications. Less obvious, 
perhaps, are the many facets of human performance in networks, ranging from the 
physiological make-up and function of individual soldiers to the psychological 
and behavioral performance of multitudes of linked soldiers and other individuals. 
Much of what will be learned from research and study in these vital human areas 
will trickle down and be applicable to research in network areas involving under
-standing adversaries and in other network areas involving the biological and social 
sciences and their applications (see Table 2-2). The Army™s support of research 
efforts in all of these disciplines will have far-reaching bene˜ts.
Table 2-3 groups all network areas of particular importance to the Army 
into four categories. While the categories are broad and somewhat overlapping, 
it is evident that an integrated approach in all network areas will be essential 
to support successful development of applicable technologies and capabilities. 
This integrated approach will require close working relationships between engi
-neers and scientists in computer, behavioral, social science, and other relevant 
disciplines. 
The committee assigned Priorities 1, 2, or 3 in Table 2-3 based on the poten
-tial criticality of the network areas to Army missions now and in the foreseeable 
future. These priorities also indicate the relative value of NSTE expenditures. 
Thus, continuing efforts in the network areas of communications and informa
-tion are Priority 1 both in terms of potential criticality and relative amount of 
expenditures. The two categories assigned Priority 2 (human performance in 
networks and adversary understanding) would require a major boost in invest
-ment emphasis
on the order of 20-25 percent of the Army™s ˜scal and personnel 
resources for NSTE. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
TABLE 2-3
 Network Areas and Priorities
Priority
Network Areas
Important Applications
1Communications and 
information
Predictable performance: fundamental to 
command and control (C2) systems, logistics, 
training, etc., for both high and low levels of 
conflict, including operations at higher echelons 
down to the individual units and soldiers
2Human performance in 
networks 
Improved command decision processes, 
soldier and team interaction, training, social 
interactions, etc.
2Adversary understanding 
Social, cultural, organizational, religious, and 
economic command and control networks; 
critical counterinsurgency (COIN) interactions; 
intelligence analysis
3Non-physical areas of network 
science (see Table 2-2)
Systems biology, neural networks, and economic 
networks
The assignment of Priority 3 in Table 2-3 to efforts in non-physical areas of 
network science should not be interpreted as meaning that efforts in such areas 
should be stopped, or that funding should be dramatically reduced during times 
of tight budgets. The Priority 3 areas are in fact what would differentiate an inte
-grated center for network science, technology, and experimentation from typical 
networking research centers. For this reason, those charged with establishing and 
administering an Army NSTEC must actively advocate that the full scope of net
-work science as laid out in the 2005 NRC report 
Network Science
 be pursued. 
NSTE S&T Investment Strategy 
Future science and technology investments for NSTE should correspond to 
the priority assignments shown in Table 2-3. These considerations, combined 
with the need to provide solid scienti˜c foundations for all pertinent network 
applications, lead to a recommended investment strategy for NSTE as follows:

Continue the current Army focus on information networks, expanding 
these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those 
networks.

Develop and fund a plan that will provide the theoretical and scienti˜c 
foundations for all network science research and applications. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT NSTE 
IS NEE
DED BY THE A
RM
Y?
 25

Signi˜cantly increase funding and efforts for human performance in net
-works and adversary understanding.

Make selected investments in other disciplines, such as sociology, behav
-ioral biology, and neural science, to ensure that the Army continually 
advances its understanding of network science.
 Proposed Mission Statement
Based on the considerations discussed above, the committee proposes that 
an appropriate mission statement for the Army NSTEC, whose activities would 
range from basic research to network applications, would include the following 
elements:

Strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science.

Conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (non-
physical) networks function, and determine their application to military 
networks.

Manage activities in network science research, technology development, 
and experimentation for the Army.

Focus science and technology (S&T) investments to enable network-
 
centric operations and warfare.

Focus applied S&T to enable social networks important to Army 
operations.

Enable development of network science applications, and facilitate their 
transition to Army and joint operations.
CHAPTER SUMMARYWithout a plan to combine and unify NSTE activities, the Army will merely 
re-construct the Communications-Electronics Research, Development, and Engi
-neering Center (CERDEC) at APG in its present form and fail to capitalize on 
the synergies possible with network science research. Ultimately, the technical 
content of Army programs in NSTE should be selected, coordinated, and man
-aged by a center for NSTE activity, an Army NSTEC, in˚uenced by a highly 
quali˜ed staff who are speci˜cally recruited for this purpose, and by discussions 
with the primary customers (e.g., program managers (PMs)/program executive 
of˜cers (PEOs), war˜ghters, the Army Chief Information Of˜cer, and others). 
There should be a conscious effort to avoid competition with commercial network 
research activities unless there is a case for efforts to meet special needs. Every 
effort should be made to collaborate with commercial network research organiza
-tions in areas of ongoing research. 
As the military increases its reliance on network-centric operations and war
-fare, the Army will be pressed to exploit NSTE to an unprecedented degree. The 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
2005 NRC report 
Network Science
 identi˜ed several areas of network research 
of interest to the Army and assessed value propositions for pursuing network 
science to achieve Army objectives. The committee combined relevant ˜ndings 
from that report with its own understanding of Army requirements to determine 
an S&T investment
 strategy and a mission statement for a new center of Army 
NSTE activity.
Conclusion 1:
 Table 2-3 provides a priority list of the network science areas and 
applications that the committee believes will be most important to the Army in 
the future. These include communications and information; human performance 
in networks; adversary understanding; and other non-physical areas of network 
science, such as systems biology, neural networks, and economic networks. 
Recommendation 1a:
 The Army should base its investment strategy for network 
science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) on the priorities shown in 
Table
 2-3 and develop and fund a plan that:

Continues the current Army focus on information networks, expanding 
these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those 
networks;

Provides the theoretical and scienti˜c foundations for all network science 
research and applications;

Signi˜cantly increases funding and efforts in human performance in net
-works and adversary understanding; and

Invests in other disciplines, such as sociology, behavioral biology, and 
neural science, to ensure that the Army continually advances its under
-standing of network science.
Recommendation 1b:
 The Army should immediately increase funding in the 
critical areas of: 

Predictability of network performance,

Human performance in networks, and

Adversary understanding.
Moreover, the Army NSTE community should continuously consult with the 
Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), the Army Capabilities Integration 
Center (ARCIC), and the program executive of˜cer/program manager (PEO/PM) 
of programs of record to identify additional gaps for immediate emphasis.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT NSTE 
IS NEE
DED BY THE A
RM
Y?
 27
Recommendation 1c:
 In order to implement its investment strategy in NSTE, the 
Army should organize a center for NSTE (NSTEC) with a mission to:

Strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science;

Conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (non-
physical) networks function and determine their applications to military 
networks;

Manage activities in network science research, technology development, 
and experimentation for the Army;

Focus science and technology (S&T) investments to enable network-cen
-tric operations and warfare;

Focus applied S&T to enable social networks important to Army opera
-tions; and

Enable development of network science applications and facilitate their 
transition to Army and joint operations.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
3Network Science, Technology, and 
Experimentation Across the Army Today
This chapter reviews the different organizations across the Army that have a 
role in NSTE today. The committee developed and used the following de˜nition 
for network science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) to determine which 
organizational elements of the Army are currently engaged in NSTE efforts:
 Network science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) encompasses 
all information and information exchange, visualization, collaboration, 
manipulation, protection, restoration, transport, services, data storage, 
and application layers. Information sources (e.g., sensors) and the pro
-cessing inherent in them are interfaced to the network, but the sensors 
and processing per se are not included in the de˜nition, except for cases 
where the processing is necessarily integral to the network, such as for 
distributed remote sensors. Human use of networks is a critical compo
-nent of NSTE. 
NSTE ORGANIZATIONS
Using the above de˜nition, the committee identi˜ed current Army organi
-zations having signi˜cant S&T investments in NSTE efforts in the areas listed 
in Table 2-3. Detailed information on NSTE funding and personnel resources 
was requested from these organizations, but the data provided were incomplete 
and unusable. The committee therefore relied on brie˜ngs provided during its 
information-gathering sessions and on the personal knowledge of its members in 
preparing the analysis presented in this chapter. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NSTE AC
RO
SS THE A
RM
Y T
OD
AY
 29
Currently, NSTE efforts conducted by the Army are primarily in the area 
of information and communications. Much less work is ongoing in human per
-formance in networks and other priority network areas described in Chapter 2. 
Figure 3-1 depicts the principal Army organizations currently engaged in NSTE, 
and Table 3-1 summarizes the present physical locations for ongoing work in 
each of the priority network areas. Speci˜c organizations and their work are 
discussed below.
Information and Communications
NSTE efforts in information and communications are performed at the 
Army Research Laboratory (ARL), which includes the Army Research Of˜ce 
(ARO), and at the Communications-Electronics Research, Development, and 
Engineering Center (CERDEC). Most of this work takes place at three major 
sites: ARL, Adelphi, Maryland; Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG), Maryland; 
and Ft.
 Monmouth, New Jersey. Although the committee was provided with only 
minimal ˜nancial data, it estimated that in Fiscal Year 2006, total NSTE invest
-ments in information and communications networks were ~$145 million, with 
ARL responsible for basic and applied research (~$70 million) and CERDEC 
 
responsible for applied research, advanced technology development, and experi
-mentation (~$75
 million).
1Army 
Research 
Laboratory
ARL is the Army™s corporate, or central, laboratory for basic and applied 
research. Its mission is to provide innovative science, technology, and analysis 
to enable the full spectrum of operations. In general, the Army relies on ARL for 
scienti˜c discoveries, technologic advances, and analyses to provide war˜ghters 
with capabilities to succeed on the battle˜eld. 
ARL consists of ARO and seven directorates. Those directly involved in 
NSTE are ARO, the Computational and Information Sciences Directorate (CISD), 
and the Human Research and Engineering Directorate (HRED). The HRED efforts 
are discussed in the section below titled ﬁHuman Performance in Networks.ﬂ
The directorate primarily engaged in NSTE at ARL is CISD, which conducts a 
broad spectrum of research focused on high-bandwidth communication, advanced 
command and control (C2) techniques, battle˜eld visualization, weather decision 
aids, and defensive information operations. CISD also addresses scienti˜c devel
-opments that would enable modeling, design, analysis, prediction, and control in 
the performance of a complex network of networks
in particular, tactical sensor 
and communications networks and the overlying decision-making networks. 
1 
J. Miller, Director, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, ﬁARL Research in Network Science,ﬂ brie˜ng 
to the committee, September 21, 2006.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
FIGURE 3-1
 Current Army organizations engaged in NSTE.
FI
GU
RE
3-
1C
urre
ntAr
my
or
ganiza
ti
onsengagedi
nN
ST
E.
Ce
nt
ra
lT
ec
hn
ic
al
Su
ppo
rt
Fa
ci
li
ty
Wa
lt
er
Re
ed
Ar
my
In
st
it
ut
eo
fR
es
ea
rc
hTr
ai
ni
ng
an
dD
oc
tr
in
eCo
mm
an
dA
na
ly
si
sCe
nt
er
U.
S.
Ar
my
Re
se
ar
ch
In
st
it
ut
ef
or
th
eBe
ha
vi
or
al
an
dS
oc
ia
lSc
ie
nc
es
Ot
he
rA
rm
yEn
gi
neer
Re
se
ar
ch
an
dD
ev
el
op
me
nt
Ce
nt
er
In
st
it
ut
ef
or
Co
ll
ab
or
at
iv
eBi
ot
ec
hnol
og
ie
sU.
S.
Ar
my
Re
se
ar
ch
De
ve
lo
pm
en
ta
nd
En
gi
ne
er
in
gCo
mm
an
dAr
my
Re
se
ar
ch
La
bo
ra
to
ry
Co
mmu
ni
ca
ti
on
s-
El
ec
tr
on
ic
sR
es
ea
rc
h,
De
ve
lo
pm
en
t,
an
dEn
gi
neer
in
gC
en
te
rCo
mm
an
da
nd
Co
nt
ro
lD
ir
ec
to
ra
te
Sp
ac
ea
nd
Te
rre
st
ri
al
Co
mmu
ni
ca
ti
on
sDi
re
ct
or
at
eIn
te
ll
ig
en
ce
an
dIn
fo
rm
at
io
nW
ar
fa
re
Di
re
ct
or
at
eAr
my
Re
se
ar
ch
Offi
ce
Co
mp
utat
io
na
la
nd
In
fo
rm
at
io
nSc
ie
nc
es
Di
re
ct
or
at
eHu
ma
nR
es
ea
rc
han
dE
ng
in
ee
ri
ng
Di
re
ct
or
at
eIn
st
it
ut
ef
or
Cr
eati
ve
Te
chno
lo
gi
es
Su
pp
or
tt
oP
ro
gr
am
Ex
ec
ut
iv
eO
ffic
er
/Pr
og
ra
mM
an
ag
er
sU.
S.
Ar
my
Re
se
ar
ch
In
st
it
ut
eo
fEn
vi
ro
nm
en
ta
lMe
di
ci
ne
Na
ti
ck
So
ld
ie
rC
en
te
rStrategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NSTE AC
RO
SS THE A
RM
Y T
OD
AY
 31
TABLE 3-1
 Current Locations of Army NSTE
Network Areas
Organization
Current Location
Information and
communications
Army Research Laboratory
Army Research Office
Army Research Laboratory
Computational and Information
Sciences Directorate
Communications-Electronics Research,
Development, and Engineering Center
Research Triangle Park, NC 
Adelphi, MD, and Aberdeen
Proving Ground, MD
Ft. Monmouth, NJ
Human 
 performance 
 in networks
Army Research Laboratory
Human Research and Engineering 
Directorate
U.S. Army Research Institute for the
Behavioral and Social Sciences 
U.S. Army Research Institute for the
Behavioral and Social Sciences Field
Unit
Natick Soldier Center
U.S. Army Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine 
Army Engineer Research and 
Development Center
Aberdeen Proving Ground,
MD
Arlington, VA
Ft. Knox, KY
Natick, MA
Natick, MA
Vicksburg, MS
Adversary
understanding
Army Research Laboratory
Human Research and Engineering 
Directorate
Aberdeen Proving Ground,
MD
Other network 
 areas 
Institute for Collaborative
Biotechnologies (University-Affiliated
Research Center)
Institute for Creative Technologies
(University-Affiliated Research Center)
Communications and Networks 
Collaborative Technology Alliance
The International Technology Alliance
in Network and Information Sciences
Santa Barbara, CA
Marina del Rey, CA
Distributed
Distributed
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
ARO represents the Army™s most long-range view for pursuing S&T advance
-ments in network technology. ARO™s mission is to serve as the Army sponsor of 
extramural basic research in the engineering, physical, information, and life 
sciences. It competitively selects and funds basic research proposals from edu
-cational institutions, non-pro˜t organizations, and private industry. The ARO 
research program consists principally of extramural academic research conducted 
through single investigator efforts, university-af˜liated research centers, and 
 
specially tailored outreach programs. Each approach has its own objectives and 
set of advantages. The priorities set by ARO serve as a means to integrate Army-
wide, long-range planning for research, development, and acquisition.
To address network science research, ARL has created ˜ve network science 
grand challenges. These are:
 1.
 Develop a fundamental understanding of the performance, scalability, and 
behavior modeling of secure networks; 
2.
 Enable autonomy and self-con˜guration; 
3.
 Develop networks that seamlessly support coalition/joint operations; 
4.
 Secure information sharing among different security domains; and
5.
 Understand underlying phenomena of decision-making networks, while 
jointly addressing the physical (e.g., mobile ad hoc wireless networks), 
the social (e.g., people, organizations, cultures), and the cognitive (e.g., 
perceptions, beliefs, decisions) aspects of networks. 
In addition to the work of the directorates and ARO, ARL also has a strong 
outreach effort with other government activities involved with network science. 
Organizations with which ARL interacts include: 

CERDEC in the areas of mobile ad hoc wireless networks
 (MANET), net
-work design tools, security, performance analysis, and experimentation;

The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the 
areas of MANET networking, sensor networking, and optical and other 
communications; 

The Army Research Institute (ARI) in the development of collaboration 
mechanisms; 

The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in MANET networking and per
-formance analysis; 

The U.S. Military Academy at West Point for research in secure networks 
and social networking; 

The Army Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) in social 
networking; and 

The U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM) in social 
networking.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NSTE AC
RO
SS THE A
RM
Y T
OD
AY
 33
Communications-Electronics 
Research, 
Development, and Engineering Center
The CERDEC mission is to develop and integrate command, control, com
-munications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) 
technologies that enable information dominance and decisive lethality for the 
networked war˜ghter. CERDEC™s areas of focus are (1) develop and transition 
C4ISR technologies in support of the global war on terrorism and the Department 
of Defense transformation; (2) proactively support the Army Materiel Command 
(AMC) Life Cycle Management Commands (LCMCs) and key customers with 
highly quali˜ed and responsive C4ISR engineers; (3) expand system engineering 
capability (integrated modeling and simulation, architecture, and experimenta
-tion) to support current and future force requirements; and (4) leverage Army 
C4ISR capabilities for homeland defense. 
CERDEC has about 1,600 scientists and engineers engaged in these
 missions. 
An important role of CERDEC is the engineering and management support pro
-vided to program executive of˜cers (PEOs) and their program managers (PMs) 
in the development, production, and ˜elding of systems. The three CERDEC 
directorates that are the primary S&T leaders for NSTE are the Command and 
Control Directorate (C2D), the Space and Terrestrial Communications Directorate 
(S&TCD) and the Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate (I2WD). 
The C2D mission areas are in battle command, portable and mobile power, 
platform integration and prototyping, environmental control systems, and navi
-gation. The battle command area has two components concerned with NSTE: 
(1)
 the command and control component, which develops enabling technologies 
to support and advance the exercise of authority and direction by a properly des
-ignated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of 
a mission; and (2) the integrated ground and air command and control platform 
systems component, which develops tactical command and control platform sys
-tems by designing, fabricating, and integrating the C4ISR systems into vehicular, 
watercraft, and dismounted soldier platforms.
 The S&TCD mission is the focal point for the Army™s tactical communica
-tions systems and for integrated, secure seamless tactical communications for the 
digitized battle˜eld. S&TCD performs research, development, and engineering 
functions in all aspects of terrestrial, avionic, and space-dependent communica
-tions technology. This technology includes adaptive, reliable seamless battle˜eld 
communications with full electronic counter-countermeasures capability and infor
-mation security (INFOSEC). S&TCD has the primary responsibility for DOD com
-munications, networking, and network security. Key areas of investment include 
information assurance, antennas, mobile networking, and systems engineering.
 The mission of the I2WD is to ensure information dominance by provid
-ing enemy situation awareness, targeting, and electronic combat technology 
to the war˜ghter. The I2WD provides effective intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance (ISR) sensors, ISR processing, and capabilities for electronic 
warfare; air/ground survivability (force protection); information operations; and 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
ISR modeling and simulation materiel to the U.S. Army. It does this through 
research, development, prototype demonstrations, and rapid transitions of state-
of-the-art technologies into systems, as well as through development, production, 
and ˜elding of speci˜ed equipment in support of Army and national intelligence 
requirements.
NSTE development efforts at CERDEC are focused in the following areas:
 
Network-aware adaptive applications,

Mobile ad hoc networking systems,

Affordable on-the-move satellite solutions,

Broadband, multi-port, omni-directional antennas,

Broadband, power-ef˜cient ampli˜ers,

Sensor management/tasking, including
 Š Data compression (especially for sensor data),
 Š Onboard processing at the sensor,
 Š Automated sensor queuing, and

Automated decision aids.
Importantly, CERDEC also addresses the ﬁexperimentationﬂ element of 
NSTE. This is accomplished primarily through the command, control, and com
-munications on-the-move (C3OTM) test bed located at Ft. Dix, New Jersey. 
This major (~$15 million per year) experimentation effort provides a relevant 
operational ˜eld experimentation venue to assess and quantify the effectiveness 
of an individual system or a system of systems. It also enables assessment and 
quanti˜cation of the enhanced combat effectiveness provided by technology 
insertions to the current force, to the Future Combat Systems (FCS) program, 
and to other programs of record.
2 The C3OTM test bed assesses technical per
-formance using objective, surrogate, and simulated systems. It uses operational 
mission threads in both scripted and unscripted play, and it develops its own test 
methodologies, assessment metrics, and automated data collection, reduction, and 
analysis techniques. The facilities available at Ft. Dix, New Jersey, include 42,000 
co
ntiguous land acres under a joint basing concept. The test bed features com
-mercially restricted airspace to support unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) opera
-tions; nearby naval and supersonic air operations; Warren Grove Bombing Range 
20 miles south; access to USAF/USN runways, hangars, test facilities and ˜ring 
ranges; and access to materiel, military vehicles, personnel, and National Guard 
and Army Reserve units.
Although the committee did not include research on sensors in its NSTE 
de˜nition, the interfaces of sensors to physical networks are fundamental to Army 
NSTE efforts. Sensor research is performed primarily at three sites: Ft. Belvoir, 
2 
G. Martin, technical director, Communications-Electronics Research, Development, and Engineering 
Center, ﬁBrie˜ng to the BAST Network Science,ﬂ brie˜ng to the committee, November 16, 2006.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NSTE AC
RO
SS THE A
RM
Y T
OD
AY
 35
Virginia, in the Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD) of 
CERDEC; Adelphi, Maryland, by the ARL CISD and Sensors and Electron 
Devices Directorate (SEDD); and, at Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey, by CERDEC. 
Human Performance in Networks
The Army has two primary organizations that perform human, behavioral, 
and social science research and development. These are the Human Research 
and Engineering Directorate of the ARL, currently located at APG, and the U.S. 
Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, headquartered 
in Arlington, Virginia. 
Human 
Research and Engineering 
Directorate
The Human Research and Engineering Directorate (HRED) of ARL is the 
Army™s human engineering laboratory and is the principal Army organization 
involved in research on human performance in networks. It conducts broad-based 
programs of scienti˜c research and technology directed toward optimizing soldier 
performance and soldier-machine interactions to maximize battle˜eld effective
-ness. One of its major functions is enabling the individual soldier, crew, and 
battle staff to comprehend and manage the vast quantities of data expected to ˚ow 
across the digitized battle˜eld in both automated and degraded support modes. 
HRED has ongoing research in network science and technology in such areas as 
social networks, control of robotic elements in network environments, human 
behavior representation in models and simulations, and technology development 
to improve human-computer interactions. It is establishing a capability to simu
-late network-centric, distributed environments that are cognitively demanding in 
order to assess situational awareness behaviors.
3Army 
Research 
Institute
The U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences 
(ARI), part of the Department of the Army Of˜ce of the Deputy Chief of Staff 
for Personnel, G-1, also conducts research to improve human performance. Its 
mission is to improve soldier, leader, and unit performance through advances in 
the behavioral and social sciences with a focus on personnel, training, and leader 
development. ARI was funded in Fiscal Year 2007 to perform research in social 
networks, and in human collaboration in networks and in social networks. ARI™s 
Armored Forces Field Unit, located at Fort Knox, Kentucky, is scheduled to move 
under the BRAC in 2011 to partner with network science organizations already 
3 
R.J. de Pontbriand, associate director for research, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, ﬁHuman 
Dimension in Network Science,ﬂ brie˜ng to the committee, August 23, 2006.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
in place or moving to APG. In the past, this small unit (fewer than 8 scientists) 
has conducted advanced development in approaches to training units in digital 
and networked environments. 
Both HRED and ARI conduct research in cognitive processes such as deci
-sion making and situational awareness that is applicable to the study of human 
performance in networks. However, the total resources that they have to conduct 
broad areas of research to support the soldier make up less than 2 percent of the 
Army™s S&T budget. The number of scienti˜c personnel in these organizations 
is less than 12 percent of the number in CERDEC. Therefore, without signi˜cant 
additional resources, it will be extremely dif˜cult for HRED and ARI to conduct 
all of the NSTE necessary to improve human performance in networks.
Other Efforts
Additional research on human performance relevant to NTSE is ongoing at 
the Natick Soldier Center and the U.S. Army Research Institute of Enviro
nmental 
Medicine, both located at Natick, Massachusetts. The Medical Research and 
Materiel Command laboratories at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research 
facilities in Bethesda, Maryland, also conduct neuroscience research that is appli
-cable to human performance. 
Adversary Understanding
Recognition of the importance of adversary understanding to successful mili
-tary operations is rapidly increasing, but there is relatively little work ongoing 
other than efforts associated with the immediate training and sensitization of 
forces deploying to the Middle East. Research in dynamic network analysis, which 
involves developing mathematical and behavioral technologies to better understand 
social networks in organizations, including terrorist networks, is funded through 
ARL cooperative technology agreements (CTAs) monitored by HRED, the Of˜ce 
of Naval Research, and ARI. Current research in adversary understanding includes 
improvements in tools to enable more ef˜cient user behavior in locating, under
-standing, and coding data and in updating analyses as new political, economic, 
military, social, and infrastructure data are acquired. An example of this research 
can be found in ﬁDestabilization of Covert Networksﬂ (Carley, 2006). 
Efforts in Other Network Areas
There are multiple NSTE efforts in network science research ongoing through 
various CTAs, international technology alliances (ITAs), and university-af˜liated 
research centers (UARCs). These include: 
 
ARL Communications and Networks CTA: Self-con˜guring wireless 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NSTE AC
RO
SS THE A
RM
Y T
OD
AY
 37
network technologies that enable secure, scalable, energy-ef˜cient, and 
survivable mobile and sensor networks, currently being funded at $7 mil
-lion per year.

The International Technology Alliance in Network and Information Sci
-ences (NISITA): Established by IBM in collaboration with ARL and the 
UK Ministry of Defense, the NISITA furthers research in network-centric 
systems to advance the technological capabilities of armed forces engaged 
in urban warfare and to enhance distributed, secure, and ˚exible decision 
making to improve coalition operations. It is currently being funded at 
$7
 million to $8 million per year in both the United States and the United 
Kingdom.
4
Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies UARC: Biologically derived 
sensors, electronics, and information processing, currently being funded 
at $6 million per year.

Institute for Creative Technologies UARC: Immersive environments through 
full sensory immersion having three-dimensional mobility with compelling 
interactive stories, currently being funded at $10 million per
 year.
Modeling and simulation capabilities, which are relevant to NSTE, are located 
at APG through the U.S. Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA), 
the Army Research Laboratory (ARL), and also the TRADOC Analysis Center 
(TRAC) in Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas. NSTE is also being conducted through 
existing acquisition programs, the most comprehensive being the FCS.
CHAPTER SUMMARYNetwork-enabled operations have proven critical for today™s military and 
are a central premise for the development of future war˜ghting capabilities. The 
developmental basis for these operations is ongoing work in network science, 
technology, and experimentation at ARL, CERDEC, ARI, and multiple other 
Army organizations. 
Conclusion 2:
 Current responsibility for NSTE is fragmented across several 
organ
izations. As the BRAC relocations to APG occur with concomitant losses in 
personnel and facilities, the existing NSTE capabilities will be further divided and 
eroded, hindering essential progress toward improvements in the Army™s ability 
to conduct network-centric operations and warfare.
Recommendation 2:
 The Army should change its organization and coordination 
of NSTE efforts to ensure essential support for future war˜ghting operations. 
4 
J. Gowens II and A. Swami, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, ﬁARL Research in Network
 Science,ﬂ 
brie˜ng to the committee, August 23, 2006.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
4Infrastructure Resources Necessary for 
Army Network Science, 
 Technology, and Experimentation
This chapter discusses the infrastructure needed for the Army to develop a 
world-class network science, technology, and experimentation (NSTE) capability. 
Many of the organizations currently engaged in NSTE will move to Aberdeen 
Proving Ground, but the committee recognized that much of the NSTE infrastruc
-ture would continue to be distributed. Consequently, the chapter also discusses 
the advantages and disadvantages of distributed and centralized approaches to 
organization. 
All of the network areas shown in Table 2-3 (i.e., communications and 
information, human performance in networks, adversary understanding, and non-
physical network science research areas) have infrastructure requirements that 
are necessary to support NSTE activities. The ˜rst two areas tend to be focused 
on the development of new capabilities associated with enabling information 
networks to support network-centric operations and on the social and human net
-works involved in decision making. Network-centric operations involve people, 
processes, and information technologies working together to enable timely and 
trusted access to and sharing of information, as well as collaboration among those 
who need it. The Global Information Grid (GIG) is the foundation for enabling 
essential social and human networks that lead to effective and timely decisions. 
Army NSTE must be capable of supporting development of these emerging com
-plex social/human models.
In addition, there is a need to conduct experiments that can improve the 
understanding of the usability of these new decision-making networks in a 
 
manner that will translate into new capabilities. This improved understanding 
of information technologies and the decision-making process will also help the 
Army to develop new capabilities that will deny adversaries similar advantages. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 39
Hence, the NSTE infrastructure being sought by the Army must also be capable 
of supporting experiments for the development of new technologies to disrupt the 
information and human networks of adversaries. 
INFRASTRUCTURE
 FRAMEWOR
K The infrastructure framework for an Army network science, technology, and 
experimentation center (NSTEC) must be capable of supporting:

Development of fundamental network theory and network technologies,

Assessment of impacts on human performance,

Integration of new technologies and social networks into capabilities, 
and

Experimentation as a means to test and con˜rm fundamental theories 
and models and/or to characterize new technologies and operational con
-cepts while also being capable of promoting training of personnel when 
applicable. 
Network science theory currently is focused on fundamentals of information 
theory, decision making, and understanding of network vulnerabilities. These 
theoretical foundations are based on those elements of networks that technolo
-gies can provide and support, as well as on improving the understanding of 
how social/human networks evolve with respect to new network technologies 
(e.g., getting humans connected in different ways
as an example, consider how 
teenagers stay continuously connected (ﬁ24/7ﬂ) via wireless cell phones, both 
synchronous and asynchronous). The 24/7 wireless cell phone is more than just 
voice, including an ever-expanding richness of collaboration and social network
-ing never seen before, as evidenced by new applications of multi-point video, 
gaming, music, etc.
Theories of networks and decision-making models need experimentation 
to test or con˜rm, discard, or modify the principles on which a fundamental 
understanding of the subject is based. These ﬁnetwork modelsﬂ are essential to 
characterize how new network technologies will scale with size or degrade due 
to ﬁblack-outsﬂ and malicious attacks. However, experiments on network models 
are very sensitive (in a very non-linear way) to the environment, and innovative 
approaches will be needed to design an infrastructure that enables live and virtual 
simulations to be performed at geographically separated laboratories.
For some time, there has been recognition that conducting complex network 
experiments, including social/human behavior, is very dif˜cult in a controlled 
environment. That is, successfully achieving the integration of interdependent 
and very mobile/dynamic network technologies and social/human networks is the 
ﬁAchilles™ heelﬂ of successful network experiments. Special consideration must 
be given to the infrastructure testing environment (complex wireless propagation, 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
mobility, chaotic behavior, etc.) to allow various levels of integration (one-to-one 
systems, multiple-systems, and system-of-systems), and to allow testing of vari
-ous technical issues, theories, and models. The importance of integration has been 
highlighted in earlier ﬁdigitizationﬂ efforts by the Army, and the essential role of 
integrating human performance in battle command exercises has been studied in 
multiple C2 experiments for the Future Combat Systems (FCS) (Lickteig et al., 
2003). Other complexities of the system-of-systems integration environment are 
discussed in Krygiel (1999).
 Development of Theory and Associated Technologies 
The development of new theories, models, and technologies requires a 
world-class environment that will foster innovation and ﬁnetwork thinking.ﬂ A 
world-class environment should have a university or campus-like feel with inter
-connected buildings, libraries, open areas (inside and outside) for discussions, 
public spaces with wireless Internet access, multi-media information displays, 
conference facilities, and lodging for visitors. State-of-the-art collaboration facili
-ties are needed that incorporate best practices from industry and academia
such 
as the ﬁsmartﬂ rooms (intelligent agent technology, voice/gesture activated, etc.) 
present at the MIT Media Lab. There will also be a need for some dedicated 
facilities for secret, top-secret, and sensitive compartmented information.
Theoretical research will require extensive network modeling facilities, 
including a computing infrastructure with supercomputing capabilities. An 
improved understanding of the complex, large-scale, and dynamic nature of 
human and social network interactions will be advanced through the use of high-
˜delity models that include physical wireless networks, i.e., complex models 
that will involve very intensive computations. New approaches in areas such as 
parallel computing, biological computers, and large-scale network computing 
(grid computing) will be required. In addition to the computing infrastructure, the 
investigation of new networking technologies (e.g., large-scale ad hoc networks) 
places new demands on recon˜gurable network labs (with emphasis on wireless 
functionality) that can quickly adopt new technologies and easily be adapted to 
human/social networking.
The computing requirements for such research will require an infrastructure 
that includes a set of dedicated labs (i.e., facilities for sensitive compartmented 
information, command and control, advancing networking, etc.) that are designed 
around a controlled environment with human subjects as participants. An NSTEC 
would also have to establish laboratories in ˜eld locations with access to soldiers 
and leaders who can serve as subjects in experiments. These ˜eld-location labo
-ratories must be dedicated sites that are highly instrumented and allow for the 
collection of data that can be analyzed and used in developing new models and 
re˜ning a theoretical understanding of network characteristics and applications.
In addition, these dedicated labs would host new information technologies 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 41
(e.g., physical networks, command and control, networked sensors, etc.). Some 
labs, for example, might host a set of technologies dedicated to research on adver
-sary networks. Due to the necessary levels of security and nature of this work, 
these special dedicated labs would require that isolated and secure networks be 
in place that could quickly improve awareness of vulnerabilities and promote the 
development of new technologies to deny network-centric operational capabili
-ties to adversaries. 
High-capacity (i.e., gigabyte) optical ˜ber and wireless (Wi-Fi and next-
 
generation 802.xxx systems) networks are key enablers for mobile multi-point 
and multi-media (data, voice, video, etc.) information transmission. These net
-works would ensure GIG connectivity to the other Army and governmental 
organizations concerned with network advances, such as the Army Materiel 
Command, Department of the Army staff, the Army Training and Doctrine Com
-mand, the Army Intelligence and Security Command, the Defense Informa
-tion Systems Agency, and the Department of Homeland Security. An optical 
˜ber backbone would enable access to a rich set of network services (including 
security authentication, data management, collaboration, discovery, etc.) as well 
as to other NSTEC facilities and test ranges. All facilities and the computing 
infrastructure would need to operate through this high-capacity backbone and be 
interconnected with all associated sites. Given the classi˜ed nature of some work, 
these networks would have to be secure and approved for use at different levels of 
security classi˜cation (e.g., secret level, top-secret level, sensitive compartmented 
information, etc.).
Human Performance in Networks
Critical nodes in the Army networks of today and in the future are the 
 
soldiers and leaders who (1) seek and use complex information from networks; 
(2)
 must quickly make decisions based on that information and communicate 
and collaborate with subordinates, peers, and superiors over the network; and 
(3)
 control actions and equipment on other network nodes. In the areas of human 
performance, the focus of the NSTE infrastructure framework is on ﬁintellectual 
capitalﬂ and research that is complementary to network science theory, integra
-tion, and experimentation. Indeed, the dynamic con˜guration of the networks per 
se should be driven by the human need for information and connection necessary 
to make decisions. Four actions are required to ensure that human performance 
in networks is optimized:
1.
 A substantial increase in ARI and HRED efforts is needed if research 
on human performance in networks and adversary understanding is to 
have any impact. This does not mean a change in emphasis solely to add 
network-related research: both ARI and HRED have important research 
missions without the addition of network research, and that other research 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
is funded at levels that are barely adequate. The committee believes that 
the Army de˜nitely needs to have more personnel than the roughly 15-20 
scientists who are currently conducting or scheduled to perform research 
in behavioral and social science areas related to networks at ARI and 
HRED. Substantial growth in both personnel and resources is called for, 
with something on the order of 20-25 percent of the Army™s ˜scal and per
-sonnel resources for NSTE dedicated to human performance in networks 
and adversary understanding.
2.
 Hire or retrain in-house scientists in such relevant areas as social net
-works, decision making and other cognitive processes, behavioral repre
-sentation and modeling, performance measurement, and neural sciences. 
3.
 Require teaming between information, human factors, and behavioral 
scientists so that network interfaces are compatible with human capabili
-ties and information requirements to promote ˚exible and recon˜gurable 
networking.
4.
 Ensure that the impact of research in information and communication 
science is measured in terms of how it bene˜ts human performance in 
the network, both in the laboratory and in ˜eld environments. This will 
require new experimental paradigms and measurement techniques and 
tools (as described in the section titled ﬁExperimentationﬂ below in this 
chapter). 
Integration of New Technologies
As mentioned earlier, an integration capability that can handle the increas
-ing complexity of interdependent technologies and a scale of experimentation 
that includes human/social networks is essential. This will call for a network 
science integration facility (NSIF) that should include several key components 
as follows:

A large-open-space laboratory area to allow the integration of network 
technologies onto platforms (vehicles, robots, humans, etc.),

The ability to accommodate a scale-up of as many as several hundred 
nodes (i.e., a number representative of the types of networks the Army 
plans to ˜eld; known also as the ﬁsub-net topologyﬂ) in a virtual network 
with the capability to have a large fraction of the nodes in motion, and

Full instrumentation (including for social/human networks) to allow 
detailed diagnostics of integration and performance issues.
The NSIF should be connected with other network test beds, such as those of 
the Army Future Combat Systems (FCS) program, and it should be able to exer
-cise control over other network test beds as necessary to expand overall experi
-mentation capabilities. The NSIF networks will require signi˜cant networking 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 43
capacity with external networks; indeed, extending the Department of Defense 
Information Systems Network (DISN) GIG into the NSIF environment should be 
a high Army priority, regardless of expense.
Integration with network systems outside the NSIF will enable the connec
-tion of various elements of research in a manner that allows interoperability and 
performance issues to be characterized and resolved. In addition to the DISN 
GIG, this integration should include the networks of other DOD services, federal 
agencies (intelligence, Department of Homeland Security (DHS), health, local, 
etc.), and selected coalition/multi-national partners. 
Experimentation 
The DOD has long embraced experimentation as a fundamental tool for 
building capabilities. As in the physical sciences, experimentation is essential in 
this case for improving fundamental understanding and expanding knowledge 
in the areas of information and communications, adversary understanding, and 
human performance in networks. In addition to the necessary infrastructure and 
tools, successful experimentation requires a culture for ﬁnew system thinking,ﬂ 
committed leaders (because experimentation is naturally disruptive of the status 
quo), and skilled personnel. 
The basic infrastructure and tools needed for the experimentation envi
-ronment are discussed in Boutelle and Grasso (1998) and NRC (2004). These 
include:
 1. Information and physical infrastructure
 a.
 Networks
 b.
 Information repositories
 c.
 Architecture frameworks
 d.
 Test facilities and integration capability
 e.
 Training facilities
 f.
 Places and platforms 
2. Tools
 a. 
 Modeling and simulation
 b. 
 Prototypes, surrogates, etc.
 c.
 Arti˜cial environments
 d.
 Data capture and dissemination
Most experiments will require networking connectivity and capacity as well 
as computing power and data storage. In addition, experiments will be dependent 
on the existence of accepted operational, technical, and system architectures for 
the integration of assets and their application to scenarios and missions. Having 
data repositories with such information readily available and accessible to other 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
locations can ease experiment planning and support the extension of results to 
other cases or scenarios (NRC, 2004). 
An instrumented test range requires a physical infrastructure. As discussed 
earlier, core facilities for such things as simulations, war games, integration and 
testing, and training must all be provided as part of a distributed test range. The 
associated facilities must be equipped with the basics of uninterrupted power, 
good lighting and ventilation, suitable climate control, and adequate space as well 
as any specialized equipment needed for speci˜c activities. Equally critical is the 
timely availability of networked vehicles across distributed experimental ranges, 
aircraft, and the various platforms that are integral to the experiments. Major ele
-ments of an instrumented-distributed test range for Army NSTE should include:

A facility of ~100 nodes, most or all of which can be in motion (represent
-ing vehicles, in a typical future Army sub-net);

The CERDEC Fort Dix command, control, and communications on-the-
move (C3OTM) test bed that is fully connected back to an NSTEC and 
other Army
 test ranges (e.g., central technical support facility (CTSF) at 
Ft. Hood, Texas, Army FCS at Ft. Bliss, Texas, etc.); and

The ability to conduct ﬁadversary network attacksﬂ and appropriate 
diagnostics.
As the Army learned from its earlier experiments in digitization, the integra
-tion of the above test ranges will be critical to supporting future experimentation 
objectives (Boutelle and Grasso, 1998; Krygiel, 1999). The ranges will combine 
with other components to allow collaboration experiments and a wide exchange 
of new innovative concepts.
1 External network facilities need to include:

Capability to connect into all elements of NSTE infrastructure, including 
ranges and network C2 lab facilities;

A network C2 facility for ~50-seat ˜xed nodes completely under the 
control of an NSTEC;

Con˜gurable laboratory space (similar to the CTSF at Fort Hood) to allow 
for participation by representative command elements (i.e., C2, battle 
management, squad/company/battalion/brigade, joint/multi-national); 
and

Ability to connect/interact with other external C2 facilities (e.g., Fort Dix, 
Fort Hood, universities, joint experimentation facilities, etc.).
Ultimately, experiments must support embedded and distance training and 
learning capabilities via a system that links platforms into a virtual environment 
1 
A high-capacity and ˚exible external network is necessary to conduct related research and other 
S&T together.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 45
that will be necessary to provide an appropriate level of realism in live experi
-mentation conducted across a large network. Connecting remotely into training 
systems that are integrated into platforms will help operators and experimental 
investigators to shift seamlessly between training and experimentation. Note that 
the operators of the units participating in experiments must be aware of such 
goals and be well trained in their usual roles as well as agile enough to handle 
new, and networked, surrogate systems and new concepts. The spectrum of 
experiments to be conducted would include human-in-the-loop experimentation, 
prototypes, surrogates, and stimulators. Arti˜cial environments sometimes would 
be required.
 As previously noted, network science experimentation requires new ﬁtoolsﬂ 
with emphasis on an integrated family of models ranging from customized 
spreadsheets and war games to high-resolution simulations. These tools should 
include a sophisticated system for data collection and information capture, and 
they should provide a capability for interpretive analysis so that learning derived 
through experiments can be put to use in informing decisions about future forces 
(NRC, 2004). Simulation and stimulation facilities, such as those currently at 
the CTSF at Ft. Hood and at the National Training Center (NTC) at Ft. Irwin, 
California, are necessary to provide capabilities regarding:

Force-on-force and counterinsurgency; 

Intelligence via remote sensors (e.g., unattended ground sensors ); and

Modeling of complex environments (e.g., urban/town), as well as adver
-sary social networks (e.g., tribal, ˜nancial, political, etc.).
Table 4-1 summarizes key NSTEC infrastructure elements and the features of 
each element. The table highlights characteristics of the infrastructure necessary 
to support NSTE in priority network science areas and to accomplish the mission 
recommended (see Recommendations 1a and 1c in Chapter 2). 
Development of the NSTEC capabilities and infrastructure could be phased 
over multiple years, and there are several reasons why a phased implementation 
approach might be the most favorable for the Army. Foremost is the erratic nature 
of government funding for the BRAC, which has already affected the BRAC 
timetable. The requisite talents and skills of the leadership team that is needed are 
likely to be signi˜cantly different for different phases. Moreover, the content of 
the NSTE R&D portfolio will change as the infrastructure for the center is estab
-lished and the new organization matures. Phase 1 might include infrastructure 
inherited from the existing BRAC planning that could later be integrated into the 
NSTEC. Phase 2 might include the infrastructure needed to ﬁstand upﬂ distinct 
NSTEC facilities at a target date, and Phase 3 might encompass the infrastructure 
needed for future growth and modernization due to expected advances in network 
science knowledge and technology. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
TABLE 4-1
 Elements of NSTEC Infrastructure
Elements
Features
NSTEC campus facilities

Interconnected buildings, libraries, open areas, Wi-Fi 
(wireless Internet) access, conference facilities

Smart rooms (intelligent software agent technology, 
voice/gesture, etc.)

Secret/top-secret/sensitive compartmented information 
facilities

Dedicated network innovation labs
Fully instrumented
Human performance
Mobile and C2 networks, networked sensors, etc.
Adversary networks
Networks and services

High-capacity (Gb) optical fiber (multiple colors)

Wireless LAN, Wi-Fi, and next-generation 802.xxx

Labs interconnected with conference and demonstration 
facilities

High-capacity backbone inter-connections to all labs

DISN (GIG-BE) DOD network to APG

Firewalls, gateways, and security guards (support multi-
level security)

Virtual private network (VPN) services

Security services (authentication, access, etc.) 
Computing

Supercomputing capabilities

Parallel computing, biological computing

Information technology (IT) computing (researchers 
computers, software, mobile wireless devices, etc.) 
Data storage

Robust and secure repositories

Search engines and accessibility

Data capture and dissemination
Application services and 
tools

Architecture framework tools

DOD NCES (Net-Centric Enterprise Services) to include 
collaboration, security, management, etc.

IT applications (e-mail, business, human services, etc.) 
Simulation and stimulation

Force-on-force

Sensors

Complex environments

Adversary networks

Artificial environments
Instrumented and distributed 
test ranges

Ft. Dix C3 on-the-move test range modernization

Army FCS test ranges

Army™s Ft. Hood central technical support facility

APG test range modernization
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 47
Elements
Features
Integration, testing, training, 
and experimentation 
facilities

Network science integration facility (NSIF)

Training facilities (10,000 sq. ft.)

Platforms (20, increasing to 50)

Prototype fabrication labs

Surrogates

Large-open-space lab (30,000 sq. ft. growing to 100,000 
sq. ft.) 

Network instrumentation: three phasesŠscale from 20 
nodes to 100 nodes 
Human performance 
(intellectual capital)

Communication and collaboration tools (multi-point 
computer, video, and audio conferencing)

Intelligent computer software ﬁagentsﬂ to enable 
enhanced collaboration and improved understanding of 
human performance
TABLE 4-1
 Continued
ORGANIZATIONAL
 ELEMENTS OF AN NSTECIn addition to the infrastructure needed to support a center for NSTE, a full 
NSTE capability will also involve government, industry, and academia, and all 
three must be considered in determining an organizational approach for an Army 
NSTEC. The unique contributions of each of these groups are described below.
Army Contributions
Chapter 3 discusses the NSTE activities that are meeting current Army needs. 
The primary Army organizations engaged in NSTE are ARL (ARO, HRED, and 
CISD) for basic research; CERDEC (C2D, S&TCD, and C3OTM test bed) for 
applied and advanced research and technology development; and ARI for basic, 
applied, and advanced research. The estimates of annual NSTE investments in 
these three organizations are ARL, ~$70 million; CERDEC, ~$75 million; and 
ARI, ~$2 million, with corresponding staf˜ng. The committee sought more 
detailed information on the actual funding levels and staff related to NSTE, but 
the Army was unable to supply usable data. 
Academic (University) Contributions
Universities provide access to state-of-the-art research at all levels, including 
the global level. A steady and continuing relationship with academia can ensure 
responsiveness to evolving Army sponsorship requirements as well as compre
-hensive understanding of the sponsor™s requirements and problems. It will be 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
important for an Army NSTEC to engage multiple universities in providing broad 
and diverse thinking on relevant advances in network science. 
Other contributions made by academia may include:

Broad access to information, including proprietary data;

Independence and objectivity;

Quick response capability; and

Freedom from real and/or perceived con˚icts of interest.
Industry Contributions
Industry provides the path most frequently used by the government for 
transitioning technology to the operating forces. Relationships with industry can 
also provide an NSTEC with knowledge concerning best commercial practices 
and cost-effective approaches. In addition, industry can provide commercial 
surrogates and prototypes (e.g., state-of-the-art wireless systems and networks), 
access to large-scale system architecture, engineering and integration expertise, 
models for commercial networks and information systems, general logistics sup
-port in experimentation preparation and execution, and commercial tools to aid 
analysts in interpreting data. 
Other contributions made by industry include:

Broad access to industry information, including proprietary data;

Broad access to specialized facilities (e.g., software integration); and

Support for technology transfer agreements between government and 
industry. 
Scope and Structure
An NSTEC would be established to perform S&T in network science, net
-work technology, and network experimentation. As discussed in Chapter 3, a 
considerable amount of NSTE work, on the order of $150 million annually, is 
funded by the Army today. However, current efforts in network science research 
are not adequate for Army needs, and there are important network areas that are 
not being addressed by the Army S&T program (NRC, 2005). In order to form 
an NSTEC, the Army would need to consolidate its efforts in network technol
-ogy and experimentation and combine them with an augmented program of 
network science research. The importance of networks to military performance 
is increasing rapidly, and NSTE deserves substantially increased attention by the 
S&T community. 
In the long term, the NSTEC should become a joint entity serving the needs 
of all of the U.S. military services in a coherent, collaborative fashion. While 
addressing the Army™s current needs seems to be a practical ˜rst step, a longer-
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFR
AST
RU
CT
UR
E 
RES
OUR
CES NECESSA
RY 
FOR
 A
RM
Y NSTE
 49
term vision should be maintained by NSTEC management. This is an important 
issue that will impact the scale and scope of the research and basic technology 
efforts in NSTE.
Centralized Versus Distributed Facilities
Just what should an NSTEC look like? Should the emphasis be on an attrac
-tive central campus featuring buildings and infrastructure, or is a virtual ﬁco-
laboratoryﬂ of distributed activities more appropriate? Do the imperatives of 
existing resources suggest an immediate change or an incremental approach to 
implementation? One thing is clearŠan NSTEC, to be a world-class organization 
and a key contributor to the Army™s future success, must attract ˜rst-class talent, 
and that means providing cutting-edge challenges for top-˚ight scientists and 
engineers, providing them an environment in which to strive and achieve. 
An obvious but far from optimal version of an NSTEC would involve merely 
relocating elements of various existing Army organizations to a centralized 
 
government-operated location such as Aberdeen Proving Ground. To be effec
-tive, any such relocation should involve an attractive physical plant with state-
of-the-art technical facilities. This alternative could be considerably enhanced by 
delegating existing special authorities available to the Army for utilization by an 
NSTEC in areas such as personnel management, acquisition, and other ˜nancial 
and business practices.
The advantages of a distributed (versus centralized) NSTEC include: 

Access to highly talented and specialized knowledge and expertise in the 
large ˜eld of network science that can be leveraged globally;

Cost-effective and ef˜cient global access to specialized facilities, such as 
the MIT Media Lab, Microsoft labs, National Security Agency labs, and 
operating force experiments (e.g., regional joint forces experiments);

Access to specialized platforms (e.g., aircraft, ground vehicles, ships, 
etc.);

Access to industry and university laboratories and expertise; and

Distributed operations that mirror how the Army ˜ghts in the ˜eld.
 The disadvantages of a distributed (versus centralized) NSTEC include:

Increased management overhead due to many distributed moving parts;

Increased operating expenses (external networks, management, etc.);

Information sharing across a large distributed environment involving data 
repositories and content staging cost and complexity; and

Increased security risks.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
 CHAPTER SUMMARYThere are key elements of infrastructure that will be essential to the creation 
of a center for NSTE. Current and ongoing NSTE activities in the Army provide a 
˜rm basis for the infrastructure requirements that would be needed to establish an 
NSTEC. The key elements of the required infrastructure are listed in Table 4-1.
Options for physical realization of an NSTEC range from the extremes 
of a centralized facility in a single location to fully distributed facilities using 
networked connectivity. There are advantages to both; but regardless of which 
is selected, there will be important needs for contributions from academia and 
industry, which will require interconnections to many locations. 
Conclusion 3a: 
The extensive infrastructure needed to support Army NSTE 
requir
ements will be developed initially from the facilities of existing organiza
-tions and will require a special planning effort to synchronize with BRAC reloca
-tions already in progress.
 Conclusion 3b: 
The magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure sug
-gest a phased implementation approach to establish an Army NSTEC. A plan to 
develop NSTE capabilities and infrastructure could be phased over multiple years, 
beginning with the reorganization of existing and relocated facilities and ending 
with the establishment of a world-class center for network science, technology, 
and experimentation. An adequate plan will involve leadership with the appropri
-ate talent and vision for all phases, especially as the content of the NSTE R&D 
portfolio matures.
Conclusion 3c: 
Based on Army needs, the NSTEC should be a hybrid opera
-tion consisting of two or three centralized facilities having interconnectivity to a 
variety of distributed supporting elements.
Recommendation 3: 
The Army should plan and fund for NSTE infrastructure 
resources that provide for (1) ˚exible con˜gurations of network experiments 
and integration, both internally and externally; (2) facility designs that enhance 
and encourage academic and industry partnerships; and (3) an environment with 
world-class experimental capabilities and a campus-like atmosphere to attract 
truly talented people. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51
5Goals, Models, and 
 Alternatives for an NSTEC
This chapter discusses organizational goals, operating models, and other 
issues considered by the committee that bear on the development of alternatives 
for establishing an Army center for NSTE. The committee recognized that the 
potential creation of an NSTEC would realistically occur in an environment of 
existing organizations and resources, legal constraints, and plans in progress. 
However, the committee believed that merely yielding to what seemed a likely or 
inevitable course of development strictly based on these circumstances was not 
the most useful perspective from which to conduct its study. Whatever model is 
used, basic organizational goals for an Army NSTEC should be kept in focus.
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 GOALS
Decisions involved in setting the best organizational structure should be 
grounded in a clear set of goals that take into account and balance historical 
experience and current conditions, while allowing some ˚exibility in dealing 
with changing conditions in the future as fundamental understanding of networks 
increases and innovations in network applications emerge. At its core, the orga
-nization must be able to attract (i.e., compete for) and wisely use the intelligence 
and talents of scientists and researchers; adequately partner with the creativity 
and innovation of the private sector (including industry and academia) concern
-ing the application of network structures; and deliver results that meet the special 
needs of military operations. The organization must be able to achieve each of 
the above well into the future under uncertain economic, political, and social 
conditions, and unrelenting technological change. This section explains in greater 
detail the core goals and their implications.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
Attracting and Retaining Human Talent
When assessing the needs of highly quali˜ed people, several issues require 
attention. Studies suggest that the most important factor in attracting and retaining 
talented technical professionals is challenging work in the ˜eld of their
 chosen 
endeavor. In the long term, several unknowns directly related to the emerging 
˜eld of network science impact the kinds of work incentives that can be offered. 
These unknowns include:
 1.
 Whether network science as a ˜eld of study will connect suf˜ciently with 
industry objectives so that increasing job opportunities and work chal
-lenges arise that attract the best young minds; 
2.
 Whether network sciences will evolve so that new skills and abili
-ties emerge that support more learning opportunities and thus career 
longevity; 
3.
 Whether network science as a ˜eld of work will evolve in a stable pattern 
(as opposed to ˜ts and starts that lead to career instability); and
4.
 Whether new professions, occupations, credentials, and job specialties 
will emerge in the ˜eld of network science that ˜t well within the federal 
governmental system.
The answers to these unknowns will determine whether the Army is in a posi
-tion to support long-term careers in network science and thus get the
 technical 
and military-related results needed from an NSTEC. If network science develops 
in a manner that successfully addresses the unknowns listed above, then the Army 
will be well positioned to deal with more traditional key issues such as developing 
management so that good management is the norm and is supportive of a positive 
work atmosphere; offering continuously available attractive job bene˜ts; using 
innovative organizational structures; and managing to encourage a team orienta
-tion to research work so that strong career relationships emerge.
In the near term, the incentives needed to compete for quali˜ed people may 
be within the Army™s reach. They include competitive salaries and bene˜ts; poli
-cies supportive of rewards and recognition; attractive work/life balance in jobs; 
family-friendly policies; opportunities for educational advancement; attractive 
on-site amenities; and ˚exibility in work culture (˚exible dress and environment). 
For exceptionally quali˜ed people, other incentives come into play and may be 
more dif˜cult for the Army (or any federal lab) to offer due to legal constraints. 
These incentives include competitive salaries and housing assistance in high-cost 
areas of the country; ˜rst-class relocation assistance; and support for child educa
-tion. Finally, incentives that promote diversity in terms of race, ethnicity, national 
origin, and culture, including assistance with immigration issues, may be impor
-tant to members of the workforce now and likely even more so in the future.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 53
Partnering with Industry and Academia
There is a long history of federal laboratories and research connecting with 
and partnering with private industry and academia. This experience can suggest 
ways by which the organizational goals of an NSTEC could be ful˜lled, e.g., by 
enabling new network science applications for the military. As with the computer 
and biological sciences, the creative and innovative lead in exploiting network 
science clearly exists in private industry and academia. The private sector has 
been responsible for bringing most of the practical network science applications, 
especially computer and communications network technologies, into the service 
of both consumers and the military. Without access to the talents and resources 
of private industry, it would be impossible to stay on the leading edge of network 
science applications, much less continually and economically create special ver
-sions of such applications suited for military applications. 
While history provides examples of successful collaborations between gov
-ernment and the private sector, the NSTEC approach to partnership should be 
multi-dimensional and not limited to standard models. The participating parties 
and forms of collaboration will depend on the types of research undertaken. 
For example, a project involving engineering improvements to ˜eld wireless 
capabilities of current communications networks would bene˜t from industry 
involvement. 
Other types of projects require other strengths. An experimental exploration 
of how to make timely decisions utilizing massive data sets from large-scale 
data fusion test facilities would have to involve leading-edge academic efforts 
in data fusion, social networking, and modeling. This would allow well-framed 
questions to be examined such that predictive (and therefore practically useful) 
results could be obtained. Other types of projects, e.g., de˜ning how both large 
and small military units could utilize advanced network communications capa
-bilities to improve command and control, might involve partnering with industry 
or academia or both in combination.
An Army NSTEC must be prepared to exploit the most relevant research 
capabilities wherever they might be found. This requirement will involve structur
-ing a wide variety of partnership arrangements, from simple to complex, based on 
determining the directions of research with high potential payoff. Collaborations 
need to be nurtured that combine the knowledge and competencies of both the 
academic and the industrial world, encouraging partnerships in the development 
of future military capabilities.
Meeting Special Military Needs
The growth of network science and applications will fuel the global
 availability 
of network technologies in the consumer market, in turn leading to
 competition-
driven technological innovation. These products and services will sometimes have 
direct military applications for network-centric warfare; however, in many cases 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
they will have to be modi˜ed for military use. A core organizational goal for an 
NSTEC would be to develop these special applications quickly and economically. 
Similarly, advances tailored to military needs will require vision and focus, as 
well as unprecedented agility in coordinating diverse efforts. In this regard, it will 
be particularly important for an NSTEC to leverage industry efforts and to avoid 
duplicative investments in technology development.
One highly successful model of government and industry collaboration dates 
back to the pioneering days of aviation. Specialized facilities (primarily wind 
 
tunnels) of the National Advisory Commission on Aeronautics (NACA) were 
made available to industry to test and evaluate industry developments. This 
arrangement created a natural forum for government and industry experts to 
interact to their mutual bene˜t. The world-class facilities and infrastructure of an 
NSTEC may prove attractive to industry for its own experimentation and demon
-stration purposes. This in turn could create a forum for productive interchanges 
between NSTEC researchers and the broader community of network scientists.
The primary aims of collaboration and partnering between the military and 
private industry are access to technology and intelligent people, as well as the 
sharing of research and development costs. Secondary but also important reasons 
concern local economic development (including jobs) and support of education 
(especially higher education). Such collaboration helps in sustaining long-term 
U.S. global economic and technological competitiveness. All of these aspects are 
relevant for the general advancement of network science. Thus, making collabo
-ration between people on both sides (private and government) easy, and making 
technology transfer between industry and the government as smooth as possible, 
should be viewed as primary goals for an NSTEC organization.
Private industry most likely will not be in a position to readily leverage 
bene˜ts from government-sponsored research in network science, especially 
that which may be critical or essential to invention or innovation for military 
purposes. The pace of development of commercial products for the marketplace 
is much too fast to depend on government-funded research. Therefore, it might 
be necessary to provide incentives for business to collaborate with government 
in such instances.
Effective incentives for collaboration might include easier technology trans
-fer; programs that simultaneously foster local economic development; technical 
and ˜nancial support to private enterprise (especially for smaller businesses); 
access to laboratory facilities for industry research and testing; and programs 
that support local education and thus contribute to increasing the talent pool. 
 
Collaboration with industry can also be assured through strong mandates and 
reward systems for collaboration within the labs, clear congressional and admin
-istration support for government-industry collaboration, and funding support 
within the labs.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 55
OPERATIN
G MODELS FOR NSTEC GOVERNANCE
The operating model chosen for NSTEC governance should be capable of 
addressing the following key elements: 

Bringing the best and brightest minds to bear on the networking problems 
confronting the military; 

Ensuring incentives for motivating the workforce;

Minimizing the effects of technological obsolescence on personnel and 
research equipment and infrastructure;

Establishing effective collaboration throughout the Department of Defense 
(DOD) and with other agencies of government, the private sector, and 
internationally;

Enhancing joint service/combined operations networking; and 

Adopting technology, management approaches, and business practices 
that optimize or smooth the path for the ˚ow of technology into ˜elded 
military capabilities.
Box 5-1 shows that these goals are consistent with criteria developed by the 
RAND Corporation to assess optimal operating models for military R&D labo
-ratories (Owen et al., 2001).
Structure
An Army NSTEC should have strong and effective management, be sup
-ported by state-of-the-art infrastructure, and be attractive to top-˚ight scientists 
and technologists. The leadership of an NSTEC should be supportive of the 
technical interests of an excellent workforce, foster a spirit of innovation, and be 
proactive in advancing the leading edge of network technology. Policies should 
be adopted that support:

Long-term career development and stability to make work at the NSTEC 
an attractive career step for up to 5 years;

Management development for proven managerial talent;

An expeditious hiring process; 

Opportunities for creativity on the job;

Use of innovative organizational approaches; 

Competitive salaries/bene˜ts; praise/reward/recognition policies; family-
friendly policies; educational advancement; and a ˚exible work culture; 
and

Attractive state-of-the-art facilities and on-site amenities.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
BOX 5-1
 Key Attributes of an Army 
 Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation Center
Ł Understand
 and
 in˜uence
 the
 Army™s
 long-term
 vision
 in
 order
 to
 maintain
 military
 technological superiority.
Ł Plan
 and direct a research program
 to implement the Army
 vision.Ł In˜uence
 and leverage
 commercial technology/system developments.
Ł Conduct
 high-quality,
 revolutionary
 government-funded
 research,
 development,
 engineering,
 and analysis in key
 advanced
 technologies/systems.
Ł Conduct
 high-quality,
 comprehensive,
 evolutionary
 government-funded
 re
-search, development,
 engineering,
 and analysis.
Ł Perform
 the
 ﬁsmart-buyerﬂ
 function
 for
 current
 and
 future
 materiel
 acquisitions.
Ł Plan
 and direct the integration
 of technologies into current and future weapon
 systems.
Ł Evolve
 as necessary
 to effectively
 and ef˚ciently achieve
 mission goals.
SOURCE: Adapted from Owen
 et al., 2001.To compete at the highest levels, the Army should additionally consider 
incentives such as the following:

Housing and relocation assistance; 

Support for child education; 

Programs to address workforce diversity in terms of race, ethnicity, 
national origin, and culture; and

Provision for a budget commitment to the top 10-20 percent of recruits for 
capital equipment as part of the hiring process, thereby allowing recruits 
to select equipment in an arrangement analogous to a university ﬁstart-up 
packageﬂ model.
Special Authorities
If all or part of the NSTEC will be a government-owned, government-oper
-ated laboratory or network of laboratories staffed primarily by a civil service 
workforce, full advantage must be taken of existing management ˚exibilities 
afforded by special authorities, particularly those in the areas of personnel and 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 57
procurement.
1 As a prerequisite to taking advantage of these ˚exibilities, NSTEC 
leadership must encourage line managers and affected staff of˜cers (includ
-ing contracting and personnel of˜cials) at all levels to use such nontraditional 
 
methods when appropriate, and make available speci˜c training for doing so.
The value of ˚exible personnel management and procurement techniques is not 
necessarily immediately obvious, at least to federal insiders. As some may observe, 
most of the federal government usually operates by using standard legal authorities 
to conduct its business, which may lead one to ask: Why do anything different? 
The simple answer is that many organizations get by on sub-standard management 
systems and practices; unless challenged to be top-˚ight or world-class organiza
-tions, they will not necessarily recognize the need to do things differently. 
Personnel
If an Army NSTEC is to perform world-class research and technology devel
-opment, it will have to be a world-class organization with world-class talent. 
These ﬁbest and brightestﬂ have many career opportunities available to them and 
are much less likely than less-talented candidates to wait through the months-long 
hiring process that is often standard in the federal government. The traditional 
federal personnel hiring sequenceŠ(1) classify a position, (2) recruit candidates, 
(3) evaluate candidates, and (4) make an offerŠis simply not the optimal system 
for an organization such as that being envisioned for an NSTEC. Instead, a system 
whereby the best and brightest talent among network science technologists are 
being constantly sought is preferred, e.g., via an ongoing competitive procedure 
for appointments. Rather than ˜lling an already classi˜ed position, an alternative 
sequence on a much shorter time scale will often be appropriate, such as, for 
example, (1) identifying a highly quali˜ed candidate in a key area of network 
science, (2) creating a position attractive to the candidate and the NSTEC, and (3) 
making an offer. Such a sequence can be completed in weeks or even days rather 
than months and is an approach that has been used successfully by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). 
The full extent of authority available to create alternative personnel systems 
within the DOD has often been underutilized either by inaction at DOD top 
levels, or by the inability of responsible human resources professionals to fully 
embrace nontraditional concepts (Coffey et al., 2003; DeYoung, 2003).
2 In 2008, 
1 
Maximizing available existing special authorities is an alternative for Army laboratory governance 
referred to as ﬁbaseline plusﬂ (Owen et al., 2001).
2 
Letter from J. Lieberman, J.M. Inhofe, M.L. Landrieu, J. Bingaman, E.M. Kennedy, B. Nelson, 
and J. McCain, to Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary, United States Department of Defense, highlighting 
ﬁour concerns with the Department of Defense™s efforts to recruit and retain top-˚ight scienti˜c and 
engineering talent for its laboratories,ﬂ in a press release dated August 5, 2002. Additionally, the head 
of the DARPA Human Resources Directorate told a member of the committee of the apparent inability 
of some other DOD human resources specialists to comprehend the DARPA approach.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
the national security personnel system (NSPS) might become applicable to DOD 
organizations performing NSTE. There is no reason to believe, however, that the 
NSPS will afford an NSTEC, or any other laboratory organizations, more ˚exibil
-ity than is already available to them. Arguably, the NSPS may be viewed as a step 
backward from alternative approaches.
3 Meanwhile, the DOD plan to implement 
the NSPS has been partially thwarted because key elements of the NSPS have 
been permanently enjoined by court action (USDC, 2006). 
For the most part, statutes authorizing laboratory demonstration projects and 
similar projects allow ˚exibility within existing federal pay levels (most com
-monly used are ﬁpay bandsﬂ), but do not necessarily authorize federal employees 
to be paid at competitive rates in circumstances where job market rates exceed 
federal limits. However, authority to exceed normal federal pay limits does exist 
under at least two available authorities, but only for limited terms. One
 authority 
is the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), which allows personnel from 
eligible organizations (typically universities) to come to the federal government 
and act as federal employees for 2 to 4 years while being paid by their sending 
institution. The federal government reimburses the sending institution in whole or 
part for the expense of the employee™s salary and bene˜ts. The second
 authority 
(known as the ﬁexperimental personnel authorityﬂ) was pioneered by DARPA 
but is available to any designated DOD laboratory. Terms are up to 4 or 6 years. 
 
Salary and bonuses for specially quali˜ed scientists and engineers may consider
-ably exceed normal federal pay limits.
4 Such term-limited employment arrange
-ments can generate a continued ˚ow of ﬁnew bloodﬂ (and more pertinently, new 
ideas) into the organization. 
Procurement
As with the federal personnel system, the federal procurement system seems 
to function adequately, and its weaknesses may not be immediately apparent. The 
federal procurement system is very extensive and involves a variety of players 
ranging from Congress and the President to a myriad of contracting of˜cers, 
contract administrators, inspectors, auditors, and others. Moreover, it is com
-plex, involving laws; formal and informal regulations, guidance, and standards; 
court and administrative decisions; and its own lore. This complexity has led 
3 
For example, since 1980, a number of the laboratory demonstration projects under various 
 
authorities have often achieved a noteworthy degree of success using alternative approaches to staff
-ing requirements.
4 
The IPA is found at Title 5 USC 3371-3376; the ﬁexperimental personnel authorityﬂ was originally 
authorized by Sec. 1101 of P.L. 105-261 and extended by Sec. 1116, P.L. 108-136 (see Title 5 USC 
3104 note). If the Army NSTEC were to become a world-class organization and present challeng
-ing technical problems to the scientists and engineers employed there, it might not be necessary to 
match the private sector job market dollar-for-dollar in order to attract outstanding talent. However, 
˜nancial compensation so low as to require a signi˜cant sacri˜ce on the part of potential employees 
will undoubtedly have an adverse effect. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 59
observers to make such comments as, ﬁIf someone were asked to come up with a 
contracting system for the federal government, it is inconceivable that a reason
-able
 person or committee of reasonable people could come up with our current 
systemﬂ (Nagle, 1992, p. 519). 
Additionally, the effects of the regulatory nature of the federal procurement 
system have been aptly described by one expert in the following terms:
 A body of laws, regulations, and practices has developed that control the many 
daily procurement actions between DOD and its suppliers. Although each of 
these may have a valid historic rationale, the result is that there are only a few 
˜rms skilled in conducting defense business, and they may be totally isolated 
from, and uncompetitive with, their commercial counterparts. Even ˜rms that 
operate in both military and commercial worlds are forced to separate the two 
parts of their operations. . . . Other commercial ˜rms simply refuse to accept 
R&D contracts from DOD because of their specialized rules. (Gansler, 1996, 
pp. 23-24)
5 Having separate procedural business practices for defense industry projects 
and the broader commercial sector presents real-world problems. In areas such as 
network science, where cutting-edge research is being conducted by non-defense 
˜rms, means must be found by which these separate ways of conducting business 
can be bridged. Means for overcoming other barriers that exist between com
-mercial ˜rms seeking entry to the federal procurement system and defense con
-tractors likewise must be found. A key role for an organization such as an NSTEC 
will be to form relationships or partnerships with both the non-defense sector 
(commercial industry and academia) and the defense industry to help bridge the 
gap. How an NSTEC could conduct its business would be critical to that effort. 
Standard contracting vehicles used in government laboratory R&D con
-tracting include the procurement contract (typically a cost-reimbursement type 
contract), assistance instruments (grants and cooperative agreements), and the 
cooperative research and development agreement (CRADA). These are used 
respectively to (1) acquire goods and services for the direct bene˜t and use of the 
government, (2) stimulate and support private sector activities that have a govern
-mental purpose, and (3) transfer government technology to the private sector and 
involve the private sector in government R&D. However, the statutory purpose 
and approved uses of these contracting vehicles were not necessarily intended to 
be applicable to multiple objectives on the part of the government, nor were they 
necessarily designed for complex transactions involving multiple parties.
 The standard procurement contracting authorities can be used intelligently 
5 
The situation described by Gansler more than 10 years ago has worsened. There are barely half 
a dozen large contractors capable of performing the role of system integrator (prime contractor) on 
major defense procurement programs. The isolation of the defense industry from the broader com
-mercial sector continues at other levels as well.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
and ˚exibly, but layers of bureaucracy, excessive oversight, and certain in˚ex
-ible rules often deter their innovative and optimal use. Government intellectual 
property rules, government cost and accounting standards, and the complexity 
of government regulations can limit the willingness of private sector parties 
to participate in government R&D programs. There are, however, a number of 
statutes that permit government research, prototype development, and acquisition 
for experimental purposes to be done outside the purview of the basic laws and 
regulations that traditionally are used for government procurement.
6To perform contract research or carry out prototype projects, an Army 
NSTEC should make routine use of these ﬁother transactionsﬂ authorities in 
preference to using standard authorities.
7 These authorities allow, or in certain 
circumstances require, cost sharing. Cost sharing and recovery of funds should 
be considered in projects that have potential commercial implications as well as 
military payoffs.
8 Costs that are recovered under these authorities can be used 
to fund additional research. Cost recovery should not be a primary goal of any 
project, but it should not be overlooked. Note also that signal equipment (a key 
element of communications networks) can be acquired in experimental quantities 
outside the normal procurement statutes.
9In order for an NSTEC to make full use of the special acquisition techniques 
inherent in these statutes, it is essential that DOD and the Army delegate adequate 
authority. Other than reporting requirements, any existing DOD and Army limita
-tions on the use of these authorities should be lifted, and the NSTEC should be 
allowed to experiment and innovate to the full extent consistent with the statutes 
themselves. Any funds recovered under these statutes should become available 
to the NSTEC.
A number of DOD organizations have already made effective use of the 
special acquisition authorities referred to above. For example, these authorities 
have been used to support research projects, especially those involving consortia 
of diverse ˜rms, government agencies, and organizations. Useful examples are 
available from DARPA and the Army Research Laboratory consortia. This form 
of contracting has the potential to be particularly attractive to commercial ˜rms 
due to its simplicity, ˚exibility in crafting intellectual property provisions, and 
the avoidance of cost-reimbursement contracting.
6 
Primary statutes in this regard include ﬁResearch Projects: Transactions Other Than Contracts and 
Grantsﬂ (Title 10 USC 2371); ﬁSection 845ﬂ prototyping (Title 10 USC 2371 note); and ﬁProcurement 
for Experimental Purposesﬂ (Title 10 USC 2373).
7 
Despite the statutory requirements related to these authorities, their ﬁroutineﬂ use is indeed pos
-sible to support R&D projects given an understanding of what is actually involved in research or 
prototype development.
8 
Cost-sharing contracts (FAR 16.303) and cost sharing or recoupments (FAR 35.003) are both pos
-sible using standard procurement contracts. Cost recovery under Title 10 USC 2371 is more ˚exible 
than recoupment and not limited to the total amount of the government investment.
9 
The authority under Title 10 USC 2373 to purchase ordnance, chemical, and aeronautical supplies 
may also prove useful.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 61
Major prototype projects conducted by a number of DOD agencies under 
Section 845 of Title 10 USC 2371 provide additional examples of the potential 
of alternative acquisition approaches. Prototyping is an important ﬁtry before you 
buyﬂ approach to acquisition. Such an approach is probably more important in 
the area of network science than in many other areas. The Army should advocate 
that Congress remove legislative restrictions added to the prototyping authority 
in recent years.
10
 The use of special acquisition authorities is not an end in itself. An NSTEC 
would have to develop complementary policies and utilize ˚exible acquisition 
approaches to help implement such policies. It would also need to develop poli
-cies that implement ˚exible approaches to produce real effects. These include:

Developing working relationships using the infrastructure networks to 
establish continual teaming with key players including universities, indus
-try, networks of program executive of˜cers, program managers, and joint 
networks;

Developing capital equipment policy and planning that renews equipment 
on a timescale consistent with the fast pace of technological advances;

Incentivizing participation by all contributors through shared results and 
recognition of the value of their connection with and enhancement of the 
NSTEC;

Focusing attention on a ﬁtry before you buyﬂ approach to prototyping;

Establishing close relationships with the central technical support facility 
(CTSF),
 the
 Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC), and other 
technology transition organizations and crafting these relationships to the 
advantage of the Army at large;

Conducting deliberate and well-planned funding of target activities; and

Seeking Army and DOD agreement to modify the acquisition cycle to ˜t 
the needs of networks (as distinguished from platforms).
Governance and Business Attributes
The potential for improvements in the governance and business practices 
of federal laboratories has been repeatedly studied over the decades (Coffey et 
al., 2003; Bement, 1980; Deutch, 1987). The pressure for federal laboratories to 
operate more ef˜ciently and effectively has led to calls for laboratory reform or 
reinvention and more recently has been driven by consolidation, closure, realign
-ment, and personnel downsizing dating from the end of the Cold War. A fairly 
clear lesson from previous studies is that for an NSTEC to operate effectively 
10
 Prototype projects (Section 845, Title 10 USC 2371 note) conducted outside the federal acquisi
-tion regulations are useful both to bring commercial ˜rms into defense acquisition programs and to 
allow traditional defense contractors to become more ﬁcommercial-likeﬂ and innovate outside the 
current system. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
and ef˜ciently, its governance and business practices cannot follow the model 
of a government-owned, government-operated laboratory subject to personnel, 
procurement, and other government bureaucratic systems, nor will minor adjust
-ments to a ﬁbusiness as usualﬂ approach be suf˜cient.
Two highly credible reports on the subject of laboratory governance, one 
general and one speci˜c to the Army, contain similar ˜ndings (Coffey et al., 2003; 
Owen et al., 2001). Both studies conclude that the most effective models, given 
all considerations, are either government-owned, contractor-operated (GOCO); 
a federal government corporation (FGC); or a federally funded research and 
development center (FFRDC). Examples of each are the Livermore National 
Laboratory (GOCO), the Tennessee Valley Authority (FGC), and the MIT Lincoln 
Laboratory (FFRDC).
11
 A comparative analysis of these three forms is provided 
in Table 5-1.
 The GOCO and FFRDC operating models have long histories of successfully 
conducting research and development (R&D). Over the years, however, there has 
been a gradual increase in regulation that has constrained their independence and 
innovation in adopting best practices in business and management. 
Within the Department of Defense, FFRDCs are subject to increasing con
-straints, and few new FFRDCs have been formed in recent years. A number of 
new UARCs have been created. UARCs are similar to FFRDCs in many ways 
but are subject to less regulation. An example of a UARC with a long history of 
success is the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, 
Maryland. This laboratory actually started as an FFRDC but later lost that status 
and was subsequently chartered as a UARC.
A FGC that is legislatively established by Congress with its own charter may 
be the best approach to creating a world-class NSTEC. However, since there is 
no existing example of an FGC chartered speci˜cally to perform R&D, such an 
approach would be experimental in nature and involve risks that may be inap
-propriate for an undertaking so closely aligned with DOD transformation and 
successful Army operations.
As useful as the FFRDC model has been in the past, the increasing con
-straints placed on FFRDCs, and the reluctance of DOD to push for the creation 
of new FFRDCs, limits its attractiveness as a model for an NSTEC. The UARC 
may, however, be considered a more viable model.
The GOCO also provides a possible model for an NSTEC. Within the Depart
-ment of Energy, the GOCO national laboratories are administered and receive 
government oversight through management and operations contracts (FAR Sub
-11
 The terminology used in the cited reports and adopted here is not necessarily universally used or 
mutually exclusive. The committee ˜nds the terminology used, combined with the examples, useful 
for this report. It should be noted that many GOCO (and some FFRDC) facilities are not laboratories. 
As far as the committee is aware, no FGC has research and development as its primary mission. Other 
models not cited in Coffey et al. (2003) or Owen et al. (2001), such as the university-af˜liated research 
centers (UARCs), have many similarities to the models cited.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 63
TABLE 5-1
 Comparative Analysis Adapted from RAND E-Delphi Exercise 
Assessment Criteria 
Government-owned/
Contractor-operated
(GOCO)
Federally Funded
Research and
Development
Center (FFRDC) 
Federal 
Government
Corporation 
(FGC)
Understand and influence the 
Army™s long-term vision
Good
Excellent
Good
Plan and direct a research 
program
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Influence and leverage 
commercial technology
Good
Good
Excellent
Conduct revolutionary 
research, development, test, 
and evaluation
 in key areas
Good
Excellent
Good
Conduct comprehensive 
evolutionary research, 
development, test, and 
evaluation
Good
Excellent
Excellent
Perform the ﬁsmart buyerﬂ 
function
Good
Excellent
Excellent
Plan and direct the integration 
of technologies
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Evolve the organization
Good
Excellent
Good
NOTE: ﬁGoodﬂ and ﬁExcellentﬂ ratings adapted from original 1-5 rating scale.
SOURCE: Adapted from Owen et al., 2001.
part 17.6), as does the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. This is not necessar
-ily the only way to provide oversight, but it constitutes a convenient model for 
consideration of the government-contractor relationship. If it is pre-determined 
to select a university or nonpro˜t organization as the operating contractor, the 
contract could be awarded non-competitively (FAR 6.302-3); otherwise, competi
-tive procedures could be used. 
Absent legislative relief, any conversion from functions now performed by 
government civilian employees to functions performed by contract would require 
compliance with laws and regulations governing such conversions, primarily by 
Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-76 (OMB, 1999). The 
˜nancial cost and dif˜culty of complying with all the rules governing conver
-sion from a government to contractor performance model resulted in the Naval 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
Research Laboratory rejecting a plan to convert to non-government performance 
in the 1990s (Coffey et al., 2003). Creation of an NSTEC by conversion of exist
-ing civil-service functions (as opposed to creating a new organizational entity 
from scratch) might make the contract approach (GOCO, FFRDC, or UARC) far 
less attractive in practice than in theory. 
Whether existing models (FGC, GOCO, FFRDC, or UARC) are practical 
or not, they do provide insight into the attributes that an NSTEC should have 
as a world-class science and technology organization. These include ˚exibility 
in personnel policies, in particular, hiring practices, competitive compensation, 
and personnel incentives. Flexible business practices and funding approaches are 
required to avoid technological obsolescence and ensure that needed research and 
experimental equipment can be acquired in a timely fashion. Flexible contracting 
approaches are required to ensure that key business relationships and effective 
collaboration can occur.
Command Relationships and Leadership
In addition to the form of governance, an NSTEC must have adequate visibil
-ity and independence provided by respected leadership and key relationships. An 
NSTEC director should be respected for technical expertise as well as management 
ability, and the NSTEC should report directly to the Army™s Research, Develop
-ment, and Engineering Command (RDECOM) and have an organizational status 
equivalent to that of CERDEC and ARL. This will facilitate the transition of person
-nel and functions to the new organization and ensure adequate status for coordinat
-ing all Army NSTE activities with other R&D agencies and joint activities.
Given that organizations likely to be incorporated in an NSTEC are affected by 
BRAC, and many decisions regarding disposition and relocation have already been 
made, it is essential that an NSTEC director be appointed as soon as possible. The 
appointed director should play a primary role in the BRAC planning and execu
-tion process and in organizing initial elements of the NSTEC. The urgency is such 
that it may be appropriate to appoint the NSTEC director immediately pending the 
establishment of the NSTEC in consonance with overall BRAC planning. 
 Ideally, the NSTEC director would combine varied strengths including (1) 
those needed to shepherd the NSTEC through the complex management chal
-lenges of BRAC implementation while creating an essentially new organizational 
entity and capability incorporating many pre-existing parts and (2) the technical 
insights and judgment to establish an NSTEC research portfolio and attract top-
˚ight researchers to join the NSTEC. As the NSTEC becomes established and 
evolves, the relative importance of these strengths will shift from the ˜rst to the 
second. It may be that the necessary strengths cannot be found in a single execu
-Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 65
tive and that consideration should be given to forming a management team that 
incorporates the necessary strengths.
12
Alternatives
An obvious but far from optimal version of an NSTEC would involve merely 
relocating elements of various existing Army organizations to a centralized gov
-ernment-operated location such as Aberdeen Proving Ground. Another alternative 
would involve chartering a completely new non-government organization, such as 
an FGC, GOCO, UARC, or FFRDC, with government funding and under Army 
supervision. Maximum ˚exibility might be obtained by legislative authorization 
of a specially chartered FGC, but the time involved and experimental nature of 
this approach might make one of the other types of organizations attractive as an 
initial step. The physical attributes of this organization could be varied from cen
-tralized to distributed; it could recruit its workforce from current Army organiza
-tions affected by BRAC as well as from a broader workforce market. A variation 
on this alternative might be to charter an existing or new UARC or FFRDC to 
serve as the core of an NSTEC.
Another alternative could combine the best features of the two alternatives 
mentioned above. That is, a new or existing non-governmental organization 
would be chartered. It might be located on leased land at Aberdeen Proving 
Ground or at a different location. It could recruit from current experienced gov
-ernment employees as well as the private sector. In addition, existing government 
organizations could be combined either physically or as a virtual organization to 
make a government cadre for the NSTEC. An element of the government orga
-nization could manage the non-government wing of the NSTEC as well as be an 
operating agency for part of the NSTEC™s work.
The ˜nal selection from the alternatives should focus on pursuing the goals 
discussed in this chapter and on utilizing ˚exible business and operating methods 
consistent with achieving the NSTEC mission recommended in Chapter 2.
Recommended Strategy
Given the foregoing discussion, the committee believes that chartering a 
new or existing UARC or FFRDC (hereafter referred to as UARC/FFRDC) to 
serve as the core of an NSTEC would be the most effective course of action. It 
should be feasible to establish the core UARC/FFRDC so as to allow ˚exibility 
12
 Historic examples include teams such as Leslie Groves and Robert Oppenheimer of the Manhat
-tan Project. Also, in NASA at the inception of Project Apollo, NASA Administrator James Webb 
had a background as an aggressive manager in both government and industry and was known to be 
politically savvy while his deputy, Hugh Dryden, had a technical background and a long history with 
NASA™s predecessor organization. In the NASA case, the supporting team of Werner Von Braun, 
Samuel Phillips, George Mueller, and Robert Gilruth was outstanding.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
in the early days of the overall NSTEC establishment and also allow the core to 
continue as the NSTEC evolves in future years. In order to play such a role in an 
evolutionary environment, the core UARC/FFRDC needs to have a broad charter 
in NSTE from the outset.
The NSTEC UARC/FFRDC could be established at any appropriate location 
or locations and then be relocated at or in proximity to Aberdeen Proving Ground 
as circumstances warrant. In its early days, the UARC/FFRDC could perform a 
ﬁgap ˜llerﬂ role when (1) existing Army resources fail to match key elements 
of the NSTEC mission or (2) Army organizational elements involved in BRAC 
relocations lose the expertise of key personnel who choose not to relocate.
The target date for Ft. Monmouth to close is September 2011, and actions 
regarding budget shifts in accord with the government™s planning, programming, 
and budget execution system will need to occur with the submission of the Fiscal 
Year 2009 budget. To meet the timelines for implementation will require making 
budgetary shifts of existing funds to phase in the UARC/FFRDC capability. 
In the long-term evolution of an NSTEC, it may make sense for the core 
UARC/FFRDC to take over performance of much of the NSTEC mission. What
-ever the ultimate mix of government and non-governmental performance respon
-sibilities, the core UARC/FFRDC must be closely integrated with the Army™s 
mission needs in network science. Personnel interchanges and co-location of 
Army and UARC/FFRDC personnel should occur routinely. 
The core UARC/FFRDC must retain ˚exibility in acquiring facilities and 
research equipment as a key means of avoiding technological obsolescence over 
time. The use of an independent advisory board could also be considered to 
provide feedback on NSTEC currency and performance. The NSTEC as a whole 
should be some mix of distributed and centralized facilities, starting with 1 to 3 
physical centers connected to a variety of remote facilities. The degree of distri
-bution or centralization should be driven by mission needs and effectiveness in 
achieving research results rather than be pre-determined. 
The committee believes that the alternative of creating a UARC/FFRDC that 
addresses some but not all NSTEC mission areas at the core of an NSTEC orga
-nization makes more sense than creating a new UARC/FFRDC to immediately 
displace all existing Army efforts in NSTE.
The committee also believes that establishing a UARC/FFRDC as a core ele
-ment in an NSTEC is better than retaining only the civil service laboratory model 
of governance and operations. Initially at least, it seems highly likely that much of 
what becomes the NSTEC will be constituted as a civil service laboratory. Those 
parts of the NSTEC that retain that form must be chartered to take full advantage 
of the special authorities discussed in this chapter. The least attractive alternative 
for an NSTEC is a business-as-usual civil service laboratory.
Figure 5-1 illustrates the NSTEC organization with a UARC/FFRDC core 
that the committee recommends. At the outset, all relevant existing work would 
become the responsibility of the proposed NSTEC. Within the NSTEC, the core 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GO
ALS, 
MOD
ELS, AN
D A
LTE
RNAT
IVES 
FOR
 AN NSTEC
 67
FIGURE 5-1
 Recommended NSTEC organization. (Acronyms are de˜ned on pages xvi-
xviii of the front matter.)
S-1 and 5-1R01028Network ScienceUARC/FFRDC would begin by ˜lling current gaps in S&T and would take 
responsibility for efforts that cannot be performed due to quali˜ed technical staff 
deciding not to move to APG.
CHAPTER SUMMARYPrevious comparative analyses of prospective models for Army research 
organizations have narrowed the ˜eld of consideration for an NSTEC to govern
-ment-owned, contractor-operated (GOCO), federally funded research and devel
-opment center (FFRDC), and federal government corporation (FGC) operating 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
models. The Army has a wealth of experience with a variation of the FFRDC 
known as the university-af˜liated research center (UARC). 
Conclusion 4:
 The UARC/FFRDC operating model has emerged in recent years 
as a ˚exible and productive model capable of integrating commercial and military 
R&D development for the Army. The UARC/FFRDC is also superior to other 
operating models, because it allows ongoing access to a broad range of expertise, 
talent, and innovation while ef˜ciently using government resources.
Recommendation 4:
 The Army should establish a new UARC/FFRDC (or 
 
expand an existing UARC/FFRDC) to serve as the core of an overall Army 
NSTEC
 organization. 
The coordination and implementation of NSTE for the Army will require 
extraordinary leadership at a level commensurate with the importance of
 network-
centric operations in the future. The new organization would alter existing 
 
boundaries of responsibility for the various NSTE functions, and the scope of 
responsibilities is equivalent to that of the present research, development, and 
engineering centers (RDECs). For this reason, a director for all NSTE activities 
should be assigned immediately to assist with planning and establishment of the 
recommended NSTEC organization and core shown in Figure 5-1. The NSTEC 
director should be provided with a supporting management team to assure the 
availability of expertise in all the management and technical disciplines neces
-sary to carry out the complex process of transitioning existing organizations to an 
NSTEC and incisively establishing and managing the NSTE research portfolio. 
Conclusion 5:
 An NSTEC organization must exhibit a high degree of ˚exibility 
in personnel policies that will enable it to become a world-class leader in network 
research and development. Establishment and evolution of the NSTEC will require 
exceptional leadership.
Recommendation 5a:
 The Army strategy for NSTE should be to establish an 
NSTEC organization with a UARC/FFRDC core as shown in Figure 5-1.
Recommendation 5b:
 The Army should immediately designate a director to 
establish an Army NSTEC at Aberdeen Proving Ground (Maryland). The NSTEC 
director should report to the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering 
Command (RDECOM) at a level equivalent to the ARL and RDEC directors. All 
NSTE funding and resources should be assigned to this individual. 
Recommendation 5c:
 For the NSTEC to be able to accomplish the mission envi
-sioned, the Army should designate at least two deputy directors: one for technol
-ogy and another for human performance/adversary understanding. This action will 
ensure that the large number of CERDEC engineers does not overwhelm research 
and development efforts in human performance and adversary understanding.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69
References
Bement, A.L. 1980. Report of the DOD Laboratory Management Task Force. Washington, D.C.: 
 
Of˜ce of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Research and Advanced Technology).
Boutelle, S., and A. Grasso. 1998. A Case Study: The Central Technical Support Facility. Army 
RDD&A (now Army Acquisition, Logistics & Technology (AL&T)): pp. 30-33.
Carley, K. 2006. Destabilization of covert networks. Computational and Mathematical Organization 
Theory 12(1): 51-66.
Coffey, T., K.W. Lackie, and M.L. Marshall. 2003. Alternative Governance: A Tool for Military Labo
-ratory Reform. Defense Horizons. Available at http://www.ndu.edu/inss/DefHor/DH34/DH34.
htm. Accessed April 6, 2007.
Deutch, J. 1987. Report of the 1987 DSB Summer Study on Technology Base Management. Wash
-ington, D.C.: Defense Science Board.
DeYoung, D. 2003. The Silence of the Labs. Defense Horizons. Available at http://www.ndu.edu/inss/
DefHor/DH21/DH_21.htm. Accessed April 6, 2007.
Gansler, J.S. 1996. Defense Conversion. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Garstka, J., and D. Alberts. 2004. Network Centric Operations: Conceptual Framework Version 2.0. 
Vienna, Va.: Evidence-Based Research, Inc.
Krygiel, A. 1999. Behind the Wizard™s Curtain: An Integration Environment for System of Systems. 
Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press.
Lickteig, C.W., W.R. Sanders, P.J. Durlach, J.W. Lussier, and T.J. Carnahan. 2003. Human Perfor
-mance Essential to Battle Command: Report on Four Future Combat Systems Command and 
Control (FCS C2) Experiments. Army Research Institute Report 1812. Alexandria, Va.: U.S. 
Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences.
Nagle, J.F. 1992. A History of Government Contracting. Washington, D.C.: George Washington 
University.
National Research Council (NRC). 2004. The Role of Experimentation in Building Future Naval 
Forces. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2005. Network Science. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB). 1999. Circular No. A-76. Washington, D.C.: Executive 
Of˜ce of the President.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
Owen, D., K.P. Horn, C. Wong, and B.J. Held. 2001. DB-347-A, Applicability of Alternative Organi
-zational Models to Army Laboratories: A Preliminary E-Delphi Analysis. Santa Monica, Calif.: 
RAND.
United States District Court (USDC) for the District of Columbia. 2006.
 Civil Number
 05-2183: 
American 
Federation of 
Government Employees, A
FL
-C
IO
, et al. 
v. 
Donald H. 
Rumsfeld, Sec
-retary, 
United States 
Department of 
Defense, et al.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73
Appendix A
Committee Meetings
AUGUST 23-24, 2006, W
ASHINGTON
, D.C.
Using Networks to Advance the Army Network Science, Technology and 
Experimentation Center.
 John 
Parmentola
, Director, Research and Laboratory Management, Of˜ce of 
the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army (Research and Technology).
Dealing with the Unexpected: A Critical Challenge for DOD
. David Alberts
, Director, Research and Strategic Planning, Of˜ce of Assistant 
Secretary of Defense (C3I).
ARL Research in Network Science. 
Anathram Swami
, Army Research Laboratory (ARL), U.S. Army.
Whither a Science of Networks? 
J. Christopher 
Ramming
, Program Manager, Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA).
Toward New and Better Protocols for Wireless Networking.
J. Christopher 
Ramming
, Program Manager, Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA).
BRAC Update (Unof˜cial Observations).
Pete Cahill
, Senior Principal Analyst and Program Manager, BRTRC, Of˜ce 
of Research and Laboratory Management, Assistant Secretary of the Army 
(Acquisition, Logistics and Technology) [ASA(ALT)].
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
Human Dimension in Network Science.
 Rene de 
Pontbriand
, Human Research and Engineering Directorate (HRED), 
Army Research Laboratory (ARL), U.S. Army.
SEPTEMBER 21-22, 2006, W
ASHINGTON
, D.C.
Strategies for a Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation Center. 
Gary 
P. 
Martin
, Director, Communications-Electronics Research, Development 
and Engineering Center (CERDEC)
.Army Capabilities Integration Center. 
John 
Kincaid
, Deputy Chief, Science and Technology Division, U.S. Army 
Training and Doctrine Command, Capabilities Developments Directorate, 
Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC).
ARCIC Gaps Process. 
John 
Kincaid
, Deputy Chief, Science and Technology Division, U.S. Army 
Training and Doctrine Command, Capabilities Developments Directorate, 
Army Capabilities Integration Center (ARCIC).
FCS (BCT) Program Overview to Network Science, Technology, and 
Experimentation (NSTE). 
MG
 Charles A. Cartwright
, Program Manager, Future Combat Systems 
(Brigade Combat Team), Program Executive Of˜ce (PEO), U.S. Army.
Strategies for a Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation Center. 
Gary 
P. 
Martin
, Director, Communications-Electronics Research, Development 
and Engineering Center (CERDEC)
.Battle Command Requirements and Technical Challenges. 
Gary 
P. 
Martin
, Director, Communications-Electronics Research, Development 
and Engineering Center (CERDEC)
.Transforming Through BRAC 2005: RDAT&E at APG. 
Craig College
, Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff for Installation Management 
Headquarters, U.S. Army.
ARL Research in Network Science. 
John 
M. 
Miller
, Director, Army Research Laboratory (ARL), U.S. Army.
ARL BRAC 91 Relocation Lessons Learned. 
John 
Pellegrino
, Director, Sensors and Electron Devices Directorate (SEDD), 
Army Research Laboratory (ARL), U.S. Army.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX A
 75
DA G-6/CIO Views on Network Science, Technology, and Experimentation 
(NTSE).
Vern Bettencourt
, Deputy, Chief Information Of˜cer/G-6, Of˜ce of the 
Secretary of the Army, U.S. Army.
Communications-Electronics Life Cycle Management Command (C-E LCMC). 
MG
 Michael 
Mazzucchi
, Commanding General, Communications-Electronics 
Command (CECOM); Program Executive Of˜cer for Command, Control, 
Communications-Tactical (PEO C3T), U.S. Army.
RAND™s Organizational Design Research for Army R&D. 
Bruce Held
, Director, Force Development and Technology Program, RAND 
Arroyo Center.
NOVEMBER
 15-16, 2006, W
ASHINGTON
, D.C.
Presentation of NSTE Data. 
Pete Cahill
, Senior Principal Analyst and Program Manager, BRTRC, Of˜ce 
of Research and Laboratory Management, Assistant Secretary of the Army 
(Acquisition, Logistics and Technology) [ASA(ALT)].
Army Materiel Command/Army Corps of Engineers Planning for BRAC at 
Aberdeen Proving Ground. 
Judy 
Wettig
, Director, APG BRAC Transition Team, and 
John 
Koss
, Contractor, 
MCFA Planning.
Discuss Parallel ASB Study. (Via audio teleconference.)
Joe Braddock
, former chair, Army Science Board; currently trustee of the 
Potomac and Aztec Foundations.
Defense Information Systems Agency Perspective on NSTE. 
Ed Siomacco
, Deputy Program Director, Net-Centric Enterprise Services 
Program Of˜ce, Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA).
Brie˜ng to the BAST Network Sciences. 
Gary 
Martin
, Director, Communications-Electronics Research, Development 
and Engineering Center (CERDEC).
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
JANUAR
Y 16-17, 2007, IRVINE
, CALIFORNIANo brie˜ngs.
FEBRUAR
Y 14-15, 2007, W
ASHINGTON
, D.C.
No brie˜ngs.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of 
 Committee Members
Verne L. (Larry) Lynn
 (NAE), 
Chair,
 is an independent consultant to indus
-try and the Department of Defense (DOD). Mr. Lynn is retired director of the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the principal agency 
within DOD for research, development, and demonstration of concepts, devices, 
and systems for advanced military capabilities. He also served in DOD as the 
deputy undersecretary of defense for Advanced Technology and was vice presi
-dent and chief operating of˜cer for the Atlantic Aerospace Electronics Corpora
-tion.
  Mr. Lynn has authored over 40 technical publications in the areas of military 
surveillance and weapons systems, and he has extensive knowledge of military 
organization and operations for research, development, and acquisition. He is a 
fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and serves on the 
Defense Science Board. 
Raj 
K. Aggarwal
 is vice president of Global Technology at the Rockwell
 Collins 
Corporation. He is a former director of research and technology for Alliant 
Techsystems, Inc., and a director of advanced programs for Honeywell, Inc. 
Dr.
 Aggarwal received a B.S. degree in physics (with honors) and B.S. and M.S. 
degrees in electrical and communications engineering from Delhi University in 
Delhi, India. He received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Purdue Uni
-versity. He is a member of the Board on Army Science and Technology (BAST) 
and served previously on the NRC Committee on Unmanned Ground Vehicle 
Technology. Dr. Aggarwal has knowledge of research and development organiza
-tional models in industry as well as experience with DOD research, development, 
and acquisition.
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 ST
RATE
GY 
FOR
 AN A
RM
Y CENTE
R FOR
 NSTE
A. Michael Andrews
 II
 is vice president and chief technology of˜cer of L-3 
Communications, where he guides the company™s long-term R&D initiatives. 
Prior to joining L-3 in June 2003, he served as deputy assistant secretary of 
research and technology/chief scientist for the United States Army, a position 
he held since 1998. Andrews was instrumental in the development of the Future 
Combat Systems and realigning Army S&T toward Future Force capabilities. 
Prior to coming to the Army in 1997, Dr. Andrews held a variety of leadership 
positions at Rockwell International. He has produced over 50 technical articles 
and has several patents in infrared sensors, materials, and signal processors. He 
is a member of the Naval Research Advisory Committee, was a member of the 
National Research Council™s Committee on Review of the National Nanotechnol
-ogy Initiative, was an advisor to the Defense Science Board Task Force on Roles 
and Authorities for the DDR&E, and is an advisor to the DSB Summer Study on 
21st Century Strategic Technology Vectors. Dr. Andrews is a recipient of vari
-ous honors, including the U.S. Army™s Meritorious Civilian Service Award, the 
Presidential Rank Award, Rockwell™s Engineer of the Year Award, selection as 
a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the University 
of Illinois Distinguished
 Alumnus Award, the SPIE™s Defense & Security 2005 
honoree of the year, and a career pro˜le in the April 2002 IEEE Spectrum Maga
-zine. Dr. Andrews received his B.S. and M.S. in electrical engineering from the 
University of Oklahoma and his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the Univer
-sity of Illinois.
Richard L. Dunn
 is an independent consultant and senior fellow at the Univer
-sity of Maryland. He conducts research in national security operations and is an 
expert in the analysis of laws, policies, and practices that impact the effective 
implementation of technology. He served as the ˜rst general counsel for the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), where he pioneered 
efforts in conducting prototype projects outside normal DOD contracting statutes. 
He also served as counsel to the NASA Space Commercialization Task Force 
and as a staff judge advocate (legal of˜cer) in the U.S. Air Force. Mr. Dunn™s 
degrees include a B.A. cum laude from the University of New Hampshire, a J.D. 
from the University of Maryland, and an LL.M. with highest honors from George 
Washington University.
 Gerald Harris,
 a senior consultant with the Global Business Network, develops 
global scenarios for long-term development of the electric power industry. He is a 
former director of business planning for the Paci˜c Gas and Electric Company and 
a published expert in the ˜eld of scenario planning to support potential investment 
strategies. Mr. Harris has led scenario projects linking planning goals to R&D 
objectives for companies in diverse ˜elds, including oil and natural gas, engineer
-ing and construction, and information technology. He received his B.A. degree in 
economics from Morehouse College, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa, and an 
M.B.A. in ˜nance and business economics from the University of Chicago. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DI
X B
 79
Jason F. Providakes
 is executive director at the MITRE Corporation, managing 
programs for theater and strategic systems with enterprise-wide implications 
across the DOD, including the Global Information Grid. Dr. Providakes was chief 
engineer for the MITRE-Washington C3 Center, where he managed technology 
development and integration, and he is former executive director of the MITRE 
Army Program. He has published extensively in the ˜eld of over-the-horizon 
radar and serves as a member of the Army DARPA Senior Advisory Group and 
the Army Science Board. Dr. Providakes received his B.S. degree from Worcester 
Polytechnical Institute and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Cornell University, 
all in electrical engineering.
Zita M. Simutis
 is retired director of the Army Research Institute (ARI) for 
the Behavioral and Social Sciences, where she served in positions ranging from 
research psychologist to technical director to chief psychologist of the Army 
over a 30-year career. At ARI, she was responsible for directing and managing 
long-term research as well as short-term studies involving applied personnel 
performance and training. She has authored numerous articles on training, leader 
development, and soldier-computer interfaces. Dr. Simutis received her B.S. 
degree in psychology from the University of Illinois and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees 
in experimental psychology from the University of Connecticut. 
W. David Sincoskie
 (NAE) is vice president of the Network Systems Research 
Laboratory at Telcordia. He is former executive director of the Computer Net
-working Research Department at Bellcore, where he managed projects on the 
AURORA gigabit test bed, IPv6, IP over ATM, NSFNET, and broadband service 
control. Dr. Sincoskie co-authored the ˜rst speci˜cations for local ATM, and he 
pioneered the use of packet switching technology in broadband networking. He 
is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and received the IEEE Fred 
W. Ellersick prize paper award in 2003. Dr. Sincoskie serves on the NRC Board 
on Army Science and Technology. He received B.E.E., M.E.E., and Ph.D. degrees 
in electrical engineering from the University of Delaware. 
Ronald L. Smith
 is in private practice and is a clinical associate professor in 
the University of Nevada School of Medicine. He is a former neurobiologist at 
the NASA Ames Research Center and was a postdoctoral fellow at the UCLA 
Brain Research Institute. He currently serves on the Joint Independent Science 
Panel on Chemical and Biological Defense and has reviewed research involv
-ing modeling and simulation and operations research for the Department of the 
Army. Dr.
 Smith received his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in anatomy (neuroscience) 
from the University of California at San Francisco and his M.D. degree from the 
Autonomous University of Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. 
Strategy for an Army Center for Network Science, Technology, and ExperimentationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.