DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11920Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision:A Strategic Assessment174 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-10393-0 | DOI 10.17226/11920Leon J. Osterweil, Lynette I. Millett, and Joan D. Winston, Editors; Committeeon the Social Security Administration's E-Government Strategy and Planning forthe Future; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division onEngineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilSocial Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.





A STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT
Leon J. Osterweil, Lynette I. Millett, and Joan D. Winston, 
Editors
Committee on the Social Security Administration™s E-Government Strategy 
and Planning for the Future
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the Social Security Administration with 
assistance from the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
 CNS-0344585. 
Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this pub
-lication are those of the authors and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the 
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13
: 
978-0-309-10393-0
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-10393-2
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2007 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 
Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE
 ON
 T
HE
 S
OCIAL
 S
EC
URIT
Y A
DMINISTRATION
™S E-G
OVERNMENT
 S
TRATEG
Y 
AND
 P
LANNING
 FOR
 THE
 FU
TURE
LEON J. OSTERWEIL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
MATT BISHOP, University of California, Davis
MICHAEL J. CAREY, BEA Systems, Inc.
DAVID J. DeWITT, University of Wisconsin-Madison
VALERIE GREGG, University of Southern California, Information 
Sciences Institute
BLAISE HELTAI, New Vantage Partners
STEPHEN H. HOLDEN, Touchstone Consulting Group
LARRY G. MASSANARI, Social Security Administration (retired)
JUDITH S. OLSON, University of Michigan
Staff
LYNETTE I. MILLETT
, Study Director and Senior Program Of˜cer
JOAN D. WINSTON, Program Of˜cer
JANICE M. SABUDA, 
Senior Program Assistant
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMP
UTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMM
UNICATIONS BOARD
JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair
ERIC
 B
ENHAMOU
, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC
FREDERICK R. CHANG, University of Texas, Austin
WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center
DEBORAH ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Independent Consultant, Pelham, New York
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC
PETER WEINBERGER, Google Inc.
JEANNETTE M. WING, Carnegie Mellon University
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director
KRISTEN BATCH, Associate Program Of˜cer
RADHIKA CHARI, Administrative Coordinator
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH, Senior Program Assistant
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˜cer
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Of˜cer
JANICE M. SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant
TED SCHMITT, Consultant
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Program Assistant
JOAN D. WINSTON, Program Of˜cer
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Wash
-ington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
The use of the Internet (and other information technology) among 
the general population has resulted in a rising level of comfort and 
familiarity with these technologies. Businesses such as
 retailers, 
banks, and investment companies have been shifting more of their opera
-tions online, seeking to meet customer demand while reducing costs. 
Many businesses offer customer services online (these electronic services 
are often called e-business), often 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The pub
-lic sector has also embraced these technologies, although their adoption 
in the public sector often lags that of the private sector™s more aggressive 
e-busines
s adopters. Much like the case in the private sector, governments™ 
basic goals for such automation include satisfying customer service expec
-tations and increasing the ef˜ciency and effectiveness of operations. 
The Social Security Administration (SSA), a federal agency that 
interacts with broad segments of the public, has been developing online 
government services for more than a decade. The SSA™s e-government 
initiatives thus far have included support of online transactions relating 
to bene˜ts applications, requests for statements, replacement Medicare 
cards, and disability reports. 
The SSA™s clients include not only nearly all U.S. residents (both those 
contributing as workers and those collecting bene˜ts) but also millions of 
employers ˜ling wage reports. In addition to providing direct services to 
citizens and employers, agencies such as the SSA are mandated to coordi
-nate and cooperate in various ways (for example, through data exchange 
or service provision) with other state and federal agencies. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Like the underlying technologies, innovation and deployment of elec
-tronic services in the commercial sector continue at a rapid pace. As this 
report describes, this pace exerts pressure on federal agencies to improve 
their services continually and to stay abreast of both technology develop
-ments and the associated developments in business practices and technol
-ogy management. Perhaps more importantly, broader deployment and 
adoption of electronic services offer agencies like the SSA potential relief 
from the increasing workload, workforce, and other resource pressures 
facing them.
To further understanding of these and related issues, the SSA™s Dep
-uty Associate Commissioner for Electronic Services asked the National 
Research Council (NRC) to examine the SSA™s proposed e-government 
strategy and the underlying service-delivery and information technology 
infrastructure and to prepare a report discussing issues including the fol
-lowing: the SSA™s current e-government strategy, including technological 
assumptions, performance measures and targets, planned operational 
capabilities, strategic requirements, and future goals; strategies, assump
-tions, and technical and operational requirements in comparable public- 
and private-sector institutions, and their implications for the SSA; and 
ongoing efforts to de˜ne and re˜ne the SSA™s long-term strategy
. The Committee on the Social Security Administration™s E
-Government 
Strategy and Planning for the Future was appointed under the auspices 
of the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board to con
-duct the study. The nine members of the study committee have exper
-tise in areas such as software engineering and methodology, e-business, 
e-government, information system security, databases, data and applica
-tion integration, application of technology to business transformation, 
project management and decision-support systems, human-computer 
interaction, and SSA operations and management. Biographical infor
-mation for members of the committee and the NRC staff is presented 
in Appendix A. (Ken Orr of the Ken Orr Institute resigned from the 
 
committee in September 2005 owing to time constraints.) 
 The committee held three meetings during the course of its work. 
One was an organizational meeting by teleconference and two featured 
testimony (1) to gather information on the SSA™s current e-government 
strategy, including technical requirements and strategies of the agency, 
and to learn what the agency believes are roadblocks to potential success, 
as well as what positive outcomes are anticipated; and (2) to gather related 
information from representatives of some of the SSA™s key constituencies 
and to discuss comparable systems issues in other institutions (in both 
the public and private sectors). Panelists and briefers for the meetings are 
listed in Appendix B. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE 
ix
In late spring of 2007, during a ˜nal fact-checking phase in the course 
of preparing this report, the committee requested an update from the SSA 
regarding any additional steps taken in consideration of converting its 
Master Data Access Method (MADAM) database system and any changes 
to the SSA™s organizational structure affecting electronic services. The 
committee was informed that there were no substantive updates. 
The committee focused on examining the SSA™s current e-government 
strategy, including technological assumptions, operational capabilities, 
functional requirements, and future goals and ongoing efforts to de˜ne 
and re˜ne the SSA™s long-term strategy to support information technology 
applications and online services to its many and varied constituencies. 
Consistent with early discussions with and brie˜ngs from the SSA, this 
report assumes that the SSA intends to, and should, pursue delivering an 
expanding array of online services. Questions of whether online services 
are appropriate for the SSA or what the balance of resources devoted to 
online services and other modes of delivery should be were considered 
to be beyond the scope of this study. In keeping with the resources avail
-able for the study, the report does not undertake to develop a compre
-hensive roadmap to take the agency from its current situation to a future 
involving more online services. Finally, although the report acknowledges 
the importance of privacy to individuals and to society, it does not pro
-vide a comprehensive examination of the agency™s privacy policies and 
safeguards.  
The committee thanks the many individuals who contributed to its 
work. It appreciates the panelists™ and the SSA™s willingness to address 
the questions posed to them and is grateful for their insights. The study™s 
sponsors at the Social Security Administration and the SSA staff have 
been most supportive and responsive in helping the committee to do its 
work. We further wish to recognize the energetic participation of the SSA 
meeting attendees as a group. The reviewers of this report provided con
-structive feedback and insights, and we are grateful for their assistance. 
The committee would also like to express its thanks to the members of 
the staff of the National Academies, especially
 to study director Lynette 
Millett and program of˜cer Joan Winston, who displayed
 exemplary pro
-fessionalism and patience in seeing this challenging project through to a 
satisfying conclusion, and
 to Janice Sabuda, who facilitated our meeting 
and other activities through the course of the project.
  
Leon J. Osterweil, 
Chair
Committee on the Social Security 
 Administration™s E-Government Strategy and
Planning for the Future
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
   Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 
(NRC™s) Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent 
review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the 
institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evi
-dence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments 
and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the 
deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their 
review of this report:
Michael Brodie, Verizon Communications,
Sharon Dawes, State University of New York at Albany,
Carlo De Luca, Boston University,
Marc Donner, Morgan Stanley,
Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon University,
Darrell Long, University of California, Santa Cruz,
Ken Nibali, Independent Consultant, West Friendship, Maryland,
Daniel Schutzer, Financial Services Technology Consortium,
Peter Weinberger, Google Inc., and 
Marsha Young, Booz Allen Hamilton.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 OF
 REVIEWERS
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by William 
H. Press, Los Alamos National Laboratory. Appointed by the National 
Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an inde
-pendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely 
with the authoring committee and the institution.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY
 11 BACKGROUND AND CURRENT CONTEXT
 14 
 The Mission of the Social Security Administration, 14
 Internal Organization of the Social Security Administration, 20
 The Agency™s Broad Base of Users, 23
 The Social Security Administration™s E-Government Strategy 
  
Document, 26
 Outline of the Report, 29
2 LESSONS FROM ELECTRONIC SERVICES IN 
 FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
 32
 The Transformation in Financial Institutions, 33
 Typical Online Capabilities, 37
 Financial Institution Web Site Design, 42
 Customers and Users of Online Services, 46
 Business Incentives for Online Services, 47
 Organizational Structures for Online Services, 52
 Summary, 53
3 THE
 S
OCIAL
 S
ECURITY
 A
DMINISTRATION
™S  INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOGY
ŠP
RESENT
 AND
 F
UTURE
  54
 Information Technology Infrastructure, 55
 Security, Privacy, and Authentication, 77
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v CONTENTS
 User Interface, 85
 Access Technologies, 89
 Summary, 90
4 TOWARD ORGANIZATIONAL TRANSFORMATION FOR 
 ELECTRONIC SERVICE DELIVERY
 91
 Organizational Culture and Its Implications, 92
 Opportunities for Change, 101
 The Prospect of Governmental Transformation, 115
 Conclusion, 124
APPENDIXES
 A Committee and Staff Biographies
 127
B Panelists and Briefers at Open Committee Meetings
 135
C Social Security Administration Major Of˜ce Missions
 137
D Overview of Selected Legislation Pertaining to E-Government
 144
E A Short History of E-Government
 149
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
This report examines the Social Security Administration™s (SSA™s) 
proposed e-government strategy and provides advice on how the 
SSA can best deliver services to its constituencies in the future. 
The assessment by the Committee on the Social Security Administra
-tion™s E-Government Strategy and Planning for the Future was based on 
(1)
 its examination of the SSA™s current e-government strategy, including 
technological assumptions, performance measures and targets, planned 
operational capabilities, strategic requirements, and future goals; (2) its 
consideration of strategies, assumptions, and technical and operational 
requirements in comparable public- and private-sector institutions; and 
(3) its consideration of the larger organizational, societal, and technologi
-cal context in which the SSA operates.
 CHALLENGES
 AND OPPORT
UNITIES 
FOR
  THE
 S
OCIAL
 S
EC
URIT
Y A
DMINISTRATION
The SSA™s operations are extensiveŠone or more of its programs 
touch the lives of most Americans, from the almost 160 million workers 
who pay Social Security taxes on wages, to the nearly 50 million people 
who receive bene˜ts under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance pro
-gram, to the roughly 8 million disabled individuals and eligible family 
members who receive bene˜ts under the Disability Insurance program. 
The SSA also administers the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) pro
-Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
gram and makes needs-based determinations of eligibility for payments 
under the program.
The SSA faces demographic challenges and growing public expecta
-tions as it conducts a broad scope of activities, services, and
 interactions.
 It is predicted that the SSA™s workload will increase sharply as the baby 
boomersŠthe large cohort born during the 1946-1964 period, some
-times called the Silver TsunamiŠreach retirement or become disability-
prone. For example, the number of people ˜ling for retirement annu
-ally has increased by 500,000 since 2000, a 25 percent increase.
1 At the 
same time, like other federal agencies with an aging workforce, the SSA 
is facing a projected brain drain. A substantial number of the agency™s 
most experienced employees (who best understand the complex bene˜ts-
 
determination processes and the agency™s large and complex technology 
infrastructure) could retire at any time.  
Today, public contact with the SSA largely takes place face to face at 
its ˜eld of˜ces, by phone through the teleservice centers, or through the 
mail (for example, Social Security statements are automatically mailed 
yearly to workers over the age of 25). These activities are labor-intensive; 
over 60 percent of the SSA™s employees (located mainly in ˜eld of˜ces 
and at teleservice centers) deliver direct service to the public, and another 
30 percent (in the regional of˜ces, processing centers, and headquarters) 
provide direct support to those front-line workers.
  Some sectors of the economy have seen a broad push toward online 
services as both a complement to and a substitute for traditional ser
-vice-delivery mechanisms. For reasons including cost-effectiveness and 
enhanced customer satisfaction, many commercial organizations today 
are offering online, e-business services, often 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week (24/7), 365 days a year. The growing adoption and use of such ser
-vices re˚ect the emergence of a suite of information technologies capable 
of supporting online services and a general public that has a rising level of 
comfort and familiarity with the Internet and other information technolo
-gies in personal, social, and commercial contexts and that increasingly 
expects both ˜rms and government agencies to provide online informa
-tion and services. 
As they do for commercial enterprises, online services offer the SSA 
an opportunity to improve its operational ef˜ciency and to increase its 
total service capacityŠin particular, to cope with its growing workload 
at a time when it is facing its own retirement wave.
 The technologies for 
providing online services have reached a suf˜cient level of maturity to 
1 
Mary Mosquera, ﬁCase Files Travel Lighter, Faster,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Computer
 News
, Oct. 
9, 2006, available at http://www.gcn.com/print/25_30/42177-1.html, accessed June 14, 
2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
3enable the realization of this goal. Additionally, many in the new wave of 
retirees are likely to be computer-literate and Internet-savvy (and to retain 
these traits after reaching retirement age); they will thus be more adept 
and frequent users of online services than were previous generations 
of SSA bene˜ciaries. This does not mean that the SSA should go to all-
electronic service, but it does mean that a larger proportion of its clients 
and bene˜ciaries will be able to use, and may even prefer, online service 
channelsŠpaths through which they can accomplish their goalsŠto the 
extent possible. 
Indeed, the SSA uses a range of online services as a complement 
to the traditional service-delivery channels, and it looks to information 
technology (IT) to help provide services to its varied user communities: 
clients (current and prospective SSA bene˜ciaries), the general public, and 
partners such as the states and other federal agencies, along with various 
types of third parties (such as third-party representatives, representative 
payees, employers that pay workers™ payroll taxes, and so on). However, 
the SSA currently does not strongly promote online services as an alter
-native to traditional service-delivery channels. In addition, with respect to 
the SSA™s e-government initiatives, the focus of this report, responsibilities 
for software, hardware, and support for providing electronic informa
-tion and services are split across the domains of several SSA Deputy 
Commissioners. 
Finding: The SSA™s organizational structure does not support the estab
-lishment of a strategic focus in electronic services that is suf˜ciently 
high-level and broad-based. The SSA has an opportunity to be more 
proactive in fundamentally reassessing its customer service value chain 
and, for as many customers as possible, focusing on the potential sub
-stitution of electronic services for other delivery channels, such as paper 
mail and face-to-face interactions in ˜eld of˜ces. 
Recommendation: The SSA should make an unambiguous, strategic 
commitment to electronic services as part of its long-term service-
delivery strategy, placing a central emphasis on electronic services that 
encompass timely and up-to-date information for users, partners, and 
bene˜ciaries. 
LEARNING
 FROM
 THE
 EXPERIENCES
 OF
  LARGE
 F
INANCIAL
 I
NSTIT
UTIONS
Although the SSA is in some ways a distinctive institution, in many 
respects its activities, information technology, and other operational 
characteristics resemble those of large ˜nancial institutions (banks and 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
 
brokerages). These institutions maintain a very large number of accounts 
and receive and make a high volume of payments. They usually conduct 
transactions in multiple customer segments (individual retail customers, 
businesses, other ˜nancial institutions, and so on) and through multiple 
service channels (online, through automated teller machines and branch 
of˜ces, through call centers, and so on). The analogy is also apt in terms 
of IT requirements; the databases maintained by the largest of the private-
sector institutions are now quite comparable, both in size and in transac
-tion volume, to the databases for which the SSA is responsible. 
The ˜nancial services community has been one of the most aggres
-sive and competitive in using IT and electronic commerce, and banks and 
brokerages have made signi˜cant investments in developing their online 
service channels. The business case for doing so is composed of multiple 
elements: customer satisfaction, customer retention, new
-customer acqui
-sition, cross-sales of other products to existing customers, and the eco
-nomic trade-offs between cost reduction (including savings from reduced 
error rates and from not needing to redo work to correct errors) and 
the comparative cost of delivering online services. In particular, the cost 
per transaction differs greatly among service-delivery channels, by some 
accounts by an order of magnitude. 
Because of these advantages, banks aggressively market online ser
-vices to attract customers to these channels and to retain customers in 
them. Experience has shown that the successful introduction of electronic 
services leads to customers™ use of other available electronic services, thus 
compounding the bene˜ts of the investment in such services. A satis˜ed 
user of one online service is more likely to seek out similar services in 
order to avoid long telephone queues or paper-based cycle times.
Importantly, even as they have greatly increased their emphasis on 
online operations, banks have not abandoned their branch of˜ces or call 
centers. Rather, they consider online services as one important aspect of 
providing services and continually balance and rebalance their portfolio 
of service offerings. Indeed, banks still make heavy use of call centers 
for servicing customersŠalthough the call centers themselves have been 
transformed. With the convergence of voice and data (Voice over Internet 
Protocol, or VoIP) and the use of speech recognition, these call centers 
are becoming very heavily automated and very cost-effective. Banks are 
exploring in which situations to have self-service and in which it is desir
-able to have human agents, as well as experimenting with collaborative 
Web sites that can draw on assistance from human agents. For example, 
for simple transactions and information access, self-service is offered; for 
more complex transactions and cross-sell opportunities, more direct inter
-action with humans is used. Analogously, the committee does not suggest 
that the SSA should offer online services exclusively, but that it should be 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
5prepared to balance and rebalance its service channels in order to meet its 
ef˜ciency and effectiveness goals and the expectations of its public. 
The SSA might not be able toŠor want toŠuse ﬁas isﬂ all of the 
approaches and solutions pursued by other institutions. The committee 
believes that there is nonetheless substantial value to the SSA in consid
-ering what might be learned and what might be adapted or applied as a 
result of studying appropriate analogous organizationsŠof which ˜nan
-cial institutions are a leading example. Although the SSA™s operations, 
customer base, and transaction patterns are not identical with those of a 
large ˜nancial institution, the committee believes that examination of the 
commercial ˜nancial services industry™s experience, market research, and 
product-re˜nement knowledge would be useful to the SSA and to other 
government agencies seeking to make more comprehensive and effective 
transitions to online services. 
Finding: The experiences of large-scale ˜nancial institutions in transi
-tioning to the provision of electronic services are instructive in consid
-ering the challenges faced by the SSA in formulating its medium- and 
long-term electronic services strategy.
Recommendation: The SSA should carefully consider the ways in which 
the experiences and approaches of large-scale ˜nancial institutionsŠ
including state-of-the-practice electronic information and service deliv
-ery, metrics-guided improvement, and process transformation, among 
other approaches and solutionsŠmight be relevant to the kinds of 
services that the agency is providing or may provide in the future.
The strategic and management approaches that ˜nancial institutions 
have adopted to launch and develop online services are also especially 
instructive. In the largest and most successful ˜nancial companies, com
-mercial management and organizational structures for online services 
have gone through three phases: 
Ł In the ˜rst phase, which for most banks was 1996 to 1998, multiple 
ﬁe-groupsﬂ were emerging in the organization. The primary focus was 
often in marketing and communications organizations, as the chief use of 
Web sites was to market services rather than to provide them. 
Ł In the second phase (approximately 1999 to 2002) ﬁe-businessﬂ was 
paramount. Centralized, autonomous e-commerce lines of businessŠ
reporting very high in the organizationŠwere formed with virtually 
end-to-end control of the e-channel. This seems, in retrospect, an almost 
necessary step to developing a sophisticated strategy, infrastructure, and 
set of policies for electronic service provision. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Ł In the current state of maturity (approximately 2002 to the present), 
the motto appears to be ﬁe-business is business,ﬂ and electronic services 
have become reabsorbed as integral parts of the organization™s lines of 
business. 
Note that this progression, which the committee believes closely mir
-rors the processes that the SSA will need to follow, is characteristic of 
institutions that have had to undergo signi˜cant transformation to take 
advantage of electronic service provision. (Note also that the strategy 
and evolution of companies that were Internet-based from the outset, 
such as Amazon or eBay, hold fewer organizational lessons for the SSA 
because they have not had to revamp their technology, operations, and 
organization.)
The SSA™s management and organizational structures for electronic 
services and e-government have not yet moved to the second phase of 
electronic services maturity.
 When moving from the ˜rst to the second 
phase in this progression, the large-scale ˜nancial institutions referred to 
above established centralized focal points for electronic services. These 
focal points typically reported very high in the organization. The com
-mittee believes that the SSA should follow a trajectory similar to that 
described above and that the development and management of electronic 
services should be centralized and elevated in the organization. 
Finding: The SSA™s present direction diverges from the three-phase pro
-gression that large ˜nancial institutions have followed in successfully 
developing and launching electronic services.  
Recommendation: In order to move to the second phase of electronic 
services maturity, the SSA should create a focal point responsible for 
developing and managing electronic information and service deliv
-eryŠincluding components such as Web content, online transactions, 
user interfaces, research, database systems and other key enabling tech
-nologies, and other facets of electronic service delivery that are cur
-rently dispersed throughout the SSA. This focal point should have suf
-˜cient resources to take on organization-wide responsibility for online 
services and should report directly to the SSA Commissioner or to a 
Deputy Commissioner. 
TECHNOLOGICAL
 LEGAC
Y POSES RISKS AND 
HINDERS
 DE
VELOPMENT
 OF
 E
LECTRONIC
 SER
VICES
The SSA™s Master Data Access Method (MADAM) is a database system 
that was developed in-house by SSA staff in the early 1980s when the SSA 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
7converted from tape to disk storage for its data sets. Although MADAM is 
still in use today, this system is technologically obsolete and functionally 
primitive compared with readily available commercial technologies and 
products; its current status has several important implications.
First, this technology will constrain the SSA as it continues to develop 
its online services. Relying on MADAM means that the SSA™s systems 
are not able to exploit modern database access tools and utilities that 
facilitate support for the full suite of electronic services provided by the 
private sector. Also, whereas contemporary commercial products sup
-port near-24/7 access, information provided to the committee indicates 
that updates to the central MADAM database are done primarily (if not 
exclusively) through periodic, lengthy batch updates, which make 24/7 
access impossible.  Thus, MADAM could be an obstacle to the kind of 
user acceptance needed to reduce the SSA™s costs of transactions with its 
growing user community. 
Second, although MADAM continues to function, it exposes the SSA 
to a number of signi˜cant risks. The use of MADAM requires that the SSA 
and its contractors maintain an obsolete, custom system that is built on top 
of an increasingly antiquated underlying technology base, in which some 
of the software is written in the Common Business-Oriented Language, or 
COBOL. Maintaining this system requires very specialized expertise that 
is becoming increasingly scarce. It is also unclear how easy it will be to 
continue to ˜nd expertise in more-generic but increasingly obsolete soft
-ware technologies such as the COBOL programming language. Related to 
this, the underlying programming technology of the SSA™s core systems 
makes these systems more cumbersome to maintain compared with those 
implemented using modern technology. Moreover, the continued use of 
MADAM (and other now-antiquated similar solutions such as Computer 
Associates Integrated Database Management System [CA-IDMS]) locks 
the SSA into a single, expensive hardware and software combination, 
which precludes the agency from taking advantage of potentially lower 
cost alternatives.
In 1986, a report from the congressional Of˜ce of Technology Assess
-ment (OTA)
2 alerted the SSA that the technology and technological risks 
inherent in MADAM make it a serious liability. However, MADAM is still 
in use. One argument that has been offered for retaining MADAM is that 
the SSA™s databases are so large that they can only be handled by custom 
software. Today, however, other enterprises have databases that are com
-2 
U.S. Congress, Of˜ce of Technology Assessment, 
The
 Social
 Security
 Administration
 and
 Information
 Technology,
 OTA-CIT-311, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce, 
1986, p. 43 (NTIS Order PB87-136834), also available at http://www.ssa.gov/history/pdf/
ota86.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
parable in size to those of the SSA, and commercial database products 
are up to the task. Another likely reason that the SSA has not moved to 
replace MADAM is that the migration to modern database technology 
would be far from straightforward. Indeed, the committee concurs that a 
migration will be dif˜cult, but it believes that failing to migrate also poses 
considerable risks and constrains future delivery of online services. 
The SSA has been exploring a particular pathŠto convert the 
MADAM-resident data sets to a commercially available system, IBM™s 
relational database system product, DB2, but to avoid rewriting existing 
applications by changing the database system under existing middleware. 
The committee believes that the SSA has underestimated the technological 
risks of this conversion approach and has not fully considered alterna
-tive approaches. The SSA™s contractor involved in this effort and the SSA 
appear to have adopted the philosophy that any MADAM-to-DB2 conver
-sion should have little or no impact on existing applicationsŠthat is, the 
applications would not be rewritten to take advantage of more contem
-porary software and hardware capabilities. This approach not only limits 
the functionality of those applications but compromises the design of the 
new database. The proposed approach would almost certainly cause poor 
performance, potentially lead to update anomalies, and almost inevitably 
be the source of numerous long-term complications. Moreover, studies 
made available to the committee indicate that the SSA™s contractor did 
not fully consider large-scale relational database management systems 
(RDBMSs) other than DB2. 
To be sure, replacing MADAM would be far from a simple undertak
-ing. The committee believes that the SSA™s current ﬁhalfwayﬂ strategy 
would likely result in a working system but that it would also introduce 
signi˜cant new challenges of its own. The committee believes that a 
strategy involving a total conversion of the databases (using a mod
-ern RDBMS) and a rewrite of the application software is likely to yield 
the best results in the long run. However, such a major rewrite of the 
application software is itself a risky undertaking. The SSA™s predica
-ment resembles that faced by a number of other large organizations and 
˜rmsŠsuch as banks and telephone companiesŠthat have had to deal 
with large, critical systems that used obsolete technology. Like the SSA, 
they have had to modernize large custom systems that cannot easily be 
migrated using standard database-migration solutions. The experience of 
such institutions would be invaluable to the SSA as it seeks to navigate a 
similarly challenging course. 
Without detailed information about the current nature and status 
of the SSA™s MADAM conversion efforts, the committee did not reach 
conclusions as to whether any of the SSA™s ongoing conversion efforts 
should stop. However, it would be a mistake for the SSA to rely on too 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
9narrow a range of technical expertise to plan and/or execute something 
as central to its operations as the MADAM conversion effort. Not relying 
on a broad range of technical expertise to architect such a massive conver
-sion effortŠand not to fully explore alternative approachesŠwill make 
the achievement of successful outcomes more dif˜cult and less likely. In 
seeking broader technical advice as opposed to advice from a relatively 
narrow range of vendors and contractors, the SSA might, for example, 
establish an external advisory boardŠconsisting of experts from the data
-base software industry, several large commercial enterprises (banks and 
telecommunications companies) that have deployed large relational data
-bases, and academicsŠto oversee the MADAM conversion effort. Given 
the national importance of the SSA and its computer systems, it should be 
possible to attract top technical talent to provide such advice. 
Finding: In
 1986, the Of˜ce of Technology Assessment alerted the 
SSA to the technology and technological risks inherent in its Master 
Data Access Method, or MADAM.
  Today, MADAM and the SSA™s 
current data-management approach continue to pose increasing risks. 
The approach faces increasing limits in the availability of staff who 
understand and can support the SSA™s technologically obsolete, cus
-tom solution. In addition, the approach precludes the use of valuable 
new technological capabilities and requires interruptions in service for 
batch updates, both of which impede the provision of desirable new 
e-services.
Recommendation: As it makes decisions about future directions for its 
database technology, the SSA should give considerable weight to the 
implications of those decisions for the effectiveness and ef˜ciency of 
current and future electronic service delivery and should be open to the 
introduction of new technologies. 
Finding: The scope and scale of the challenges that the SSA faces with 
regard to its database conversion strategy merit the input of a broad 
range of expertise. 
Recommendation: In continuing to develop its conversion strategy and 
long-term services strategy, the SSA should draw on a broad range of 
technical expertiseŠincluding but not limited to database software 
experts, software engineers, software security experts, ˜nancial services 
experts, large-scale commercial service providers, and systems archi
-tecture expertsŠand put systematic mechanisms in place so that it can 
hear and learn from outside advisers. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
TOWARD
 O
RGANI
ZATIONAL
 T
RANSFORMATION
The SSA has been slow to develop and implement strategic service-
delivery plans, despite repeatedly being encouraged to do so by outside 
auditors and experts. The reasons for this are not entirely clear. One 
contributing factor may be a lack of sustained leadership commitment to 
this issue over the years. Another may be an organizational culture that 
is focused on personal, individualized customer service and has had a 
long tradition of understanding its public and how to serve it bestŠthat 
is, through personal attention. The cultural mores within the SSA seem to 
equate electronic or online services with impersonal service without giv
-ing due consideration to the opportunity for the SSA to use electronic or 
online services to respond more quickly, to provide greater convenience, 
to enhance user satisfaction, to increase accuracy, and to reduce costs. A 
˜nal factor may involve the prospect that organizational change would 
also require an updated employee skill mix to support the technological 
innovation required for the development and implementation of a ser
-vice-delivery strategy that embraces online services. 
Although charting a roadmap for the future under these circum
-stances may be daunting, the terrain is not completely unexplored and 
uncharted. The experiences of and lessons learned by other institutions 
should serve as a useful guide to the approaches that the SSA might take 
as it expands its electronic service offerings.  Moreover, as the following 
subsections indicate, there are a number of areas in which changes to 
organizational practice and culture would greatly help the SSA develop 
and re˜ne its service-delivery strategy.
Balancing Risks and Rewards
The committee™s impression is that the SSA takes a conservative and 
cautious approach to service provision. Indeed, being subject to constant 
and intense scrutiny from the U.S. Congress and various federal oversight 
agencies not unexpectedly causes the agency to be reluctant to assume 
risk. Yet failing to make needed changes can also incur costs that can 
eventually outweigh the risks associated with making such changes.
Finding: The SSA may be missing important opportunities to make sus
-tained improvements in its service delivery because of an overemphasis 
on the potential risks of modernizing its service-delivery strategy and a 
lack of emphasis on the long-term risks associated with 
not
 revamping 
that strategy. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
11
Recommendation: When evaluating new electronic service-delivery 
initiatives, the SSA should when appropriate seek to balance risks and 
rewards by recognizing such upside bene˜ts from automation as cost 
reduction, fraud prevention, and customer satisfaction. 
Metrics
 The SSA™s own internal assessments of its strategies, initiatives, and 
deployments are ongoing. The identi˜cation of appropriate metrics and 
the continual gathering of adequate measurements needed to ensure 
effective decision making can be useful in such processes. When organiza
-tional goals can be systematically reduced to metrics that are quanti˜able 
(although not necessarily directly monetized), such metrics and measures 
can be the key components in a program of continuous improvement, as 
they help demonstrate progress in achieving organizational goals such as 
meeting the various needs of diverse publics and user communities. 
The committee understands that it seems easy enough to simply 
assert the importance of quantitative measures in managing toward meet
-ing goals, but that putting in place the details of how to do so may be far 
more dif˜cult. It seems most important, however, that the SSA adopt as 
a goal the movement toward basing its operations and decisions on this 
approach. The establishment of effective, agreed-on metrics and measures 
would provide immediate bene˜ts for the better management of projects, 
and potentially they could better justify requests for funds for the deploy
-ment of electronic services.  
In general, metrics and measures should stem from a careful examina
-tion of goals that are ultimately quanti˜ed. The units of this quanti˜cation 
would be used to identify the metrics. Implementing data-collection pro
-cesses in the framework of those metrics would yield measures.  Engag
-ing in dialogue with managers from other organizations that manage 
in a metrics-oriented fashion and drawing from their ﬁlessons learnedﬂ 
may be useful. In some cases, organizations ˜nd it helpful to engage the 
services of management consultants and/or to have ongoing dialogues 
with people who have implemented this approach in related institutions, 
such as large banks or brokerages.  
Finding: The establishment of appropriate metrics and measures to 
evaluate the effectiveness of various services and delivery
 channels is 
an important component of an effective service-delivery plan.
Recommendation: The SSA should de˜ne and use metrics and mea
-sures to assess and improve its service delivery across all channels, 
including electronic services. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Partnerships
Large organizations such as the SSA are increasingly deciding that it 
is unsustainable to maintain in-house all of the competencies that they 
require in order to meet challenges that are growing in scope and num
-ber. Such organizations often make conscious decisions about which core 
competencies they will develop and nurture in-house and which they will 
outsource. Given the ongoing transition to and emerging demand from a 
variety of user communities for large-scale and highly effective electronic 
services, there may be increased opportunities that the SSA could explore 
in this area. 
In the federal arena, there are precedents for partnering with the pri
-vate sector. For example, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) implemented 
the free ˜le tax program with private-sector partners; in this case the IRS 
was able to develop the necessary partnerships within existing law and 
regulation, while in other instances legislative changes were sought and 
obtained. Other types of opportunities that might prove fruitful for the 
SSA include partnering with the states to enable the delivery of certi˜ed, 
electronic vital records evidence, promoting standards work involving 
data interchange, or increased cooperation with third parties regarding 
advice and counseling in the area of claims ˜ling. Partnership opportu
-nities for some of the SSA™s activities may be possible within its current 
legislative and regulatory framework. In other cases, new authority may 
be needed in order to pursue partnership opportunities to enhance service 
delivery. In the area of electronic services, organizations have often found 
it useful to consider what their core competencies need to be and then 
to seek ways to partner effectively to ful˜ll other functions. In exploring 
potential partnerships, the committee suggests using an open process that 
engages bene˜ciaries, third parties, and other user communities as well 
as Congress to explore needs and alternatives. 
Finding: There are opportunities for the SSA to partner with other agen
-cies and third parties in ways that could provide mutual bene˜t. 
Recommendation: The SSA should undertake to understand the identi
-ties, needs, and attitudes of its various user communities and should 
use that information to establish effective relationships and ongoing 
interactions with users, potential partners, and third parties. The SSA 
should explore partnering opportunities and identify the changes and 
initiatives that are necessary in order for it to enable appropriate inter
-action and cross-functionality with strategic partners and to support 
the exchange of data with other government agencies (both federal and 
state) while ensuring that appropriate security and privacy measures 
are in place.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 
13
CONCL
USION
The recommendations above are subordinate to what the commit
-tee sees as a more general and overarching need: that the SSA embrace 
change as a constant factor in the way that it does business. Particu
-larly as change continues in the various domains of SSA involvement, it 
will become increasingly important for the SSA to devote attention and 
resources to being well informed about the nature and rami˜cations of 
these changes, both for itself and for its various user groups, including 
bene˜ciaries. Although the SSA does pay attention to change and seeks 
advice externally and internally, there are opportunities to use that advice 
more systematically as a basis for sustained and effective action. Broader 
and more systematic attention to anticipating and addressing change is 
warranted. 
Finding: The SSA faces signi˜cant ongoing changeŠin terms of technol
-ogy, demographics, and public expectationsŠas it carries out its activi
-ties, services, and interactions with a variety of user communities.  
Recommendation: The SSA should embrace change as a constant. It 
should regularly evaluate emerging trends in such areas as technol
-ogy (for example, database technologies) and business practices (for 
example, by learning from the experiences of ˜nancial institutions 
and moving toward the use of strategic partnerships for ef˜ciency and 
effectiveness). It should also regularly evaluate the changing societal 
attitudes and expectations of its various user communities. The SSA 
should also institutionalize the formulation of strategies for addressing 
these trends.
Although the challenges outlined in this report are numerous and 
sizable, the committee is con˜dent that they are not insurmountable for 
the SSA. Throughout the course of the committee™s work, it has been clear 
that the SSA and its people are ˜rmly dedicated to meeting bene˜ciaries™ 
needs with enthusiasm and professionalism. Their dedication to their mis
-sion seems absolute and unwavering. This report is offered in the spirit of 
advice to dedicated professionals about how they address the opportuni
-ties that exist for meeting continually growing challenges.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
1 Background and Current Context 
This chapter provides some background on the Social Security 
Administration™s (SSA™s) mission and strategy and presents a brief 
overview of the rest of the report.
THE
 MISSION 
OF
 THE
 S
OCIAL
 S
EC
URIT
Y A
DMINISTRATION
The mission of the Social Security Administration is ﬁto promote the 
economic security of the nation™s people through compassionate and 
vigilant leadership in shaping and managing America™s Social Security 
programs.ﬂ
1 The agency™s mission, along with its organizational structure 
and culture, has its roots in the Great Depression and President Franklin 
D. Roosevelt™s broad initiatives for addressing economic insecurity and 
poverty.
Development and Expansion of the Social Security Act
In 1934, with the country traumatized by the Great Depression, Presi
-dent Roosevelt pressed forward to provide economic security for older 
Americans in the form of old-age bene˜ts from an insurance system with 
near-universal coverage.
2 The original Social Security Act was signed by 
1 
See Social Security Administration, ﬁInformation About the Social Security Administra
-tion,ﬂ available at
 http://www.ssa.gov/aboutus/, accessed June 9, 2006.
2 
See, for example, Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, 
Thinking
 in
 Time:
 The
 Use
 of
 History
 for
 Decision
 Makers
, New York: The Free Press, 1986, pp. 97-102.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
15
the president on August 14, 1935. The 1935 act included two major provi
-sions for the elderly: 
Ł Title I (Grants to States for Old-Age Assistance) supported state 
welfare payments for the aged, and 
Ł Title II (Social Security) provided bene˜ts to workers upon retire
-ment at age 65.
3The Social Security Act of 1935 provided 
retirement
 bene˜ts
 for workers 
at age 65. Social Security bene˜ts and programs were expanded through 
a series of legislative amendments to cover the following:
Ł In 1939: 
dependent™s
 bene˜ts
 for the spouse and minor children of a 
retired worker and 
sur
vivor™s
 bene˜ts
 for the family of a covered worker 
who died before retirement,
Ł In 1950: increased bene˜t amounts and 
cost-of-li
ving
 allowance
 (COLA) increases,
Ł In 1954 and 1956: 
disability
 bene˜ts
,Ł In 1956 and 1961: 
options
 pro
viding
 for
 early
 retirement
 at age 62 (with 
reduced bene˜ts) for women in 1956 and for men in 1961, 
Ł In 1965: 
Medicare
 (an SSA-administered health insurance program 
for people over 65), and 
Ł In 1972: a modern 
Supplemental
 Security
 Income
 (SSI) program and 
yearly COLA increases.
4The SSA began as an independent agency at the subcabinet level. It 
became part of the new Department of Health, Education and Welfare in 
1953; was made part of the new Department of Health and Human Ser
-vices in 1980; and was returned to independent-agency status in 1995.
5 The SSA no longer administers Medicare, which is now administered 
by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS; formerly the 
Health Care Financing Administration), itself part of the Department of 
Health and Human Services. Although CMS is in charge of Medicare, 
the SSA provides substantial service-delivery support for the program. 
For example, applicants can receive general information about Medicare 
and its programs from the SSA and can apply for Medicare through the 
3 
Adapted from Social Security Administration, ﬁSocial Security Historyﬂ available at 
http://www.ssa.gov/history/briefhistory3.html, accessed June 9, 2006. 
4 
Social Security Administration, ﬁSocial Security History,ﬂ available at http://www.ssa.
gov/history/briefhistory3.html, accessed June 9, 2006. 
5 
Abridged from ﬁSSA History,ﬂ available at http://www.ssa.gov/history/orghist.html, 
accessed June 9, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
SSA.
6 The SSA also provides substantial service-delivery support for the 
Medicaid, Railroad Retirement, and Food Stamp programs.
7Current SSA Programs
The Social Security Act, as amended, established the following three 
programs that the SSA currently administers: 
Ł Old Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI), 
Ł Disability Insurance (DI), and 
Ł Supplemental Security Income (SSI). 
The OASI program is ˜nanced by the OASI Trust Fund. According to 
the SSA, 92 percent of persons aged 65 or over in 2004Šsome 40 million 
peopleŠwere receiving OASI bene˜ts as retirees, spouses, or other depen
-dents; these bene˜ts amounted to more than 50 percent of income for 
65
 percent of these bene˜ciaries.
8  
In that same year, more than 158
 million 
individuals earned bene˜ts by paying Social Security payroll taxes, and the 
SSA paid more than $490 billion to more than 48 million people.
9The DI program is administered by the SSA. The SSA funds state-run 
Disability Determination Services (DDS). Although these state-run DDS 
agencies are federally funded and guided by SSA rules in their decision 
making, they hire their own staffs and retain a considerable degree of 
independence in how they manage their of˜ces and conduct disability 
6 
Medicaid is a different program, run by the states, that provides qualifying, low-income 
people with medical and hospital coverage. For more information, see http://www.ssa.
gov/pubs/10043.html#part7, accessed June 9, 2006.
7 
Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
, January 2006, p. 2 (here
-after cited as Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
), available at 
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/strategicplan.html, accessed June 9, 2006.
8 
Social Security Administration, ﬁManagement™s Discussion and Analysis,ﬂ pp. 8-9 in 
Per
-formance
 and
 Accountability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5, January 2006 (hereafter cited as Social Security 
Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report
, FY
 2
00
5), available at http://www.
ssa.gov/˜nance/2005/MDA.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. According to the SSA Web site 
at http://www.ssa.gov/deposit/DDFAQ898.htm (accessed June 20, 2007), ﬁas of January 
1999, 75 percent of all Social Security and SSI bene˜ciaries received their bene˜ts by direct 
deposit.ﬂ 
9 
Social Security Administration, 
Results
 at
 the
 Social
 Security
 Administration:
 Getting
 It
 Done
, August 2, 2005, p. 1, available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/performance/results
/results2005.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. To qualify for retirement and survivor™s insurance 
bene˜ts, a worker born after 1929 must have paid Social Security taxes for at least 10 years 
(thus receiving 40 ﬁcreditsﬂ) during his or her lifetime. Credits are based on earnings; in 
2006, a worker could earn one credit for each $970 in earnings, up to a maximum of four 
credits a year. Bene˜ts are payable to workers upon retirement at age 62 or later; bene˜ts 
are also paid to certain dependents and survivors.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
17
determinations.
10
 To qualify for the DI program, an individual must be 
eligible through recent covered work before the onset of disability. The 
number of recent credits required for eligibility increases with age. ﬁDis
-abilityﬂ requires that a worker have a mental or physical impairment that 
has lasted (or is expected to last) more than 12 months or that is expected 
to result in death (the DDS agencies perform the medical review function 
and are responsible for making the medical determinations under SSA™s 
direction). DI bene˜ts can be paid to disabled workers and eligible fam
-ily members as long as the individual is disabled and does not perform 
ﬁsubstantial gainful work.ﬂ The SSA periodically reviews the disability 
status of bene˜ciaries. The SSA also offers programs to provide incen
-tives for individuals who want to try to return to work. According to the 
SSA, in 2005 SSA DI bene˜ts replaced about 44 percent of the income of 
a ﬁmedium incomeﬂ disabled worker. DI bene˜ts were paid to about 8 
million bene˜ciaries.
11 
SSI is a needs-based program ˜nanced from general tax revenues, 
in contrast to the retirement and survivor™s insurance bene˜ts provided 
under the OASI program and the disability insurance bene˜ts provided 
under the DI program. It is designed to provide bene˜ts to aged adults 
and to blind or disabled adults and children with limited income and 
resources. For adults, the SSI de˜nition of ﬁdisabilityﬂ and the SSI dis
-ability review procedures are the same as those for the DI program, 
except that different rules apply for statutory blindness. Different de˜ni
-tions apply for children. There are provisions and incentives intended to 
encourage people receiving SSI bene˜ts to work. Because it is a needs-
based program, SSI has ongoing requirements for recipients to submit 
and the SSA to process monthly information about income and resources. 
This information impacts bene˜t amounts and continuing eligibility. The 
full SSI bene˜t is designed to be equivalent to about 73 percent of the 
federal poverty level for an individual and about 81 percent for a couple. 
In 2005, the federal poverty level was de˜ned as $9,750 for an individual 
and $12,830 for a couple. Most states supplement the federal SSI bene˜t. 
According to the SSA, in 2005, 4.6 million individuals received SSI bene˜ts 
only; 2.5 million received concurrent SSI and OASI/DI bene˜ts.
12
10
 U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, Testimony Before the Subcommittees on Human Re
-sources and Social Security, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representa
-tives
, SSA
 Customer
 Ser
vice:
 Broad
 Ser
vice
 Deli
very
 Plan
 Needed
 to
 Address
 Future
 Challenges
, February 11, 2000, available at http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/h100075t.pdf, accessed 
June 20, 2007.
11
 Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report
, 
FY
 2
00
5, pp. 8, 
10.
12
 Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5, pp. 2, 
11.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Although the most visible users in these programs are members of 
the general public, users in addition to individual bene˜ciaries also have 
interests in the SSA™s varied programs. Most notably, state governments, 
as joint administrators of programs such as DI, have important stakes 
at least in how various databases of information are maintained and 
made accessible: proper access directly affects the timeliness and accuracy 
of processing disability claims and providing bene˜ts to those who are 
found eligible. See Chapter 4 for more on external partnering.
SSA Business Products and Processes
According to the SSA, the OASI, DI, and SSI programs ﬁtouchﬂ over 
95 percent of the American public at various points during their lifetimes. 
The reasons include the following: ˜ling for a Social Security number 
(SSN), establishing a record of earnings, retiring, becoming disabled, suf
-fering the loss of a spouse or parent, and/or being unable to meet basic 
˜nancial needs as an older American. The SSA views these as the critical 
points at which members of the public interact with the agency by seek
-ing information, applying for bene˜ts, or reporting ﬁpost-entitlementﬂ 
changes. See Table 1.1 for a sense of the scale of the SSA™s activities across 
the three programs.
TABLE 1.1 Social Security Administration Activities in Fiscal Year 
2005 Across Three Programs: OASI, DI, and SSI
Activity in Fiscal Year 2005
Scale
Benefits paid
Almost 53 million people per month
Eligibility determinations made
8 million new claims
Decisions made
1.6 million hearings and appeals
Continuing disability benefits 
reviewed
1.5 million reviews
New and replacement Social 
Security cards issued
17 million cards
Worker™s earnings records 
processed
257 million items
Calls received at the SSA 800-
number
56 million calls
Social Security Statements 
issued
142 million statements
NOTE: OASI, Old Age and Survivors Insurance; DI, Disability Insurance; SSI, Supplemental 
Security Income.
SOURCE: Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5, January 2006, p. 12, available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/strategicplan.html, accessed 
June 9, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
19
As it carries out its mission through these business processes, the SSA 
emphasizes ﬁService, Stewardship, Solvency, and Staffﬂ as shorthand for 
its commitment to do the following:
Ł Give the American people the excellent service they expect and de
-serve,
Ł Ensure the highest level of program integrity through sound ˜scal 
stewardship,
Ł Ensure the program™s ˜nancial solvency for future generations, and
Ł Maintain high-quality staff committed to organizational excellence.
13
These are the top-level, strategic commitments that are re˚ected in the 
agency™s formulation of strategic goals and objectives and performance 
indicators. In ˜scal year (FY) 2005, according to the SSA, 78 percent of its 
operating expenses, some $7.4 billion, were used in support of the service 
goal.
14
 The SSA has de˜ned ˜ve core business processes to facilitate the plan
-ning and managing of the delivery of services to bene˜ciaries: 
Ł Issuing SSNs (enumeration),
Ł Establishing and maintaining individual records of earnings,
Ł Processing bene˜ts claims,
Ł Maintaining post-entitlement records of changes and reviews, 
and
Ł Informing the public.
15
These core business processes cross program and organizational lines 
within the agency.
16 
For example, processing bene˜ts claims applies to all 
programs for which the SSA is responsible. Although there are variations 
among the claims processes for the respective programs, the essential 
claims process is the same. Similarly, the basic post-entitlement business 
process applies to all programs, again with some variations among them. 
The same basic communications strategies, tools, methods, and so on are 
used to inform the public about each of the programs, although targeted 
audiences, emphases, and media might be used to suit the program need. 
In all cases, executing these processes also entails crossing organizational 
lines.
Although the focus of each of these processes is to serve members 
of the public, each also entails important interaction, either current or 
13
 Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
, p. 1.
14
 Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report
, 
FY
 2
00
5, p. 15.
15
 Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
, p. 2.
16
 Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
, p. 2.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
potential, with other communities. Thus, for example, while the issuance 
of SSNs is a service to individual members of the public, the veri˜cation 
of SSNs is an important service to business and other governmental agen
-cies. Serving these additional users entails responding to many millions 
of additional service requests. 
INTERNAL ORGANI
ZATION 
OF
 THE
  SOCIAL
 S
EC
URIT
Y A
DMINISTRATION
The Social Security Administration has a staff of more than 65,000 
employees spread throughout a network of some 1,500 of˜ces. In addition 
to the Baltimore, Maryland, and Washington, D.C., headquarters, these 
of˜ces include the SSA™s 10 regional of˜ces; 7 processing centers; more 
than 1,300 ˜eld of˜ces (which, among other things, handle application 
intake); 36 teleservice (800-number) centers; and hearings of˜ces. In addi
-tion, the SSA provides policy, administrative direction, and funding for the 
54 state-run DDS agencies, which have more than 16,000 employees.
17 
Public contact with the SSA is primarily conducted face to face at 
the ˜eld of˜ces, by phone through the teleservice centers, or by mail (for 
example, Social Security Statements are automatically mailed yearly to 
workers over age 25). Over 60 percent of the SSA™s employees deliver 
direct service to the public, mainly in ˜eld of˜ces and teleservice centers; 
another 30 percent in the regional of˜ces, processing centers, and head
-quarters, providing direct support to those front-line workers.
18 However, 
the SSA is also seeking to use online information and online interactions 
with the public, both to obtain the ef˜ciencies that technology can offer 
and to achieve the increases in service capacity that will be required in 
order to handle the growing baby boom-related workload.
19
 The SSA also 
looks to online interactions as a way to help in providing services to its 
wider user communities.
The SSA is headed by the Commissioner of Social Security.
20 
In addi
-tion to the Of˜ce of the Commissioner, there are 15 major headquarters 
17
 Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5, pp. 
13-14. 
18
 Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5.19
 The SSA is facing a baby boom ﬁretirement boomﬂ increase in workload just as its own 
workforce is becoming eligible for retirement: more than 40 percent of the SSA™s employees 
are expected to retire by 2014. The baby boom generation has already entered the ﬁdisability-
proneﬂ years; as a result, the SSA expects its DI rolls to increase by 35 percent between 2002 
and 2012 (Social Security Administration, 
Strategic
 Plan:
 FY
 2
00
6-FY
 2
011
, pp. 8, 41).
20
 The current Commissioner is Michael J. Astrue, whose term began in February 2007. 
When this study was initiated, the Commissioner was Jo Anne B. Barnhart, whose term be
-gan in 2001. The ˜rst Commissioner was Arthur J. Altmeyer, who served from 1946 to 1953. 
See http://www.ssa.gov/history/commissioners.html, accessed June 9, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
21
components, organized along functional lines. Each component is headed 
by a Deputy Commissioner or other senior-level of˜cial. (See Appendix C 
for brief descriptions of the functions of these major of˜ces.) 
SSA Organization and E-Government Services
Just as the SSA™s de˜ned business processes cross lines of bene˜ts 
programs, the SSA™s management structure crosses lines of both program 
and delivery channels. This subsection is based on material and quota
-tions from the ﬁOrganizational Structure of the Social Security Admin
-istrationﬂ at the SSA™s Web site (http://www.ssa.gov/org/ssaorg.htm). 
Quotations below are from the SSA™s organizational element descrip
-tions. With respect to the SSA™s e-government initiatives, the focus of this 
report, responsibilities for software, hardware, and support for providing 
electronic information and services are split across several Deputy Com
-missioners™ domains:
Ł The Of˜ce of Automation Support in the 
Of˜ce
 of
 the
 Deputy
 Com
-missioner,
 Operations
 (ODCO) is responsible for ﬁintegrating service deliv
-ery and employee concerns with modern technology.ﬂ This of˜ce deter
-mines Operations™ requirements for software, hardware, and electronic 
service-delivery support. Also in Operations, the Of˜ce of Electronic Ser
-vices (OES) is the lead for ﬁdevelopment and implementation of electronic 
services.ﬂ 
Ł Under the 
Chief
 Information
 Of˜cer™s
 leadership, OES also works 
with other federal agencies on interagency electronic service-delivery 
initiatives.
21
Ł The 
Of˜ce
 of
 the
 Deputy
 Commissioner,
 Systems
 (ODCS) contains the 
Of˜ce of Telecommunications and System Operations, which is respon
-sible for the management, operation, and maintenance of the computer 
systems and networks on which both e-government and voice appli
-cations run. It also contains the Of˜ce of Systems Electronic Services, 
which directs the development of the software that supports electronic 
service-delivery initiatives; the Of˜ce of Disability Systems, which devel
-ops, implements, and maintains electronic systems to support disability 
programs (such as the ﬁeDIBﬂ initiative
22
); and the Of˜ce of Enterprise 
21
 See Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
E-Go
vernment
 Strategy:
 Simpli˜ed
 Deli
very
 of
 Ser
vices
 to
 Citizens
, February 2002, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/
egovstrategy.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. 
22
 The eDIB system replaces the paper SSA disability folders with electronic records ac
-cessible to all case-processing personnel of˜cers across the country. The electronic folder 
addresses the problem of lost paper folders. Moreover, it eliminates delays in transferring 
paper ˜les and can be used to support electronic hearings during the appeals process. See 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Support, Architecture and Engineering (OESAE), which ﬁidenti˜es the 
strategic information technology resources needed to support SSA busi
-ness processes and operations and the transition processes for research
-ing, demonstrating and implementing new technologies in response to 
the Agency™s strategic vision.ﬂ OESAE includes the Division of Data Base 
SystemsŠamong other things this division develops and maintains the 
crucial Master Data Access Method (MADAM) software that manages the 
bene˜t programs™ master ˜les.
Ł The 
Of˜ce
 of
 the
 Deputy
 Commissioner,
 Communications
 (ODCComm) 
is responsible for the creation, development, evaluation, and oversight of 
all internal and external SSA communications, as well as its public affairs 
and public information activities. Within the Of˜ce of Communications, 
the Of˜ce of Communications Planning and Technology is the focal point 
for the development, clearance, and placement of content material on the 
SSA™s of˜cial Internet/Intranet Web sites and is responsible for the devel
-opment, content, and coordination of the SSA™s internal and external Web 
marketing activities.
 The Of˜ce of Communications has responsibility for 
setting policy, for determining what information content is posted on the 
SSA Web site, and for maintaining the ﬁlook and feelﬂ of the entire site. 
Ł Within the 
Of˜ce
 of
 the
 Deputy
 Commissioner,
 Disability
 and
 Income
 Security
 Programs
 (ODCDISP), the Of˜ce of the Associate Commissioner 
for Disability Programs is responsible for the development, coordination, 
and oversight of disability policies, procedures, and process requirements 
supporting the creation of a paperless disability claims process.
These split responsibilities for electronic information and services and 
their implications are discussed further in Chapter 4. 
The SSA, like other government entities, seeks ways to improve the 
delivery of information and services while also reducing costs.
23
 To accom
-plish these effectiveness and ef˜ciency improvements, the SSA and others 
are turning to more expansive applications of information technology (IT) 
and looking to electronic services as a way to help in providing its services 
to its users. (See Appendix E for a short history of federal e-government 
activities to provide a broader federal context for the SSA™s activities in 
this area. Also see Box 1.1 for a brief discussion of terminology.)
ﬁAgency Challenges,ﬂ pp. 25-26 in Social Security Administration, 
Performance
 and
 Account
-ability
 Report,
 FY
 2
00
5, available at http://www.ssa.gov/˜nance/2005/Agency_Challenges.
pdf, accessed June 12, 2007.
23
 One key bene˜t of providing electronic access to SSA transactional services is likely to 
be a substantial reduction in error rates and, subsequently, in associated costs. For example, 
presumably an SSA user or bene˜ciary is less likely to enter his or her own name and ad
-dress incorrectly than is a call-center person who only hears it or a key entry person who is 
transcribing it from a handwritten entry on a paper form.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
23
THE
 A
GENC
Y™
S B
ROAD
 BASE 
OF
 U
SERS
The SSA™s clients and users are not just individual bene˜ciaries but also 
include federal government agencies and state governments (for example, 
the U.S. Internal Revenue Service [IRS], U.S. Department of Labor, and 
state of˜ces of vital recordsŠsee below); third parties (for example, payroll 
services); representatives assisting bene˜ciaries (for example, attorneys 
or representative payees); internal agency users of electronic services (for 
example, ˜eld of˜ce workers); and external users of electronic services 
(for example, community service agencies and social science researchers). 
Consideration of how the SSA should position itself to provide electronic 
services in the future should take into account the needs of these vari
-ous communities and whether they are to be addressed individually or 
comprehensively. Owing to limited resources and scope, this study did 
not examine the full range of needs of all of these users. The following 
su
bsections indicate the character of some of these user needs. 
Federal Agencies and State and Local Governments
Increasingly, in both e-commerce and e-government, organizations 
such as the SSA partner with a variety of other organizations to deliver 
electronic products and services. The SSA already does this to some extent 
through its participation in some of the federal e-government initiatives 
that require interagency and intergovernmental coordination and cooper
-ation. For instance, the eVital project involved the SSA™s working with the 
organization that represents state vital statistics agenciesŠthe National 
Association for Public Health Statistics and Information SystemsŠto 
BOX 1.1
ﬁElectronic Servicesﬂ Meant to Be Construed Broadly
Throughout this report, several terms are used that are often perceived as 
nearly interchangeable: ﬁonline services,ﬂ ﬁe-services,ﬂ ﬁe-government,ﬂ ﬁelectronic 
services,ﬂ and so on. Although there are subtle distinctions among all of these, the 
committee™s preferred term is ﬁelectronic servicesﬂ; it is meant to encompass all of 
the above. That term was chosen in part because it is the most generic and all-
 
encompassing term, and it also closely mirrors the terminology used currently by 
the Social Security Administration. It is meant to encompass a broad vision of ser
-vice deliveryŠnot just to include interactions that take place solely through the use 
of the Internet, although that is a primary focus, but encompassing others as well. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
streamline the process of reporting and verifying state-level birth and 
death data electronically.
24
 In this instance, the SSA found a community 
that shared an interest in speeding up and increasing the accuracy of 
data needed by both partners to ful˜ll their missions. More speci˜cally, 
automating the data exchange between state and federal agencies reduced 
costs, minimized errors from manual processes, and reduced unnecessary 
and sometimes fraudulent bene˜ts payments.
25
 The activity just described also points out that a government-to-
 
government e-government project can bene˜t both the government and 
SSA bene˜ciaries without the SSA™s necessarily having to interact directly 
with bene˜ciaries. There are challenges of course. As an obvious condition 
of such interagency and intergovernmental data exchanges, the SSA will 
want to ensure that the organizations with which it intends to exchange 
data are willing to comply with the privacy and security requirements 
that surround data maintained by the SSA on behalf of workers, bene˜
-ciaries, and other users. Toward this end, the SSA likely will engage in 
discussions with potential data-sharing partners and work with them to 
reduce risks, thereby obtaining important new bene˜ts. 
There are risks in failing to take advantage of important new tech
-nologies, interactions, and opportunities. To be sure, any data-sharing 
or data-exchange agreement would have to be cost-effective enough for 
the parties to agree to it. In addition, many states and most counties may 
not have automated records or only have automated records from fairly 
recent times. Resource constraints may hamper the ability of some states 
and counties to create electronic databases despite the obvious long-term 
bene˜ts to be gained over time from the up-front investment well beyond 
merely exchanging the data with the SSA. 
As noted previously, the SSA is required to share information with a 
variety of other federal government agencies. Considerable exchange of 
information is required with the IRS in particular, but exchanges with the 
Department of Veterans Affairs, for example, are also an important part 
of the SSA™s role and mission. There may be increased interactions in the 
future with the Department of Homeland Security and other agencies as 
well. Because of this, the SSA will need to position itself to ensure that 
these intra-federal-government transactions are as prompt, ef˜cient, and 
yet secure as possible. An ongoing consideration will be how to maintain 
appropriate privacy protection while meeting emerging demands. The 
creation of transaction modes that are convenient for all agencies will 
24
 For more information, see http://www.ssa.gov/pressof˜ce/evital-pr.htm, accessed June 
12, 2007.
25
 For more information, see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/c-2-4-evital.html, 
accessed June 12, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
25
clearly be important. But it is also important that the SSA and its federal 
partners not overlook the need to ensure that underlying data repositories 
are designed and implemented so as to facilitate and support suf˜cient 
privacy protection, access, security, and sharing modes that serve all par
-ticipants as effectively as possible. 
The SSA interacts with state governments in a number of ways, most 
notably in the handling of Disability Insurance cases. Because of the 
complexity of disability claims cases and the number, size, and diversity 
of the data ˜les that comprise them, the demands already being placed 
on the SSA by the state governments are considerable, and they must be 
expected to grow in the coming decades. The nature of the data that the 
SSA must share with the states can be quite sensitive, placing consider
-able demands for protection of privacy on these transactions. The SSA 
has developed a system (the eDIB, or Electronic Disability, system) that 
is intended to improve the quality of its interactions with state-run DDS 
agencies in what appears to be recognition of the importance of this com
-munity in the SSA™s future e-government plans.
Third Parties
Third-party entities can be potential service-delivery partners, and 
there are likely opportunities for the SSA to seek initiatives that provide 
mutual bene˜ts to both organizations and their shared user bases. One 
challenge is that there are no clear-cut rules for initiating or managing 
such partnerships for federal agencies.
26
 This lack of clear-cut rules also 
means, however, that agencies have wide discretion to create partner
-ships with third parties for electronic product and service delivery. There 
are models of innovative e-government partnership, with the IRS™s Free 
File being the most visible example,
27
 that can serve as both inspiration 
and a source of lessons learned. Mindful of privacy and security consid
-erationsŠwhich the committee acknowledges can be considerableŠthe 
SSA would be well served to explore a broad set of possible partnerships 
to reach the widest set of users and bene˜ciaries. 
Various types of third parties already interact with the SSA. Payroll 
services companies, for example, are quite prevalent in the U.S. economy, 
providing to private companies of all sizes support for the preparation of 
their payrolls. Included in this support are the collection of Social Security 
26
 S.H. Holden and P.D. Fletcher, ﬁThe Virtual Value Chain and E-Government Partner
-ship: Non-Monetary Agreements in the IRS E-File Program,ﬂ 
International
 Journal
 of
 Public
 Administration
 28(7-8):643-664, 2005. 
27
 Information is available at http://www.irs.gov/e˜le/article/0,,id=118986,00.html, ac
-cessed June 12, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
deductions and the preparation of the required Social Security reports. 
Attorneys specializing in the preparation of disability claims are also an 
increasingly noticeable presence in our society, and they have substantial 
interactions with the SSA. Representative payeesŠfriends, family, or other 
parties who help bene˜ciaries manage their Social Security payments if 
the bene˜ciaries are not able to do so themselvesŠare another example 
of third parties that have substantial interactions with the SSA. Many of 
these third parties already help potential and current bene˜ciaries with 
SSA interactions and, as a result, already require the SSA™s attention and 
resources. The role of third parties intermediating interaction between the 
SSA and its constituents is already present and likely to increaseŠat least 
in quantity if not in kind. The SSA will need to decide how to support 
third parties in the service-delivery processŠwhile managing the SSA™s 
appropriately stringent privacy and security requirements
28
Šand what 
the potential of these individuals and groups is for assuming an impor
-tant role in service delivery working with the agency. 
THE
 S
OCIAL
 SEC
URIT
Y 
ADMINISTRATION
™S  E-G
OVERNMENT
 S
TRATEG
Y D
OC
UMENT
As part of the study process, the Committee on the Social Security 
Administration™s E-Government Strategy and Planning for the Future was 
asked to react to the SSA™s ﬁE-Government Strategy document.ﬂ
29 Early in 
the study process, brie˜ngs from the SSA and others and an examination 
of documents provided by the SSA led the committee to conclude that the 
SSA faces fundamental challenges that, unless properly addressed, would 
signi˜cantly hinder 
any
 strategy for implementing electronic services. In 
the committee™s view, electronic services are best examined in the context 
of the SSA™s overall service-delivery strategy. Therefore, in the view of 
the committee, given available resources, an extensive focus on this one 
particular document would not have been the best use of committee 
efforts or best serve the SSA or the public. In essence, this entire report is 
the committee™s response to the early strategy documents and the subse
-quent input and brie˜ngs that it received. Below is a brief discussion of 
the strategy document itself. 
28
 Recent losses of personal data by the Department of Veterans Affairs, credit reporting 
agencies, and others highlight the importance of privacy and security considerations. 
29
 This document, Social Security Administration, ﬁE-Government Strategy: Meeting Ex
-pectations in a Changing World,ﬂ dated July 22, 2004, was provided to the committee at the 
start of the study process. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
27
The Strategy Document
The SSA describes the motivation for the ﬁE-Government Strategyﬂ 
document as follows:
To guide the future development of electronic services and plan to meet 
the performance measure [targets set as part of the SSA™s FY 2005 Agency 
Performance Plan development process], agency executives have estab
-lished the SSA E-Government vision and goals along with the speci˜c 
projects to achieve the goals within 3 to 5 years.
30
The SSA sets its context for action in terms of the President™s Manage
-ment Agenda (PMA)
31
 focus on ﬁcitizen-centeredﬂ use of information tech
-nologies to provide ﬁhigh quality service, cost reduction, improved access 
to services and government accountability.ﬂ
32
 The SSA also notes the pro
-found effect that the forthcoming baby boom retirement wave will have 
on its workload, as well as changing public expectations and behaviors 
with respect to online information and services. The e-government vision 
as outlined in the strategy document is to provide easy-to-use, secure, and 
cost-effective e-government services to individuals, businesses, and other 
government agencies by 2009, so that these clients and other users can 
conduct most of their business with the SSA electronically. 
The PMA separates e-government projects into four cross-agency proj
-ect portfolios: government to citizen (g2c), government to business (g2b), 
government to government (g2g), and internal ef˜ciency and effective
-ness (iee). The strategy document describes the SSA™s progress in imple
-menting discrete projects in each segment, including the Social Security 
Online Web site and the Internet Social Security bene˜t application (g2c), 
electronic wage reporting and the SSN veri˜cation service (g2b), data 
exchanges for secondary payer and veterans™ bene˜ts matching (g2g), and 
travel bookings (iee).  It then highlights selected projects, such as eDIB, 
supporting the agency™s e-government goals and lists e-government goals 
linked to three of the agency™s four strategic goals (Service, Stewardship, 
and Staff). For example:
30
 Social Security Administration, ﬁE-Government Strategy: Meeting Expectations in a 
Changing World,ﬂ July 22, 2004, p. 4. 
31
 For more information on the PMA generally, see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/
budintegration/pma_index.html, accessed June 12, 2007. The SSA leads the eVital project (in 
the government-to-government portfolio described above); the goal is to establish common 
processes for federal and state agencies to collect, process, analyze, and share birth- and 
death-record information. 
32
 All quotations in this subsection are taken directly from the ﬁE-Government Strategyﬂ 
document (see footnote 29, above). 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Ł ﬁBetter identify SSA interactions that are appropriate for self-
 
serviceﬂ is an element in support of the Service goal (the lead is ODCO);
Ł ﬁDevelop an integrated policy framework on privacy, security, and 
disclosure,ﬂ ﬁEstablish new g2b partnerships with our consultants and 
with interest groups,ﬂ and ﬁManage and measure the cost-effectiveness 
of a portfolio of e-Gov products and services as opposed to an isolated 
focus on single Online products/servicesﬂ are elements in support of the 
Stewardship goal (the leads are the Of˜ce of the Chief Information Of˜cer 
[OCIO]/ODCS and ODCO; ODCO and ODCComm; and ODCO, respec
-tively); and 
Ł ﬁStructure programs and policy to better ˜t the electronic world 
while continuing to maintain the integrity of the programsﬂ is an element 
of the Staff goal (the lead is the E-Government Executive Council).
33
 The strategy document describes the governance and organization 
of the SSA™s e-government activities as spread across the E-Government 
Executive Council (to provide leadership at the Deputy Commissioner 
level), the Associate Commissioner E-Government Steering Committee (to 
develop and monitor the implementation of the strategy), and the rela
-tively new position of the Chief Information Of˜cer (responsible for the 
e-government portion of the PMA and for ensuring that information tech
-nology and information resources are acquired and managed according 
to the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996, passed 
as part of the National Defense Authorization Act for 1996 [Public Law 
104-106] and the E-Government Act of 2002 [Public Law 107-347]). 
Brief Assessment
Over the course of the study, the committee examined the SSA™s 
history, current status, and strategic plans for providing electronic infor
-mation and services to its various user groups (see Box 1.2 for some 
examples of these users and uses). The resulting report is not so much a 
reaction to what is in the SSA™s strategy document as a reaction to what 
is not included. In isolation, and at ˜rst glance, the agency™s e-govern
-ment goalsŠto employ a citizen-centered approach, to ensure privacy 
and security, to pursue partnerships, to achieve cost-effectiveness, to 
align the organization for progressŠseem reasonable. However, in the 
committee™s view, this approach will not take the agency where it needs 
to go. The strategic goals and projects do not break out of the status quo 
organizational culture and the highly cautious approach to adopting and 
33
 Social Security Administration, ﬁE-Government Strategy: Meeting Expectations in a 
Changing World,ﬂ July 22, 2004, pp. 11-12.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
29
deploying contemporary IT. They do not set the SSA on the path that it 
needs to be on in an environment of continuous technological and societal 
change. An implicit theme in this report is that the agency™s technological 
underpinnings and its organizational culture should each be examined in 
order to ensure that all are poised to support the shift toward a culture 
of continuously striving to meet effectively the manifold pressures for 
change. The committee™s vision is of an SSA that is proactive and thriving 
in an environment of continuous technological and societal change. The 
committee believes that this report can be useful in helping the agency™s 
dedicated employees reach that vision.
OU
TLINE
 OF
 THE
 R
EPORT
Beyond the Summary (which includes all of the ˜ndings and recom
-mendations found in the body of the report) and the background and 
current context provided in this chapter, the rest of this report examines 
and assesses the SSA™s medium- and long-term strategy for electronic 
services, including technological assumptions, operational capabilities, 
functional requirements, and future goals. Chapter 2 describes current 
electronic services offered by world-class ˜nancial institutions. In the 
committee™s view, the experiences of ˜nancial institutions are a source of 
important lessons and insights for the SSA (and other agencies) seeking to 
meet modern expectations and requirements. Chapter 3 provides a brief 
overview and assessment of the SSA™s current technological infrastructure 
and organizational approach and summarizes relevant technological and 
demographic trends, along with their implications for the effective provi
-sion of electronic services. Chapter 4 provides an assessment of the SSA™s 
current organizational culture and structure and addresses the impact of 
culture and structure on the SSA™s IT choices and service delivery. Chap
-ter 4 concludes with a discussion of opportunities for change. The report 
outlines a variety of ways in which the SSA can position itself to meet the 
demands of the future and effectively integrate electronic services into its 
long-term service-delivery strategy.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
1Online resources indicated as ﬁnowﬂ available were available at the stated locations as of 
April 17, 2007.
BOX 1.2
 Electronic Services at the Social Security Administration: 
 Users and Uses
Throughout this study, the Committee on the Social Security Administration™s 
E-Government Strategy and Planning for the Future has been mindful of the broad 
range of current and potential users of Social Security Administration (SSA) elec
-tronic services, as well as of the variety of uses that online capabilities do and can 
enable. The following examples present ways in which an increasingly effective 
www.ssa.gov system can help serve the spectrum of SSA client and user com
-munities. It is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to illustrate capabilities that 
are available now
1 or that could be made available in the future. By presenting 
these examples, the committee does not intend to suggest or imply that the SSA 
should provide only electronic services in any particular program or to a certain 
groupŠindeed, multiple channels will always need to be maintained, as there will 
always be some population that is unable or unwilling to use electronic services. 
Ł A worker approaching retirement age
 can now use the SSA™s Retirement 
Planner tools, available at http://www.ssa.gov/retire2/, to ˜nd his or her retirement 
age, to see the trade-offs between retirement age and bene˜t amount, to learn 
how work after retirement and other bene˜ts affect SSA payments, and to com
-plete most
 of the paperwork needed to apply for retirement bene˜ts. At present, 
applicants must mail originals or certi˜ed copies of supporting documents such as 
a birth certi˜cate to the SSA or take them to an SSA of˜ce, even if the application 
is made electronically. In the future, if applicants were able to include identifying 
information about their birth certi˜cates (or circumstances of birth) in the electronic 
application and if this information was suf˜cient for use by the SSA to obtain certi
-˜ed birth information through a partnership with the states, then the application 
process could be entirely electronic, faster, and would not generate visits to local 
SSA of˜ces. 
Ł A retiree 
can ˜nd information about the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan 
now at http://ssa.gov/prescriptionhelp/.
Ł The father of a low-birth-weight child 
can go to http://www.ssa.gov/d&s1.
htm now for information on Supplemental Security Income (SSI) eligibility and on 
how to apply for SSI disability bene˜ts on behalf of his daughter.
Ł A newly disabled worker 
can ˜nd information now about the SSA programs 
for which he or she may be eligible, detailed information about the Disability Insur
-ance (DI) and SSI programs, ˜ll out an online disability application, and get an Adult 
Disability Starter Kit to help prepare for the disability interview. Medical providers 
can submit supporting information online through the SSA™s Electronic Records 
Express Web site, or fax the records to the SSA or the state Disability Determi
-nation Services (DDS) agency. Information about Electronic Records Express is 
available now at http://www.ssa.gov/ere/index.html.
Ł A self-employed person 
can use his or her Social Security number (SSN) as 
a taxpayer identi˜cation number, can report annual income and expenses by ˜ling 
Schedule C, and can calculate the amount of self-employment tax owed by ˜ling 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BACKGROUND
 AND
 CURRENT
 CONTEXT 
31
Schedule SE, both of which are attached to his or her current federal income tax 
Form 1040. The self-employment tax includes both Social Security and Medicare 
payments. The IRS now sends a record of this Social Security tax payment to the 
SSA so that it can be added to the individual™s earnings history. 
Ł Service-provider companies
 offering accounting and payroll services can 
help their clients to comply with requirements for SSN veri˜cation and electronic 
wage and W-2 reporting. Employers and their authorized representatives can use 
the suite of services available now at the SSA™s Business Services Online site, 
http://www.ssa.gov/bso/bsowelcome.htm.
Ł Attorneys, advocates, and other third-party representatives 
can assist cli
-ents who have a variety of disabilities that might entitle them to SSA disability and 
income support bene˜ts. Their primary services are to help bene˜ciaries negoti
-ate the complex interactions between the SSA™s program rules and those of other 
federal agencies and state and local social services agencies.
  In most cases, 
clients have signed a power of attorney to recognized third-party representatives 
to represent them before the SSA to help ensure that they receive the full bene˜ts 
to which they are entitled.
  Information for advocates, attorneys, and third-party 
representatives is now available at http://www.ssa.gov/onlineservices/thirdparty.
htm and http://www.ssa.gov/thirdparties.htm.
Ł In the future, a 
Social Security claims representative 
(CR) in a local ˜eld 
of˜ce could use a suite of electronic services to develop the required electronic 
evidence to support disability or retirement bene˜ts claims as well as continuation 
of disability bene˜ts. The CR typically obtains prior-year earnings and tax informa
-tion from the Internal Revenue Service. The CR also needs to get information from 
a variety of state databases to ascertain proof of age, marriage, and relationship to 
pre-teen children in the family. Determining eligibility might also require information 
not currently readily available to the SSA. Automated tools to facilitate this process 
would help ensure that bene˜ciaries are more likely to receive the bene˜ts to which 
they are entitled more quickly and with fewer chances of error. Currently
, only parts 
of this process are done electronically. 
Ł A woman planning her wedding 
uses a wedding-related Web site with vari
-ous ﬁto-doﬂ lists. She sees that, because she plans to change her name after she 
is married, she will need a new Social Security card in her married name. She 
uses a link on the site to go to www.ssa.gov and reads why it is important to get 
the new card now, ˜nds a link to a form to ˜ll out, and sees instructions on how 
to send or take the supporting documents to her nearest Social Security of˜ce. 
She downloads the ﬁApplication for a Social Security Cardﬂ (Form SS-5) from the 
SSA Web site available now at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/online/ss-5.html and 
begins to ˜ll it out. Reading the instructions, she sees that she needs to show proof 
of citizenship, proof of identity, and proof of name change to the SSA, along with 
the completed form. She does not want to mail those documents to the SSA, so 
she uses the SSA Web site Local Of˜ce Search available now at https://s044a90.
ssa.gov/apps6z/FOLO/fo001.jsp to locate the closest of˜ce. She realizes that she 
will have to leave work early sometime after her honeymoon so that she can take 
her marriage document, driver™s license, and Form SS-5 to the SSA of˜ce. In the 
future, if she could securely send certi˜ed, electronic copies of her SS-5 form to 
the SSA, along with suf˜cient identifying information pointing to her certi˜ed iden
-ti˜cation and name change documents, she could avoid making a trip to the local 
SSA of˜ce. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
2  Lessons from Electronic Services in 
 Financial Institutions
Although much about the Social Security Administration (SSA) 
is distinctive, in some ways the SSA, its activities, its informa
-tion technology (IT) needs, and its operational characteristics are 
analogous to other organizations outside the federal government. This 
chapter explores that premise and seeks to identify ways in which these 
organizations and institutions outside the federal government are dealing 
with some of the challenges that currently face the SSA in the realm of 
electronic services.
The committee recognizes that the SSA might not be able toŠor want 
toŠuse ﬁas isﬂ all of the approaches and solutions pursued by other 
institutions. Some activities that citizens conduct with the SSA involve 
one-time, very personal, potentially traumatic events in their livesŠat 
such times people desire the personal contact and support that tradi
-tional service-delivery options offer. Another stark distinguisher is the 
SSA™s funding model. The agency has a budget limited by the congres
-sional appropriations process. It is required to balance its spending of 
the appropriated funds. Given the federal context in which it operates, 
it cannot, as a general rule, raise new funds by attracting more business, 
nor can it easily justify exploring, then abandoning new services on the 
basis of a trial offering of new services as the ˜nancial industry might do. 
In practice, new services must readily be demonstrable to be in the public 
interest, and the bene˜ts of providing those services should outweigh the 
bene˜ts of developing other services competing for the same limited pot 
of funds.  
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
33
There is nonetheless substantial value in considering what might be 
learned and what might be adapted or applied as a result of studying 
organizations that only provide somewhat-analogous servicesŠif more-
routine and less-personal interactions can be accomplished ef˜ciently 
and with less staff overhead through the use of electronic services, that 
could, as an additional bene˜t, help to make more resources available for 
when more-personal service is needed. This chapter examines large-scale 
˜nancial institutions having high-volume interactions with large numbers 
of individuals. The ˜nancial services community has been one of the most 
aggressive and competitive in using IT and electronic commerce. While 
the SSA is, appropriately, neither as aggressive nor competitive, there 
are ways in which ˜nancial institutions are dealing with situations that 
are relevant for the SSA. In addition, unlike more recent Internet-based 
companies such as Amazon or eBay, major ˜nancial institutions have 
had to undergo a transformation away from primarily bricks-and-mor
-tar-based organizations to take advantage of and move into electronic 
service provision, a transformation much like what the SSA faces. At the 
same time, there are few ﬁonline-onlyﬂ banks, meaning that most ˜nancial 
institutions have had to expand the kinds of channels through which they 
offer services, not replace them. Learning from their experience of that 
transformation may also be instructive for the SSA.
THE
 T
RANSFORMATION
 IN
 F
INANCIAL
 I
NSTIT
UTIONS
Just two decades ago, banks™ interactions with their retail (individual) 
customers were almost exclusively walk-in or telephone transactions. 
Deposits and withdrawals were generally carried out in person, and 
account statements were printed on paper and sent through the mail, usu
-ally monthly. All of that started to change with the widespread deploy
-ment of automated teller machines (ATMs) and the creation of central
-ized call centers. In the 1980s, many services were introduced through 
proprietary services delivered to personal computers, screen phones, and 
television sets. However, the story of mass adoption, as well as economi
-cally feasible delivery of these services, begins in the mid- to late-1990s 
with Web-based delivery, fueled by growing public use of the Internet. 
The net effect of these changes has been to alter the entire character of the 
retail banking industry dramatically and to transform the way in which 
it is both used and perceived by its customers. Although not every bank 
has been as aggressive in all dimensions, there are lessons to be learned 
from best practices in the aggregate in the industry. 
Some aspects of the role, activities, and operations of the SSA have 
much in common with those of a large commercial bank or brokerage 
house that maintains accounts and receives and makes payments. These 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
institutions usually conduct transactions in multiple customer segments 
(individual retail customers, businesses, other ˜nancial institutions, and 
so on) and through multiple service channels (online, through ATMs and 
branch of˜ces, through call centers, and so on). For reasons of cost and 
competitiveness, most such institutions have seen increasing value in 
emphasizing online customer channels to their services. From a coarse 
technical feasibility perspective, the databases that are maintained by 
private-sector institutions are now quite comparable, both in size and 
in transaction volume, to the databases for which the SSA is responsible 
(see Chapter 3). At least one major credit card issuer has 170 million open 
accounts, comparable with the SSA™s approximately 140 million Social 
Security statements issued annually. These observations suggest that the 
experience, market research, and product-re˜nement knowledge accrued 
by these ˜nancial institutions during the past 15 years, as well as the set 
of practices and approaches to effective information- and service-deliv
-ery capabilities and customer service that they have developed, can be 
strongly relevant to the SSA. An examination of the commercial ˜nancial 
services industry offers relevant insights and lessons learned for effective 
electronic services. These can be useful to the SSA and other government 
agencies seeking to make more comprehensive and effective transitions 
to online services. 
Online banking, in particular, seems to be a relevant, if not completely 
analogous, success story. A segment of the public has embraced the con
-venience that comes from immediate access to virtually up-to-the-minute 
information about personal ˜nances 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (24/7).
1 Bills can be paid online and money can be transferred at all hours. Bank
-ing customers now expect that they can track the ˚ow of money both into 
and out of their accounts at all times. Thus, 24/7 access has become the 
expected norm. Given that the SSA offers some similar types of servicesŠ
albeit usually at a different frequency (monthly account changes instead 
of daily or hourly changes, for example)Šthis expectation is a reality that 
the SSA must confront. The SSA™s current clientele is generally older, less 
abled physically and/or cognitively, and less ˜nancially well off than the 
general population of online bill payers. However, as the current popula
-tion of online bill payers ages and starts using SSA services, their expecta
-tions will likely transfer to the SSA. Unlike today™s population of people 
1 
According to the Pew Internet and American Life survey of online banking in 2005, 
ﬁ˜fty-three million people, or 44% of Internet users and one-quarter of all adults, now say 
they use online banking. Those ˜gures amount to an increase of 47% over the number of 
Americans who were performing online banking in late 2002.ﬂ In 2006, that number had 
increased: ﬁFully 43% of Internet users, or about 63 million American adults, bank online.ﬂ 
See http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/149/report_display.asp, accessed July 10, 2007, 
for more information. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
35
65 and older, in another 10 years the people who are 55 to 65 and older 
will be much more technology-savvy. Thus, a forward-looking electronic 
service strategy should contend not only with the constituent population 
of today, but also with the likely constituent population of the future, 
which will inevitably be more technologically sophisticated. In addition, 
transaction and information services online have a signi˜cant cost bene˜t 
versus in-person or call-center alternatives.
The public is becoming accustomed to gaining access to personal 
banking information through bank or brokerage Web sites that present 
a smooth, seamless interface to a wide range of related services. Thus, 
banks, for example, now present to the public comprehensive Web sites 
through which customers can access information about their checking 
accounts and mortgage balances, while also viewing real-time stock mar
-ket information, and can also access increasingly comprehensive ranges of 
other ˜nancial information and services. Some of the information acces
-sible through such portals (for example, stock market data) is not owned 
by the portal maintainers themselves but is furnished as a convenient 
service. There seems to be a growing expectation that institutions such 
as ˜nancial services organizations will provide comprehensive access to 
data that their customers feel they need. This, too, is a characteristic of 
the world that the SSA will increasingly have to come to terms with. Such 
expectations are likely to hold, even though most people will deal with 
the SSA only infrequently.
2The SSA™s many users are active participants in this world that is con
-tinuing to embrace such comprehensive 24/7-Internet-accessible services. 
Internet-connected computers are increasingly present in homes, and 
a growing majority of the public increasingly looks to these computers 
as vehicles for information and timely, convenient, online transactions. 
Although younger individuals may have been the ˜rst to grasp this new 
medium as a routine source of both information and service, older seg
-2 
The partnerships that enable the consolidation of ˜nancial information and services 
are examples of a ﬁvirtual value chain.ﬂ The metaphor of the chain includes the notions 
of links, which the service provider may or may not control directly but may use for a fee 
or through partnership. In the ﬁbrick-and-mortarﬂ world, the classic example of the value 
chain is the auto industry that ˚ows from raw material providers and parts suppliers to the 
manufacturers to the distributors and dealerships that provide everything from parts to 
sales to service. Each link in the value chain does what it is best at.  Typically, the customer 
does not deal with the individual links in the chain, but instead with whichever link is as
-signed to customer-facing issues. There are analogies in the e-business world; hence the term 
ﬁvirtual value chain,ﬂ where the products being sold are information products and services 
instead of cars. The virtual value chain exists in e-government just as it does in e-business, 
with IRS e-˜le being one well-known example. S.H. Holden and P.D. Fletcher, ﬁThe Virtual 
Value Chain and E-Government Partnership: Non-Monetary Agreements in the IRS E-File 
Program,ﬂ 
International
 Journal
 of
 Public
 Administration
 28(7-8):643-664, 2005. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
ments of the public are making similar changes to their expectations and 
habits (see Chapter 4). Search services such as those provided by Google 
and Yahoo! are increasingly used to locate information and service pro
-viders. Both public and private service providers are increasingly encour
-aging online access to their services: the public is becoming accustomed to 
shopping online, tracking the progress of parcel deliveries online, paying 
bills online, and renewing driver™s licenses online. 
One important reason for this shift in delivery channels is that service 
providers generally ˜nd that online transactions are less costly than in-
person or telephone transactions.
3 This situation has changed signi˜cantly 
in the past 10 years, especially in the United States and to the advantage 
of online transactions.
4 Also, the 24/7 availability of such services makes 
them particularly convenient for customers and other users; convenience 
builds customer satisfaction and loyalty, both to the institution and to 
the online service channel, making it even more attractive for the service 
providers. Modern retail and institutional businesses generally view cus
-tomer satisfaction as a primary metric, along with cost. 
With respect to the SSA™s mission requirements, the delivery of ˜nan
-cial services has some compelling analogies to the delivery of bene˜ts to 
citizens. For example:
Ł Customers expect their ˜nancial institutions to keep track of their 
accounts ˚awlessly and to handle transactions with complete privacy, 
security, and ef˜ciency; 
Ł Large ˜nancial institutions have transaction volumes comparable 
with those of the SSA (partially due to consolidation
5 in the bank indus
-try); and
Ł A large proportion of customer transactions have moved online in 
the past 10 years.
3 
For instance, an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
study reported that by the late 1990s, traditional branch banking customer service cost $1.08 
per transaction, compared with $0.13 per transaction for Internet-based e-business. (That is, 
e-business provided an 88 percent cost savings per transaction.) That same study reported 
that telephone-based banking customer service cost $0.54 per transaction, indicating signi˜
-cant cost advantages to shifting service from phone to online. OECD, 
The
 Economic
 and
 Social
 Impact
 of
 Electronic
 Commerce:
 Preliminary
 Findings
 and
 Research
 Agenda,
 Paris, France: OECD, 
1999, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/3/12/1944883.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007.
4 
With the convergence of voice and data and the emergence of Voice over Internet Proto
-col (VoIP) and speech recognition, the cost differences between call centers (for automated 
transactions) and the Internet are narrowing. 
5 
The ef˜ciencies provided by integrated electronic services have been substantial drivers 
for the consolidation that has taken place. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
37
The following sections describe the state of the practice in the ˜nan
-cial services industry and note parallels and potential lessons for the SSA 
and other agencies. While the committee is focused on the SSA, the les
-sons here are broadly applicable and should not be construed to imply 
that the SSA is alone in facing these challenges.
6 TYPICAL O
NLINE
 CAPABILITIES
Online services made available by banks encompass essentially any
-thing except cash withdrawal and check or cash deposit.
  Routine banking 
transactions now increasingly occur online, leaving customer service rep
-resentatives at call centers and branches to handle the more complex situ
-ations (and sales opportunities). For brokerages, online transactions can 
comprise over 90 percent of their total interactions with their customers. 
There are several categories of online capabilities, and while each plays a 
role in the delivery of services, they are at different points of maturity and 
adoption. Several of these capabilities are described below. 
Product Information and Service Aggregation
Ideally, all products and services delivered by a ˜nancial institution 
are described in detail on the institution™s Web site. This amount of infor
-mation can be overwhelming, so in virtually all cases there are three ways 
in which information tends to be found and accessed: by looking for links 
corresponding to a need or precipitating event (for example, marriage); 
by looking for a particular product type (for example, loan account); and 
through a simple text search (for example, ﬁcd ratesﬂ). All three mecha
-nisms are widely used by customers, although search
 has increased in 
importance as Internet users have become habituated to the search box 
as the point of entry to content.
Over time, customers have grown to expect that their relationship 
with a single institution can be managed almost entirely online in a seam
-less fashion. Therefore, although retail banking, credit card, mortgage 
lending, and brokerage units (for example) are usually separate business 
units within a ˜nancial institution, customers expect them to be available 
in one place, with one log-in. Although most in the industry no longer 
think of this as ﬁaggregation,ﬂ it has required ˜nancial institutions to 
gather information from different systems, with different rules, and often 
from legally separate businesses, and to make them appear to be a single 
cohesive system that provides ﬁone-stop service.ﬂ 
6 
Nor should the relevancies discussed here be taken to suggest that the SSA is not aware 
of these considerations. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Another form of aggregation is the gathering and organizing in one 
place of account information from multiple ˜nancial institutions. This 
aggregation can also be applied to non˜nancial accounts such as frequent-
˚yer miles, e-mail accounts, and so on. Intuit™s Quicken as well as several 
˜nancial institutions™ Web-based aggregation services (such as Bank of 
America™s My Portfolio and Fidelity™s Full View) are examples. Another 
type of aggregation service that is being adopted is Bill Presentment, 
which assembles and organizes incoming bills to make them ready for 
payment. Coupled with online bill payment, this service eliminates the 
round-trip ˜rst-class mail circuit of receiving a paper bill and paying it 
by paper check. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
In order to design and deliver content through a Web site with state-
of-the-practice functionality, an organization should conduct a thorough 
review of content and access to that content. What are the obvious high-
level ﬁtypesﬂ of material or services that users might be looking for? The 
committee has not conducted a detailed analysis of this issue, but exam
-ples for the SSA might be ﬁretirement bene˜ts,ﬂ ﬁdisability application,ﬂ 
or ﬁearnings data.ﬂ Web pages, especially home pages, that are ﬁ˚atﬂ in 
structure, with a large number of disaggregated links, can appear clut
-tered, disorganized, and confusing to users. (See also the discussion in the 
section entitled ﬁFinancial Institution Web Site Designﬂ below.) The public 
expectation that an individual will be able to ˜nd and access all of his or 
her bene˜t accounts in one place will continue to grow. Accordingly, a 
seamless presentation of any bene˜ts or services to users that is facilitated 
by effective search capabilitiesŠeven if the management of those bene˜ts 
crosses organizational linesŠis preferred. 
Account Management and Money Movement
Account-management and information activities include such tasks 
as looking up balances and terms. These activities once comprised the 
bulk of volume of online ﬁtransactionsﬂ for banks. Simply answering the 
question ﬁHow much money do I have?ﬂ was much simpler to do online 
for a segment of customers than to use the telephone (where inquiries of 
this kind are usually handled by an automated interactive voice response 
[IVR] system and can be quite cumbersome), an ATM, or a branch teller. 
Most account-management features also allow users to query balances 
or move funds among accounts or products after signing on to the Web 
site once. As an example, most users of online banking can log in to their 
˜nancial institution™s Web site and see information on their savings and 
checking accounts, their mortgage, credit cards, and possibly their retire
-Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
39
ment funds if they have chosen to consolidate their ˜nancial dealings 
with one ˜rm.
Money-movement activities in ˜nancial institutions include account-
to-account transfers (within the institution), bill payment, and account-
to-account movement to other institutions. Of these, bill payment services 
have caused the most dramatic changes in customer behavior. U.S. banks 
have historically played only a limited role in consumer bill payment. 
While some activities, such as recurring automated payments for ˜xed 
amounts (such as mortgage payments) and telephone-based ﬁpay anyoneﬂ 
services were available in the 1990s, there was very little adoption of these 
services. Online bill payment is now used by approximately half of online 
customers. Bill payment has fundamentally changed those consumers™ 
interactions with their banks, both in terms of frequency of interaction 
and ﬁstickinessﬂ
7Ša ﬁstickyﬂ Web site has features that cause visitors to 
spend more time on the site and to return to the site. Thus, stickiness helps 
retain customers in the electronic service-delivery channel. 
Brokerages and brokerage arms of banks offer every type of trading 
capability from buying and selling of simple securities and mutual funds 
to limit orders and option puts and calls. Trading online is today the stan
-dard way for individual investors to interact with the markets.
The ability for consumers to manage their accounts interactively 
online presents myriad security and access-control challenges. While this 
report™s focus is not on security per se, it is a critical component of any 
electronic services strategy, as the SSA is appropriately aware. As ˜nancial 
institutions deploy and advance their own security strategies, there will 
likely be lessons for the SSA and other government agencies in how those 
institutions proceed. 
Authentication for consumers on Web sites of ˜nancial institutions 
generally consists of a log-in and a password. Some of the banks with 
the highest rates of adoption for online services have used an authentica
-tion scheme that is already known to the customerŠhis or her ATM card 
number and personal identi˜cation number (PIN)Šand required no extra 
enrollment step. The October 2005 guidance on authentication from the 
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council has been changing 
this situation fundamentally; it requires multifactor authentication for 
banking transactions by the end of 2006.
8 Most banks have implemented 
some risk-based approaches to authentication (additional veri˜cation of 
7 
See http://www.arraydev.com/commerce/JIBC/9908-03.htm, accessed June 20, 2007; 
and M. Khalifa, M. Limayem, and V. Liu, ﬁOnline Consumer Stickiness: A Longitudinal 
Study,ﬂ 
Journal
 of
 Global
 Information
 Management
 10(3):1-14, 2002.
8 
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, ﬁAuthentication in an Internet Bank
-ing Environment,ﬂ FIL-103-2005, Oct. 12, 2005. See http://www.fdic.gov/news/news
/˜nancial/2005/˜l10305.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
high-risk transactions such as funds transferŠfor example, out-of-channel 
veri˜cation and/or stronger authentication) and employ layered authenti
-cation (for example, a minimum of identi˜cation [ID] and password, other 
knowledge-based checks, plus behavioral anomaly detection; two-factor 
authentication is also being introduced for the riskier interactions).
Another large issue here is better authentication of the ˜nancial insti
-tution™s Web site and e-mails to the customerŠwhich is currently a major 
vulnerability, given the prevalence of ﬁphishingﬂ scams.
9 The Financial 
Services Technology Consortium has launched the project ﬁAuthenti
-cating the FI [Financial Institution] to the Consumerﬂ to address this 
issue.
10
Relevance for the SSA 
Despite the SSA™s early unsuccessful experience with making the 
Personal Earnings and Bene˜t Estimate Statement (PEBES, discussed 
brie˚y in Chapter 4) available online, if the SSA wishes to deliver state-
of-the-practice electronic services, then online access to individuals™ Social 
Security Statements of Earnings and other account information will be a 
required and basic function. Given the near ubiquity of such functionality 
in the ˜nancial services sector, as time goes on its lack will appear increas
-ingly strange to a user base that is ever more technologically experienced. 
The implication is that users are accustomed to a high-value proposition 
in their online transactions that makes it more attractive to use electronic 
transactions than transactions by telephone or in person. If the SSA does 
not provide such a compelling set of services online to its users, they will 
remain loyal to the traditional service-delivery channels that they have 
become comfortable with in the past. 
The SSA will never (and should not) remove the customer™s ability to 
contact a human if desired; however, in order to attract and retain users in 
online channels, the SSA should strive to provide a consolidated view to 
users across program lines, even if the programs are run by different parts 
of the SSA organizationŠfor example, a consolidated view of retirement 
bene˜ts and disability bene˜ts. Such provision may bene˜t from technol
-ogy and data infrastructure that would support the capability for users 
9 
ﬁPhishingﬂ is an attack that tricks a user into entering sensitive information (such as ac
-count numbers, log-in names, and passwords) at the wrong Web site, making it available to 
attackers. The most common example is an e-mail from a bank stating that there is an irregu
-larity in payments or accounts that the recipient must attend to, and a link for the recipient 
to follow. But the underlying link takes the recipient to the attacker™s Web site, which looks 
like the bank™s legitimate site. The recipient follows the link and enters the information to 
access the account. The attacker can now also do so.
10
 See http://www.fstc.org/projects/current/auth˜_home.2007.php, accessed June 20, 
2007, for more information.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
41
to authenticate themselves once to gain access to a variety of information 
and services across the SSA. (As more users access services over the Inter
-net, ﬁphishingﬂ may also become a larger security risk for the SSA.) 
Customer Service
In ˜nancial institutions, straightforward customer service activities 
such as opening or applying for accounts, ordering checks, changing one™s 
address, and changing bene˜ciaries have moved online steadily. When 
third parties are involved, such as in ordering checks, and even in many 
cases when they are not, ˜nancial institutions had been slow to offer the 
option of ﬁpre-˜llingﬂ known customer information, making the online 
process more tedious. The more advanced sites now deliver that capabil
-ity to authenticated customers and, as a result, provide more personalized 
services, thus making those services more convenient for users. With 
respect to opening accounts, banks and brokerages have been moving 
steadily away from simply making application forms available online 
toward offering fully interactive, ﬁpre-˜lledﬂ and streamlined application 
processes.
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies
 Maintaining multiple channels for people to access services is impor
-tant (apart from a very few online-only banks, ˜nancial services institu
-tions maintain several use channels). Indeed, there may be lessons to be 
learned from the ˜nancial services sector with respect to state-of-the-art 
telephone triage and automation as well. Nevertheless, the state of the 
practice in retail ˜nancial institutions is to make available online all com
-mon services that are feasible from the customer™s perspective. When the 
SSA is unable to provide a service electronicallyŠfor example, owing to 
regulationŠclear explanations and alternative means of access are an 
important part of a comprehensive service-delivery strategy. 
Where appropriate, a form or forms should be made available (not 
just as a printable blank form, but as a printable form that can be both 
˜lled in and submitted online) with detailed instructions on other needed 
materials and on how the applicant can complete the process. The state of 
the practice for online services today is that common information should 
only be provided once. For the SSA, this suggests that when a life event 
requires multiple forms for multiple programs, the common information 
should only be requested once. Pre-˜lling for authenticated users (such 
as current bene˜ciaries) should be the norm,
11
 with clear explanations 
11
 The committee understands that this capability is under development.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
and alternatives provided for exceptional cases. This kind of functionality 
will have implications for the interfaces between the front-end electronic 
service sites and the back-end databases, processes, and infrastructure. 
(See Chapter 3 for more on technological considerations.) 
In general, the maintenance of multiple channels should not preclude 
the transformation needed to provide services comparable with those of a 
large-scale ˜nancial services institutionŠsuch institutions maintain mul
-tiple channels themselves. As described in Chapter 4, e-government will 
eventually become simply ﬁgovernmentﬂ (and, accordingly, electronic 
services should simply be thought of as ﬁservicesﬂ). 
FINANCIAL INSTIT
UTION WEB SITE DESIGN
Web Design Principles
It is not accidental that the top ˜nancial sites are alike in many ways, 
and it is not due to one™s copying another; this is an industry in which 
every participant expends great energy differentiating itself from its com
-petitors. There are no hard-and-fast rules for the ﬁbestﬂ design for a bank 
or brokerage site. However, a set of common principles has emerged, in 
addition to those standards and best practices codi˜ed by organizations 
such as the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). These principles, relat
-ing to simplicity, navigation, and accessibility, are described below. Most 
of the companies™ design processes incorporate signi˜cant user input and 
an understanding of appropriate usability mechanisms and techniquesŠ
this drives similarity in information architecture and navigation. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies
 Universal design principles should be applied to Web sites and usabil
-ity testing should be made a routine part of the design process.
12
 Before 
sites face actual users, it is imperative to adopt user-centered design meth
-ods in which the needs and constraints of users are taken into account 
at all stages: that is, in design, development, deployment, requirements 
analysis from user perspectives, user participation in the design process, 
and user testing. 
In addition, careful analysis about what kinds of services are most 
analogous to those offered by ˜nancial services institutions (and what are 
not) will be needed. Where suf˜cient similarity is found, not everything 
12
 See, for example, B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant,
 Designing
 the
 User
 Interface
, 4th ed., 
Addison Wesley, Boston, 2005; or S. Krug, 
Don™t
 Make
 Me
 Think:
 A Common
 Sense
 Approach
 to
 Web
 Usability
, 2nd ed.,
 New Riders Press, 2005.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
43
needs to be tested; many of the most common practices in industry can be 
assumed to be the current best practices. Care must be taken, though, not 
to assume that the customer bases are necessarily similar; demographics 
and user expectations of the SSA user base may differ in subtle ways from 
those of major ˜nancial institutions, requiring attention when designing 
interfaces. Appropriate attention to standards and best practices articu
-lated by Web standards organizations such as the W3C may also be help
-ful. Of particular importance is the need to avoid the assumption that 
everyone uses or has access to one or a small number of browsers. In 
general, as more is learned about how people interact with the Web and 
as the ways that people interact with Web sites change, the standards and 
best practices for the design of effective and usable Web sites will change. 
The SSA Web site™s design will need to evolve as the best practices and 
standards evolve.
Navigation and Simplicity 
Any effective ˜nancial services site will have uncluttered pages with 
clear emphasis on the most common and natural transaction at each step. 
Achieving effective simplicity can be a more subtle challenge than one 
might think at ˜rst. In the case of basic Web design principles, counting 
the number of clicks to a transaction was once the core metric applied. 
This metric led to much ﬁbusierﬂ pages and more choices at each step. 
This way of measuring simplicity has been relegated to a secondary mea
-sure, primarily for the following reasons:
Ł Considerably-more-complex pages are tolerable for users whose 
Internet access speeds have improved (owing to increasing penetration 
of broadband access and high-speed Internet access from the workplace, 
libraries, or other institutions); 
Ł New technologies that allow pages to be dynamically updated 
eliminate the need for a complete page refresh; and 
Ł Users have become more sophisticated.
Simplicity also applies to visual clutter; if the eyes cannot ˜nd what 
they are looking for among things too similar to each other, then the user 
is likely to fail. Having good graphical design, putting similar things near 
each other, using wording that is clearŠall lead to successful designs. 
An additional simplifying feature, from the user™s perspective, is for the 
back end to be ˚exible and robust in terms of how it handles data. Many 
Web sites distinguish themselves by both being maximally ˚exible in the 
syntax that they accept (for instance, telephone numbers may be entered 
with or without blanks, dots, or hyphens) and maximally consistent in the 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
syntax that they produce (for instance, always exhibiting telephone num
-bers consistently broken down into area code, exchange, and subscriber 
number separated by hyphens). An emphasis on robust data handling 
and presentationŠaccepting anything reasonable but always producing 
a canonical formŠcan achieve a huge improvement in data quality and 
in user experience while the user is entering data.
A navigational norm has emerged, consistent with many other com
-mercial sites. If a single domain name serves multiple natural audiences, 
the navigation bar at the top allows users to indicate what type of cus
-tomer they are and/or what services they are interested in (see the ˜rst 
two examples in Figure 2.1). Alternatively, they may navigate by type 
of product or service they are seeking (see the second two examples in 
Figure 2.1).
Common elements on the sorts of sites illustrated in Figure 2.1 are 
ﬁsearchﬂ and ﬁlog-in.ﬂ The log-in function is the gateway between the 
authenticated and unauthenticated parts of the site. For virtually all mod
-ern ˜nancial sites, the user experience (look and feel, navigation) is the 
same whether one is on the authenticated or unauthenticated part of the 
FIGURE 2-1FIGURE 2.1
 Examples of typical commercial navigation styles.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
45
site. Although the technology behind sites can be quite different, that 
distinction is designed to be transparent to the user.
There is less consistency than ever in the use of underlining for links. 
This was a virtual requirement in good design 10 years ago, but that is no 
longer the case. Through extended use of the Internet, along with acclima
-tization to interaction online, users have learned to recognize other cues, 
now expecting nearly everything except paragraphs of text to be a link. 
The use of underlining for link-intensive pages or sections of pages causes 
visual clutter and reduces readability.
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
As a simplifying measure and as a way to emphasize a service ori
-entation, content on the Web site regarding the agency itself (as opposed 
to the services that it offers) might be placed in a section subordinate 
to material that emphasizes services at the top level. A navigation bar 
should be composed of ﬁparallelﬂ items in some dimension. ﬁSearchﬂ 
should have a text-input box. It is particularly important to understand 
the primary modes of use represented by those who will visit this Web 
site and to design labels suited to those individuals: for example, ﬁNewly 
Retired,ﬂ ﬁChecking Bene˜ts,ﬂ or ﬁAre You Ready to Retire?ﬂ
13
 Accessibility 
All well-designed ˜nancial services sites are developed to be ﬁacces
-sibleﬂ to the visually impaired, in the technical sense of their information 
or content pages being W3C accessibility compliant
14
 and thus navigable 
by a screen reader (such as Job Access with Speech, or JAWS
15
). That is 
more challenging for the transactional portions of sites, but progress has 
been made there in the past 5 years. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
The SSA Web site, as well as other government Web sites, is expected 
to be at least Section 508 compliant; the SSA should ensure that all internal 
13
 Among government portals, FirstGov.gov offered an example of a reasonably effective 
use of usage-mode-oriented parallelism in the way that it presents its options.
14
 See World Wide Web Consortium, Web Accessibility Initiative, ﬁWeb Content Accessibil
-ity Guidelines 2.0 (WCAG 2.0) Working Draft,ﬂ Nov. 23, 2005, at http://www.w3.org/WAI/, 
accessed June 20, 2007.
15
 JAWS (Job Access with Speech) is a screen reader for the visually impaired. See http://
www.freedomscienti˜c.com/fs_products/JAWS_HQ.asp, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
and external applications are also compliant with Section 508
16
 and, to the 
extent possible, with other accessibility guidelines (such as those devel
-oped under the auspices of the W3C
17
). The SSA has a particular interest 
in accessibility given that it serves the disabled community explicitly. As 
more sophisticated electronic services are made available, maintaining 
accessibility will be important going forward, especially given the broad, 
diverse, and heterogeneous user base of the SSA.
 CU
STOMERS
 AND
 USERS
 OF
 ONLINE
 SER
VICES
Over 90 percent of U.S. households maintain a ﬁtransaction accountﬂ 
(such as a checking account, bill-paying account, or share draft account) 
with a bank, thrift institution, or credit union.
18
 Nearly all of these institu
-tions offer online capabilities to their customers, and almost half of their 
customers make use of some or all of these services.
19
Getting to these levels of penetration has taken 10 years of sustained 
and focused effort across the industry.
20
 Banking customers in the United 
States, even those most devoted to the online channel, remain largely 
ﬁmultichannel,ﬂ with consumers making use at the very least of a bank™s 
16
 Per the Web site http://www.section508.gov (accessed June 14, 2007), ﬁIn 1998, Con
-gress amended the Rehabilitation Act to require Federal agencies to make their electronic 
and information technology accessible to people with disabilities. Inaccessible technology 
interferes with an individual™s ability to obtain and use information quickly and easily. 
Section 508 was enacted to eliminate barriers in information technology, to make available 
new opportunities for people with disabilities, and to encourage development of technolo
-gies that will help achieve these goals. The law applies to all Federal agencies when they 
develop, procure, maintain, or use electronic and information technology. Under Section 508 
. . . agencies must give disabled employees and members of the public access to information 
that is comparable to the access available to others.ﬂ
17
 See the Web Accessibility Initiative at http://www.w3.org/WAI/, accessed June 20, 
2007.
18
 In 2004, the Federal Reserve Board found that 91.3 percent of families hold transaction 
accounts. See Brian K. Bucke, Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore, ﬁRecent Changes in 
U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,ﬂ 
Fed
-eral
 Reser
ve Bulletin
, Vol. 92, February 2006, pp. A1-A38 (Table 5), available at http://www.
federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/2004/bull0206.pdf, accessed July 10, 2007.
19
 Ted Schadler, Charles S. Golvin with Jed Kolko, Sally M. Cohen, and Tenley McHarg, 
ﬁThe State of Consumers and Technology: Benchmark 2005ﬂ in Forrester, 
Consumer
 Techno
-graphics
 North
 America
, available at http://www.forrester.com/go?docid=36987, accessed 
June 14, 2007.
20
 The experiments in so-called online banks that allow only online interaction peaked in 
the bubble years of 1999-2001. Of these, Wingspan and First Security were ultimately unsuc
-cessful, for example. Although some, such as NetBank, have survived, their impact on the 
industry has thus far been negligible in the United States. There are, however, some special 
cases, such as institutions offering above-market certi˜cate of deposit rates, where online-
only institutions (such as ING) are beginning to gather substantial deposits.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
47
ATMs for cash and check-deposit needs, and more generally remaining at 
least occasional users of branches and call centers. 
The retail brokerage industry serves a smaller client base. The major
-ity of brokerage accounts are with ﬁlower costﬂ brokers, formerly known 
as ﬁdiscountﬂ brokers, such as Charles Schwab, Fidelity, E*Trade, and 
Ameritrade. Nearly all customers of these brokers, as well as a majority 
of clients of the traditional ﬁwire housesﬂ (such as Merrill Lynch) have 
sophisticated online capabilities. Trading online has become the default 
execution method; adoption of online services has transformed the retail 
brokerage industry. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
Much of the ˜nancial services industry, which previously relied heav
-ily on paper-based transactions for customer interactions, has shifted large 
proportions of its interactions with consumers online. Certain market seg
-ments, primarily those early adopters with more income, education, and 
computer-savvy, are both comfortable and experienced with e-commerce. 
As a result, they should be comfortable with e-government transactionsŠ
even those involving their bene˜tsŠbecause they have already completed 
analogous transactions online with private-sector ˜nancial institutions. 
Looking ahead to the kinds of services that might be expected in the 
future, these same users might also value being able to understand their 
complete ˜nancial picture online if the ˜nancial services industry had the 
capacity to display information from the SSA as part of users™ ˜nancial 
pro˜les without rekeying the dataŠalbeit such a service raises the usual 
privacy and security considerations. 
BU
SINESS
 INCENTI
VES FOR ONLINE SER
VICES
Banks and brokerages have made signi˜cant investments in develop
-ing their online service channels. One motivation has been that the cost per 
transaction differs greatly among service-delivery channels. The business 
case for doing so is composed of multiple elements: customer satisfaction, 
customer retention, acquisition of new customers, cross-sales of other 
products to existing customers, and the economic trade-offs between cost 
reduction and the cost of delivering online services. 
Customer Satisfaction
A solid set of well-designed online capabilities improves customer 
satisfaction. In the past 10 years there has been ever-increasing focus on 
customer satisfaction as the ˜nancial services industry has consolidated 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
and personal relationships with local bankers have been replaced by inter
-actions with megabanks. In the leading institutions, customer satisfaction 
is carefully measured and tracked. These banks can therefore measure the 
impact of online capabilities through matched samples of online custom
-ers versus customers using other service channels (though ˜nding that 
control group for predictive purposes becomes more dif˜cult as online 
usage becomes increasingly ubiquitous). Although the banks™ ˜ndings 
are proprietary, in general the results are thought to be very positive, with 
customers who conduct much of their business online showing signi˜cant 
improvements over time in their overall view of the banks.
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies
 Appropriate measures of customer satisfaction require data from 
individuals using all of the agency™s service channels. This means that 
a representative sample of all individuals who interact with the agency, 
whether by phone, in an of˜ce, or online, should be consistently surveyed 
on a few simple measures of service satisfaction. One important observa
-tion is that the effectiveness of electronic services should be determined 
by measuring 
relati
ve overall satisfaction of the users of online services 
as
 compared
 with
 the satisfaction of the remaining population of individuals 
using phone or of˜ce interactions (as opposed to measuring ﬁsatisfaction 
with online serviceﬂ by itself). Note that the topic of customer satisfaction 
addressed in this subsection is only one of the many reasons for encour
-aging the use of electronic servicesŠothers include ef˜ciency, accuracy 
and improved error rates, and convenience.
21
 Monitoring customer sat
-isfaction as part of an overall metrics-based approach (see Chapter 4) to 
service provision can aid in encouraging the use of electronic services and 
in retaining users for that channel. 
Customer Retention, New Customer Acquisition, and Marketing
Most Americans inevitably turn to the SSA at key points in their lives. 
Therefore, the SSA does not need to ﬁacquireﬂ new customers or ﬁretainﬂ 
them in exactly same way that a commercial concern would seek to attract 
new customers and keep its customers from switching to a competitor. 
However, the advantages that can be gained by the SSA and the public 
21
 A 2006 OECD paper proposing an inventory of business case indicators for e-governmen
t initiatives noted both reductions in bene˜ts mispayments and in savings ef˜ciency from both 
time savings for public servants and reduced error rates and rework. OECD E-Governmen
t Project, 
Proposal
 for Work
 on an Inventory of E-Government Business Case Indicators, Feb. 6, 2006, 
available at http://webdomino1.oecd.org/COMNET/PUM/egovproweb.nsf/viewHtml/
index/$FILE/GOV.PGC.EGOV.2006.3.doc, accessed January 4, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
49
through wider use of electronic services do create motivation for the SSA 
to try to acquire and retain users in electronic channels of service delivery. 
Toward that end, the learning curve of commercial ˜nancial institutions 
can be informative for the agency.
The effect of online services on retaining existing customers has been 
the most compelling element of the case for introducing, expanding, and 
encouraging the use of these services. The rule of thumb in the bank
-ing industry is that it costs two to four times as much to acquire a new 
customer as it does to retain an existing one; in addition, the revenue 
generated by a new customer is often signi˜cantly less than the one they 
ﬁreplace.ﬂ Retention, therefore, is a key operational metric in any ˜nancial 
institution. The search for ﬁstickyﬂ products or services has been a long 
one, and none has succeeded like online access andŠparticularly, and 
quite dramaticallyŠlike online bill payment. 
In contrast, online service offerings in retail banking have not had a 
dramatic impact on acquiring new customers. This is due to two counter
-vailing forces. In the early years of online banking (1996 through 1999), 
there was signi˜cant differentiation among banks regarding their online 
offerings, but the demand for those offerings was quite low.
 In recent 
years, demand has increased dramatically, but now virtually every bank 
offers online access. Certainly the quality of the online services varies 
substantially, but that is apparent only to actual users of the services and 
much less so to those ﬁshoppingﬂ for a bank. By contrast, in the retail 
brokerage industry, the situation is dramatically different. New entrants 
(with E*Trade and Ameritrade being the principal survivors) and more 
nimble ﬁdiscountﬂ brokers used their online expertise to draw in a whole 
class of new customers, as well as converting customers from the tradi
-tional ﬁfull serviceﬂ wire houses.
The marketing of online services has taken multiple forms. For retail 
brokerages, as the bulk of their business has become e-business, virtually 
all of their marketingŠwhether print, television, or onlineŠhas placed 
their electronic services in the center of communications. For retail banks, 
marketing online services is one of the arrows in the communications 
quiver. It has become standard practice for banks to actively introduce and 
promote their online capabilities to new customers at the time of account 
opening, even if that takes place in the branch. For both the banking and 
the brokerage industries, one of the most effective means to convince 
customers to migrate to the online channel is to inform them politely at 
all other points of contactŠfor example, on the telephone or in personŠ
that the particular transaction they are undertaking could be done more 
 
easily online (some banks even offer kiosks in their walk-in lobbies that 
facilitate online access to customer accounts). Brokerages now conduct 
the bulk of their transactions online; this may be partially due to the fact 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
that the demographics of users of brokerages are even more conducive to 
e-commerce adoption than are the demographics of users of banks. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
Although the SSA may not need to ﬁacquireﬂ new customers, it does 
need to attract them toŠand retain them inŠelectronic channels. As 
noted earlier, having users™ needs met in the electronic services channel 
frees up resources for other users who need more-personalized service or 
responsiveness from other channels. This ﬁstickinessﬂ (retention) matters 
because the increasing use of an effective electronic channel will help the 
SSA keep costs down; it will mitigate shortages of in-person staff to han
-dle the expected workload as the baby boom generation ages, becomes 
disability-prone, and retires; and it will likely increase public satisfaction 
with SSA information and services.
Public expectations for ˜nancial institutions with respect to func
-tionality and availability are likely to translate to public expectations for 
electronic information and services from government agencies. At the 
same time, shortcomings will likely frustrate people and keep them in the 
more costly (and strained) delivery channels such as telephone calls and 
in-person visits. In addition, careful consideration of demographics and 
of particular market segments that are using electronic services at a high 
rate might lead the SSA to consider marketing to those segments very 
aggressively. There may also be lessons in how other government agen
-cies have reached out to particular customer segments (see the discussion 
of the Internal Revenue Service in Chapter 4). Most importantly, the SSA 
needs to be able to promote the relative bene˜ts of electronic services over 
the competing service channels in ways that are meaningful to users. The 
marketing needs to answer the question of, ﬁWhat™s in it for me?ﬂ in a 
clear and compelling way. 
Cross-Selling
Selling additional products or services to existing customers has 
generally been more successful through the online channel for ˜nancial 
services institutions. As compared with physical channels, the online 
experience more readily allows customers to appreciate the convenience 
of having ﬁeverything in one placeﬂŠeven at a branch, a loan application 
might take place in a physical space different from where one makes a 
deposit; the online interface can hide even that sort of process separation. 
This drives the desire on the part of customers to consolidate their ˜nan
-cial activities. In addition, a user of online services can be marketed to in 
a highly targeted way, at very low cost. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
51
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
Successful electronic services induce use of other available electronic 
services, potentially producing more effective and ef˜cient service deliv
-ery overall. This improvement includes a reduction in data-entry error 
rates and the resultant costs of reworking to correct errors. Because of 
the relatively higher customer satisfaction scores for electronic services 
compared with telephone and paper processes, it stands to reason that a 
satis˜ed user of one e-government service will be more likely to seek out 
similar services to avoid long phone queues or paper-based cycle times.
Cost Trade-offs
Marginal costs of online transactions are very close to zero, and in any 
case much lower than any other means of delivery such as in person or by 
telephone. The ˜xed costs of building and maintaining online systems are 
signi˜cant, but the payback periodŠat least for the initial outlayŠshould 
be relatively short, even assuming that transaction volume remains the 
same. But, indeed, transaction volumes have tended to increase, as cus
-tomers with online access have been observed to increase their overall 
use of services quite signi˜cantly. As these services have marginal costs 
that are close to zero, the costs incurred due to increased volume are out
-weighed by the savings due to the reduction in need for call center staff 
and IVR calls. 
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
As the SSA seeks to improve ef˜ciency and migrate users to elec
-tronic channels, systematic cost tracking can help assess where additional 
efforts would prove fruitful. Such cost tracking should not be just at the 
aggregate level but instead should examine cost per transaction through 
a methodology such as activity-based costing. The effects of each service 
offered online with respect to call and of˜ce-visit volume could be sys
-tematically tracked as part of an overall effort to monitor appropriate 
metrics. Although the attribution of changes in call or of˜ce-visit volumes 
to the use of particular online services can be dif˜cult, a standard and 
consistent methodology should be developed and agreed on. Items to be 
measured might include things such as costs per transaction, satisfaction, 
error rates, cycle times, repeat users by delivery channel, and so on. All of 
this should be done with a goal of maximizing value to users (taxpayers) 
and minimizing cost. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
ORGANI
ZATIONAL
 STR
UCT
URES
 FOR
 ONLINE SER
VICES
When considering e-business and electronic services generally, it 
appears that management and organizational structures for such services 
have had to proceed through three phases in the largest and most suc
-cessful companies. In the ˜rst phase, which for most banks was approx
-imately 1996 through 1998, there were multiple ﬁe-groupsﬂ emerging 
in the organization. The primary focus for these services was often in 
marketing and communications organizations, as the chief use of Web 
sites was to market services rather than to provide them. In the second 
phase (approximately 1999 through 2002) ﬁe-businessﬂ was paramount. 
Centralized, autonomous e-commerce lines of businessŠreporting very 
high in the organizationŠwere formed with virtually end-to-end control 
of the e-channel. This seems, in retrospect, an almost necessary step to 
developing a sophisticated strategy, infrastructure, and set of policies for 
electronic service provision.
In the third phase, the current state of maturity (approximately 2002 
to the present), the underlying approach appears to be ﬁe-business is 
businessﬂ (see Chapter 4 for this committee™s presentation of the idea that 
now, or very soon, ﬁe-government is governmentﬂ). Although some of the 
largest and most successful institutions have kept a large e-group at the 
core, virtually every line of business and function has developed expertise 
to leverage the core assets. For example, organizational roles have tended 
to evolve along the following lines:
Ł Centralized
 e-group:
 Strategy development, funding, navigation and 
information architecture, content ownership assignment, look and feel, 
policy development and enforcement, business requirements, storyboard
-ing, wireframing, page design, sometimes front-end development;
Ł Marketing
 and
 communications
 functions:
 Content for the ﬁAboutﬂ 
section, sign-off on the overall look and feel to ˜t the brand architecture;
Ł IT
 function:
 Infrastructure, back-end and middleware development, 
sometimes front-end development; and 
Ł Lines
 of
 business:
 Content, business requirements for transaction 
services jointly with the core group.
Relevance for the SSA and Other Agencies 
The SSA™s management and organizational structures for electronic 
services and e-government have not yet passed through the second phase 
described above. To track well with the maturing electronic services 
knowledge in the ˜nancial industry, in the second phase the development 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS
 FROM
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICES
 IN
 FINANCIAL
 INSTITUTIONS 
53
and management of electronic services would be centralized and elevated 
in the organization.
22
 See Chapter 4 for more on this issue. 
SUMMAR
YIn the future, the Social Security Administration will increasingly be 
viewed as a ˜nancial institution whose services are needed, and hence 
whose services will be expected to be available, on a 24/7 basis. Taking 
advantage of the experience of commercial ˜nancial institutions can help 
the SSA as it orients itself technologically and culturally toward weather
-ing the oncoming storm of increasing workload, workforce transition, and 
changing public expectations. The commercial ˜nancial industry™s history 
of developing and marketing online services can provide the SSA with 
relevant experiences in the areas of adoption patterns, economic incen
-tives, typical capabilities, Web site design, and organizational structure. 
Incorporating these lessons will require a strategic focus on electronic 
information and service delivery, metrics-guided improvement, and pro
-cess transformation.
 Finding: The experiences of large-scale ˜nancial institutions in transi
-tioning to the provision of electronic services are instructive in consid
-ering the challenges faced by the SSA in formulating its medium- and 
long-term electronic services strategy.
Recommendation: The SSA should carefully consider the ways in 
which the experiences and approaches of large-scale ˜nancial institu
-tionsŠincluding state-of-the-practice electronic information and ser
-vice delivery, metrics-guided improvement, and process transformation, 
among other approaches and solutionsŠmight be relevant to the kinds 
of services that the agency is providing or may provide in the future.
22
 Julianne Mahler and Priscilla Regan have documented how federal agencies™ manage
-ment of their Web resources has evolved over time, tending toward more-centralized control 
mechanisms. Many agencies have struggled with issues involving the degree of centraliza
-tion in policy making and the locus of responsibility within the agency. See J. Mahler and P. 
Regan, ﬁThe Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government,ﬂ 
International
 Journal
 of
 Electronic
 Go
vernment
 Research
 2(1):21-35, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
3  The Social Security Administration™s 
Information TechnologyŠ
 Present and Future 
As the Social Security Administration™s (SSA™s) workload increases, 
technological change continues and brings with it a correspond
-ing increase in the online service expectations of at least some 
segments of its clientele. Unlike earlier retirees, the baby boom generation 
is more computer-literate and Internet-savvy and is likely to retain these 
traits after reaching retirement age.
1 Thus, it should be expected that the 
SSA™s various bene˜ciaries and other user communities will continue to 
be adept at keeping pace with these technological changes. Broader and 
more systematic attention to technical and social trends will be warranted. 
Further, to achieve a forward-looking electronic services strategy in any 
organization requires an understanding of the organization™s current tech
-nological capacities coupled with an understanding of trends in important 
and relevant information technology (IT) and user expectations. This 
chapter provides a high-level assessment and set of impressions regarding 
the SSA™s current IT infrastructure, its database technology and conver
-sion strategy in particular, external technological trends, a brief overview 
of user expectations and projected demographics, and how they all can 
affect prospects for effective electronic services, now and in the future. 
1 
See the discussion of Pew Internet and American Life Project survey data later in this 
chapter. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
55
INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y I
NFRASTR
UCT
URE
 The IT infrastructure of an organization encompasses hardware, soft
-ware, databases, applications (including Web services) along with security 
processes and, for the purposes of this report, software-development poli
-cies and practices. This section brie˚y describes the committee™s assess
-ment of various of these parts of the SSA™s IT infrastructure. It focuses par
-ticularly, however, on the underlying databases and database architecture, 
as these are especially key components of any effective electronic services 
strategy and application suite (see Box 3.1 for more on the centrality of 
databases to electronic services provision).
2 Hardware Infrastructure
The SSA organizes its hardware and IT infrastructure
3 in three tiers: 
local/departmental, remote operations control centers (ROCCs), and 
headquarters. There are numerous local of˜ces; six ROCCs located in 
Pennsylvania, New York, Illinois, Missouri, California, and Alabama; and 
one headquarters facility, the National Computer Center (NCC), located 
in Baltimore, Maryland. 
The hardware in the local of˜ces consists primarily of personal com
-puters (PCs) running the Microsoft Windows operating system, plus a 
local ˜le server, all connected using standard local area network (LAN) 
technology. Desktop machines are upgraded regularly on a 3- or 4-year 
cycle. In addition to access to the local servers, local PCs also have access 
to the servers at the ROCCs through virtual private network (VPN) con
-nections. The ROCCs run standard Unix servers from a mix of vendors 
and again are connected using standard LAN technology.
The bulk of the SSA programmatic applications run at the NCC. The 
NCC hardware con˜guration is typical of a large ˜nancial services orga
-nization. It consists of a variety of hardware con˜gurations, including 
midsized servers running both Windows and Unix with their own storage 
volumes, six IBM Parallel Sysplex mainframe systems, and a large data-
storage farm implemented using storage area network (SAN) technology 
from EMC Corporation. Most of the programmatic data sets reside on the 
2 
Note that this overview is of necessity brief and based on comparatively small amounts of 
data and input. A comprehensive assessment of such a large organization™s IT infrastructure 
was outside the scope of this committee™s activities; the committee tried to focus particularly 
on the capabilities and functionalities related to electronic services provision. 
3 
Factual details about the SSA™s IT infrastructure in this section are from Social Security 
Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 especially pp. 85-224 
(hereafter cited as Social Security Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5)), available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/irm/IRM_2005.pdf, accessed June 
20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
BOX
 3.1
 Modern Database Technology Is Critical to the SSA
The rapid growth in the development of large-scale electronic services has 
been strongly supported by rapidly growing understanding of the anatomy of such 
services and by advances in supporting the development and deployment of their 
component parts. The data-management component is the most critical compo
-nentŠonline services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (24/7) are as dependent on 
the data-management component as an automobile is on its engine. 
Virtually any information technology (IT) application, whether it is in the public 
or the private sector, is about data. In the case of the Social Security Administra
-tion (SSA), the central data comprise the information that the SSA has about its 
core constituentsŠessentially every person and business in the country. That is at 
the very core of the agency™s missionŠit keeps track of everyone: who they are, 
who their families are, where they live, what they have earned each year, what 
they or their employers on their behalf have paid to the SSA. This is all data. It is 
what drives everything that the SSA does. All of the SSA processes and services 
are centered on those dataŠthey read the data, they record changes to it, they 
note what is happening to it, and so on. The data are the model that the SSA has 
of everyoneŠthey are its computerized model of the world that the SSA exists to 
manage.
Electronic services must rely pivotally on appropriate database services. 
Requested services may simply require access to up-to-the-minute information, 
in which case this must be available from an archival data store that is capable 
of receiving and processing updated information in real time. The privacy of this 
information, however, must be carefully guarded, and its security from loss or 
tampering must also be ensured. These demanding requirements must be sup
-ported by the archival data-storage component. The services requested may also 
entail modi˜cation of archival information (for example, adding in the latest Social 
Security employer deposit, or logging the payment of a monthly bene˜t). Here too, 
the data-storage component is relied on for assuring the provision of the appropri
-EMC storage arrays so that they are available from any of the mainframes. 
All of the machines are interconnected using standard LAN technology, 
which is protected from outside access by a ˜rewall.
The SSA™s continued dependence on Customer Information Control 
System (CICS), Virtual Storage Access Method (VSAM), and the crucial 
Master Data Access Method (MADAM) software currently restricts the 
SSA to IBM mainframes for the bulk of its programmatic data. As dis
-cussed below, migrating these data to a relational database system would 
offer the SSA an opportunity to consider hardware alternatives with more 
performance at a much lower cost. For example, since the mid-1980s, the 
software company Teradata has provided the retail and banking sectors 
with scalable database technology based on the use of scalable servers con
-structed from commodity hardware components. In 2004, Wal-Mart had 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
57
ate capabilities. Thus, the data-storage component must be capable of immediate 
updating as well. The challenges entailed in developing such data stores clearly 
are considerable: they must be incorruptible, persistent in perpetuity, even in the 
face of attempts to corrupt them, and must also support being able to be updated 
in real time. Considerable research and commercial development, however, have 
led to the availability of such databases.
Support for 24/7 access to electronic services requires that all components 
be capable of providing appropriate support. Thus, clearly, the services promised 
by an inviting user interface can only be provided if an appropriately powerful 
database is a component of the application. Today, though, the SSA is using 
a decades-old database system. The Master Data Access Method (MADAM) is 
based on a 40-year-old proprietary record-based ˜le/index system that ran on IBM 
360s and still runs on their modern mainframe hardware. The fact that the SSA™s 
equivalent of the ﬁcorporate jewelsﬂ are stored using decades-old technology is 
alarming and needs to change.
As Chapter 3 in this report points out, modern database technology can 
readily manage the amount of data that the SSA has. Moreover, the number of IT 
professionals having the background and skills to maintain the current MADAM 
database and surrounding applications is very small, and dwindling. Few people 
today know how to deal with mainframes and the kind of software that MADAM is 
based on. In the relatively near future, there may be none. By contrast, Structured 
Query Language (SQL) developers are ubiquitous. The SSA needs to move for
-ward quickly in this area so that it can develop new services and processes using 
the many skilled developers and system administrators and performance tuners 
available in the modern job market. Otherwise it will continue to operate in the ﬁold 
daysﬂ of multi-hour batch updates and backups, fragile software that few know how 
to tune or manage, and so on. The SSA will not be able to provide effective 24/7 
services that way, nor will it be able to add new data to support new services easily. 
Modernizing the underlying databases that support the SSA™s activities is critical 
to the agency™s effectiveness in the realm of electronic services. 
almost 500 terabytes (TB) of operational data stored on its 1,000 processor 
Teradata con˜guration.
4 Other scalable database alternatives include IBM™s 
relational database system product DB2/PE (Parallel Edition), Oracle 10g, 
and products from vendors such as Netezza and Datallegro. The adoption 
of scalable database technology and clusters of commodity processors to 
handle even the very largest database tasks is expected to accelerate as 
databases of all forms and types continue to grow. Exploration of the use 
4 
Constance L. Hays, ﬁWhat Wal-Mart Knows About Customers™ Habits,ﬂ 
New
 York
 Times
 Business Section, Nov. 14, 2004, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/14
/business/yourmoney/14wal.html, accessed June 14, 2007; and Charles Babcock, ﬁData, 
Data Everywhere,ﬂ 
Information
 Week,
 Jan. 9, 2006, available at http://www.informationweek.
com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=175801775, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
of this sort of technology as part of a migration plan from MADAM to 
relational database technology would likely be fruitful.
Redundancy and backups are of course essential to data integrity 
and availabilityŠand ultimately to business continuity. One means for 
meeting this need is through the use of data replication to provide the 
capability to switch over automatically to spare components that provide 
for continuity of operations. In general, the reason that such replication is 
important is that, although backup tapes are kept off-site in a secure loca
-tion to prevent signi˜cant data loss, without replication a major disaster at 
the primary site could leave the SSA unable to access its master database 
until a replacement facility was up and running. 
In this study, the committee was unable to obtain information from 
the SSA regarding data replication and failover plans for handling disaster 
recovery owing to security sensitivities. Therefore, rather than evaluating 
the agency™s current or planned capabilities in this regard, the commit
-tee notes that various approaches to addressing this challenge are pos
-sible and are supported by modern database systems and architectures. 
However, in the committee™s view, realizing a modern data-replication 
and disaster recovery strategy could be signi˜cantly hindered by the 
SSA™s use of decades-old database technology for storing the majority of 
its programmatic data (see the discussion of MADAM in the following 
sections). The antiquated MADAM database system and technology are 
dif˜cult to replicate using current technology (see below), and the custom 
modi˜cations that would be needed to do so would be very costly and 
would require scarce expertise. 
Software Infrastructure
Each of the three SSA organizational tiers runs slightly different soft
-ware.
5 At the local/departmental level, both the desktop PCs and the 
 
servers run Windows NT and the usual suite of Microsoft
 productivity 
tools. Microsoft Access is run on the desktop PCs, and the local/depart
-mental servers run Structured Query Language (SQL) Server. As is typical 
for large organizations, the desktops are used for running a broad spec
-trum of applications, including administrative applications (for example, 
payroll and travel); management information applications (for example, 
report generation); and programmatic applications (for example, data 
entry). Although the applications are currently a mix of client-server 
5 
Factual details about the SSA™s IT infrastructure in this subsection are drawn from Social 
Security Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 especially 
pp. 85-224; available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/irm/IRM_2005.pdf, accessed June 
20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
59
and Web-based applications, the SSA is in the process of replacing most 
or all of the client-server applications with Web-based versions. Both 
types of applications are used to communicate with servers located at 
all three tiers: local, ROCCs, and NCC. The servers at the ROCCs are 
a combination of Unix and Windows NT servers. Both Oracle and SQL 
Server database systems are used at this tier. The NCC hosts servers run
-ning Windows NT, Unix, and IBM™s z/OS operating system. SQL Server 
is run on the Windows servers, Oracle runs on the Unix servers, and a 
combination of DB2, Computer Associates Integrated Database Manage
-ment System (CA-IDMS), MADAM, and VSAM run on the IBM Parallel 
Sysplex servers.
The databases housed on the servers at the NCC can be roughly 
divided into three categories: programmatic, administrative, and man
-agement information (MI). The programmatic databases are organized 
into separate operational data stores; they include Title II (administer
-ing disability, old age, and survivor bene˜ts); Title XVI (administering 
Supplemental Security Income [SSI]); Disability (determination, control, 
and tracking); Earnings (recording of annual wage reporting by employ
-ers and bene˜t reports); and Enumeration (allocation and veri˜cation of 
Social Security numbers [SSNs]). The administrative database is a separate 
operational data store that includes information on SSA employees, facili
-ties, and ˜nances. Each of these operational data stores feeds abstracted 
and aggregated information into a data warehouse that is used to support 
management decision-making processes based on both current and his
-torical data. The schemas for each of these databases are consolidated in 
a metadata database. See Figure 3.1 for a graphical depiction of the SSA™s 
Management Information Database Architecture.
The MI data warehouse is hosted using Oracle running on the Unix 
servers. The administrative databases and associated applications are cur
-rently in the process of being migrated to a combination of DB2 running 
on one of the SSA mainframes and Oracle running on a Unix server.
With the exception of the Disability database, which is housed on DB2 
on a mainframe, the primary programmatic databases including Title II, 
Title XVI, Earnings, and Enumeration are stored on a SAN and manipu
-lated using a combination of CA-IDMS, MADAM, and IBM™s VSAM.
While the names DB2 and Oracle will likely be familiar to the casual 
reader, it is highly unlikely that CA-IDMS, MADAM, and VSAM will 
be. CA-IDMS is an implementation of the Conference on Data Systems 
Languages (CODASYL) data model. The company that actually built 
IDMS (Cullinet) went out of business in 1989, at which time Computer 
Associates acquired the rights to Cullinet™s system and its customers. 
The CODASYL data model was popular in the early to mid-1970s, but 
by approximately 1980 most experts in the data-management ˜eld had 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
FIGURE 3.1
 The Social Security Administration™s Management Information Data
-base Architecture. 
NOTE: SSI, Supplemental Security Income; PEBES, Personal Earnings and Bene˜t 
Estimate Statement; SSN, Social Security number; ADMIN/MI, administrative 
and management information; RDBMS, relational database management system; 
IWS/LAN, intelligent workstation/local area network
.  
SOURCE: Social Security Administration, ﬁSSA Data Architecture,ﬂ Version 1.0, 
Dec. 9, 2002, p. 22. (Courtesy of the Social Security Administration.) 
Clai
ms
,Po
stEn
titlemen
tCont
ro
la
nd
Tr
acking
Sy
stem
sSS
IClaim
s,Po
stEn
titlemen
tCont
ro
la
nd
Tr
acking
Sy
stem
sDisabilit
yD
eter
mi
nations
,Cont
rol
and
Tr
acking
Sy
stem
sAnnual
Wa
ge
Repor
ting,
Co
rr
ection
sReconciliation,
PE
BE
SFi
nanc
eTi
me
&A
ttendanc
eHu
ma
nR
esour
cesAc
tion
Cont
ro
lWo
rk
Sa
mp
lin
gand
Paper
less
SS
NR
equest
,Ve
ri
fications,
Querie
sand
DataEx
change
Ti
tl
eI
ITi
tl
eX
VI
Disab
ili
ty
Ea
rn
in
gs
En
um
er
at
io
nAd
mi
ni
st
ra
ti
ve
Pr
ocessi
ng
Ce
nt
er
Op
er
atio
na
lDa
ta
St
or
es
Ap
pl
icat
io
nS
ystem
sDB2RelationalDatabaseManagementSystemŁS
um
ma
ri
zedD
at
aŁH
istori
calD
at
aŁT
re
nd
sD
at
aOracle
RDBMS
Da
ta
Wa
re
ho
us
eIW
S/
LA
NDa
ta
Access
Qu
er
y&
Su
pp
or
tEx
te
rn
al
Database
sMe
ta
da
ta
AD
MI
N/
MI
Rep
os
it
or
yEx
ec
ut
iv
e&
Ma
na
ge
me
nt
In
fo
rm
at
io
nSy
st
em
(E
MI
S)
concluded that the relational data model was superior.
6 In addition, 
CODASYL database systems are almost exclusively accessed by applica
-6 
For a timeline history of databases, see International Federation for Information Process
-ing Working Group 9.7, ﬁA Brief History of Database Systems,ﬂ in 
History
 of
 Computing,
 last 
modi˜ed Dec. 5, 2004, available at http://www.comphist.org/computing_history/new_
page_9.htm, accessed June 20, 2007. For discussion of the foundations of database systems, 
see Raghu Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gehrke, 
Database
 Management
 Systems
, New York: 
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2002, especially Ch. 3 (hereafter cited as R. Ramakrishnan 
and J. Gehrke, 
Database
 Management
 Systems
). A mid-1970s comparison of the CODASYL and 
relational approaches is presented in Ann S. Michaels, Benjamin Mittman, and C. Robert 
Carlson, ﬁA Comparison of the Relational and CODASYL Approaches to Data-Base Manage
-ment,ﬂ 
ACM
 Computing
 Sur
veys
 8(1):125-151, March 1976. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
61
tions written in
 Common Business-Oriented Language (COBOL), which, 
as the oldest business-oriented programming language in the history of 
computing, is now generally considered to be obsolete, understood by 
only an increasingly small fraction of the practitioner community. 
One drawback is that applications written in COBOL/CODASYL 
are more cumbersome to maintain compared with those implemented 
using modern technology. An application written in COBOL against a 
CODASYL database management system (DBMS) such as CA-IDMS is 
typically 10 to 100 times longer (in lines of application code) than an 
equivalent application written in C++ or Java against a relational database 
system. The main reason for this difference is that the database requests 
against a relational database system are written in SQL, the declarative 
data manipulation language that is the mainstay of relational databases 
and modern IT organizations. Simply put, SQL allows applications devel
-opers to request data by saying ﬁwhatﬂ they want, not ﬁhowﬂ they want 
the system to obtain the data. The underlying relational DBMS optimizes 
the application™s request based on how the data are physically organized 
and indexed and what the current data statistics look like. This provides 
orders-of-magnitude code reduction and productivity gains relative to 
CODASYL database applications.
CODASYL applications are extremely dif˜cult to write, debug, and 
maintain in comparison with today™s mainstream data-centric applica
-tion-development technologies. The SSA™s dependence on CODASYL 
and COBOL for MADAM represents a severe handicap because of these 
dif˜culties in developing, re˜ning, and maintaining the demanding 
applications needed to meet the current requirements of SSA™s diverse 
constituencies.
Another drawback is that COBOL itself will eventually become a 
ﬁdead language.ﬂ It is rare today for new applications to be written in 
COBOL, and the dwindling number of existing COBOL/CODASYL appli
-cations is being steadily replaced by versions written in contemporary 
languages such as C, C++, or Java, or scripting languages such as PHP or 
Perl, using SQL (or SQL-based programming tools) for database access. 
This is due to the much more productive database programming capa
-bilities and associated bene˜ts that these combinations of technologies 
offer. In fact, COBOL and CODASYL are no longer taught in college and 
university computer science departments, and the number of program
-mers who are conversant with COBOL and CODASYL programming has 
become quite small and is shrinking rapidly. Thus, in addition to the SSA™s 
being dependent on a set of low-productivity technologies, it is likely to 
become increasingly dif˜cult for the agency to recruit and retain the pool 
of IT developers needed to meet its current and future IT needs. 
In summary, these issues represent major challenges for the SSA going 
forward. Speci˜cally, because such outdated technology is used for the 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
SSA™s master database, it raises barriers in terms of the feasibility of link
-ing it to new Internet applications. In addition, it causes applications to be 
unavailable for 24/7 access, because this technology requires downtime 
for updates in batch windows (see below). Some software for MADAM 
is written in assembly language and so closely coupled to the operating 
system (OS) that any changes in the OS require testing of the database. 
Finally, the cost and increasing scarcity of relevant custom programming 
expertise is making the maintenance of this technology increasing dif˜cult 
and problematic. The SSA is not unaware of these issues, which have also 
been raised in earlier reports and studies (some are cited below). Indeed, 
the SSA reported to the committee that it was exploring converting to a 
newer technology, but the committee nevertheless has concerns about the 
conversion process, as discussed below.
MADAM and the MADAM Conversion Process
The SSA™s Master Data Access Method, MADAM, is a database sys
-tem that was developed in-house by SSA staff in the early 1980s when 
the SSA converted from tape to disk storage for its data sets. In 1986, the 
congressional Of˜ce of Technology Assessment (OTA) issued a report 
entitled 
The
 Social
 Security
 Administration
 and
 Information
 Technology
. As 
part of that report, OTA expressed concerns about the use of MADAM 
instead of a commercial database system:
The most controversial accomplishment of the data integration effort is 
perhaps the Master Data Access Method, or MADAM, the ˜le manage
-ment system that SSA developed when it converted from tape to disk 
storage. Many experts thought that SSA should have sought or adopted 
off-the-shelf software for this purpose which would be maintained by 
vendors, rather than developing its own which it must maintain (that 
is, improve, modify, and update). MADAM may well be incompatible 
with future mainframe operating systems, database management sys
-tems, and fourth generation languages. The SSA incurs future risks of 
incompatibility and long-term maintenance costs. In the short term, there 
are also risks and costs. MADAM is apparently a very complicated and 
poorly documented system, so that only a small group of people are suf
-˜ciently knowledgeable to operate it, yet it is the basis of the SSA™s data 
management. This constitutes a particular vulnerability to smooth opera
-tions if there is any short-term emergency, sudden work force reduction, 
or drastic reorganization.
77 
U.S. Congress, Of˜ce of Technology Assessment, 
The
 Social
 Security
 Administration
 and
 Information
 Technology,
 OTA-CIT-311, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce, 
1986, p. 43 (NTIS Order PB87-136834), also available at http://www.ssa.gov/history/pdf/
ota86.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
63
Despite those concerns, the committee notes that MADAM is still 
functioning, 20 years later. However, the vulnerability factors, including 
workforce issues that OTA noted, still pertain. 
MADAM is layered on top of IBM™s Virtual Storage Access Method 
product (VSAM is IBM™s indexed ˜le management package, based on the 
use of B-trees to support searching
8), which allows it to run in a Parallel 
Sysplex environment. It appears, however, that updates to the central 
MADAM database are done primarily (if not exclusively) in a batch mode. 
New data (for example, batches of earnings reports) are ˜rst inserted into 
CA-IDMS and then batch loaded into MADAM during a nightly batch 
window (based on information that the committee received from the SSA, 
this window is 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. during the week and longer on the 
weekends). The large batch window is required to update the MADAM 
database daily; this scheduled downtime makes 24/7 operation of online 
services impossible without the implementation of some sort of complex 
caching and merging mechanism that could allow online services to over
-lap the batch window.
The continued use of the CA-IDMS/MADAM combination of tech
-nologies represents a signi˜cant barrier to the SSA goal of providing 
improved and expanded electronic services to users. One issue is that 
Java Platform, Enterprise Edition (J2EE) application servers, such as the 
IBM WebSphere product that the SSA is using to deliver new Internet 
applications, typically communicate with databases using Java and SQL, 
not through COBOL and CODASYL record-level operations. Connecting 
WebSphere applications to CA-IDMS and MADAM will involve custom 
adaptors that are dif˜cult to program against from within a J2EE environ
-ment and that cannot reap the usual bene˜ts of the productivity tools and 
technologies available to ﬁnormalﬂ J2EE developers. 
It is also worth noting that, aside from the software issues, the contin
-ued use of CA-IDMS and MADAM serve to lock the SSA into a particular 
expensive hardware and software combination. Both pieces of software 
only run on high-end IBM mainframes, making it impossible for the SSA 
to take advantage of potentially lower cost alternatives such as scalable 
Unix clusters or parallel database systems such as IBM DB2/PE, Oracle 
10g, or NCR Teradata, among others.
One justi˜cation sometimes offered for the continued use of MADAM 
is its size. The argument is that the SSA databases are so large that they 
can only be handled by custom software. Although this argument may 
have been valid 20 years ago, the SSA databases are no longer uniquely 
8 
B-trees are useful for exact match and range retrievals, such as looking up someone™s 
Social Security account using the SSN as the key for the B-tree. See R. Ramakrishnan and J. 
Gehrke, 
Database
 Management
 Systems
, Ch. 9.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
large by modern enterprise standards. As of 2005, the SSA™s program
-matic databases had a total size of about 30 TB
9 (a terabyte is 1 trillion 
bytes). Proprietary concerns make it dif˜cult to obtain published data on 
commercial enterprise database sizes and workloads in order to identify 
those that rival the SSA™s database in terms of size and number of transac
-tions. However, published data indicate that commercial systems handle 
very large relational databases, and relational databases with very large 
workloads. By way of comparative example, the customer database for 
Verizon, a major U.S. telecommunications company, consists of 50 billion 
records and 47 TB, and this database does not include data concerning the 
company™s wireless customers.
10
 Verizon™s database is currently housed 
on a cluster of Windows Servers running Microsoft SQL ServerŠusing 
commercial off-the-shelf relational database technology. Moreover, the 
annual Winter survey
11
 lists a number of commercial relational database 
instances in the 20 TB to 100 TB range, and these databases are all man
-aged by standard relational database products, each typically housed 
on Unix or Windows clusters. In terms of system load, SSA™s workload 
approaches 50 million CICS transactions a day.
12
 The 2005 Winter survey 
indicates that standard relational database systems in use at telecommu
-nications companies and banks typically handle well over 1 million trans
-actions per hour, with one system in the report having a peak workload 
of 28 million transactions per hour. This system handles this transaction 
load using DB2 running on Unix. It is the committee™s opinion that the 
capabilities of commercial relational database products in 2007 have now 
overcome any technical rationale that might justify the SSA™s continued 
reliance on decades-old, custom data-management technology.
Selecting a MADAM Conversion Strategy 
The SSA has taken some steps to explore MADAM alternatives. A 
2002 report describing the SSA™s data architecture plans states that ﬁefforts 
will be made to determine what portions of the [MADAM] data could be 
9 
See Social Security Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 p. 168, available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/irm/IRM_2005.pdf, accessed June 20, 
2007.
 The SSA has a total of 110 terabytes of mainframe data stores, and the SSA™s client-
server data stores maintain 80 terabytes (ibid., p. 5). 
10
 Personal communication from Michael Brodie, Distinguished Architect, Verizon Com
-munications, to David J. DeWitt and Michael Carey, e-mail, Feb. 20, 2006. 
11
 This survey is available from Winter Corporation, Waltham, Mass., http://www.
wintercorp.com.
12
 The SSA reported that, in 2004, its mainframe and client-server databases had supported 
some 42 million individual data transactions a day. Social Security Administration, 
Informa
-tion
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 p. 5. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
65
managed by DB2.ﬂ
13
 The same language appears on page 130 of the 2005 
SSA 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan.
14 The scale and scope 
of the committee™s investigation did not allow for an in-depth analysis of 
what progress has been made. However, it is clear that, given the state 
of relational database technology in 2007, the actual answer today to the 
question of what portions of MADAM data could be managed by DB2 (or 
another modern database solution) is simply, ﬁAll of it.ﬂ
As part of this study, the committee requested documentation for 
MADAM and any available documents related to the SSA™s ongoing 
MADAM-to-DB2 conversion process, especially the results of SSA pilot 
or feasibility studies. The following discussion is based on the documents 
received by the committee and conversations with SSA staff.
 During the process of selecting its conversion strategy for MADAM, 
the SSA appears to have relied on one contractor for technical expertise.
 In January 2003, the SSA took delivery of a study entitled 
MADAM
 Alter
-nati
ve Evaluation
, conducted by the consulting ˜rm YL&A.
15
 This study 
focused on alternative strategies for converting the SSA™s master ˜les, 
which are currently managed by the MADAM software, to DB2, IBM™s 
relational database system product. After reviewing the MADAM data
-base system and related applications software in some detail, the YL&A 
consultants concluded that:
The MADAM, AIF, and Builder/Spreader software is a collection of cus
-tom code written in IBM assembler language (ALC). It is tightly coupled 
with the operating system, is extremely complicated, and can only be 
supported by a limited number of extremely talented application devel
-opers. In fact, MADAM is so tied to the operating system that any change 
to the operating system has to be tested for its impact on MADAM. There 
is some fear that future operating system changes may render MADAM 
unusable and the talent need [sic] to remedy the situation may no longer 
be accessible.
16
The 
MADAM
 Alternati
ve Evaluation
 report begins with a brief over
-view of the different master ˜les and the advantages that switching to a 
commercial relational database system such as DB2 would provide, even 
if DB2 proves to be slower for certain operations. Section 5 of that report 
proposes ˜ve alternative proof-of-concept (POC) studies that the SSA 
13
 Social Security Administration, ﬁFuture Database Management Sub-Architecture,ﬂ 
SSA
 Data
 Architecture
, Version 1.0, December 2002, p. 30.
14
 Social Security Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 p. 130.
15
 YL&A, 
Social
 Security
 AdministrationŠMADAM
 Alternati
ve Evaluation,
 Spring˜eld, Ill.: 
Jan. 22, 2003 (hereafter cited as YL&A, 
MADAM
 Alternati
ve Evaluation
). 
16
 YL&A, 
MADAM
 Alternati
ve Evaluation
, p. 9. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
could undertake to evaluate the dif˜culty of replacing MADAM with DB2 
and recommends selecting the Supplemental Security Income Records 
(SSR) database for a POC conversion effort.
The same report also considers alternative approaches to converting 
the SSA™s various applications (for example, the programs that do things 
like issuing monthly checks). It appears that the bulk of these applications 
are currently written in IBM assembly language
17
 and make use of an 
abstraction layer known as the Application Interface Facility (AIF) that is 
built on top of the various MADAM ˜les.  
The existence of such an interface provides a number of alternative 
ways of converting the actual applications. For example, one could con
-ceivably rewrite the AIF software to make DB2 calls instead of MADAM 
calls. This would make it theoretically possible to run the existing applica
-tions without modi˜cation. Although this sounds very appealing at ˜rst 
glance, it in effect turns DB2 into a MADAM simulator. This is not a useful 
approach in the long term because it would forgo many of the reasons 
for doing the conversion in the ˜rst place, and it almost certainly would 
sacri˜ce long-term ˚exibility and performance for short-term gains. (See 
the next section for more on architecture.)
A second, 2004 report from YL&A entitled 
SSR
 Master
 File
 to
 DB
2 Con
version
 Deli
verables
 Detail
 Document
18
 describes the results of the POC 
study recommended by YL&A in its January 2003 report to convert a por
-tion of the records in the SSR master ˜le to DB2. Unfortunately, this sec
-ond report does not contain key details of the POC study (for example, the 
DB2 schema used); hence it is not possible for the committee to evaluate 
the results of the study or the approach adopted. Certain things suggested 
in the 2004 report do, however, cause concern, as elaborated below.
As noted above, the POC that YL&A and the SSA executed adopted 
the philosophy that any MADAM-to-DB2 conversion should have little 
or no impact on existing applications. As a consequence of this decision, 
the resulting database design was severely compromised with 
indi
vidual
 SSR records ﬁstored in as many as 46 DB2 tables.ﬂ
19
 Such an approach 
is almost certainly going to experience poor performance, suffer from 
numerous potential update anomalies, and almost inevitably be the source 
of numerous long-term complications if actually adopted. The proposal of 
such a design in the ˜rst place is very surprising and illustrates the inad
-visability of adopting a MADAM-to-DB2 conversion approach that does 
17
 YL&A, 
MADAM
 Alternati
ve Evaluation
, p. 13.
18
 YL&A, 
SSR
 Master
 File
 to
 DB
2 
Con
version
 Deli
verables
 Detail
 Document,
 Spring˜eld, Ill., 
July 1, 2004.
19
 YL&A, 
SSR
 Master
 File
 to
 DB
2 
Con
version
 Deli
verables
 Detail
 Document,
 Spring˜eld, Ill., 
July 1, 2004, p. 14.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
67
not include a rewrite of the actual applications to make DB2 calls directly. 
(Furthermore, if 46 tables were really needed, the use of views might be 
preferable, instead of actually storing an individual record 46 times.)
Another issue is the apparent failure of the YL&A studies to consider 
other large-scale relational database management system (RDBMS) tech
-nologies. There are several other vendors in addition to IBM (DB2), and 
these vary in their performance, functionality, and scaling capabilities. 
However, the YL&A report does not enumerate the SSA™s requirements 
and evaluate other leading vendors™ systems
20
 against them, thus not 
enabling the SSA to make the most informed selection. 
Migrating legacy databases of the size and vintage of MADAM 
is fraught with challenges.
21
 While long-established enterprises (such 
as major telecommunications companies) have faced the challenges of 
migrating legacy applications and databases, seldom if ever are databases 
migrated from one platform to another unless the target database is a 
close match to the source database, in which case, the process is relatively 
straightforward. Consulting ˜rms and DBMS vendors (for example, IBM, 
Oracle, and Microsoft) are in the business of database migration with data
-base-migration tools and factories. While these factories and tools address 
the database migration, they are less able to deal with the greatest cost 
and complexity, namely, all software above the database layerŠmiddle
-ware, application programming interfaces (APIs), and thousands of calls 
throughout known and unknown applications that access the database. 
Hence, database migration for similarly structured targets and sources 
is relatively straightforward, while migrating the software stack above it 
is almost never straightforward. It is unlikely that the structure of SSA™s 
MADAM is close to what would be required of a new database to sup
-port SSA™s e-government and related requirements. Hence, it is unlikely 
that any conventional database-migration strategies or tools would be 
applicable. 
With very rare exceptions, major companies have not attempted direct 
translation of mainframe databases from one platform to another without 
signi˜cantly affecting applications. The rare cases involve large VSAM 
˜les using powerful tool sets for VSAM to signi˜cantly manipulate the 
20
 For 2005, the leading RDBMSs, based on worldwide market share, were as follows: 
Oracle (44.6%), IBM (21.4%), Microsoft (16.8%), Sybase (2.5%), and NCR Teradata (2.9%). 
The rank order was the same in 2004. ﬁIDC Reveals Steady Growth for Worldwide RDBMS 
Market as Top 5 Vendors Hold Their Positions,ﬂ Press Release, Framingham, Mass.: IDC, 
May 24, 2006. 
21
 See M. Brodie and M. Stonebraker, 
Legacy
 Information
 Systems
 Migration:
 The
 Incremental
 Strategy
, San Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1995,
 for an extended discus
-sion of issues to consider when contemplating the challenges and risks of a large-scale data 
migration of the sort that the MADAM-to-modern-DBMS migration poses.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
˜les prior to their being imported into Information Management System 
(IMS) or DB2 databases aided by migration tools designed by IBM and 
others for the migration of VSAM to IMS or DB2. Most successful cases 
have involved completely replacing the legacy applications and data
-bases with entirely new applications and databases. In such cases, legacy 
databases are not migrated in toto into new databases, but instead the 
necessary information content is extracted and incorporated into the new 
databases. The legacy applications and databases are then capped on a 
speci˜c cutoff date, after which time all new transactions are redirected 
to the new applications and databases. For operational, regulatory, and 
other reasons, the legacy databases and their applications are usually 
maintained in case access to information that had been in use prior to 
the cutoff date is ever needed. The new applications and databases then 
become the systems of record for all transactions from the legacy system 
cutoff date or the new systems production date forward. This methodol
-ogy eliminates the challenges involved in attempting to migrate the total
-ity of all legacy data, structures, and other artifacts from legacy databases 
to new databases. It also frees the new databases and applications to focus 
on current and future requirements, similar to those associated with the 
SSA™s e-government strategy.
Finding: In 1986, the Of˜ce of Technology Assessment alerted the SSA 
to the technology and technological risks inherent in its Master Data 
Access Method, or MADAM. Today, MADAM and the SSA™s current 
data-management approach continue to pose increasing risks.
  
The 
approach faces increasing limits in the availability of staff who under
-stand and can support the SSA™s technologically obsolete, custom 
solution. In addition, the approach precludes the use of valuable new 
technological capabilities and requires interruptions in service for 
batch updates, both of which impede the provision of desirable new 
e-services.
Recommendation: As it makes decisions about future directions for its 
database technology, the SSA should give considerable weight to the 
implications of those decisions for the effectiveness and ef˜ciency of 
current and future electronic service delivery and should be open to the 
introduction of new technologies. 
Architecture
In addition to speci˜c database challenges, architectural consider
-ations are a key component of a successful electronic services strategy. It 
is beyond the scope of this report to recommend a speci˜c architectural 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
69
approach. In principle, however, the SSA will need to develop a data-
management strategy and architecture. Doing so entails developing a 
data-management architecture that includes appropriate storage to meet 
the requirements of the organization™s e-government strategy and other 
operations. In addition, it entails the development of a migration strategy 
and supporting architecture for capturing the needed pre-replacement 
information and making it available as part of the new data-management 
architecture. Where possible, the replacement should be incremental in 
order to minimize risk and to minimize interruption of the agency™s 
workload and operations. The data-management architecture should be 
an integral part of the next-generation architecture. 
While the SSA has some modern technology componentsŠfor exam
-ple, its Web site and security practicesŠthe core technologies, such as 
data management, are outdated and pose signi˜cant risks and limita
-tions to the SSA™s operations and impose constraints on the SSA™s ability 
to achieve an electronic services strategy comparable with those in the 
private sector (see Chapter 2). In addition to data management, user inter
-action, and of course security, architectural considerations loom large in 
the necessary transition. The committee does not recommend a particular 
future architecture, but a number of questions should be addressed as the 
SSA moves forward. What would that target architecture be? How would 
the SSA migrate from the current architecture to the target incrementally 
without disrupting its operations and at the same time improving pro
-ductivity, responsiveness, and new services and lowering cost? The data-
management issue should not be addressed without a target architecture. 
The data-management challenge is an integral part of a larger challenge, 
the architecture. 
The committee acknowledges that it is easy, from the outside, to coun
-sel a radical reengineering of an outdated legacy system, while it is very 
much harder to build a case for the major expense and downside risks 
entailed in the retirement of such a system with its large historical invest
-ment. The SSA, in addition to the technical considerations outlined here, 
will also need to take into account congressional attention and the likely 
inevitable congressional hearings and newspaper headlines that will 
ensue if the reengineering efforts result in even a single month in which 
Social Security checks do not go out on time. Because the committee did 
not receive detailed information about the current nature and status of 
the SSA™s MADAM conversion effort, it did not reach conclusions as to 
whether any ongoing activities should stop. However, as described above, 
the committee does have concerns about some of the technical advice that 
the SSA has received regarding conversion. The SSA thus should look 
broadly for advice as it plans and executes its MADAM conversion effort 
and architectural overhaul. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
In seeking broader technical advice, the SSA might, for example, 
establish an external advisory board consisting of experts from the data
-base software industry, several large commercial enterprises (˜nancial 
services and telecommunications companies) that have deployed large 
relational databases, and academics to oversee the MADAM conversion 
effort. Relying on a comparatively narrow range of expertise to architect 
such a massive conversion effort creates needless risks for successful 
outcomes. In many ways, the SSA is at a critical crossroads. The way 
forward is dif˜cult and risky, but standing still is risky as well. The com
-mittee believes that the best way to move forward is to ensure that the 
SSA has the best possible technical adviceŠboth to guide the agency and 
to provide context and insights on managing the inevitable glitches that 
will occur. 
Finding: The scope and scale of the challenges that the SSA faces with 
regard to its database conversion strategy merit the input of a broad 
range of expertise.
Recommendation: In continuing to develop its conversion strategy and 
long-term services strategy, the SSA should draw on a broad range of 
technical expertiseŠincluding but not limited to database software 
experts, software engineers, software security experts, ˜nancial services 
experts, large-scale commercial service providers, and systems archi
-tecture expertsŠand put systematic mechanisms in place so that it can 
hear and learn from outside advisers. 
Other Applications
As indicated above, the key programmatic SSA applications
22
 are the 
following:
Ł Title
 II:
 Administering disability, old age, and survivor bene˜ts;
Ł Title
 XVI:
 Administering Supplemental Security Income;
Ł Earnings:
 Recording of annual wage reports;
Ł Enumeration:
 Allocation and veri˜cation of Social Security num
-bers; and 
Ł Disability:
 Determination, control, and tracking of disability 
claims.
22
 Factual information in this subsection is from material presented to the study commit
-tee by SSA and Disability Determination Services speakers during study brie˜ngs and from 
other material provided to the committee. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
71
Of these key applications, all but Disability are implemented as batch 
applications against the CA-IDMS and MADAM databases, with CICS 
being used to drive ﬁgreen-screenﬂ application interfaces.
23
Over the past few years, the SSA, as part of its Electronic Disability 
process (eDIB) and paperless claims effort,
24
 working in partnership with 
state Disability Determination Services (DDS) of˜ces, has implemented 
an electronic version of the disability determination process using Web
-Sphere and DB2. With this new system, users can initiate claims either 
over the Internet through the SSA Web site or at their local disability 
of˜ce. As a claim is assembled, all the supporting medical evidence (for 
example, x-rays, doctor™s and laboratory reports, and so on) is digitized 
and stored in the DB2 database (using DB2 large object capabilities) along 
with the other details of the claim. At the time of this writing, the eDIB 
application was still in the process of being rolled out state by state. Use 
of eDIB will reportedly cost $850 million over a 7-year life cycle, and the 
SSA expects to reap $1.3 billion in total savings (including postage and 
˜le-storage costs) from eDIB and to cut more than 3 months from the 
average time required to process a disability claim.
25
Although the eDIB effort is certainly a step in the right direction, the 
implementation is basically an electronic ﬁcopyﬂ of the formerly paper-
based process. The electronic folder that is ultimately assembled using 
the application process closely resembles the paper folder that it replaces. 
This is a good ˜rst step, and the approach provides a natural online transi
-tion for users of the system, but it misses a number of opportunities for 
enhancement. For example, with the current electronic folder, all support
-ing documentsŠincluding not just multimedia artifacts such as x-rays 
and photographs, but also all doctors™ reports, laboratory reports, and so 
onŠare converted to images encoded in the Tagged Image File Format 
(TIFF) format. This approach does succeed in archiving the documents 
but makes it impossible to index and search them without resorting to 
23
 ﬁGreen screenﬂ is common usage to refer to the monochrome-display cathode ray tubes 
(CRTs) used as computer monitors, predominantly in the 1970s and 1980s. A green phosphor 
was used, producing green characters on a dark background; some early CRT monitors used 
orange phosphors. 
24
 The eDIB process is intended to provide better and more timely service to claimants, in 
part by replacing voluminous paper case ˜les with electronic ˜les. In contrast to transfer
-ring the electronic case ˜les used for ﬁpaperlessﬂ claims processing, locating and physically 
transferring paper ˜les when a disability claimant requests a hearing used to take a month 
or more. The SSA describes its eDIB and paperless processing approaches in Social Security 
Administration, 
Information
 Resources
 Management
 Strategic
 Plan
 (200
5),
 available at http://
www.socialsecurity.gov/irm/IRM_2005.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007.
25
 Mary Mosquera, ﬁCase Files Travel Lighter, Faster,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Computer
 News
, Oct. 
9, 2006, available at http://www.gcn.com/print/25_30/42177-1.html, accessed June 14, 
2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
optical character recognition of the image ˜les, a process that will intro
-duce errors. In contrast, if doctors™ reports were captured and stored in 
the database in a format such as Word documents or Portable Document 
Format (PDF), they could readily be indexed and searched. This would 
greatly enhance the accessibility and usability of the data in the eDIB data
-base. In the future, as machine-readable standards for electronic patient 
records take the place of handwritten notes and other unstructured docu
-ments, it would be useful to be able to store such records directly in the 
disability database.
26
Web and Internet Services
The SSA™s public Web site (http://www.ssa.gov) is a primary access 
point for many users of electronic services. Although the previous compo
-nents of the agency™s IT infrastructure all play a role in electronic service 
provisionŠthe database technologies and architectures in particular are 
keyŠthe Web site typically provides the ˜rst impression and the bulk 
of the interaction experience for most users. Thus, attention to interface 
considerations, information architecture, and an intuitive and informative 
user experience is critical. 
Although the SSA was one of the ˜rst government agencies to have 
a Web site, it is now several years behind what commercial e-commerce 
and ˜nancial services sites are providing today (see Chapter 2 for more on 
expectations and offerings of world-class ˜nancial institutions). The cur
-rent SSA Web site is largely a site for dispensing information about SSA 
programs, with capability for some (partial) online bene˜ts applications 
and some retirement-planning calculations that require user-provided 
earnings and estimated bene˜t data. Thus, for example, a very basic 
operation that one might expect to ˜nd, being able to view one™s earnings 
history, is not supported at the time of this writing. The problem is more 
a policy issue than a technical one, and it may stem in part from a 1997 
episode, when the SSA made an initial attempt to provide online services 
without completely thinking through the approach to security (speci˜
-cally, only the SSN, mother™s maiden name, and state of birth were used 
for account authentication) and was strongly criticized as a result. How
-ever, given the widespread public adoption of online and secure access 
to bank and brokerage accounts that has occurred during the intervening 
26
 For more on general challenges relating to storing or archiving electronic records, see 
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board™s recent report for the National Ar
-chives and Records Administration: National Research Council, 
Building
 an
 Electronic
 Records
 Archi
ve at
 the
 National
 Archi
ves
 and
 Records
 Administration:
 Recommendations
 for
 a Long-Term
 Strategy
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2005. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
73
period of about 10 years, it seems possible that there may have been a 
change in the public™s attitudes about trade-offs between privacy protec
-tion and the bene˜ts associated with having online access to con˜dential 
˜nancial information. Accordingly, the SSA should continue to monitor 
public attitudes toward online access to sensitive personal information in 
order to determine if and how the SSA might furnish individual records 
and data online in ways that are consistent with contemporary practices, 
that present minimal and acceptable risk, and that are acceptable to the 
users of its services. 
The current SSA Web site is limited in several additional ways. First, 
only a subset of the information on the SSA site is available in a language 
other than English. Furthermore, the online application for Social Secu
-rity retirement and disability bene˜ts is only available in English and, 
at the time of writing of this report, was only accessible using particular 
browsers.
27
 The bene˜ts application pages explicitly state that there is 
no support for users of Apple or WebTV systems. As noted in Chapter 
2, this situation should not be allowed to persist, as this level of ser
-vices falls short of the current state of cross-browser and cross-platform 
compatibility found in such commercial sectors as ˜nancial services and 
telecommunications.
Future Directions for Software Development
A number of trends in the computer software-development and appli
-cations arenas will be relevant to the SSA as it updates its systems and 
develops its strategy for electronic services. These trends, which should 
be watched and leveraged over time,
28
 include the following:
Ł The Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
29
 wave, 
27
 On October 24, 2006, the SSA Web site section ﬁSocial Security Claimsﬂ at https://
s044a90.ssa.gov/apps6z/ISBA/main.html had the following message: ﬁNote to Mac and 
Web TV Users: This Internet service does not support Mac or Web TV browsers. If you are 
a Mac/Web TV user, please call one of the toll-free numbers listed on the page. Our rep
-resentatives can arrange for your application to be taken over the phone or in person at a 
Social Security of˜ce.ﬂ
28
 Names of speci˜c companies and technologies are offered simply as examples. The com
-mittee does not necessarily endorse or recommend any particular company or technology. 
29
 See, for example, M. Huhns and M. Singh, ﬁService-Oriented Computing: Key Concepts 
and Principles,ﬂ 
IEEE
 Internet
 Computing
 1(9):75-81, 2005; G. Alonso, F. Casati, H. Kuno, 
and V. Machiraju, 
Web
 Ser
vices:
 Concepts,
 Architectures,
 and
 Applications
, Berlin/Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag, 2004; M. Singh and M. Huhns
, Ser
vice-Oriented
 Computing:
 Semantics,
 Pro
-cesses,
 Agents
, West Sussex, England: Wiley, 2005. See also the work of the OASIS SOA 
Reference Model technical committee at http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.
php?wg_abbrev=soa-rm, accessed June 20, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Ł Software as services and resulting value-added service and third-
party software opportunities, 
Ł The proliferation of Extensible Markup Language (XML) and its 
impact both on search and on record format standardization efforts, 
Ł Advances in data mining and machine learning techniques, 
Ł Continued advances in commercial database technology, and 
Ł Advances in interactive applications.
SOA is one of the most highly touted trends in enterprise IT software 
today. Like the SSA, virtually every large enterprise today runs on a 
heterogeneous collection of software applications, some off the shelf (for 
example, SAP, PeopleSoft, Siebel, Oracle) and some in-house (and often 
mainframe-based) applications that would be dif˜cult or expensive to 
replace. In order to automate more of their business processes to offer 
new and enhanced services to various stakeholder groups, enterprises 
often need to develop new applications that integrate functionality and 
data from multiple existing applications. Responding to this need, soft
-ware research in the 1990s focused on ﬁmegaprogramming,ﬂ
30
 work˚ow 
systems technology, and distributed component-based programming 
models. The fruits of that researchŠand of the corresponding industrial 
activity in the areaŠinclude XML-based Web services and new, high-level 
programming approaches and tools for building new applications by 
composing existing services (also known as ﬁprogramming by composi
-tionﬂ). The SOA trend and its associated tools are likely to be very relevant 
to the SSA, providing high-productivity tools for service-enabling the 
agency™s existing applications and for using and/or reusing the result
-ing component services in constructing new online services and internal 
applications.
A companion trend to the one involving SOA and high-productivity 
tools for service composition is the availability of tools for business activ
-ity monitoring (BAM) and/or business process analysis (BPA). These tools 
support the modeling, monitoring, and gathering of analytic information 
about the day-to-day operations of business processes. Such tools, which 
are rapidly maturing, could enable the SSA to gain visibility into the 
ef˜ciency and performance of its business processes, providing informa
-tion that could then be used to diagnose bottlenecks and other problems 
and to tune or adapt its processes over time to provide better service to 
its users and clients. Disability-claim processing, a complex and lengthy 
SSA process, seems to be a particularly appropriate target for such moni
-toring and analysis tools. Other tools will be able to analyze process 
30
 G. Wiederhold, P. Wegner, and S. Ceri, ﬁTowards Mega-Programming,ﬂ 
Communications
 of
 the
 ACM
 11(35):89-99, 1992.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
75
de˜nitions in order to identify process defects that could lead to incorrect 
outcomes.
Another related and very relevant trend is the ﬁsoftware as a serviceﬂ 
trend. Rather than building and selling software packages that enterprises 
must then install, manage, and maintain or upgrade, a number of compa
-nies are starting to offer ﬁsoftware as a serviceﬂŠthey build and manage 
vertical applications that are available to enterprises through a combina
-tion of Web services and interactive Web pages.
31
 Another relevant exam
-ple is in the tax preparation software market, where companies including 
H&R Block and TurboTax are now offering tax preparation online as well 
as through client-installed software packages. The types of services and 
interactive client applications that these industries are now offering are 
not unlike the services needed by SSA partners and clients, particularly 
for complex functions such as disability-claim preparation and planning, 
ﬁwhat ifﬂ planning for various bene˜ts (such as online retirement plan
-ning, assistance with prescription drug program selection, and impact 
analysis of change in employment status), representative payment, annual 
wage reporting, and so on.
Trends in data formats and standardization thereof, notably centered 
on XML, are very relevant to the SSA. In the past several years, XML has 
taken the machine-to-machine Internet data-transfer ˜eld by storm, not 
unlike the impact that HyperText Markup Language (HTML) had on 
the machine-to-person side of the Internet. XML is now central to data 
interchange both within and between enterprises. As a result, it is now 
also at the heart of many efforts for standardizing electronic documents 
for use in a wide variety of ˜elds, including insurance, law, manufactur
-ing, business, and of course health care (e.g., the Health Level Seven, or 
HL7 initiative
32
). Continued adoption of XML and associated schema 
standards for data interchange appears likely to offer the SSA signi˜cant 
future opportunities to streamline and automate its interactions with 
many of its user communities, such as other government agencies and 
nongovernment business partners. 
Another signi˜cant data-format trend is the use of XML as a ˜le 
format for of˜ce automation software, such as the Organization for the 
Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) Open Docu
-ment Format for Of˜ce Applications and the new Microsoft Of˜ce open 
31
 SalesForce.com is a leading example of this class of software vendorŠit provides a lead
-ing customer relationship management (CRM) application via this ﬁsoftware as a serviceﬂ 
model. The signi˜cant traction that SalesForce.com has in the CRM marketplace is an indica
-tion of the potential for this model.
32
 HL7 is one of several 
American National Standards Institut
e (ANSI)-accredited Stan
-dards Developing Organizations operating in the health care arena. HL7™s domain is clinical 
and administrative data. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
XML formats. These trends could open up many types of electronic docu
-mentsŠan SSA example might be various reports related to disability 
claimsŠto broad and ef˜cient searching (subject, of course, to stringent 
access control in order to protect privacy) and more advanced XML-based 
semistructured content search technologies as they are developed. Such 
technologies should provide the SSA with powerful search capabilities 
that can be leveraged for disability-claims processing and related services 
in the future.
Moving to a different technology area, the past decade has seen great 
advances in the area sometimes referred to as Knowledge and Data Dis
-covery. Signi˜cant advances have been made in the areas of data mining 
and machine learning, giving rise to a number of new approaches to 
mining very large sets of data, building and maintaining classi˜cation 
networks, and so on. These advances are being exploited today in a num
-ber of industries and government agencies that face problems not unlike 
those that confront the SSA. The insurance industry is successfully using 
these advances to speed claim analysis and provide enhanced automatic 
fraud detection, while the ˜nancial industry is using these advances to 
automate much of the loan origination process (such as for mortgage lend
-ing). As the SSA seeks to improve the quality and timeliness of service to 
its constituents, it stands to bene˜t from the use of these advances as well. 
As an example, it seems well within the capabilities of this technology for 
the SSA to automate fully the classi˜cation of ﬁsimpleﬂ disability claims. 
Presumably the SSA would wish to ensure some level of human monitor
-ing of such automated classi˜cation, but ef˜ciencies would certainly still 
be obtained. This technology could also be put to work on the other end 
of the process to look for patterns indicating potential fraud.
Last but not least, advances continue in the database-management 
˜eld as well, and the SSA is de˜nitely a strong candidate for bene˜ting 
from these advances. As discussed elsewhere in the report, relational 
database system technology has made huge strides in the 35 years since 
its inception, having gone from theoretical speculation in 1970 to serious 
commercial offerings in 1980 to a booming industry in 1990 to the heart 
of almost every serious enterprise™s IT infrastructure today. Telecom
-munications and ˜nancial services companies manage many terabytes 
of data today using commercial off-the-shelf relational database man
-agement systems. Relational database technology today is on the verge 
of commoditization on the lower end, and on the higher end there are 
a number of high-performance, highly scalable systems available that 
provide integrated replication services for failover and disaster recovery. 
Moreover, most of these systems provide support for advanced ﬁlargeﬂ 
or ﬁmultimediaﬂ data types, including text, images, geospatial data, and 
XMLŠessentially every imaginable data type that the SSA needs to store, 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
77
manage, and search. Also as mentioned earlier, database technology limi
-tations are de˜nitely no longer a reason for the SSA to rely on the use of 
in-house data management solutions.
As with the case of best practices described in Chapter 2, trends in 
technology development and deployment should also be monitored care
-fully for their potential relevance to the SSA. There are a number of tech
-nologies on the horizonŠthis section mentions several exemplarsŠthat 
appear to be gaining signi˜cant traction in other IT sectors and that may 
be of great use to the SSA. These should be monitored and adopted as 
appropriateŠthey may not all mature at the same rate or at the same 
time, or even soon.
SEC
URIT
Y, P
RI
VAC
Y, 
AND
 AU
THENTICATION
Like other institutions, the SSA faces an onslaught of information and 
computer security challenges, including attempted break-ins, theft, tam
-pering, and phishing. And, as with any other large organization, the SSA 
will also inevitably face challenges in dealing with the problem of hav
-ing insiders participate in facilitating violations of privacy and security, 
the so-called insider problem.
33
 In recognition of these challenges, there 
is understandably a very strong security focus underlying the SSA™s IT 
efforts. In the committee™s view, the SSA clearly takes the problem of secu
-rity very seriously and appears to have adopted best industry practices. 
The SSA views its user community as consisting of four distinct groups: 
employees and trusted individuals, government agencies, nongovern
-ment business partners, and the general public. Identi˜cation, authentica
-tion, and authorization are handled differently for each of these groups. 
Internally, the SSA security team is organized into four subteams, as 
follows:
Ł The
 policy
 group
 sets security policies.
Ł The
 standards
 group
 creates standards that embody the policies set 
by the policy group.
Ł The
 execute
 group
 implements the organization™s security policies in 
software and architecture. 
Ł The
 oversight
 group
 ensures that SSA IT projects use the appropri
-33
 ﬁWhite Paper: Cyber-Security and the Insider Threat to Classi˜ed Information,ﬂ a non-
reviewed summary prepared by the National Research Council™s Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, 2001, available at http://cstb.org/whitepaper_insiderthreat, 
accessed June 15, 2007. See also M. Bishop, 
Computer
 Security:
 Art
 and
 Science
, New York: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2002, p. 21. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
ate tools and that the resulting implementations match the established 
policies.
The SSA also does regular penetration testing of its Web site; this is 
one of the responsibilities of its Intrusion Protection Team, which is made 
up of both SSA employees and outside penetration testing specialists. In 
addition, the SSA has a contract with an external vendor (IBM Managed 
Security Services) for providing real-time intrusion-detection services. 
These security approaches are aimed at, among other things, protect
-ing the integrity and con˜dentiality of the data that SSA maintains. In 
terms of SSA™s approach to privacy from a policy standpoint, the SSA 
Web site states that with regard to government information exchange, 
ﬁThe privacy of all personal information SSA maintains in its databases is 
protected and controlled by a number of Federal statutes, including 
sec
-tion 110
6 of the Social Security Act, the 
Privacy Act of 197
4, section 6103 
of the Internal Revenue Code, and 
related Social Security regulation
s and 
policies.ﬂ
34
 In the case of the SSA™s electronic services in particular, the issue 
of privacy typically revolves around how and why individual data are 
accessed or disclosed and to what extent individuals can control access 
to their data. As is often the case, privacy overlaps security in that con
-˜dentiality mechanisms provide the tools used to control access to data 
and to monitor to whom the SSA allows access to customer data. The SSA 
collects ˜nancial and medical data about individuals, as well as customer 
service data. The former support the SSA™s goals of ˜nancial stewardship 
and service provision; the latter improves the SSA™s ability to provide that 
service. There are likely cases in which those who need access to customer 
service data will not need access to the ˜nancial or medical data and 
vice versa. Thus, keeping these types of data separate and secure unless, 
perhaps, when there is a programmatic need for both types of data (for 
example, when paying medical bills) can serve to protect privacy while 
not compromising needed service provision. 
Authentication
AuthenticationŠboth technological measures that authenticate indi
-viduals and ways to perform authentication that respect privacyŠwas 
discussed at length in a previous National Research Council report that 
34
 See http://www.ssa.gov/gix/privacyinfo.html, accessed June 20, 2007. In addition, the 
SSA™s privacy policy for its online offerings is available at http://www.ssa.gov/privacy.
html, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
79
was partially funded by the SSA.
35
 Authentication issues, including the 
existence and use of a unique identi˜er such as the SSN, continue to be 
highly controversial and continue to hinder progress on providing a wide 
range of electronic services. For example, comprehensive authentication 
across multiple applications would allow the SSA™s clients to authenticate 
once per session, without having to reenter their data in order to conduct 
transactions related to separate applications or programs. The committee 
conjectures that part of the problem in moving forward with comprehen
-sive online authentication solutions is the recognition that any security 
or privacy breach may result in chastisement by Congress. Furthermore, 
commercial sites generally factor the ˜nancial cost of a certain potential 
level of fraud into their basic cost structure. Commercial organizations 
reason that it can be less expensive to tolerate certain improbable poten
-tial losses than to try to prevent them at any cost. As with other ˜nancial 
institutions that face trade-offs between security and accessibility, in most 
cases the costs of security breaches to the SSA may be more a matter of 
reputation than of ˜nance. Although the risk-cost or risk-bene˜t analyses 
can be challenging, it is nevertheless important for the SSA to weigh the 
agency and public bene˜ts from expanding electronic service functional
-ities against the incremental risks and costs.  
For its current online suite of services, the SSA™s solution to the authen
-tication problem is to do initial password assignments through the U.S. 
mail. (And, indeed, some ˜nancial institutions still use a Postal Service 
channel for initial veri˜cation when setting up online authentication for 
an individual.)  In June 2006, individuals 
already
 recei
ving
 bene˜ts
 could 
apply online for a temporary password request code (PRC) by providing 
their date of birth and SSN through a secure transmission. (The SSN itself 
cannot be used as a secure password/secret; see Box 3.2 for more on the 
SSN as an identi˜er.) At that time, the SSA Web site indicated that a per
-son could expect to wait at least 15 days for a temporary PRC to be mailed 
to his or her address of record. Once a bene˜ciary has a temporary PRC, 
he or she can use it to create a permanent password. Logging in allows a 
person to c
heck personal information and bene˜t
s; see his or her address, 
telephone number, direct deposit, and Medicare and payment informa
-tion; c
hange the address and/or telephone number in the SSA™s record
s; request or change direct deposi
t; start direct deposit of checks or change 
35
 National Research Council, 
Who
 Goes
 There?:
 Authentication
 Through
 the
 Lens
 of
 Pri
vacy,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2003.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
BOX
 3.2
 The SSN as Identifier and Authenticator
Social Security numbers (SSNs) are nine-digit numbers whose ˜rst three 
digits are related to the geographic location where the SSN was issued. The SSN 
concept was originally created in 1935-1936 to keep track of workers™ earnings. 
After Executive Order 9397, issued in 1943, required federal agencies to use the 
SSN to identify persons in any new federal systems-of-records systems, its use as 
an identi˜er in these systems grew, but slowly, for nearly 20 years. Then, in 1961, 
the Civil Service Commission began using the SSN to identify federal employees; 
the Internal Revenue Service began using it as the of˜cial taxpayer identi˜cation 
number the next year. As computers came into more widespread use, the use of 
the SSN as an identi˜er by federal, state, and local governments and private-sector 
organizations grew very rapidly.
No legislation prohibited broad use of the SSN. Indeed, in 1970, congressio
-nal concerns about welfare fraud and unauthorized workers led to amendments 
to the Social Security Act authorizing the Social Security Administration (SSA) 
to assign SSNs to legally admitted noncitizens entering the United States and to 
people applying for or receiving federal bene˜ts. Subsequent legislation continued 
to expand the use of the SSNŠfor example, as a condition of eligibility for federal 
assistance or loan programs; for use by states as part of their own tax processing, 
public assistance, driver™s license, or motor vehicle registration functions; for use 
in child support enforcement; and for military Selective Service (draft) purposes. 
According to the SSA, there are now 27 authorized uses of the SSN as the identi
-˜er for record-keeping or matching criteria.
1Although numerous laws authorize and/or require the use of the SSN as an 
identi˜er, no federal law regulates its overall use. Some federal laws restrict the use 
of SSNs in certain programs to speci˜c uses and prohibit unauthorized disclosure, 
but there is no federal law regulating or restricting the use of SSNs by the private 
sector.
2 Their use as a de facto near-universal identi˜er has proven to be problem
-aticŠresulting in easier paths to identity theft and credit fraud. 
the current direct deposit to another account or ˜nancial institution; and 
change the password.
36
 36
 Information obtained from the SSA™s Web site at https://s3abaca.ssa.gov/pro
/passregi/
passserv.shtml, accessed June 23, 2006. In June 2007, the SSA™s updated Web site has new 
information indicating that a current bene˜ciary or a person who has recently applied 
for bene˜ts can request a password. See https://s044a90.ssa.gov/apps6z/ACU_LDPG
/1The information in this history is from Social Security Administration, 
Report to Congress 
on Options for Enhancing the Social Security Card 
(undated), available at http://www.ssa.
gov/history/reports/ssnreport.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
2See U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, 
Social Security: Government and Commercial Use of 
the Social Security Number Is Widespread
, GAO-HEHS-99-28, Washington, D.C., February 
1999.Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
81
When possible, most institutions are now moving away from use of the SSN 
(for example, as student identi˜cation [IDs], subscriber IDs, customer IDs, and so 
on). Given the widespread use of the SSN and its increasing exposure to potential 
misuse (for example, from lost or compromised government and corporate data 
containing millions of individuals™ SSNs and other identifying information), knowl
-edge of an SSN should not be the only information required for an individual to 
authenticate himself or herself to the SSA or any other institution. 
Indeed, as the SSN contains only 9 digits (making for a maximum of 1 bil
-lion different SSNs), and the number of issued SSNs exceeds 400 million,
3 there 
is at least a 40 percent probability that a randomly generated 9-digit number will 
be someone™s SSN. Thus, the security risk from relying solely on the SSN for au
-thentication is large and growing. In comparison, American Express card account 
numbers are 14 digits long, Visa/MasterCard account numbers are 16 digits long, 
and both have a 3- or 4-digit security code marked on the card to prevent fraud.
4 Additional information related to an account (for example, the billing zip code, a 
personal identi˜cation number, or details about a recent transaction) is often re
-quired when interacting with a ˜nancial institution in a way that could compromise 
an account.
The security of the SSN, given its ubiquity and comparative simplicity, is a 
challenge. Addressing this challenge involves not just the SSA but also the multi
-plicity of federal, state, local, and private-sector entities that use the Social Security 
number to identify individuals or accounts. 
Note that a user™s password is not suf˜cient to view his or her earn
-ings history online. Indeed, only current bene˜ciaries can get passwords. 
landingpage, accessed June 20, 2007. In 2007, as in 2006, the password request functions are 
not available 24/7, and the SSA™s Web site indicates that the waiting period for receiving a 
temporary PRC by mail can be up to 15 days. See https://s044a90.ssa.gov/apps6z
/ACU_
LDPG/landingpage, accessed June 20, 2007.
3 By 2006, more than 420 million SSNs had been issued. See http://www.ssa.gov/history/
hfaq.html, accessed June 20, 2007. The structure of the numbers includes a geographical area 
number (the ˜rst three digits) and a group number (the next two digits), then four consecutive 
digits from 0001 to 9999. Because group numbers are not issued sequentially for a given 
area, at a given point in time some nine-digit numbers are not possible as valid SSNs. The 
SSA publishes SSN number ranges issued to date. See http://ssa.gov/history/ssn/geocard.
html, accessed June 20, 2007.
4The security code is not embossed on the card; therefore, it does not show up on the credit 
card slip. This prevents someone from obtaining the code from a receipt.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
A bene˜ciary™s password is, however, suf˜cient to change the bank 
account to which direct deposits are made. The committee conjectures that 
the former may be considered not merely a security risk but also a more 
emotionally laden privacy risk, even as security breaches regarding the 
earnings history are less likely to have real ˜nancial consequences than 
would security breaches regarding bank accounts and direct deposits. It 
is unclear whether this policy is a carefully considered choice, resulting 
from a rigorous cost-bene˜t analysis, or an unintended consequence of 
various privacy and security policies in˚uenced by oversight probes. 
Security and Privacy in a Dynamic Environment
In addition to continuing changes in hardware, software, and the 
ways in which people will choose to access services, large organizations 
such as the SSA will also have to address how their security, privacy, 
and authentication policies may need to change over time. Over the 
next decades, the SSA will face many challengesŠboth internal and 
 
externalŠin maintaining privacy and security. The external challenges 
will arise from entities that wish to obtain information or access for 
which they are not authorized. The internal challenges will come from 
entities that are authorized to have access or information but the autho
-rized entities abuse or misuse it, or even just make a mistake.
The set of policies that de˜ne security, privacy, and authentication for 
the SSA are controlled not only by the agency itself but also by external 
factors such as statutes and regulations (see Appendix D regarding some 
of the relevant statutes). The agency is constrained to choose mecha
-nisms to enforce these policies in a way that complies with the goals 
and constraints under which it functions. In particular, the SSA™s entire 
e-governmen
t approach must view security, privacy, and authentication 
policies in the context of the agency as a whole, with electronic services 
as part of an overall service-delivery strategy (see Chapter 4). 
Numerous approaches to information system security (in this case 
encompassing privacy and authentication, as well) have been developed 
by the information security community.
37
 On the basis of brie˜ngs and 
conversations with SSA technical staff, the committee considers that staff 
to be well informed in these areas and mindful of the challenges and 
principles involved. 
The SSA consists of several components, each of which manages dif
-ferent sets of systems. Each part of the agency has performed security 
37
 See, for example, at http://cstb.org/topic_security/ a listing of numerous reports from 
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board on cybersecurity and computer 
security.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
83
analyses. According to information given to the committee, the SSA has 
clearly weighed the risks very heavily. One caution, however, is that such 
an emphasis may lead to an unnecessary use of mechanisms that impair 
one or more security services. This can occur because security can be 
thought of as consisting of three types of services: con˜dentiality services, 
integrity services, and availability services. For example, the availability 
of information is critical for timely transactions and handling of cases. But 
availability carries with it the risk that the information may be disclosed 
to unauthorized parties. Hence, limiting availability reduces risks to con
-˜dentiality, but it increases risks to availability. The security policy must 
strike the correct balance between these qualities, and that balance should 
be determined by risk analysis and cost-bene˜t analysis.
The factors involved in determining approaches to security and policy 
include not only the SSA™s internal rules, but also the laws and regulations 
imposed externally by Congress and by other federal agencies (such as 
the Of˜ce of Management and Budget [OMB]) and court rulings. Further, 
agreements with state agencies impose additional constraints. Thus, tech
-nical concerns are not paramount but are simply one factor to be consid
-ered along with these other factors. Clearly, none of the above is meant 
to suggest that the SSA should not pay appropriate attention to security 
risks. Both internal controls and measures to address external threats 
(fraud, hackers, and so on) must be considered. To be most effective, secu
-rity must be built into a system from the start. Treating it as an add-on or 
applying Band-Aid-type measures is costly in terms of resources and risk. 
Although the SSA may not have taken a security-from-the-start approach 
in all of its previous electronic services projects,
38
 this report is aimed at 
encouraging the agency to adopt that posture as it seeks to expand the 
scope of its electronic services. Admittedly the agency cannot address 
these challenges aloneŠas with other government agencies, congressional 
and/or executive branch (through OMB, for example), involvement could 
help provide a framework and broader support for SSA actions to offset 
the threat of potential negative reactions. 
38
 See SSA, Assistant Inspector General for Audit, ﬁEvaluation of the Accelerated eDIB 
SystemŠThird Assessment (A-14-03-13047), December 20, 2002, available at http://www.
ssa.gov/oig/ADOBEPDF?A-14-03-13047.pdf, accessed June 29, 2006. The SSA™s Of˜ce of the 
Inspector General (OIG) found that the August 2000 
eDIB
 Program
 Management
 Plan
 ﬁneither 
addressed security nor evaluated the risks involved in eDib program development. OIG con
-cerns were partially addressed in the November 14, 2001, 
eDIb
 Program
 Management
 Plan.
 . . . However the [2001] plan did not address the risks associated with security, fraud, hackers, 
and complexity of the system. Instead, the Risk Management Plan addressed development 
risks, which could be incurred during systems development, such as cost, schedule, integra
-tion/technical and mission. While system development risks should be considered, it is as 
important to address risks that relate to internal controls and security.ﬂ 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
BOX
 3.3
 General Security Principles
In a dynamic and changing environment, the policy and technology questions 
relating to security and privacy must be revisited on a continuing basis. The fol
-lowing are several useful principles for any large organization developing security 
policies: 
Ł Simplicity.
 The more complex a policy or system is, the more that can go 
wrong. Worse, complexity of interfaces leads to errors, because humans develop 
mental models of how systems work and base their actions on these models. 
If a system is too complex, the mental models either fail to capture the system 
behavior or take too long to develop. In either case, errors occur. It is critical to 
understand that this pattern applies not only to ﬁoutsidersﬂ using interfaces to ac
-cess systems but also to developers of systems, who have mental models of how 
the components work; to analysts, who have mental models of what to look for 
and how to look for weaknesses; and to policy makers, who have mental models 
of what policies allow. As Einstein reputedly said, ﬁEverything should be made as 
simple as possible, but no simpler.ﬂ
Ł Least privilege. 
A person should have access to only the minimum amount 
and type of information needed to do his or her job. For example, someone analyz
-ing an individual™s usage-pattern data should not have access to that individual™s 
˜nancial data. Similarly, a statistician analyzing current funds in order to forecast 
future funds should have access to ˜nancial information but not to customers™ 
names and addresses.
Ł Breadth.
 By their nature, security policies and mechanisms need to be 
centrally managed, with each component of the organization managing security 
having a limited amount of autonomy consistent with the central policy. This ap
-proach prevents the balkanization of security but allows individual components to 
take local factors into account.
Ł Comprehensiveness. 
The principle of psychological acceptability
1 states 
that security mechanisms should be as unobtrusive as possible. One application 
of this principle is to require users to enter data only once. Then, if the data are 
needed multiple times (for example, for authentication across several systems), 
the session data should be retained so that the user need not reenter the data (for 
example, having a single sign-on for authentication). This principle functions with 
the principle of breadth, above, because local components must use security infor
-mation gathered from other local components. This is possible only when a central 
authority controls the interpretation of the data. However, local components can 
decide how to use the data, provided the use is consistent with overall policy.
Ł Holistic approach. 
An organization may interact with many private-sector 
organizations (including ˜nancial institutions); with federal, state, and local agen
-cies; and with private citizens. Issues of security, privacy, and authentication affect 
and are affected by all these relationships. Thus, the organization must consider 
not only its own systems and policies but also those outside its control with which 
it must interact, and the people and agencies that use its systems.
1J. Saltzer and M. Schroeder, ﬁThe Protection of Information in Computer Systems,ﬂ 
Pro-ceedings of the IEEE
 63(9):1278-1308, September 1975.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
85
This section has focused brie˚y on three aspects of what is commonly 
called security: namely, security, privacy, and authentication. Each is dif
-ferent, and presents different challenges. All are intertwined; none can be 
considered without regard to the other two, and decisions made for one 
affect the decisions that will have to be made for the other two. A brief 
summary of general security principles is provided in Box 3.3. Several 
themes that the SSA should continue to keep in mind when contemplating 
security, privacy, and authentication policies going forward are these: the 
larger societal, organizational, and technological contexts of which it will 
be a part; balancing risks with bene˜ts and avoiding an overemphasis on 
risk, especially with regard to electronic services (in today™s environment, 
lack of electronic service adoption is itself a serious risk for an agency fac
-ing serious workload and staf˜ng challenges); and the need to be open to 
the evaluation and adoption of proven industry technologies and tools. 
USER
 I
NTERFACE
Some of the current barriers to electronic service adoption are external 
to sponsoring organizations such as the SSA and/or they directly involve 
users. These include user concerns over privacy and security (discussed 
previously), the perceived convenience or inconvenience of electronic 
services, users™ lack of knowledge about available services, the complexity 
and cost of providing electronic services, and lack of access to Internet-
connected devices.
39
 Privacy concerns may have a signi˜cant impact on 
overall user interfaces and access, because information protection mea
-sures being considered at state and federal levels may require users to 
provide identifying information such as personal identi˜cation numbers 
(PINs) and passwords. For example, encrypted data may require the cus
-39
 Michael Adler and Paul Henman, with Jackie Gulland and Sharon Gaby, 
Computerisation
 and
 E-Go
vernment
 in
 Social
 Security:
 A Comparati
ve International
 Study,
 Washington, D.C.: IBM 
Center for the Business of Government, July 2005; Council for Excellence in Government, 
Hart-Teeter on behalf of the Council for Excellence in Government, 
The
 New
 E-Go
vernment
 Equation:
 Ease,
 Engagement,
 Pri
vacy
 and
 Protection,
 Washington, D.C.: Council for Excellence 
in Government, April 2003, available from http://www.excelgov.org/usermedia/images/
uploads/PDFs/egovpoll2003.pdf, accessed June 19, 2007; Internal Revenue Service, 
Findings
 from
 the
 2
00
2 
Wa
ve of
 e-˜le
 Taxpayer
 Attitudinal
 Tracking
 Research,
 2002, available at http://
www.irs.gov/taxpros/display/0,,i1%3D5%26genericId%3D10121,00.html, accessed May 23, 
2002; Nielsen/NetRatings, 
More
 Than
 One
 Third
 of
 All
 Online
 Users
 Log
 on
 to
 Go
vernment
 Sites,
 New York: Nielsen/Net Ratings Press Release, March 17, 2003, available at http://www.
nielsen-netratings.com/press.jsp?section=ne_press_releases&nav=1#2003, accessed June 19, 
2007; D.M. West, ﬁE-Government and the Transformation of Service Delivery and Citizen 
Attitudes,ﬂ 
Public
 Administration
 Re
view
 64(1):15-27, 2004; and Elena Larsen and Lee Rainie, 
The
 Rise
 of
 the
 E-Citizen:
 How
 People
 Use
 Go
vernment
 Agencies™
 Web
 Sites
, Washington, D.C.: 
Pew Internet and American Life Project, April 3, 2002, available at http://www.pewinternet.
org/reports/toc.asp?Report=57, accessed June 19, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
tomer to provide identifying information not only over the Web but also 
in phone calls, so as to authorize the person at the call center to access 
the caller™s data. This requirement can pose challenges to some customers 
who may have dif˜culty remembering such information. Other barriers 
are internal to sponsoring organizations and arise from institutional and 
cultural factors: lack of staff, an out-of-date technical infrastructure, com
-peting priorities for resources, lack of institutional readiness, and lack of 
leadership.
40
Fifteen years ago, the major Internet applications were e-mail, ˜le 
transfer (ftp), and remote log-in (telnet). Nearly all home users accessed 
online services through dial-up connections. There were no electronic 
commerce sites. The emergence and burgeoning of the Web has clearly 
had a dramatic impact on all aspects of our lives, and there is every reason 
to believe that its impact will only increase. The majority of individuals 
now in their retirement years are not Web users, and usage currently 
decreases markedly for those over 70. However, by the time the baby 
boom generation has ˜nished retiring, in 15 to 20 years, one can reason
-ably expect Web use by retirees to be much higher. The youngest baby 
boomers are now in their early 40s and have far different exposure and 
comfort levels with computers and electronic transactions than did aver
-age people in their 40s in the early 1980s. The oldest baby boomers have 
turned 60, and the majority of them are using the Internet (see below). 
There always will be some individuals (of all ages) who will not use 
electronic services despite efforts to make these services accessible and 
easy to use. However, other people or institutions may be assisting users 
with these electronic services; thus, the SSA™s electronic services are not 
just for use by individual clients, but also by the states, other government 
agencies, and employers, among others. 
In predicting the demand for electronic information and services, it 
is important to understand the characteristics of Internet usersŠwho will 
be online and how old will they beŠas well as how online demographics 
will be changing. Key questions include these: Is it true that older people 
do not use the Internet? What are the projections, especially among baby 
boomers, for older people using the Internet? Who will use it and what 
40
 S.H. Holden, D.F. Norris, and P.D. Fletcher, ﬁElectronic Government at the Local Level: 
Progress to Date and Future Issues,ﬂ 
Public
 Performance
 and
 Management
 Re
view
 26(4):325-
344, 2003; J.L. King, V. Gurbaxani, K.L. Kraemer, F.W. McFarlan, K.S. Raman, and C.S. Yap, 
ﬁInstitutional Factors in Information Technology Innovation,ﬂ 
Information
 Systems
 Research
 5(2):139-169, 1994; M.J. Moon, ﬁThe Evolution of E-Government Among Municipalities: 
Rhetoric or Reality?ﬂ 
Public
 Administration
 Re
view
 62(4):424-433, 2002; and D.F. Norris and 
M.J. Moon, ﬁAdvancing E-Government at the Grassroots: Tortoise or Hare?ﬂ
 Public
 Admin
-istration
 Re
view
 65(1):64-75, 2005. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
87
will they use it to do? Are the users getting help with electronic services, 
and what are the motivations of those providing the help?
In a partial answer to such questions, the Pew Internet and American 
Life Project
41
 reports the following statistics from 2004 survey data:
Ł As of February 2004, 22 percent of Americans 65 and over (about 
8 million people) use the Internet, compared with 15 percent in 2000 and 
2 percent in 1996. The trend is clear. Those who have learned how to use 
the Internet are expecting to use it in the future. Surprisingly, 77 percent 
of those with Internet experience have 4 or more years of experience. 
Ł In the population already 65 and older, Internet use decreases 
steadily with age: in 2001, about 22 percent of Americans age 65 to 69 
used the Internet, compared with about 15 percent of those age 70 to 74, 
about 8 percent of those age 75 to 80, and about 4 percent of those age 81 
to 90.
42
Ł In that population of Americans 65 and over (see the preceding 
bullet item), the number of female users equaled the number of male 
users. Compared with the general population, not surprisingly, these are 
people with higher incomes and more education. Many more of this set 
of users access the Internet at home over dial-up, rather than high-speed 
connections, compared with the general population who go online at 
home. Only 11 percent of African-Americans 65 and older use the Internet, 
although 21 percent of English-speaking Hispanics 65 and over use the 
Internet, the same as for Caucasians in that age range. 
Ł Of those 65 and older who use the Internet, 94 percent use e-mail 
and well over half look for health or medical information. By the end of 
2003, 60 percent of seniors who used the Internet had visited government 
Web sites, compared with 40 percent in 2000. Most of these users are 
online daily.
Ł Of more interest are the expectations and talents of the older baby 
boomers, at the time of the survey 50 to 58 years old; the Pew report calls 
this population the ﬁSilver Tsunami.ﬂ In 2004, Pew found that 62 percent 
of those 50 to 58 years old used the Internet, compared to 46 percent of 
those in the 59 to 68 year age range. Only 17 percent of those age 69 and 
older use the Internet. The older boomers are very much like the younger, 
Generation X, ﬁeager users.ﬂ They embrace e-mail, use instant messaging, 
41
 Susannah Fox, 
Older
 Americans
 and
 the
 Internet
, Pew Internet and American Life
 Project, 
Pew Research Center, Washington, D.C., March 25, 2004 (hereafter cited as Susannah 
Fox, 
Older
 Americans
 and
 the
 Internet
), available at http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs
/ PIP_Senior
s_Online_2004.pdf, accessed July 11, 2007. 
42
 Susannah Fox, 
Wired
 Seniors
, Pew Internet and American Life Project, Pew Research 
Center, Washington, D.C., Sept. 9, 2001, available at http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/
PIP_Wired_Seniors_Report.pdf, accessed July 11, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
and often get their news online. ﬁAs Internet users in their 50s get older 
and retire, they are unlikely to give up their wired ways and therefore will 
transform the wired senior stereotype.ﬂ
43
Ł However, one in four Americans never uses the Internet and is not 
in a household with Internet access. People over 65 currently make up a 
large portion of this group.
This last group is sometimes referred to as the ﬁTruly Disconnected,ﬂ 
and its number has not changed over the past 10 years. These are the 
people who need agents to help them get the information they need. 
Even though this group may be a relatively small proportion of the gen
-eral population, it represents a large number of people in absolute terms. 
There are barriers to these people getting the information that they need. 
For instance, a number of older people think that they do not need to 
access the Internet, since many services, such as Social Security, are avail
-able through multiple delivery channels. This is an opportunity for educa
-tion and outreach. In addition, many older people do not own a computer, 
nor know how to use one. This number will decrease in time, but right 
now there is clearly a need for third parties or intermediaries to work 
with the people in this group to get them the information they need. This 
could be done through organizations similar to commercial tax preparers 
that help tax ˜lers, through public servants such as reference librarians 
at public libraries, or through not-for-pro˜t organizations that provide a 
variety of services to SSA bene˜ciaries. Just as the ˜nancial services insti
-tutions discussed in Chapter 2 do not remove all access channels other 
than electronic services, so the SSA will need to retain and support more 
traditional approaches to service provision. 
Even if older people access Web sites on the Internet, many are dif
-˜cult to use.
44
 The Nielsen/Norman Group, a usability consulting ˜rm, 
has declared that Web sites are twice as hard for older people in general as 
for younger people to use. In particular, older people have dif˜culty with 
small type sizes, low contrast, short links (the target size to be pointed at 
is small), and rolling pull-down menus. Furthermore, because of short-
term memory challenges, if the site does not change the color of the links 
traversed, older people may have dif˜culty navigating.
45
 43
 Susannah Fox, 
Older
 Americans
 and
 the
 Internet
, p. iii.
44
 See Amanda Lenhart, John Horrigan, Lee Rainie, Katherine Allen, Angie Boyce, Mary 
Madden, and Erin O™Grady, 
The
 Ever-Shifting
 Internet
 Population:
 A New
 Look
 at
 Internet
 Ac
-cess
 and
 the
 Digital
 Di
vide
, Washington, D.C.: The Pew Internet and American Life Project, 
April 16, 2003. 
45
 U-Group:
 Impro
ving
 the
 Usability
 of
 Federal
 Communication
 Technologies
, Newsletter, Wash
-ington, D.C.: U.S. General Services Administration, September 2004.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION™S
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY 
89
One set of current usability standards for older people recommends 
the following:
Ł Less text (so that it is easier to remember),
Ł Plain language, 
Ł 12 point sans serif font,
Ł Strong color contrast,
Ł Buttons that can be used to enlarge the type size, increase the text 
contrast, or read the text out loud, and
Ł Consistent page layout (so that people can learn where to look for 
various things).
46
 Not surprisingly, efforts to make a site more usable for seniors also 
increase the usability for all age groups.
47
 The SSA will also need to keep in 
mind the requirements of individuals with disabilities or signi˜cant physi
-cal or cognitive impairments. Although the same principles and approaches 
may prove useful, ability-speci˜c methodologies may be needed to ensure 
that the SSA site is as easy to use as possible for people of varying abili
-ties. More generally, what are considered optimal Web site designs and 
standards will change over time. Remaining aware of best practices and 
conducting ongoing use testing to evaluate proposed sites and designs are 
necessary efforts for any institution maintaining an online presence. 
ACCESS
 T
ECHNOLOGIES
A variety of technology optionsŠcable, digital subscriber line (DSL), 
˜ber-to-the-premises, metropolitan area wireless networksŠare enabling 
increased broadband penetration. Increasingly functional access using 
handheld devices is available through 3G cellular networks. Although per
-sonal computers (whose prices, both absolute and performance-adjusted, 
have steadily dropped) appear likely to remain the major way that users 
access the Internet, the SSA, and indeed all government agencies, should 
expect that other technologies such as mobile phones, Internet-connected 
televisions, game boxes, and other ﬁthin clientsﬂ will provide means for 
those who are not technologically savvy to use networked information 
and services. Consequently, the SSA should not continue to expect that 
most of its customers will be using Internet Explorer (or a similar browser) 
running on a desktop or laptop PC. To be effective and to meet the likely 
future needs of its users, the SSA should be prepared to eventually
 support 
a wide variety of browsers running on a wide variety of devices ranging 
46
 Ibid. 
47
 Janice R. Nall, Usability Solutions Group, U.S. General Services Administration.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
from digital televisions to cellular phones. This is not to say that the SSA 
will need to be at the forefront in developing these services. Other private-
sector industries will undoubtedly lead the way. The agency will need to be 
mindful of these and related technologies and how they are being deployed 
and used, and it will need to be prepared to take advantage of them for its 
own bene˜ciaries and users when appropriate. 
Deep broadband penetration will provide the opportunity for the 
SSA™s users to interact with the agency using technologies such as text 
chat or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). For example, when ˜lling out a 
form, a user might click a help link connecting the user to a live help desk 
using VoIP or chat (as some online retailers do today). Alternatively, a 
ﬁstuckﬂ user might click on a context-aware help link that would bring up 
a segment of video demonstrating how to continue ˜lling out a trouble
-some part of the online application.
48
  
SU
MMAR
YLike virtually all other organizations inside or outside the govern
-ment, the SSA must carefully and regularly examine information technol
-ogy trends. The agency simply could not perform its functions without the 
use of technology, and its current reliance on technology will inevitably 
grow as its workload grows and its access to support resources inevitably 
fails to keep pace. Thus, it is incumbent on the SSA to keep close track of 
changes and advances in technology. In some areas, notably security and 
privacy, the SSA seems to be doing a good job of tracking technology and 
incorporating current best practices into its processes. In other areas, nota
-bly databases, the SSA is not on par with technological advances. Ensuring 
that the SSA is able to keep pace with technology is not only a technologi
-cal issue but is also an organizational issue. There are other organizational 
issues that have a direct bearing on the SSA™s ability to roll out needed 
electronic services in coming years. These are addressed in Chapter 4.
48
 There are also technologies known as Rich Internet Applications, such as Flash, Asyn
-chronous Java Script and XML (AJAX), and others that allow Web developers to develop 
richer client-side applications by migrating pieces of an application from the server to the 
client browser. See, for example, Jesse James Garrett, ﬁAJAX: A New Approach to Web 
Applications,ﬂ Feb. 18, 2005, available at http://www.adaptivepath.com/publications
/essays/archives/000385.php, accessed June 20, 2007. The most familiar example of AJAX 
technology is probably Google maps (http://maps.google.com), which provides the user 
the ability to ﬁscrollﬂ the map by dragging it with the mouse. This scrolling occurs locally, 
with the AJAX application asynchronously requesting additional map segments and/or 
satellite imagery from the Google server. In addition to providing a richer user experience, 
applications written using AJAX technology reduce the load on the server. On the other 
hand, such approaches can con˚ict with the desire to let the user employ ﬁthin clientsﬂ to 
access services. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91
 4
  Toward Organizational Transformation 
for Electronic Service Delivery
This study™s charge is to examine the Social Security Administration™s 
(SSA™s) strategy for expanding its provision of electronic informa
-tion and services. Developing a forward-looking strategy for elec
-tronic service delivery requires more than just an understanding of the 
organization™s current technological infrastructure and capabilities. Suc
-cessful service-delivery strategies are grounded in an understanding of 
the organization™s strengths, the constraints under which it must operate, 
and the nature of the organizational support for (or resistance to) a new 
or updated vision of service delivery.  As a result, an understanding of 
the organization™s culture and its approach to both technology and service 
provision is also necessary. 
This chapter provides a high-level assessment and set of impressions 
regarding the SSA™s organizational culture and approaches to service pro
-vision on the basis of input that the committee received over the course 
of this study. The chapter also explores how the SSA™s organizational cul
-ture, leadership, management choices, and policy choices may affect the 
agency™s ability to plan and execute a new service-delivery strategy that 
emphasizes electronic services. It presents a set of ˜ndings and recom
-mendations to assist the SSA in effecting a transition to the future.
1 The 
1 
As in Chapter 3, note that this overview is of necessity brief and based on comparatively 
small amounts of data and input. A comprehensive assessment of such a large organization 
was outside the scope of this committee™s activities; the committee tried to focus particularly 
on the capabilities and functionalities related to electronic services provision.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
chapter concludes by laying out a vision of government in which informa
-tion technology (IT) has transformed the service-delivery process. 
ORGANI
ZATIONAL
 CU
LT
URE
 AND
 ITS
 I
MPLICATIONS
Organizations and individuals in organizations make decisions about 
the technologies that they will design and deploy for a variety of reasons, 
some stemming from the organizational culture. This section discusses 
some potential impediments in the realm of organizational culture to an 
effective transformation of the SSA™s service-delivery strategy. To be sure, 
some of these potential impediments, including a cautious approach and 
instincts to preserve the status quo, are inherent in any large organization 
and especially in government organizations. Nonetheless, such impedi
-ments present a particular challenge when an organization reaches a criti
-cal juncture such as the one that faces the SSA now.
Organization and organizational cultureŠespecially as they relate 
to structure, decision-making processes, approaches to problem solv
-ing, service provision, change management, and so onŠare signi˜cant 
determiners of the success of any large organization™s attempt to make 
fundamental and critical changes. By ﬁcultural issues,ﬂ the committee 
is referring to a combination of history, leadership, existing social and 
political relationships, overarching regulations and rules, and existing 
operational procedures that determine or in˚uence the agency™s activities 
and ways of doing business. 
The experience of industries such as the ˜nancial services industry 
demonstrates that development, deployment, and integration of elec
-tronic services entail just such critical and fundamental change. Culture 
has an effect at all stages and in all components of any path forward in 
this area. Thus, the committee has examined relevant SSA cultural issues 
in order to ensure a more complete and well-rounded report and a more 
relevant and realistic set of recommendations.
To provide a historical context and a variety of perspectives, this sec
-tion draws on presentations and discussions from meetings of the com
-mittee, the ˜ndings of previous National Research Council reports, Gen
-eral Accounting Of˜ce (GAO; now Government Accountability Of˜ce) 
reports and testimonies before Congress, and various consultants™ reports. 
Together, these sources provide strong evidence that organizational cul
-ture has been a challenge to past attempts to improve electronic services 
provision at the SSA. Moreover, despite these previous ˜ndings, the orga
-nizational culture does not seem to have changed or evolved as quickly 
as it could (or should) have.  
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
93
The SSA™s Organization and CultureŠFeatures and Issues
The SSA is a very large government institution with a long history of 
valuing and providing personal service to the people of the United States.
2 It has built up an impressive infrastructure over decades to support its 
overriding objective of providing effective personal service to its bene˜
-ciaries. It has adopted as its organizational structure a traditional hierar
-chical bureaucracy of the sort that most large organizations have viewed 
as a model of ef˜ciency since the Industrial Revolution. However, infor
-mation technology (IT) advancesŠof which a hallmark is the widespread 
availability of information at the ˜ngertips of most employeesŠthat have 
the potential for transforming work processes and service delivery were 
not envisioned when the industrial model was developed. 
During its study and associated brie˜ngs and conversations, the com
-mittee noted that there seemed to be an understanding of the promise 
of an IT-enabled organizational transformation and of its potential for 
supporting electronic services delivery. But the promise of such a trans
-formation seemed to be outweighed by the concern of the organization 
and many of its people for the impact of such a change on SSA users and 
bene˜ciaries. 
The SSA is not unique in facing cultural and organizational challenges 
in attempting to pursue innovative initiatives, especially those relating 
to the implementation of electronic information and services. In 2001, 
major ˜ndings from studies of the U.S. government™s experiences in the 
development of e-government examined the strong role of embeddedness 
and culture.
3 In that work, ﬁembeddednessﬂ refers to the fact that infor
-mation systems are embedded or situated in organizations with complex 
histories, existing social and political relationships, overarching regula
-tions and rules, and existing operational procedures. The study found 
that embeddedness can indeed cause cultural issues to become important 
factors in determining the success of an organization™s efforts to innovate. 
Researchers in organizational theory have found that adopting innovative 
technologies and procedures can signi˜cantly affect an organization™s 
culture because their adoption usually cuts across organizational bound
-2 
The SSA operates a vast network of some 1,500 of˜ces and 65,000 staff distributed 
throughout the country (see Chapter 1). The agency™s policy is to provide customers with 
a choice in how they conduct business with the SSA. Options include visiting or calling a 
˜eld of˜ce, calling a toll-free number, contacting the SSA through the mail, or, in some cases, 
using Social Security Online, the agency™s Web site at http://www.ssa.gov. In addition, 54 
state Disability Determination Service (DDS) agencies make initial and ongoing disability 
determinations. 
3 
Jane Fountain, 
Building
 the
 Virtual
 State:
 Information
 Technology
 and
 Institutional
 Change
, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2001 (hereafter cited as Jane Fountain, 
Build
-ing
 the
 Virtual
 State
). 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
aries.
4 Coming to realize this can then cause the organizational culture to 
resist the innovations.
The diffuse nature of electronic service responsibilities across the 
agency and the SSA™s e-government initiative can be seen as an example 
of innovation that generates such resistance. This innovation may be 
perceived by some as threatening the institutional status quo. The result 
seems to be dif˜culty in undertaking innovative strategiesŠthat is, mak
-ing signi˜cant changes, such as moving strongly to electronic servicesŠ
because the organization has a strong investment in preserving its own 
culture (although, as is often the case, this is not necessarily a deliberate 
choice). Moreover, there are admittedly reasons for defending the status 
quoŠthe SSA™s ultimate mission of serving its bene˜ciaries (and issuing 
millions of checks on time each year to millions of bene˜ciaries) has been 
successful. All of this suggests that the SSA™s organizational culture is 
a factor that must be considered and dealt with if the promise of an IT-
enabled organization, structured to support the kind of electronic services 
that are increasingly expected by society at large, is to be achieved. 
These observations about the impact of the SSA™s organizational cul
-ture and resistance to change become increasingly important because 
the technological and social environments in which the SSA operates are 
changing rapidly, making the alternative of an IT-enabled organizational 
transformation an increasingly attractive alternative for supporting effec
-tive operation and service delivery. The number of the SSA™s bene˜ciaries 
will soon expand rapidly as baby boomers retire or qualify for disability. 
For example, since the year 2000, the number of people who ˜le for dis
-ability increased by 500,000 a year, an increase of 25 percent.
5 At the same 
time, the scale and scope of the SSA™s services continue to grow. 
Service Culture Issues
From what the committee observed, the SSA workforce takes great 
pride in ful˜lling its mission and has a very strong commitment to and 
long tradition of providing personal service tailored to the individual cli
-ent. As a result, SSA devotes quite substantial resources today to its face-
to-face and telephone service channels. In addition, the cultural mores 
within the SSA seem to equate electronic or online services with imper
-4 
Jane Fountain, 
Building
 the
 Virtual
 State
. See also, for example, Lionel Pierce, ﬁNew Gov
-ernment: Managing the Transformation,ﬂ Discussion Paper No. 20, 2004, available at http://
www.agimo.gov.au/publications/2004/05/egovt_challenges/issues/transformation, ac
-cessed July 11, 2007.
5 
Mary Mosquera, ﬁCase Files Travel Lighter, Faster,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Computer
 News
, Oct. 
9, 2006, available at http://www.gcn.com/print/25_30/42177-1.html, accessed June 14, 
2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
95
sonal service instead of recognizing this service channel as often being 
more responsive in terms of cycle times, convenience, user satisfaction, 
burden reduction, and accuracy (see Chapter 2).
Personnel Issues
Like virtually all federal agencies, the SSA faces a projected brain 
drain. A substantial number of the agency™s most experienced civil ser
-vants, who best understand the complex bene˜ts-determination processes 
and interworkings of the outdated technology infrastructure, are eligible 
to retire. Thus, one immediate challenge involves human resources and 
workforce considerations. The agency™s planning estimates for the work
-force indicate that just over 40 percent of the workforce will be retiring 
by 2014, just when the baby boom generation approaches its peak dis
-ability and retirement years. Consequently, the SSA acknowledges that a 
signi˜cant human capital challenge is to develop strategies to maintain 
a capable workforce to handle the workload increase, despite the retire
-ment wave. To address this challenge, the SSA reports that it developed 
its ˜rst human capital plan in 2004, updating the plan in 2005, along with 
completion of its future workforce transition plan. The latter lays out the 
SSA™s plans to recruit, hire, develop, and retain a diverse workforce. The 
agency reports having hired more than 18,000 permanent employees since 
2001.
6 The SSA also reports that it is focused on workforce development 
and retention, especially for employees providing services to the public, 
and that it is working to improve training and development programs, 
including online training.
7 The committee notes that the start of the SSA™s hiring wave appar
-ently preceded completion of the 2004 Human Capital Plan
. This timing 
raises possible concerns about the skill mix of the newly hired workforce 
(see the subsection below entitled ﬁStrategic Service-Delivery Planﬂ). An 
updated employee skill mix will be needed to support technological inno
-vations indicated as part of a modern electronic services strategy. More 
important perhaps is the need for new employees to bring to the SSA a 
fresh outlook on IT and electronic services. The SSA may ˜nd it chal
-lenging to establish a more modern employee skill mix, and the cadres 
of new employees who will embrace and lead a cultural transformation 
may encounter resistance.  
6 
Testimony of Jo Anne B. Barnhart, Commissioner of Social Security, before the
 Senate 
Finance Committee, March 14, 2006, available at http://www.ssa.gov/legislation
/ testimony_031406.html, accessed June 9, 2006.
7 
Social Security Administration, 
Results
 at
 the
 Social
 Security
 Administration:
 Getting
 It
 Done
, 2005, available at http://www.ssa.gov/performance/results/results2005.pdf, accessed June 
9, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Finally, it is worth underscoring that aside from the transforma
-tional issues, the SSA will continue to need to recruit and retain in-house 
technical expertise. Government agencies generally tend to outsource 
a large portion of their technical work and thus run the risk of being 
overly dependent on their vendors. A suf˜cient cadre of in-house techni
-cal experts is critical in any organization to evaluating the quality of the 
technology solutions that are offered.
Organizational Structural Issues
Although SSA programs cross organizational lines, the committee 
notes that the SSA, like many government agencies and other long-lived 
organizations, is a heavily stovepiped organization. As described in the 
discussion in Chapter 1 about the SSA™s current organizational structure, 
key elements for the development and implementation of e-government 
by the SSA are spread across three Deputy Commissioners™ domainsŠ
Operations, Systems, and Disability and Income Security Programs. The 
organizational lead for e-government is a subcomponent of Operations. 
Moreover, three additional units play a role in e-service initiativesŠ(1) the 
Of˜ce of the Chief Information Of˜cer
, which appears to have responsi
-bility for IT strategy and for compliance with legislation, Of˜ce of Man
-agement and Budget (OMB) directives, and Government Accountability 
Of˜ce (GAO) guidance concerning IT capital and investment control, and 
which also works with other agencies on government-wide projects such 
as e-government; (2)
 the Of˜ce of Electronic Communications in the Of˜ce 
of the Deputy Commissioner, Communications, which is responsible for 
online informational (as opposed to transactional) content; and (3) the 
Of˜ce of the Chief Strategic Of˜cer, which is responsible for strategic 
planning.
8  
As in any large organization, this stovepiping generally tends to 
make cross-program communications dif˜cult, and it can greatly com
-plicate the kind of coordination needed to ensure success in interorga
-nizational initiatives. In particular, such dispersed responsibilities and 
the relatively low-level lead for e-government initiatives make success 
in creating an ambitious spectrum of new e-government initiatives par
-ticularly challenging. Of particular note is the effective split between the 
electronic services organization™s mission and that of the communications 
8 
This description is current at the time of this writing and the discussion is based on 
material from the SSA™s public Web site, ﬁOrganizational Structure of the Social Security 
 
Administration.ﬂ
 See http://www.ssa.gov/org/ssaorg.htm, accessed June 9, 2006, and 
May
 30, 2007 (for up-to-date organizational information).
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
97
organizationŠwhich effectively divide responsibility and authority for 
the Internet/electronic face of the SSA. 
Given the SSA™s current stage of maturity with respect to electronic 
services (see Chapter 2), raising the level and authority of the electronic 
services organization could be helpful for the organization to successfully 
address its challenges by making electronic services a more prominent 
part of its service-delivery plans. The alternative is to maintain the dis
-tributed nature of electronic services and have responsibility for various 
facets spread across multiple Deputy Commissioners™ domains. Although 
analogous experiences in the private-sector ˜nancial services industry 
(see Chapter 2) indicate that resistance to such changes can be expected, 
those experiences also suggest that these changes are important, both to 
support the move to electronic services and to precipitate needed cultural 
change. 
Risk Management in the Federal Context
Being subject to constant and intense scrutiny from Congress and 
various federal oversight agencies understandably in˚uences the SSA 
to be reluctant to assume risk. Yet failing to make needed changes can 
incur costs that can eventually outweigh the risks incurred in making 
such changes. There is a larger need to institutionalize effective risk man
-agement in order to make increasingly accurate assessments of both the 
upside and the downside risks from decisions both to make and to defer 
change. 
A 1990 report of the National Research Council on the SSA™s systems 
modernization strategy observed that ﬁthe SSA™s intrinsic problem is 
one compounded of mammoth size, an external expectation for inherent 
agility to accept change, a built-in inertia that impedes change, often late-
breaking changes, and all overlaid with a demand for maximum accuracy 
and stable operations. So far as the nation is concerned, the SSA is a big 
information production line that must deliver checks to its clientele con
-sistently and with certainty.ﬂ
9  The desire to avoid ﬁmore bad publicityﬂ is a factor that seems to 
have signi˜cantly reinforced a cautious organizational culture. In 1997, 
the Personal Earnings and Bene˜t Estimate Statement (PEBES) situa
-tion (also mentioned brie˚y in Chapter 2) garnered the SSA signi˜cant 
negative attention. Privacy concerns among the public and among privacy 
advocates regarding the SSA™s implementation of Internet-based access 
9 
National Research Council, 
Systems
 Modernization
 and
 the
 Strategic
 Plans
 of
 the
 Social
 Secu
-rity
 Administration,
 Board on Telecommunications and Computer Applications, Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
to individuals™ PEBES information gave rise to front-page news stories
10
 and congressional hearings.
11
 The SSA Commissioner quickly suspended 
the service.
12
 The PEBES experience illustrates the kind of attention that can be 
brought to bear on agencies such as the SSA when they implement new 
technologies. Although such experiences can impose costs and increase 
wariness regarding attempts at other kinds of changes, it is also important 
to assess what positive lessons can be learned. For instance, if the SSA 
had vetted its plans for PEBES more publicly beforehand, it might well 
have been able to head off some of the negative effectsŠby, for example, 
revising its authentication solution or simply by not surprising the pri
-vacy community. Such consultation prior to the launch of the new service 
might also have given the SSA an opportunity to present the risk-reward 
trade-offs before the press presented only the downside risk. Articulating 
the bene˜ts of future improvements and securing the support of a broad 
range of users (including bene˜ciaries, third parties, and partners) is one 
way to ensure public support in case there is a mix of opinions that oth
-erwise might derail a worthwhile service offering. 
A ˜nal lesson about the PEBES episode is that too much should not 
be made of it. Today, people are much more comfortable about (secured) 
online access to private information, and much more is known about how 
to implement online authentication.
Finding: The SSA may be missing important opportunities to make sus
-tained improvements in its service delivery because of an overemphasis 
on the potential risks of modernizing its service-delivery strategy and a 
lack of emphasis on the long-term risks associated with 
not
 revamping 
that strategy.
Recommendation: When evaluating new electronic service-delivery 
initiatives, the SSA should when appropriate seek to balance risks and 
rewards by recognizing such upside bene˜ts from automation as cost 
reduction, fraud prevention, and customer satisfaction. 
10
 See, for example, ﬁFew Key Bits of Info Open Social Security Records,ﬂ 
USA
 Today
, April 
7, 1997, p. 1.
11
 U.S. Congress, Subcommittee on Social Security, House Committee on Ways and Means, 
Hearing on the Social Security Administration and the PEBES Program, May 6, 1997. 
12
 PEBES went online in March 1997. The Commissioner suspended online receipt of 
PEBES data on April 9, 1997. See U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, 
Social
 Security
 Admin
-istration:
 Internet
 Access
 to
 Personal
 Earnings
 and
 Bene˜ts
 Information
, Testimony Before the 
Subcommittee on Social Security, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representa
-tives, GAO/T-AIMD/HEHS-97-123, Washington, D.C., May 6, 1997.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
99
Strategic Service-Delivery Plan
The GAO made recommendations in 1993 and again in 2000
13
 that 
the SSA complete a service-delivery plan to ensure that its human capital 
and other key investments are put to the best use. In 1998, the agency 
took a ˜rst step by beginning a multiyear project to monitor and measure 
the needs, expectations, priorities, and satisfaction of customer groups, 
major stakeholders, and its workforce. In 2000, the SSA took another step 
by completing a document that articulated its vision for how the agency 
would function in the future.
14 
However, the overall impression of the committee is that the SSA has 
been slow to develop and implement strategic service-delivery plans, 
despite repeatedly being encouraged to do so by outside auditors and 
experts. The reasons for this are not entirely clear, although cultural 
issues, sometimes driven by external factors,
15
 are likely at least partially 
responsible. Contributing factors may be a lack of sustained leadership 
commitment over the years and an organizational culture that appears 
to equate electronic or online services with impersonal rather than more-
responsive service. Here too, these cultural predispositions need to be 
overcome in order to enable the SSA to embrace the proactive planning 
needed as the basis for electronic service-delivery initiatives.
As the committee noted above in the discussion of the retirement 
and hiring waves, the SSA sometimes takes actions with enduring conse
-quences in advance of a strategic plan for action.
16
 This way of proceed
-ing has led to outside criticisms of the SSA™s workforce and technology 
initiatives as being developed out of sequence and lacking a cohesive 
13
 See U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, Testimony Before the Subcommittees on Human 
Resources and Social Security, Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, 
SSA
 Customer
 Ser
vice:
 Broad
 Ser
vice
 Deli
very
 Plan
 Needed
 to
 Address
 Future
 Challenges,
 Feb. 11, 
2000; and U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Social 
Security, Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, 
Social
 Security
 Admin
-istration: SSA Needs to Act Now to Assure
 World-Class
 Service, T-HRD-94-4
6, Washington, D.C., 
Oct. 28, 1993.
14
 Social Security Administration,
 Social
 Security
 2
010 Vision,
 Of˜ce of the Commissioner, 
SSA Pub. No. 01-016, September 2000. 
15
 Such factors include everything from congressional requirements, to executive branch 
mandates, to employee resistance to reorganization, and so on. The committee does not seek 
to downplay these factors in any way, but making recommendations to these organizations 
is outside the scope of this report. 
16
 See U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, 
GAO
 Report
 Performance
 and
 Accountability
 Series:
 Major
 Management
 Challenges
 and
 Program
 Risks,
 Social
 Security
 Administration
, Washington, 
D.C., January 2003. GAO found that the SSA was taking human capital measures in the 
absence of a concrete service-delivery plan to help guide its investments.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
strategic vision.
17
 Indeed, the committee™s impression is that the SSA™s de 
facto service-delivery strategy appears to be oriented toward preserving 
existing organizational structures and mores instead of responding to 
emerging technological capabilities and shifting user demands for more 
convenient service channels. 
The GAO also criticized what it described as the SSA™s lack of a broad 
vision for customer service, noting that ﬁthis broad vision, as well as a 
more detailed plan spelling out who in the future will be providing what 
service and where, is needed to help the agency focus its efforts to meet its 
future challenges.ﬂ
18
 As is expanded on later in this chapter, this commit
-tee believes that a very broad new vision of the seamless delivery of SSA 
information and services through different (but predominantly electronic) 
service media centered on state-of-the-art technology is indicated. A thor
-ough and articulate plan is needed as the basis for proceeding toward 
such a vision. At the same time, the committee recognizes the dif˜culties 
that federal agencies face in projecting programmatic cost savings result
-ing from the use of new technologies and methods and then having to live 
with the consequences of those projections (e.g., budget cuts) whether or 
not the savings are realized. 
Finding: The SSA™s organizational structure does not support the estab
-lishment of a strategic focus in electronic services that is suf˜ciently 
high-level and broad-based. The SSA has an opportunity to be more 
proactive in fundamentally reassessing its customer service value chain 
and, for as many customers as possible, focusing on the potential sub
-stitution of electronic services for other delivery channels, such as paper 
mail and face-to-face interactions in ˜eld of˜ces. 
Recommendation: The SSA should make an unambiguous, strategic 
commitment to electronic services as part of its long-term service-
delivery strategy, placing a central emphasis on electronic services that 
encompass timely and up-to-date information for users, partners, and 
bene˜ciaries. 
17
 U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, Testimony Before the Subcommittees on Human Re
-sources and Social Security, Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, 
SSA
 Customer
 Ser
vice:
 Broad
 Ser
vice
 Deli
very
 Plan
 Needed
 to
 Address
 Future
 Challenges,
 Washington, 
D.C., Feb. 11, 2000. 
18
Ibid.
 Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
101OPPORT
UNITIES
 FOR
 C
HANGE
Several key issues were largely unaddressed in the brie˜ngs and 
documents made available to the committee: (1) what kinds of metrics 
and measures the agency will use to monitor and assess its efforts over 
time, (2) what kinds of marketing and promotion of services it will under
-take in order to encourage the use of electronic services, and (3) how the 
SSA™s core competencies and potential partnerships could be combined to 
strengthen and enhance service provision across the board.  The subsec
-tions that follow examine each of these questions in turn.
Metrics and Measures
The National Research Council™s 1990 report entitled 
Systems
 Mod
-ernization
 and
 the
 Strategic
 Plans
 of
 the
 Social
 Security
 Administration
 recom
-mended that the SSA develop and use suitable performance metrics and 
measures in its management process: 
Ł As part of its recommendation that the SSA adopt improved IT 
management processes, that study committee urged the SSA to ﬁthor
-oughly forecast and justify expansion and upgrade of the existing infor
-mation systems infrastructure on a continuing basis; 
quantify
 and
 de˜ne
 in
 ad
vance
 the
 speci˜c
 performance
 goals
 to
 be
 pro
vided
 its
 clients;
 measure
 and
 monitor
 actual
 performance
 [emphasis added]; and plan for the orderly 
introduction of new services consistent with available personnel and 
budgetary resources.ﬂ
Ł With respect to service quality, the same committee recommended 
that ﬁthe Social Security Administration quantify each aspect of service 
quality (e.g., elapsed time to complete), monitor its overall performance, 
and 
manage
 against
 such
 a priori
 ser
vice
 goals
 [emphasis added].ﬂ
19
This committee concurs with the above conclusions. The establish
-ment of metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of various services and deliv
-ery channels is an important component of a service-delivery plan. Such 
metrics are complemented by the establishment of speci˜c, agreed-on 
operational approaches to measurement. Although a typical cost measure 
is dollars, bene˜t measures may be dif˜cult to monetize. Careful discus
-sion that involve user communities (such as bene˜ciaries, third parties, 
partners, and SSA employees), can be useful in coming to consensus about 
19
 National Research Council, 
Systems
 Modernization
 and
 the
 Strategic
 Plans
 of
 the
 Social
 Secu
-rity
 Administration
, Board on Telecommunications and Computer Applications, Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990, p. 4.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
effectiveness measures, and such discussions themselves are often what 
is most useful to an organization. 
As a general rule, cost-reduction and ef˜ciency measures should be 
balanced by effectiveness metrics that re˚ect operational objectives. While 
cost is easily measured, de˜ning metrics of effectiveness is a signi˜cant 
challenge. Many enterprises wrestle with this issue since management 
frequently sees IT as a cost center, thus emphasizing cost reduction, and 
does not tie the operational effectiveness of its lines of business directly to 
IT capabilities. For example, effective risk management relies on effective
-ness in quantifying the costs and bene˜ts from changes and decisions that 
are under consideration. Metrics of this type are generally the basis for 
the orderly collection of measurements of speci˜c current and proposed 
costs and bene˜ts that can then be the basis for sound decision making 
and orderly change. The committee did not receive information regarding 
SSA metrics of this type. 
In addition, when any organization is working in a metrics-oriented 
fashion, effectiveness metrics against which costs can be compared should 
be established and used as vehicles for project management and control 
before major sums of money are committed to projects. That is, 
manage
-ment
 by
 cost-effecti
veness
 measurement
 should be established. The commit
-tee did not receive information from the SSA about the use of business 
case analyses to determine when projects are succeeding, when they are 
not, and what might be done about ineffective projects.
Measuring cost involves more than simply estimating the dollar costs 
of carrying out a project. In some cases, for example, there may be sub
-stantial costs in 
not
 proceeding with a project. These costs might include 
increased risk of catastrophic consequences from failing to proceed with 
replacement of critical infrastructure. Effective measures of opportunity 
cost must take such issues into account. Chapter 3 indicates that the SSA 
seems to the committee to be incurring serious ongoing risk in continu
-ing to base much of its operational capability on the Master Data Access 
Method (MADAM) system. Although the cost of replacing MADAM 
may be considerable, failing to replace it seems to increase the risk that 
MADAM may become (perhaps quite suddenly) unsustainable, render
-ing many key SSA operations problematic or impossible. The cost and 
impact on the agency and public when MADAM can no longer be sup
-ported will be enormousŠthe committee believes that this is a ﬁwhenﬂ 
not an ﬁifﬂ proposition. Determining the cost-effectiveness of a project 
like MADAM conversion should be based on a measure of cost that takes 
all of these issues accurately into account. Such a determination should 
also consider likely increases in electronic services adoption due to the 
improved functionality that results from using an up-to-date relational 
database technology.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
103Another important area for measurement is the return on investments 
in security, authentication, and privacy protections. Although this is gen
-erally recognized as a problem (not just for the SSA), there has been some 
success in developing approaches for measuring the effectiveness of an 
organization™s security, privacy, and authentication efforts.
20
 Any organi
-zation needs to determine how to measure the effectiveness of its security, 
privacy, and authentication efforts.
21
 Once determined, such metrics can 
help the organization understand how well it is doing with its efforts to 
keep its data and resources secure, how well it is protecting the privacy 
of its customers, and how effective its authentication methods are. These 
metrics can also allow it to show others, including its customers and 
interested parties (such as lawmakers, in the case of the SSA), how well 
its efforts are working. Implicit in this is that the metrics are meaningful 
and measure qualities of concern; determining what to assess and devis
-ing those metrics and corresponding measures are an important challenge 
for the organization. 
In general, metrics and measures should stem from a careful examina
-tionŠby tiger teams, internal work groups, and so onŠof goals that are 
ultimately quanti˜ed. The units of this quanti˜cation would be used to 
identify the metrics. Implementing data-collection processes in the frame
-work of those metrics would yield measures.  Engaging in dialogue with 
managers from other organizations that manage in a metrics-oriented 
fashion and drawing from their ﬁlessons learnedﬂ may be useful. In some 
cases, organizations ˜nd it helpful to engage the services of management 
consultants and/or to have ongoing dialogues with people who have 
implemented this approach in related institutions, such as large banks or 
brokerages.  
The establishment of quantitative goals is useful for more than just 
having the basis for deciding whether or not to undertake a project and 
for determining the degree of success of a project. The process of estab
-lishing such quantitative goals also serves the useful purpose of causing 
interested organizational entities to think carefully and speci˜cally about 
20
 One discussion of measures of effectiveness for security efforts is available in the 
200
6 National
 Infrastructure
 Protection
 Plan
, published by the Financial Services Sector Coordinat
-ing Council, available at https://www.fsscc.org/reports/2006/NIPP_Plan.pdf, accessed 
July 11, 2007. 
21
 Two types of measures seem appropriateŠthese are just illustrative examples: The ˜rst 
type is 
de
velopment
 measures
, indicating how closely the design and implementation are be
-lieved to meet the policies. This is essentially a function of the development process, similar 
to high-assurance engineering methodologies. The second type is 
testing
 measures
, indicat
-ing how well the systems meet the policies in practice. For example, penetration studies or 
technical audits fall into this class. This type of measure is necessary because in security 
generally, errors in the implementation, deployment, and management of systems will not 
be detected, let alone analyzed, during the development phase.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
precisely what the goals of a project should be, which capabilities it 
should have and which are of less importance. If there is discussion or dis
-pute about the inclusion or degree of thoroughness of speci˜c capabilities, 
agreement about metrics and measures can help determine whether or not 
speci˜c capabilities are likely to be suf˜ciently useful to justify their costs. 
Thus, the establishment of cost and effectiveness metrics and measures 
can be the basis for more effectiveness in ongoing project management, 
as well as for more effectiveness in determining overall project success. 
Such consultations will help build support for proposed investments in 
service delivery both inside and outside the organization. At the same 
time, when exploring cost and effective measures, the uncertainties of 
new approaches should be kept in mind. Where savings and ef˜ciencies 
might result from the deployment of electronic services, the committee is 
mindful of the risk that budgets may be reduced accordingly (sometimes 
even if the anticipated ef˜ciencies are not realized). When ef˜ciencies are 
gained, there is an opportunity to redeploy those resources elsewhere 
as part of the SSA™s broad service-delivery strategy or to manage other 
critical workloads. The committee recognizes and is sympathetic to this 
challenge for the agency. 
The SSA should pay signi˜cant attention to the identi˜cation of appro
-priate metrics and the continual gathering of adequate measurements 
needed to ensure effective decision making. The agency should place 
major emphasis on the systematic reduction of its organizational goals 
to metrics that are quanti˜able, although not necessarily monetized. As 
noted earlier, typical areas where electronic services might be compared 
with other service channels include customer satisfaction, cycle time, 
error rates, cost per transaction, paperwork burden reduction, and even 
impact on program integrity (that is, fraud rates). The SSA should con
-sider putting in place organizations and processes that use such metrics 
to gather measures of its performance. The metrics and measures should 
be the key components in a program of continuous improvement, aimed 
at demonstrating that the SSA continues to do a better job of meeting the 
various needs of its diverse publics and user communities. 
Finding: The establishment of appropriate metrics and measures to 
evaluate the effectiveness of various services and delivery channels is 
an important component of an effective service-delivery plan.
The committee understands that it seems easy enough to simply 
assert the importance of quantitative measures in managing toward meet
-ing goals, but that putting in place the details of how to do so may be far 
more dif˜cult. However, the establishment of effective, agreed-on metrics, 
complemented by agreed-on measures, would provide immediate bene˜ts 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
105for the better management of projects, and potentially, they could better 
justify requests for funding for the deployment of electronic services. 
Recommendation: The SSA should de˜ne and use metrics and mea
-sures to assess and improve its service delivery across all channels, 
including electronic services. 
Marketing and Promotion of Electronic Services
The SSA has historically done a great deal of marketing, outreach, and 
providing of public information and education, using major media (print 
or broadcast) outlets. Moreover, it has used private marketing ˜rms, the 
Ad Council, and major polling organizations to assist in the development 
of media campaigns. Since the committee received a comparatively brief 
presentation on the SSA™s marketing strategy, it did not have enough 
information to assess whether or not the SSA has translated a comprehen
-sive understanding of its diverse users™ needs into an effective marketing 
campaign for electronic services, or whether it has chosen to promote 
electronic services over other service-delivery channels for certain cat
-egories of users.
22
 In some ways, this approach is consistent with much public-sector 
marketing, which is more likely to take the form of ﬁinforming and edu
-catingﬂ the public instead of encouraging them to use one product (such 
as electronic services) over another (such as paper or in-person services). 
Generally, government agencies do not have marketing expertise that is 
comparable with what might be found in a product-oriented consumer 
business. As a result, to market a new service or service channel aggres
-sively, agencies may need to obtain outside assistance and use the most 
effective media outlets (including prime-time television). Further, since it 
is a cultural change for some agencies to think of the public and citizens as 
ﬁcustomersﬂ in a business context, there may be institutional reluctance to 
do so. Complicating matters, commercial and business marketing models 
do not always translate fully to government contexts, given the different 
constraints and expectations that government agencies face. 
Although marketing and promoting electronic services might be a 
challenge, at least one federal agency has proven that it is possible and 
can be successful. After the passage of the Restructuring and Reform 
Act of 1998 (RRA ™98)
23
 and the creation of an organization devoted 
solely to electronic tax administration (ETA), the Internal Revenue Service 
22
 ﬁMarketingﬂ is purposeful, goal directed, and usually quantitatively driven. Marketing 
a service is not synonymous with informing and educating potential users. 
23
 Public Law 105-206, 112 Stat. 685.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
(IRS) launched a substantial market-research and promotional campaign 
in 1999. The committee received a brie˜ng from a former IRS Director 
of Electronic Tax Administration; additionally, one committee member 
served as a member of the IRS executive team that led that effort. 
The IRS began the campaign by contracting with a ﬁMadison Avenueﬂ 
advertising ˜rm and then investing in objective market research that 
identi˜ed reasons for e-˜le adoption and nonadoption and in market 
segmentation so that the IRS knew the demographic characteristics of 
adopters and nonadopters. It then ﬁrebrandedﬂ electronic ˜ling (to IRS 
e-˜le)Šbased on the market researchŠas a prelude to both public service 
announcements and paid placements for advertising. The IRS worked 
with its tax-preparation and related software-company partners to coor
-dinate marketing messages for the IRS e-˜le brand that the public and 
private sector both used. As an example, ˜rms authorized by the IRS to 
submit e-˜led returns to the IRS could use the e-˜le logo on their adver
-tising and product packaging. In a marked departure from public-sector 
ﬁinform and educateﬂ efforts, the IRS used proven private-sector market
-ing techniques to promote e-˜le. Most important for the SSA to consider 
though, the IRS was able to ˜nd for-pro˜t partners in the tax-preparation 
industry that invested their marketing budgets and talents to promote e-
˜le to the public, to the mutual bene˜t of the IRS and the partners. Public 
adoption of e-˜le exceeds 50 percent of all individual tax returns, in part 
because the IRS and its commercial partners became more aggressive in 
the marketing of e-˜le. 
The previous discussion of metrics and measures applies to advertis
-ing and marketing as well: quantitative goals can be used to determine 
whether a particular campaign is succeeding, or whether it should be 
reexamined and perhaps replaced. For example, the IRS uses speci˜c 
quantitative goals (such as repeat customers, brand recognition, customer 
satisfaction) to guide its marketing activities.
24
 The costs of such market
-ing activities are to be at least recouped by savings obtained from the 
greater ef˜ciency of dealing with electronic tax returns as opposed to 
paper. The committee did not receive information about similar use of 
quantitative metrics of this type to guide the SSA™s management of elec
-tronic services marketing.
Core Competencies and External Partnering 
In an increasingly complex and demanding world, many organiza
-tions, including government agencies such as the SSA, are constantly 
24
 Stephen H. Holden, 
A Model
 for
 Increasing
 Inno
vation
 Adoption:
 Lessons
 Learned
 from
 the
 IRS
 E-File
 Program,
 Washington, D.C.: IBM Center for the Business of Government, 2006.  
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
107being pressed to provide moreŠand always more challengingŠservices. 
Many organizations have chosen to outsource functional jobs that they 
had previously supported in-house, such as food service, payroll, travel 
services, duplication, and so on, thus freeing the organizations to concen
-trate only on those ﬁcore competenciesﬂ that they feel they must maintain 
internally for their survival. Organizations have often sought to concen
-trate on what is deemed essential and to devote their efforts to being 
highly competent at what really matters, while relegating support for 
peripheral capabilities to specialist business partners. Many organizations 
have found that the outsourcing of peripheral task areas can strengthen 
their ability to perform core functions. 
The SSA is no exception to this way of working and has outsourced 
many functions over the years. At the same time, it can sometimes be a 
challenge for an organization to determine what really matters and what 
is peripheral, and it can be dif˜cult to recover from mistakes in the deter
-mination. Given the ongoing transition to more electronic services and 
the emerging demand from a variety of user communities for large-scale 
and highly effective electronic services, the SSA will face questions about 
which functions to maintain and which to outsource or partner with oth
-ers for. 
In common with other federal agencies, the SSA must address privacy 
issues as it considers expanded outsourcing. Among other requirements, 
the E-Government Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-347) requires privacy 
impact assessments for agency or contractor systems that maintain per
-sonally identi˜able data about members of the public.
25
 Moreover, out
-sourcing decisions must be always open to reconsideration. The need for 
continuing discussions of this issue is another challenge that the agency 
must face. In the area of electronic services, organizations often ˜nd it use
-ful to consider what their core competencies need to be and then to seek 
ways to partner effectively with others to ful˜ll other functions. 
There are precedents for partnering in the federal arena. In some 
cases, legislative changes were sought and enacted; in others, an agency 
was able to develop partnerships within existing law and regulation. For 
example, the IRS and the Department of the Treasury believed it necessary 
to obtain legislative authority to accept credit card payments for income 
taxes because of the ˜nancing implications of merchant fees. Such author
-ity was obtained through the IRS Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998. 
The IRS implemented the ﬁFree Fileﬂ tax program with private-sector 
25
 See Joshua Bolton, ﬁOMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the 
E-Government Act of 2002,ﬂ M-03-22, Sept. 26, 2003, available at http://www.whitehouse.
gov/omb/memoranda/m03-22.html, accessed July 11, 2007. OMB requires the privacy 
impact assessment to be submitted with OMB Exhibit 300. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
partners under explicit and implicit existing authority. The IRS Reform 
and Restructuring Commission that led to RRA ™98 did include language 
supporting private-sector partnerships; IRS e-˜ling staff and the private 
sector worked together to help develop the relevant language for both 
credit card payments and Free File. 
In the case of the SSA, the agency may have some ˚exibility to explore 
partnerships under its current legislative and regulatory framework. New 
authority may be required for some types of partnerships. The commit
-tee suggests that, in exploring possibilities for partnerships, the SSA use 
an open process that involves bene˜ciaries, third parties, and other user 
communities, as well as Congress. Productive partnerships might be pos
-sible in areas such as partnering with the states to enable the delivery of 
certi˜ed, electronic vital records evidence (e.g., copies of birth certi˜cates 
or certi˜ed dates of birth, copies of death certi˜cates or certi˜ed dates 
of death, copies of marriage certi˜cates or certi˜ed marriage informa
-tion) to streamline claims preparation and processing. For example, the 
SSA™s current online application process for retirement bene˜ts requires 
the applicant to send a certi˜ed paper copy of his or her birth certi˜cate 
to the SSA or bring it to a ˜eld of˜ce. If applicants were able to include 
identifying information about their birth certi˜cates (or circumstances of 
birth) in the electronic application suf˜cient for use by the SSA to obtain 
certi˜ed birth information through a partnership with the states, then 
the application process could be entirely electronic, faster, and would not 
generate visits to local SSA of˜ces. Another type of partnership would be 
partnering with large payroll-processing services to increase the adoption 
of electronic wage reporting.
Cultivation of effective interactions that take advantage of electronic 
services where possible with a broad range of user communities could 
deliver substantial bene˜ts to bene˜ciaries and the SSA as well as to 
third parties. As one example, the SSA has an opportunity to promote 
good standards work in a variety of areas such as Web standards, data 
exchange standards, document standards, and so on, through the publi
-cation of well-de˜ned requirements and active participation in industry 
bodies. The SSA, by dint of its size and importance, can give tremendous 
momentum to selected standardization efforts: for example, the agency 
could have a tremendous positive in˚uence on the evolution of data 
interchange standards in its area of the ‚ﬂinformation ecosystemﬂ if it (1) 
knows its own needs and (2) makes an active effort to provide leadership 
to the community. Its scale and resources make it an ideal leader in a 
number of areas if it can develop the focus and will to do so. 
On another front, the committee received brie˜ngs indicating that 
user groups such as third-party representatives or not-for-pro˜t special-
needs advocacy groups often are willing to collaborate more closely with 
the SSA, thereby potentially minimizing the impact of part of the agency™s 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
109increasing workload. Some reluctance on the part of the SSA to do so is 
understandable in that aspects of some SSA partnership relationships 
have attracted attention from watchdog groups and others (for example, 
when the SSA™s use of personal information obtained from resellers did 
not adhere to Fair Information Practices
26
). 
Another type of partnership might involve increased cooperation 
with third parties for ˜ling claims or providing advice to bene˜ciaries 
regarding the implications of SSA rules and regulations. For example, the 
SSA might establish online partnerships with third parties that would ˜le 
disability claims on behalf of their customers. It seems quite reasonable 
that the SSA can and should be the only organization that can receive, 
process, and validate bene˜ts requests. But that does not imply that only 
the SSA can counsel and assist bene˜ts applicants regarding the applica
-tion process. The committee heard in brie˜ngs that there is a community 
of service providers that is eager to assist in the preparation of claims 
and bene˜ts requests. If the SSA were actively to solicit and promote the 
establishment and growth of this community of third-party providers, it 
could have the immediate bene˜t of reducing the SSA™s current workload, 
helping deal with resource scarcities within the SSA. It could also free the 
SSA to pay greater attention to such core competencies as the adjudication 
of claims and the clari˜cation and streamlining of regulations and proce
-dures that ultimately govern decisions about bene˜ts eligibility. 
When considering the design and functionality requirements of ser
-vices made available electronically, the SSA should take steps to enable 
third parties to assist the SSA in helping their joint user base. To further 
facilitate effective relationships, the SSA should standardize and enforce 
improved interfaces to both its internal and external systems. The agen
-cy™s workload might also be reduced if other parties and agencies (with 
appropriate authorization) could gain expedited access to SSA systems 
and dataŠfor example, giving priority service to entities that drive a 
signi˜cant volume of online transactions.
27
 In addition, there may be 
legitimate research questions for the social sciences or other areas that 
26
 See U.S. Government Accountability Of˜ce, 
Personal
 Information:
 Agency
 and
 Reseller
 Adherence
 to
 Pri
vacy
 Principles
, GAO-06-421, Washington, D.C., April 2006. The SSA noted 
in its comments that it had instituted internal controls to prevent improper disclosure and 
was exploring options for enhancing its policies and internal controls over information 
from resellers. 
27
 For example, the IRS Restructuring and Reform Commission that led to the Restructuring 
and Reform Act of 1998 (RRA ™98) included language supporting IRS efforts to work with the 
private sector to increase adoption of e-˜ling for tax returns. The Internal Revenue Service, 
the Department of the Treasury, and the E-File program all agreed on the need to increase 
public adoption and were able to build a consensus for a number of legislative changes to 
support public adoption of e-˜le. As an example, RRA ™98 included authority for the IRS to 
accept credit card payments and electronic signatures as a way to make e-˜le completely 
paperless, reducing costs for the IRS and making it more convenient for taxpayers. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
would bene˜t from access to various types of SSA data. While privacy and 
security concernsŠnot to mention legislative constraintsŠmust certainly 
dictate restrictions on such access, there may be opportunities for the SSA 
to contribute to and learn from these research areas. 
When it comes to cultivating partnerships, the SSA™s location in Balti
-more, Maryland, is both a real and a perceived barrier to interacting more 
routinely with staff of other government agencies at the federal level. 
Both formal and informal, face-to-face interactions are valuable in initiat
-ing and sustaining human networking and professional relationships. 
Although the SSA is usually involved in formal interagency meetings and 
activities, the committee believes that the agency™s geographic distance 
from the nation™s capital likely discourages the informal interactions that 
take place routinely in metropolitan Washington, D.C., and may also dis
-courage the movement in terms of employment of skilled professionals 
between the SSA and other agencies, which further impedes opportunities 
for informal contacts and discussions. The committee believes that this 
comparative lack of informal interaction and engagement with outside 
perspectives, both within and external to government, may contribute to 
an inadvertently inward-focused culture. 
Given these geographic constraints and a culture that focuses on per
-sonal customer service, trying to institute an electronic services strategy 
dependent on the effective use of IT and an expanded understanding of 
third parties could be seen by some in the organization as antithetical to 
providing personalized customer service. Further, the use of third parties 
is also antithetical to the hands-on customer service that SSA staffers want 
to provide.
28
 Thus, although it may not be an agency-wide policy that 
third parties are not to be dealt with, the prevailing organizational culture 
results in some ˜eld of˜ces having a different view on this matter. 
An inward-focused culture also limits or narrows the view on how 
partnerships might make the SSA™s mission easier or more ef˜cient to 
accomplish. This concept of public and private partnerships to deliver 
public services is becoming known as ﬁnetworked government.ﬂ
29
 One 
impact of technology is its leveling effect on organizations and the emer
-gence of value networks. The Australian Management Advisory Com
-mittee observed that ﬁmost whole-of-government priorities require close 
cooperation with external groups, such as community organizations, 
businesses and other jurisdictions.ﬂ
30
 Technology accelerates this need 
28
 This is exempli˜ed by one panelist™s story of being rebuffed by staff at an SSA ˜eld of˜ce 
because he was 
representing
 a client (and was not a client himself). 
29
 Stephen Goldsmith and William Eggers, 
Go
verning
 by
 Network
, Washington, D.C.: Brook
-ings Institution Press, 2004. 
30
 See the summary of 
Connecting
 Go
vernment:
 Whole
 of
 Go
vernment
 Responses
 to
 Australia™s
 Priority
 Challenges
, Australian Management Advisory Committee, April 20, 2004, available 
at http://www.apsc.gov.au/mac/connectinggovernment.htm. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
111
because it facilitates rapid, peer-to-peer (or partner-to-partner) commu
-nication. The role of the private sector in government service deliveryŠ
and, indeed, policy developmentŠis often overlooked or underestimated. 
Some e-government researchers suggest that ﬁalthough the public may 
traditionally have thought of government as synonymous with bureau
-cracy, in the future government will be highly networked and delivering 
outcomes through federations of organizations and agencies.ﬂ
31
Finding: There are opportunities for the SSA to partner with other agen
-cies and third parties in ways that could provide mutual bene˜t. 
Recommendation: The SSA should undertake to understand the identi
-ties, needs, and attitudes of its various user communities and should 
use that information to establish effective relationships and ongoing 
interactions with users, potential partners, and third parties. The SSA 
should explore partnering opportunities and identify the changes and 
initiatives that are necessary in order for it to enable appropriate inter
-action and cross-functionality with strategic partners and to support 
the exchange of data with other government agencies (both federal and 
state) while ensuring that appropriate security and privacy measures 
are in place.
 Achieving effective partnerships and highly networked government 
will involve sustained market research in which the SSA asks its users, 
both directly and through third-party organizations, what their needs 
and capabilities are for electronic services. Further, a well-de˜ned set of 
user types (see Box 1.2 in Chapter 1 for some preliminary examples) used 
at all levels of the agency could be particularly effective in projecting a 
clear image of these user groups, both inside and outside the SSA. Hav
-ing developed clear pictures of its various user communities, the agency 
should then create structures, processes, and mechanisms for entering 
into effective ongoing relations with these groups. 
Sustained Leadership Commitment Needed
With or without speci˜c intent, delegating responsibility without 
authority hinders effectiveness and tends to preserve the status quo. For 
a revamped service-delivery strategy to work, it will need to be guided 
and enforced from the very top of the organization as the preferred way 
to conduct the SSA™s business. It is surprising that the SSA™s e
-government 
31
 John Halligan and Trevor Moore, ﬁFuture Challenges for E-Government,ﬂ Monograph, 
available at http://www.agimo.gov.au/publications/2004/05/egovt_challenges/overview, 
accessed July 11, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
strategy of˜ce is not located higher in the organization. Given its current 
placement, it does not have the authority to create and implement its 
strategy even if that strategy were complete, appropriate, effective, and 
provided a path towards transformation. (See the recommendation on 
this point in the subsection above entitled ﬁStrategic Service-Delivery 
Plan.ﬂ)
In a report issued in 2000, the GAO stated: ﬁThe SSA is one of only 
a few federal government agencies with which most American families 
will have regular contact. Because of SSA™s broad reach, the quality of 
its customer service can affect the public™s view of government overall, 
and SSA has committed itself to providing world-class service to the 
American public.ﬂ
32
 The report concluded that the SSA would be chal
-lenged to maintain a high level of service to the public because demand 
for services is expected to grow signi˜cantly, while the expectations and 
needs of the SSA™s customers are changing. The GAO further noted that 
some are expecting faster, more convenient service, while others, such as 
non-English speakers and the large population of bene˜ciaries with men
-tal impairments, may require additional assistance from staff with more 
diverse skills.
33
 Chapter 2 in this report provides a general overview of 
the kinds of functionality that world-class ˜nancial institutions routinely 
provide these days and observes that the users of the SSA™s electronic 
services are likely to expect such things, and more so as time passes. 
Why has effective and comprehensive transformation not yet hap
-pened within the SSA? One possibility is that the agency has lacked sus
-tained leadership commitment at the highest levels to provide the vision 
and incentives to make recommendations become a reality. Another con
-tributing factor could be that the SSA has an organizational culture and 
exists within a political environment that encourages a conservative and 
incremental approach to change. Taking risks, though, is inherent in any 
core business process reengineering or transformational efforts. While the 
SSA is committed to providing world-class service to the U.S. publicŠan 
attitude that seems, encouragingly, to permeate all levels of the agencyŠit 
may lack the wherewithal to effect the sort of changes that are needed as 
ef˜ciently as they are needed, in part because of its organizational culture. 
Without strong leadership, an innovative vision, and the power to carry 
out that vision, change will continue to be slow and likely will preserve 
the existing organizational status quo.
 32
 U.S. General Accounting Of˜ce, Testimony Before the Subcommittees on Human Re
-sources and Social Security, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, 
SSA
 Customer
 Ser
vice:
 Broad
 Ser
vice
 Deli
very
 Plan
 Needed
 to
 Address
 Future
 Challenges
, Wash
-ington, D.C., Feb. 11, 2000.
33
 Ibid.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
113
Thus, until electronic service delivery becomes culturally and orga
-nizationally ingrained across all program lines as desirable for users and 
needed to preserve organizational knowledge resources, the responsibil
-ity for planning and executing electronic information and service delivery 
should be elevated in the SSA. Note that this proposal is not in any way 
calling for a substantial reorganization. This elevated role for electronic 
services would serve as the organizational focal point for conducting mar
-ket research, establishing and maintaining partnerships, setting priorities 
for the development of new electronic information and service-delivery 
systems, and working with the IT organization to ensure that appropri
-ate technologies are put in place to support electronic services. Over time 
it is likely that some of these responsibilities could devolve to program 
areas in a way that is analogous to what has taken place in the private 
˜nancial services sector, where these businesses have split up their central 
e-commerce units to respective business units after achieving a critical 
mass of expertise and associated policies and practices (that is, having 
passed though the second stage of electronic service provision maturity 
as discussed in Chapter 2).
34
 The advantages of such an elevation and corresponding progress 
along the electronic services maturity model discussed previously are 
as described hereŠin particular, the elevation and centralization of elec
-tronic services planning in a way that eliminates the need for multiple 
units to tackle the problem in different, potentially inconsistent, ways. 
The potential disadvantages stem from the understandable organizational 
friction and cost that may result from changing roles and responsibilities. 
A loss of autonomy may result in an inability to modify practices in a way 
that meets local needs and conditions. However, the committee believes 
that the most effective way forward is through the sorts of changes pro
-posed here. Discussions with experts from and observations of various 
industry sectors have buttressed this point of view.
35
 34
 Financial institutions, after moving through the second phase, have come to recognize 
the need for more centralized planning and architectural control, to ensure that all customer 
transactions and assets across all businesses and products can be recognized and to provide 
the customer with a more customer-centric viewŠand consistency across all delivery chan
-nelsŠbranch, call center, Web bank. This has led to a tieringŠthere is a consumer bank 
business, but it includes cards, mortgages, brokerage, and so onŠso that there is some 
central control and integration of all these businesses and products when presented to the 
customer.
35
 One senior telecommunications executive described a similar transition at his company 
and argues that organizational structure and culture were key to this conversion. Indeed 
a revolution occurred at his company to achieve the transition. He pointed out that the 
revolution was dramatic, costly, and ultimately very effective in cost, capability, and fun
-damentally changing the company as an enterprise. The revolutionary e-business activity 
was developed in parallel with the conventional IT organization and was anointed by the 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Finding: The SSA™s present direction diverges from the three-phase pro
-gression that large ˜nancial institutions have followed in successfully 
developing and launching electronic services.  
Recommendation: In order to move to the second phase of electronic 
services maturity, the SSA should create a focal point responsible for 
developing and managing electronic information and service deliv
-eryŠincluding components such as Web content, online transactions, 
user interfaces, research, database systems and other key enabling tech
-nologies, and other facets of electronic service delivery that are cur
-rently dispersed throughout the SSA. This focal point should have suf
-˜cient resources to take on organization-wide responsibility for online 
services and should report directly to the SSA Commissioner or to a 
Deputy Commissioner. 
Embracing Change
Although charting a roadmap for the future under these circumstances 
may be daunting, the terrain is not completely unexplored and uncharted. 
The SSA is a unique enterprise in some important ways, but as discussed 
in Chapter 2, there are many other ways in which its constraints, contexts, 
and clientele are similar to those under which other large-scale ˜nancial 
institutions must operate. The extensive stock of experiences and lessons 
learned by these other institutions should serve as a useful guide to the 
approaches that the SSA might take during its evolution toward electronic 
services. Studying these experiences leads the committee to a sharpened 
appreciation of the need to embrace and engage the overriding issue of 
change. However, the committee views any individual recommendation 
of a speci˜c path toward a speci˜c suite of services as subordinate to 
what the committee sees as a more general and overarching need: the SSA 
should embrace change as a factor in the way that it makes plans for the 
future and in the way that it does business. 
Particularly as change in the various domains of SSA involvement 
continues, it will become increasingly important for the SSA to devote 
attention and resources to being well informed about the nature and 
rami˜cations of these changes, both for itself and for its various user 
chief executive of˜cer as the new IT head. The key to the success of the e-business activ
-ity was an e-business vision and a corresponding architecture designed to Web-enable as 
many services as possible. The vision and the architecture were required as a context for the 
many component technology solutions, but these would not have succeeded without the 
revolution. Personal communication from Michael Brodie, Distinguished Architect, Verizon 
Communications, to Lynette Millett, August 18, 2006.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
115
groups, including bene˜ciaries. Although the SSA does pay attention to 
change and seeks advice externally and internally, there are opportunities 
to use that advice more systematically as a basis for sustained and effec
-tive action. Broader and more systematic attention to anticipating and 
addressing change is warranted. 
Finding: The SSA faces signi˜cant ongoing changeŠin terms of technol
-ogy, demographics, and public expectationsŠas it carries out its activi
-ties, services, and interactions with a variety of user communities.  
Recommendation: The SSA should embrace change as a constant. It 
should regularly evaluate emerging trends in such areas as technol
-ogy (for example, database technologies) and business practices (for 
example, by learning from the experiences of ˜nancial institutions 
and moving toward the use of strategic partnerships for ef˜ciency and 
effectiveness). It should also regularly evaluate the changing societal 
attitudes and expectations of its various user communities. The SSA 
should also institutionalize the formulation of strategies for addressing 
these trends.
The aim of this report is to present a forward-looking vision and set of 
recommendations for the SSA to keep in mind as it strives to achieve the 
kind of technological and cultural transformation needed to best re˚ect 
and reinforce the existing and admirable, deeply grounded institutional 
commitment to its bene˜ciaries. The next section provides a brief descrip
-tion of governmental transformation conceived broadly that lays out a 
forward-looking vision for the SSA as it seeks to bring about the kinds of 
change that will be needed in the years and decades ahead. 
THE
 P
ROSPECT
 OF
 G
OVERNMENTAL
 T
RANSFORMATION
As the SSA develops and implements its electronic services strategy, 
what the agency is attempting to achieve is taking place within a more 
comprehensive shift to electronic service provision across the federal gov
-ernment. The visions of e-government discussed below describe the trans
-formative effect of automating and reengineering processes that enable 
the government delivery of information and services using technology in 
several different ways. (See Box 4.1 for speci˜c prospects for IT-enabled 
process transformation at the SSA.) 
This transformation might also be thought of as a convergenceŠ
of user experience, data, or organization. For example, 
a con
vergence
 of
 user
 experience
 might be the ability of users to access all SSA pro
-gram
 information and transactions easily through a Web portal. 
Data
 Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
BOX
 4.1
 Information Technology-Enabled 
 Process Transformation
In many cases in both the public and private sectors, organizations imple
-ment technologies in ways that implicitly reinforce the political status quo.
1 This 
phenomenon is referred to as ﬁtechnology enactment.ﬂ The term often (but not 
always) refers to the tendency of actors to implement new information technology 
(IT) in ways that reproduce or even strengthen institutionalized, sociostructural 
mechanisms. This can occur even when such enactments lead to seemingly ir
-rational and suboptimal uses of technology.
2  As a simple example
, 
navigational principles for an institution™s Web site may 
appear mysterious to an external user because the organization of information 
on the Web site mirrors the organizational chart of the institution rather than re
-˚ecting likely functionalities or information resources that external users might be 
interested in.
3,4 This suggests that if a Web site merely mirrors an organization™s 
internal structure, if that organizational structure is not optimally designed for 
electronic services, the Web site will not be either. Similarly, most telephone book 
listings for government of˜ces are organized by agency structure, not by citizens™ 
needs. If one wants to complain about the speed of traf˜c in front of one™s home, 
it is often not clear which city organization to call. Many of the calls to a general 
city number are in service of ˜nding out just 
whom to call. A telephone book listing 
that met the user™s goal (for example, road complaints) would eliminate the need 
for people whose primary job is to route calls. 
A 1990 National Research Council (NRC) study committee made a number 
of recommendations related to Social Security Administration (SSA) systems mod
-1 Jane Fountain,
 Building the Virtual State: Information Technology and Institutional Change
, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2001.
2 Jane Fountain,
 Building the Virtual State: Information Technology and Institutional Change
, 2001.3 Jane Fountain,
 Building the Virtual State: Information Technology and Institutional Change
, 2001.4 At one of this study™s open sessions, Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland™s Human 
Computer Interaction Laboratory, presented principles of good Web site design and methods 
for doing usability testing. He found the SSA Web site to be dif˜cult to navigate intuitively. As 
discussed previously, a potential reason that the SSA Web site presents navigation challenges 
is that it may be mirroring the internal organizational structure of the SSA.
 
con
vergence
 might manifest itself in a user™s being able to see all of his 
or her data and
 program eligibility information from the SSA on a single 
page within the portal. 
Organizational
 con
vergence
 would mean that users 
could understand the interrelationships among the various SSA pro
-grams from a user™s perspective, not based on the SSA™s organizational 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
117
ernization.
5 Some of those earlier recommendations can be applied to the SSA 
today in the context of rethinking the agency™s strategy for service delivery. For 
example, that NRC committee found that a particular target of opportunity was 
disability processing, which in 1990 was almost exclusively a paper-based ˜le op
-eration that consumed a disproportionate share of operating budget. Although the 
SSA tried to redesign the disability processes during the 1990s, the implementation 
largely failed.
6 Today, while the agency is deploying an electronic disability system, 
that system largely automates the existing paper-based ˜le processes, not capital
-izing on the simplicity that the digital medium offers. The result of this approach is 
that users and the government get fewer bene˜ts, such as reduced cycle times, 
lower error rates, and decreased cost per transaction, than might otherwise be 
possible through a more thorough transformation. The present committee does rec
-ognize that in early 2006 the SSA Commissioner announced a major overhaul and 
streamlining of the disability-determination processes.
7 The changes are largely 
process changes, and the extent to which strategy and planning for procedural and 
technical changes (for example, for the current Electronic Disability system, eDIB) 
were coordinated within the SSA is not clear. 
In general, the SSA™s various services are furnished through the execution 
of a variety of intricate processes. Other industries and ˜nancial institutions report 
impressive gains from disciplined overhauls of existing basic business processes, 
carried out in order to take advantage of new ef˜ciencies and functionalities offered 
by information technology. Given its imminent workload and workforce challenges, 
the SSA would be well served by being proactive in transforming its processes 
to make the best use of both its human capital and its IT investments. Process 
transformation of this sort will of necessity be closely tied to and dependent on 
the modernization and overhaul of the database systems as described in Chapter 
3 of this report.
5 National Research Council, 
Systems Modernization and the Strategic Plans of the Social 
Security Administration, 
Board on Telecommunications and Computer Applications, Washing
-ton, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990. 
6 See Social Security Advisory Board, 
How SSA™s Disability Programs Can Be Improved
, August 1998, pp. 6-8, available at http://www.ssab.gov/Publications/Disability/report6.pdf, ac
-cessed July 11, 2007; and Social Security Advisory Board,
 Charting the Future of Social 
Security™s Disability Programs: The Need for Fundamental Change, 
January 2001, pp. 15-18, 
available at http://www.ssab.gov/Publications/Disability/disabilitywhitepap.pdf, accessed July 
11, 2007.
7 Social Security Administration, ﬁNews Release: Commissioner Barnhart Unveils New So
-cial Security Disability Determination Process,ﬂ March 28, 2006. For more information on the 
changes, see http://www.ssa.gov/disability-new-approach/.
structure. These types of convergence could bring to fruition the best 
possibilities of e-government. Depending on the underlying strategic 
goals of e-government, which may vary depending on, for example, the 
political leadership driving the changes, the attendant bene˜ts of such 
convergence can take the form of streamlined government organiza
-Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
tions, improved service delivery, and/or more participatory decision 
making.
36
 Convergence of 
User Experience and Data
The envisioned transformation of government information and ser
-vice delivery begins with a radically transformed user experience. Web 
portals are one technology platform that is helping to bring a more user-
centric perspective to government.
37
 E-government offerings will increas
-ingly target market segments (for example, students); life events (for 
example, buying a house); or role (for example, small business owner 
versus nonpro˜t treasurer) to help insulate users from the complexity of 
government programs and organizational structures. This transforma
-tion would require government to think ﬁoutside inﬂ in terms of users 
needs (see Chapter 1 for examples) instead of focusing on how agencies 
are divided by program, level of government, or unit within level of 
government. 
There is little more frustrating for an individual using government-
provided electronic services than having to reenter the same data sets for 
different of˜ces in one federal agency to complete one transaction. Pri
-vacy concerns notwithstanding, users may reasonably ask, ﬁWhy doesn™t 
my government have its act together?ﬂ Users are becoming increasingly 
accustomed to and comfortable with private-sector organizations with 
which they transact business having a more holistic understanding of who 
they are as a customer. Whether it is a ˜nancial services organization or a 
retailer, users have come to expect that those businesses understand them 
as a customer across organizational units, products lines, or service chan
-nels. An existing customer of a large ˜nancial institution might reasonably 
expect that if one has car insurance and wants to buy homeowner™s insur
-ance from the same institution, a person will not be starting from scratch 
in ˜lling out the application for the new productŠat a minimum, an 
agent might provide a pre-˜lled-out application as a starting point. What 
enables this customer-centric view is data convergence. These businesses 
have either organized and consolidated their data centrally, or they have 
36
 D.M. West, 
Digital
 Go
vernment:
 Technology
 and
 Public
 Sector
 Performance
, Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2005.
37
 See D.B. Gant, J.P. Gant, and C.L. Johnson, ﬁState Web Portals: Delivering and
 Financing 
E-Service,ﬂ Endowment for the Business of Government, Arlington, Va., Pricewaterhouse 
Coopers, January 2002, available at http://www.businessofgovernment.org/pdfs
/JohnsonReport.pdf; and V. Jupp and S. Shine, ﬁGovernment PortalsŠThe Next Generation 
of Government Online,ﬂ pp. 217-223 in 
Proceedings
 of
 the
 First
 European
 Conference
 on
 E-
Go
vernmen
t, Dublin, Ireland: Trinity College, 2003. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
119
linked disparate data stores to create a holistic view of the customer, often 
relying on customer relationship management (CRM) systems. 
Organizational Transformation
Although many large organizations have top-down decision making, 
limited front-line discretion, and specialized tasks, these characteristics 
tend to be more pronounced in government organizations. Government 
organizations typically re˚ect the Weberian ideals of specialization of 
task, limited front-line employee discretion, and top-down decision mak
-ing.
38
 These organizational and management principles re˚ect the prevail
-ing wisdom when these institutions were reformed or created during the 
Industrial Revolution. What this means in practice, though, is that users 
may have to navigate through a bureaucratic maze to complete relatively 
straightforward transactions. 
Consider an entrepreneur who would like to start a business. Such a 
person likely would have to register his or her business, obtain tax identi
-˜cation numbers, comply with regulatory requirements, and generally ˜ll 
out paperwork for multiple agencies at the federal, state, and local levels. 
Ideally, the responsible agencies for regulating, taxing, and supporting 
small business generation would have converged to provide a ﬁstarter-
kitﬂ for new businesses that consolidated and rationalized paperwork, 
regulatory oversight, and reporting requirements. This would represent 
not only organizational transformation
, but the data convergence and 
transformed user experience described earlier. 
These transformations and the related level of convergence typically 
evolve over time. Although it may be possible for a government organi
-zation to outsource its electronic service capabilities and achieve order-
of-magnitude improvements in convergence, such change more typically 
occurs incrementally. Several models have been developed to describe or 
predict such an evolution of e-government capabilities.
39
 (Figure 4.1 pres
-ents as an example a four-stage model of e-government.) These models 
suggest that e-government capabilities begin modestly and initially pro
-vide static, one-way information, but grow more sophisticated and add 
interactive and transactional capabilities. The models predict the most 
38
 Max Weber, ﬁBureaucracy,ﬂ pp. 23-29 in 
Classics
 of
 Public
 Administration
, Jay M. Shafritz 
and Albert C. Hyde, Eds., Oak Park, Ill.: Moore Publishing, 1978.
39
 See, for example, C. Baum and A.D. Maio, ﬁGartner™s Four Phases of E-Government 
Model,ﬂ Research Note, Stamford, Conn.: Gartner, November 21, 2000; Janine Hiller and 
Francine Bélanger, ﬁPrivacy Strategies for Electronic Government,ﬂ pp. 162-198 in 
E-
 
Go
vernment
 2
00
1, Mark A. Abramson and Grady E. Means, Eds., Lanham, Md.: Rowman 
and Little˜eld, 2001; and Karen Layne and Jungwoo Lee, ﬁDeveloping Fully Functional E-
Government: A Four Stage Model,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Information
 Quarterly
 18(2):122-136, 2001. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
0 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
FIGURE 4.1
 Layne and Lee™s four-stage model of e-government.
SOURCE: Reprinted from Karen Layne and Jungwoo Lee, ﬁDeveloping Fully 
Functional E
-Government: A Four Stage Model,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Information
 Quarterly
 18(2):122-136, 2001, copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier. 
desired form of e-government, which includes horizontal and vertical 
integration of organization, data, and user experience that is fundamen
-tally different from traditional forms of government service provision.
This kind of convergent, transformed public service is sometimes 
referred to as ﬁjoined up governmentﬂŠa term coined in the 1990s in 
the United Kingdom.
40
 Similar to the case in the three-stage model of 
40
 See, for example, Vernon Bogdanor, 
Joined-Up
 Go
vernment,
 British Academy Occasional 
 
Papers,
 Oxford University Press/British Academy, Oxford, United Kingdom, July 21, 2005; and 
Andrea Di Maio, 
What
 ﬁJoined
 Up
 Go
vernmentﬂ
 Really
 Means,
 Stamford, Conn.: Gartner, 2004.
Catalogue
-O
nl
in
ep
resenc
e-C
atal
ogue
presentat
io
n-D
ow
nl
oadabl
efo
rm
sSparse
Co
mp
le
te
Integrat
io
nTechnolog
ic
al
and
Organizational
Complexity
Simple
Complex
Transaction
-S
ervi
cesand
fo
rm
son
lin
e-W
ork
in
gdatabas
esupporti
ng
on
lin
etransacti
ons
Ve
rt
ic
al
Integrat
io
n-Local
syste
ms
lin
ked
to
hi
gher
-l
evel
system
s-W
it
hi
ns
im
il
ar
functi
onal
it
ie
sHori
zontal
Integrat
io
n-S
ystem
si
ntegrate
dacross
di
fferen
tfuncti
on
s-R
ea
lo
ne
-s
to
pshopp
in
gf
or
citi
zens
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
121
transformation in the ˜nancial services industry, the higher the level of 
transformation and convergence, the higher the payoff for governments, 
taxpayers, and users. Joined up government also recognizes the roles of 
third parties in the delivery of government information and services, 
as described previously. As is the case with electronic commerce in the 
private sector, sometimes the government agency is only one part of a 
larger virtual value chain in which, for example, a taxpayer relies on a 
tax preparer to prepare and ˜le taxes, or a veteran relies on a veterans™ 
service organization to ˜le a disability claim with the Department of Vet
-erans Affairs.
41
 From ﬁE-Governmentﬂ to ﬁGovernmentﬂ
Technology trends and the emerging areas of convergence described 
above all suggest that ﬁe-governmentﬂ may soon seem an old
-fashioned 
term. The ﬁe-governmentﬂ or ﬁelectronic governmentﬂ
42 
labels are yester
-day™s news, because virtually all governmental and democratic
 processes 
are being or will be transformed by the strategic use of information and 
communication technologies. Perhaps the ﬁeﬂ preface can be thought of just 
as easily to signify ﬁeffectiveﬂ or ﬁef˜cientﬂ government
 moving beyond 
ﬁelectronic.ﬂ The committee noted that the concepts of ﬁe-busines
sﬂ and 
ﬁe-commerceﬂ are no longer routinely used; in fact, these concepts are 
more routinely known as ﬁbusinessﬂ and ﬁcommerce.ﬂ So, too, it would 
seem that over the course of the next several years ﬁe-governmentﬂ could 
revert to ﬁgovernment,ﬂ albeit ﬁtransformedﬂ government or perhaps 
even ﬁnetworkedﬂ government. 
One could speculate that many government agencies, including the 
SSA, have let the concept of ﬁe-governmentﬂ continue to deter them 
from undergoing a true transformation. Once an agency has done the 
(comparatively) easy part, that is, making information available through 
Internet and Web technologies, the agency in essence has provided citi
-zens with access to the agency™s information and services by way of the 
41
 S.H. Holden and P.D. Fletcher, ﬁThe Virtual Value Chain and E-Government Partnership: 
Non-Monetary Agreements in the IRS E-File Program,ﬂ pp. 375-394 in 
Handbook
 of
 Public
 Information
 Systems
, G.D. Garson, Ed., New York: Marcel Dekker, 2005; and K. Frey and 
S.H. Holden, ﬁDistribution Channel Management in E-Government: Addressing Federal 
Information Policy Issues,ﬂ 
Go
vernment
 Information
 Quarterly
 22(4):685-701, 2006.
42
 ﬁE-governmentﬂ or ﬁelectronic governmentﬂ has many working de˜nitions. For ex
-ample, Sharon Dawes, director of the Center for Technology in Government at Albany, 
de˜nes e-government as ﬁthe use of information technology to support government opera
-tions, engage citizens, and provide government services.ﬂ And the European Union de˜nes 
e-government as ﬁthe use of information and communication technology in public admin
-istrations combined with organizational change and new skills in order to improve public 
services and democratic processes and strengthen support to public policies.ﬂ
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
ﬁfront of˜ce.ﬂ The challenging part is for agencies to strategically trans
-form ﬁback-of˜ceﬂ operations by using information and communication 
technologies to undertake the more complex processes of reengineering 
the core business processes, associated policies, and ultimately the ser
-vices themselves; channel integration and management that successfully 
merges the various ways that citizens will want to access services will be 
essential. Much work over the past few years has explored the implica
-tions of this needed strategic transformation. One public administration 
expert states:
Many assume e-government is solely about delivering government 
 
services over the Internet. This popular assumption is very limited for 
two reasons. First, it narrows our vision for e-government because it 
does not allow for the wide range of governmental activities that are not 
direct services; nor does it recognize the essential use of technologies 
other than the Internet. Second, it grossly oversimpli˜es the nature of e-
government
, leaving the impression that a nicely designed, user-oriented 
web site is the whole story. This ignores the substantial investments that 
are needed in people, tools, policies, and processes. It fails to recognize 
that while the citizen sees e-government from the public side of a web 
site or email screen, the real 
work
 of e-government is on the other side, 
inside the government itself.
43
The committee has observed throughout this report that the SSA™s e-
government strategy focuses primarily on the ﬁfront-of˜ceﬂ services and 
seems to be missing or too slowly tackling ﬁback-of˜ceﬂ transformation. 
A Forrester research report published in 2005 ˜nds that, looking 
toward the future, there are signi˜cant opportunities in e-government as 
agencies address obstacles such as persistent agency silos and the eroding 
career IT workforce within government. The report concludes that ﬁover 
time, agencies will obtain sustainable results from e-government initia
-tives by adopting best practices like addressing process change before 
implementing technologies and providing integrated services through 
multi-agency portals.ﬂ
44
 Similarly, this committee concludes that the SSA™s 
e-government strategy could be improved by reengineering processes and 
43
 Sharon Dawes is director of the Center for Technology in Government at Albany (see 
http://www.ctg.albany.edu). Her article, ﬁThe Future of E-Government,ﬂ is based on testi
-mony presented to the New York City Council Select Committee on Information Technology 
in Government™s hearing, ﬁAn Examination of New York City™s E-Government Initiatives,ﬂ 
June 24, 2002, available at http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/future_of_
egov, accessed July 11, 2007.
44
 See Alan E. Webber, with Bradford J. Holmes, Gene Leganza, and Sara E, McAulay, ﬁThe 
Future of E-Government: Introducing the e-Government Maturity Continuum,ﬂ available at  
http://www.forrester.com/go?docid=36950, accessed July 11, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOWARD
 ORGANIZATIONAL
 TRANSFORMATION 
123
close collaboration with other government agencies and third-party orga
-nizations when serving the public.
45
One examination of challenges for e-government found that e-
 
government agendas are merging with wider agendas about the role 
and scope of government. In the 1990s, three broad trends dominated 
much discussion of government: globalization, marketization, and tech
-nology. Their linked effects promised smaller government and increased 
customer choice. However in the 2000s these trends have blurred. As 
e-government initiatives move beyond tightly focused transactions, they 
confront issues of integration, information sharing, ethics, access, equity, 
and governance.
46
Thus, it is increasingly clear that government transformation can
-not happen in isolation, because true transformation requires working 
beyond the agency™s walls, literally and ˜guratively. As Stephen Gold
-smith, former mayor of Indianapolis, describes his vision of networked 
government, ﬁIt is not about outsourcing vs. bureaucracy it is about 
managing diverse webs of relationships to deliver value.ﬂ
47
 So too, have 
the Australians started thinking in terms of ﬁnetworked governanceﬂ: 
ﬁWhile the public may traditionally have thought of government as syn
-onymous with bureaucracy, in the future government will be highly net
-worked and delivering outcomes through federations of organizations 
and agencies.ﬂ
48
45
 The OMB™s Federal Enterprise Architecture envisions these transformations, as 
 
detailed in a 2004 OMB report on the Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) Program. 
(See Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
Expanding
 E-Go
vernment:
 Partnering
 for
 a Results
 Oriented
 Go
ver
nment
, December 2004; available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb
/budintegration
/expanding_egov12-2004.pdf, accessed July 11, 2007.) The FEA program 
builds a comprehensive business-driven blueprint of the entire federal government. The 
development of this framework has and will continue to encourage the federal government 
to identify opportunities to take advantage of technology to reduce redundancy; facili
-tate horizontal (cross-federal) and vertical (federal, state, and local) information sharing; 
establish a direct relationship between IT and mission/program performance to support 
citizen-centered, customer-focused government; and maximize IT investments to better 
achieve mission outcomes. The FEA framework and its ˜ve supporting reference models 
(Performance, Business, Service, Technical, and Data) are now used by departments and 
agencies in developing their budgets and setting strategic goals. 
46
 Robert Smith, ﬁCentralization and Flexibility in Delivering E-Services: Tensions 
and Complements,ﬂ Discussion Paper No. 19, available at http://www.agimo.gov.au
/publications/2004/05/egovt_challenges/issues, accessed July 11, 2007.
47
 William D. Eggers and Stephen Goldsmith, ﬁNetworked Government,ﬂ pp. 28-33 in 
Go
vernment
 Executi
ve, June 2003, available at http://www.manhattan-institute.org/pdf/
gov_exec_6-03.pdf, accessed July 11, 2007.
48
John Halligan and Trevor Moore, ﬁFuture Challenges for E-Government,ﬂ Monograph, 
available at  http://www.agimo.gov.au/publications/2004/05/egovt_challenges/overview, 
accessed July 11, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
CONCL
USION
The SSA faces formidable challenges in attempting to continue to pro
-vide its services predominantly through face-to-face personal interactions. 
In the years and decades ahead, its chief challenges will be the need to be 
prompt and reliable, to guarantee security and privacy in its transactions, 
to support the accurate execution of extremely large numbers of transac
-tions, and to offer its services in ways that are convenient to the client, yet 
ef˜cient. IT and electronic services are the more likely vehicles for meeting 
these challenges and for executing an effective campaign to provide an 
expanding portfolio of services to larger and increasingly diverse users.  
The SSA and its clients cannot afford to allow cultural impediments to 
keep the agency from embracing the changes that are so clearly needed 
and indicated. 
Mechanisms such as monitoring and observing the societal context, 
keeping track of technology, establishing quantitative goals, putting in 
place effective measurement vehicles, and maintaining close, cordial, and 
continuous ties with all user communities support continuous change 
and process transformation within organizations. Although pursuing the 
creation of these mechanisms seems essential, a more urgent need is an 
appraisal of the SSA™s readiness to pursue them.  This report suggests an 
immediate examination of the agency™s management structure, its deci
-sion-making processes, and its organizational culture, to ensure that all 
are poised to support the shift toward a culture that continuously strives 
to meet effectively the manifold pressures for change.
Although the challenges outlined in this report are numerous and 
sizable, the committee is con˜dent that they are not insurmountable for 
the SSA. The committee™s investigations made it clear that the SSA and its 
people are ˜rmly dedicated to meeting bene˜ciaries™ needs with enthusi
-asm and professionalism. Their dedication to their mission seems absolute 
and unwavering. This report is offered in the spirit of advice to dedicated 
professionals regarding opportunities to do ever better in meeting con
-tinually growing challenges.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Committee and Staff Biographies
COMMITTEE
 M
EMBERS
LEON
 J. O
STERWEIL
, Chair,
 is a professor in the Department of Com
-puter Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He is a fellow of 
the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), has been an ACM lec
-turer, and has served on the editorial boards of 
IEEE
 Software
 and ACM™s 
Transactions
 on
 Software
 Engineering
 and
 Methodology
. He was interim dean 
of the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics at the University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, where he is the codirector and cofounder of 
both the Electronic Enterprise Institute and the Laboratory for Advanced 
Software Engineering Research. Dr. Osterweil was chair of the Computer 
Science Department at the University of Colorado at Boulder and of 
the Information and Computer Science Department of the University 
of California, Irvine, where he was also the founding director of the 
Irvine Research Unit in Software. He has been the program chair of many 
conferences, including the 16th International Conference on Software 
Engineering. He was General Chair of both the 28th International Con
-ference on Software Engineering and the Sixth International Symposium 
on the Foundations of Software Engineering. Dr. Osterweil™s research has 
centered on the effective application of computing to support software 
development, electronic commerce, medical safety, and digital govern
-ment. His research has placed particular emphasis on process program
-ming, tool and environment integration mechanisms, and software test
-ing and analysis tools. He has been a principal investigator on a number 
of National Science Foundation (NSF) and Advanced Research Projects 
127
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Agency/Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA/DARPA) 
projects over the past 35 years. He has published and presented more than 
100 papers on a variety of software engineering topics, mostly in leading 
venues worldwide. He has consulted for such organizations as IBM, Bell 
Laboratories, SAIC, MCC, KLA-Tencor, Tata Consultancy Services (India), 
The Numerical Algorithms Group, Ltd (UK), and TRW. He was a member 
of the Process Program Advisory Board of Carnegie Mellon University™s 
Software Engineering Institute for 8 years. He received his A.B. from 
Princeton University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University 
of Maryland, all in mathematics. 
MATT BISHOP
 is a professor in the Department of Computer Science 
at the University of California, Davis, and a codirector of the Computer 
Security Laboratory there. His main research area is the analysis of vul
-nerabilities in computer systems, including modeling them, building tools 
to detect vulnerabilities, and ameliorating or eliminating them. He is 
active in information assurance education and is a charter member of the 
Colloquium on Information Systems Security Education. He has been 
active in the area of UNIX security since 1979 and has presented tutorials 
at SANS, USENIX, and other conferences. His textbook, 
Computer
 Secu
-rity:
 Art
 and
 Science
, was published in December 2002 by Addison
-Wesley 
Professional. Dr. Bishop also teaches software engineering, machine archi
-tecture, operating systems, programming, and computer security. In 2006, 
he received the Colloquium Academia Award for his research and peda
-gogical work in computer information security. He received his Ph.D. 
in computer science from Purdue University, where he specialized in 
computer security, in 1984.
MICHAEL
 J. C
ARE
Y received his Ph.D. in computer science from the 
University of California, Berkeley, in 1983. From 1983 to 1995 he was on 
the Computer Sciences Department faculty at the University of
 Wisconsin-
Madison, where he taught and conducted research on a variety of database 
system architecture and performance issues. In 1995, Dr. Carey moved to 
IBM Research, where he worked on data integration, DB2 Universal Data
-base, and Extensible Markup Language (XML) query technologies and 
managed a small team of object/relational and XML database researchers. 
Dr. Carey left IBM in 2000 to lead an e-commerce infrastructure team as 
a fellow at Propel, a small, Internet-era startup company. He joined BEA 
Systems, Inc., in late 2001, and since that time he has been working on 
the XML data-handling and XQuery-related aspects of BEA™s WebLogic 
Integration, Liquid Data for WebLogic, and AquaLogic Data Services 
 
Platform products. He is currently a senior engineering director and prod
-uct architect within BEA™s AquaLogic product organization. Dr.
 Carey 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 A 
129
has authored well over 100 technical articles in refereed conference pro
-ceedings and journals. He has served on the editorial boards of ACM™s 
Transactions
 on
 Database
 Systems
, 
VLDB
 Journal
, and 
IEEE
 Database
 Engi
-neering
 Bulletin
, and he has served on numerous conference committees. 
He is co-editor-in-chief of Springer-Verlag™s book series on Data-Centric 
Systems and Applications and is currently serving on the ACM SIGMOD 
(Special Interest Group on Management of Data) Awards Committee and 
the University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison Computer Sciences Depart
-ment Board of Visitors. Dr. Carey has received a number of awards, 
including an IBM Faculty Development Award, a Digital Equipment 
 
Corporation Incentives for Excellence Award, a UW-Madison Computer 
Sciences Department Teaching Award, an NSF Presidential Young Investi
-gator Award, an IBM Outstanding Technical Achievement Award, a VLDB 
(Very Large Databases) 10-Year Best Paper Award, an ACM SIGMOD Test 
of Time Paper Award, a University of California, Berkeley, Computer Sci
-ence Outstanding Alumnus Award, and the ACM SIGMOD Contributions 
and Edgar F. Codd Innovations Awards. Dr. Carey is a fellow of the ACM 
and a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
DAVID
 J. D
eWITT
 joined the Computer Sciences Department at the Uni
-versity of Wisconsin-Madison in September 1976 after receiving his Ph.D. 
degree from the University of Michigan.  He served as department chair 
for 5 years (July 1999 to July 2004) and is currently the John P. Morgridge 
Professor of Computer
 Sciences. In 1995, Professor DeWitt was selected 
to be an ACM Fellow. He also received the 1995 SIGMOD Innovations 
Award for his contributions
 to the database systems ˜eld. He was elected 
to the National Academy of Engineering in 1998. His research program 
has focused on the design and implementation of database management 
systems including parallel, object-oriented, and object-relational database 
systems. In the late 1980s, his Gamma parallel database system project 
produced many of the key pieces of technology that form the basis for 
today™s generation of large parallel database systems, including products 
from IBM, NCR/Teradata, Netezza, Tandem, and Oracle. Throughout his 
career, he has also been interested in database system performance evalu
-ation. In the early 1980s, he developed the ˜rst relational database system 
benchmark, which became known as the Wisconsin benchmark. More 
recently, his research program has focused on the design and implemen
-tation of distributed database techniques for executing complex queries 
against the content of the Internet. Professor DeWitt has authored more 
than 120 technical publications and served on numerous program com
-mittees and NSF review panels. He was a member of the NSF™s Computer 
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Advisory Committee 
(2000-2003) and has served on several National Research Council (NRC) 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
0 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) study panels. 
He is currently a member of the Computer Science and Telecommunica
-tions Board (CSTB). He was the program chair of the 1983 SIGMOD con
-ference, program co-chair of the 1988 VLDB conference, and general chair 
of the 2002 SIGMOD conference. He has graduated 32 Ph.D. students. 
Professor DeWitt has served as a consultant to numerous companies, 
including IBM, NCR, Informix, Tandem, and Microsoft, on a variety of 
technical issues regarding the design and implementation of database 
systems.
VALERIE
 G
REGG
 is assistant director for development at the Digital 
Government Research Center of the Information Sciences Institute at the 
University of Southern California. She is secretary of the North American 
chapter of the Digital Government Society. She is co-principal investigator 
on a National Science Foundation-funded 4-year award entitled ﬁBuilding 
and Sustaining an International Digital Government Research Commu
-nity of Practice.ﬂ Prior to working in academia, Ms. Gregg had a 30-year 
career in public service at the federal level. For 8 years, she was program 
manager for the Digital Government Research program in the Division of 
Information and Intelligent Systems at NSF. She has been on the confer
-ence committee for the annual International Conference for Digital Gov
-ernment Research since its inception in 2000. Prior to her service at NSF, 
Ms. Gregg worked for 22 years at the U.S. Census Bureau as a program 
manager in various aspects of the decennial census. She was a member of 
the Joint Ventures Project with the Census Bureau, and her work included 
involvement with the Tiger Mapping Service, a coast-to-coast digital map 
base that was designed and implemented to demonstrate cost-ef˜cient 
delivery of public data and research and development of Census Bureau 
applications on the Internet. She also served as chair for the Interagency 
Task Force responsible for the design, development, and management of 
the award-winning Internet site www.fedstats.gov for ﬁone-stop shop
-pingﬂ for federal statistics.
BLAISE
 H
ELTAI
 is a partner at NewVantage Partners focusing on the 
applications of technology to business transformation, emerging tech
-nologies, multichannel strategy, and Internet delivery. Dr. Heltai was 
previously an executive at the FleetBoston Financial Group, where, as the 
managing director for e-business, he led the company through a funda
-mental transformation of e-enablement, integration, and rationalization 
of Internet initiatives for all lines of businessŠconsumer, commercial, 
and governmentŠin the United States and internationally. He had also 
led customer relationship management (CRM) initiatives for FleetBoston, 
as well as managing customer data analysis, direct marketing, market 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 A 
131
research and research and development (R&D) functions for Fleet and 
Bank of America. He was chief executive of˜cer of ˜leTRUST, which 
produced a secure online document-storage and -sharing service. He 
has held positions at Bell Laboratories and at AT&T Consumer Products, 
where he led efforts ranging from assessing the demand for new telecom
-munications services to inventing, developing, and managing interactive 
television and online services. Dr. Heltai has been published and widely 
quoted by the national print and broadcast media as a recognized expert 
in areas such as e-business, online banking and investing, public policy 
issues, payment technologies, video on demand, and emerging technolo
-gies. He has won numerous awards, including Internet Week™s Top 100 
of 2001, MassEcomm Top 10 Executives, Microsoft Innovation Award, 
and Best in Show at the Consumer Electronics Show. He has served on 
the board of directors of MECA Software, Integrion, LLC, and numerous 
nonpro˜t organizations. He has been on the advisory boards of S1 Cor
-poration, PostX, and FTVentures, and currently serves as the president 
of the Massachusetts Innovation and Technology Exchange. He received 
his Ph.D. in mathematics from the State University of New York at Stony 
Brook in 1984.
STEPHEN
 H. H
OLDEN
 is a principal with Touchstone Consulting Group. 
While participating on the present NRC committee, he was an assistant 
professor in the information systems department at the University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC). Dr. Holden™s research included 
the management of information technology in the public sector, informa
-tion policy, electronic authentication policies and practices, and electronic 
government. He has published in 
Administration
 and
 Society
, 
IEEE
 Internet
 Computing
, 
Go
vernment
 Information
 Quarterly
, 
The
 Information
 Society
, 
Inter
-national
 Journal
 of
 Public
 Administration
, and 
Public
 Performance
 and
 Man
-agement
 Re
view
. He has also contributed book chapters on information 
policy, electronic government, and information technology in the public 
sector. Dr. Holden was on the CSTB committee that produced the report 
Who
 Goes
 There?:
 Authentication
 Through
 the
 Lens
 of
 Pri
vacy
. He also serves 
on the editorial board of the 
Journal
 of
 Public
 Administration
 Research
 and
 Theory
 and the 
International
 Journal
 of
 E-Go
vernment
 Research
. The MITRE 
Corporation, the IBM Center for the Business of Government, and the 
Real User Corporation have funded his research. Prior to his academic 
career, Dr. Holden worked for 16 years in the federal government. That 
experience included joining the civil service as a presidential management 
intern at the Naval Sea Systems Command. He spent 10 years at the Of˜ce 
of Management and Budget doing a variety of policy and management 
work. In his last federal position, he worked at the Internal Revenue 
Service as a member of the senior executive service in the Electronic Tax 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Administration organization. He earned his Ph.D. in public administra
-tion and public affairs from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Uni
-versity. He also holds a master of public administration and a bachelor of 
arts in public management from the University of Maine.
LARR
Y G. M
ASSANARI
 was acting commissioner of Social Security and 
most recently served as the regional commissioner for the Social Security 
Administration™s (SSA™s) Philadelphia region, where he directed agency 
operations in the mid-Atlantic states. Mr. Massanari began his career with 
Social Security in 1966 as a claims representative in one of SSA‚s ˜eld 
of˜ces. He served in a variety of administrative and managerial positions 
in the Chicago area before moving to the agency‚s headquarters in 1979. 
He held several top-level positions in SSA‚s central of˜ce, including direc
-tor of human resources and associate commissioner for policy. He was 
named regional commissioner for the Philadelphia Region in 1987. Mr. 
Massanari has received numerous awards for outstanding achievement. 
He was a Presidential ExecutiveŒrank award winner in 1992 and 1997, 
receiving the rank of both Meritorious and Distinguished Executive. He 
was also named a ˜nalist by the Professional Development League in 1997 
for distinguished executive service. He has been the recipient of three 
Commissioner‚s Citations, the highest honor conferred on Social Security 
Administration employees. In 1990, he received the ˜rst Commissioner‚s 
Leadership Award, which recognizes the accomplishments of SSA execu
-tives. A graduate of Western Michigan University, Mr. Massanari also 
completed graduate work at Northwestern University. 
JU
DITH
 S. O
LSON
 is the Richard W. Pew Chair in Human Computer 
Interaction at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. She is also a profes
-sor in the School of Information, the Business School, and the Department 
of Psychology. Her research interests include computer-supported cooper
-ative work, human-computer interaction, the design of business informa
-tion systems for organizational effectiveness, and cognitive psychology. 
Dr. Olson™s recent research focuses on the nature of group work and the 
design and evaluation of technology to support it. This ˜eld combines 
cognitive and social psychology with the design of information systems. 
Dr. Olson began her career at the University of Michigan in the Depart
-ment of Psychology, served as a technical supervisor for human factors in 
systems engineering at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey, and returned to 
Michigan to the Business School and the then-new School of Information. 
She has more than 60 publications in journals and books, and served on 
the NRC committee that produced the report
 Who
 Goes
 There?:
 Authenti
-cation
 Through
 the
 Lens
 of
 Pri
vacy
. She has recently been appointed to the 
CHI Academy of ACM™s Special Interest Group on
 Computer-Human 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 A 
133
Interaction. Dr. Olson earned a B.A. in mathematics and psychology from 
Northwestern University in 1965 and a Ph.D. in 1969 in the same disci
-plines from the University of Michigan.
STAFF
LY
NETTE
 I. M
ILLETT
 is a senior program of˜cer and study director 
at the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the 
National Research Council. She is currently involved in several CSTB 
projects, including a study on sustaining growth in computing perfor
-mance, an exploration of software-intensive systems producibility, and 
an activity on biometrics systems, among other things. She was the study 
director for the CSTB projects that produced 
Software
 for
 Dependable
 Sys
-tems:
 Suf˜cient
 Evidence?
, 
Who
 Goes
 There?:
 Authentication
 Through
 the
 Lens
 of
 Pri
vacy
, and 
IDsŠNot
 That
 Easy:
 Questions
 About
 Nationwide
 Identity
 Systems
. Her portfolio includes signi˜cant portions of CSTB‚s recent work 
on software and on identity systems and privacy. She has an M.Sc. in 
computer science from Cornell University and a B.A. in mathematics and 
computer science with honors from Colby College. Her graduate work 
was supported by both a National Science Foundation graduate fellow
-ship and an Intel graduate fellowship. 
JOAN D. WINSTON
 is a program of˜cer at the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council. 
Before joining the staff of CSTB, she was an assistant director (Informa
-tion Technology Team) at the U.S. Government Accountability Of˜ce. 
From 1998 to 2001, Ms. Winston was principal associate at Steve Walker 
and Associates, LLC, which managed early-stage venture funds focus
-ing on information technology. From 1995 to 1998, she was director of 
policy analysis for Trusted Information Systems, Inc. From 1986 to 1995, 
she held various analytical and project direction positions at the congres
-sional Of˜ce of Technology Assessment (OTA) and was named an OTA 
senior associate in 1993. Before her service with OTA, she worked brie˚y 
for the Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress. Ms. 
Winston started her career as an engineer at the Charles Stark Draper 
Laboratory, Inc., in Cambridge, Mass. She received an S.B. in physics and 
an S.M. in technology and policy, both from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology.
JANICE M. SAB
UDA
 is a senior program assistant at the Computer Sci
-ence and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. 
She has supported board activities and is involved in several studies, 
including 
Impro
ving
 Cybersecurity
 Research
 in
 the
 United
 States
 and 
Pri
vacy
 Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
in
 the
 Information
 Age
. Previously, she focused on the congressionally 
requested study that resulted in 
Youth,
 Pornography,
 and
 the
 Internet
 and 
the project that resulted in 
Global
 Networks
 and
 Local
 Values:
 A Compara
-ti
ve Look
 at
 Germany
 and
 the
 United
 States
. Prior to joining CSTB in August 
2001, she worked as a customer service representative at an online fund-
raising company and as a client services analyst at a prospect research 
˜rm. She is currently pursuing a certi˜cate in event management from the 
George Washington University Center for Professional Development. She 
received her bachelor of science degree (1999) in business administration 
from the State University of New York College at Fredonia.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.B  Panelists and Briefers at 
 Open Committee Meetings
OCTOBER
 11-12, 2005, 
AND
 F
EBR
UAR
Y 8-9, 2006
Panelists and Briefers
Diana Andrews, Social Security Administration
Jo Armstrong, Social Security Administration
Philip Becker, Social Security Administration
Jerry Berson, Social Security Administration
Mark Blatchford, Social Security Administration
Darlynda Bogle, Social Security Administration
Joseph Coates, Consulting Futurist
Jim Courtney, Social Security Administration
Renato J. DiPentima, SRA International
Marti Eckert, Social Security Administration
Debby Ellis, Social Security Administration
Marty Ford, Disability Policy Coalition
Judy Fryback, Disability Determination Service, Wisconsin
Lyman Goon, Social Security Administration
William E. Gray, Social Security Administration
Leonard Green, Rhode Island Department of Health
Myrtle S. Habersham, Social Security Administration
John Halamka, Harvard Medical School
Blaise Heltai, New Vantage Partners
John Horrigan, Pew Internet and American Life Project
Thomas P. Hughes, Social Security Administration
135
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Steve Kautsch, Social Security Administration
Marcia Kent, Social Security Administration
Amy Lee, AARP Services, Inc.
Wayne Lemon, Social Security Administration
James B. Lockhart III, Social Security Administration
Terry Lutes, IRS (retired)
Keith Mallinson, Yankee Group 
Denise Maynard, Social Security Administration
Linda S. McMahon, Social Security Administration
Paul Patrick, BEA Systems
Martin Prahl, Lockheed Martin
Peter Quinn, Former CIO, Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Ann Robert, Disability Determination Service, Illinois
Sue Roecker, Social Security Administration
Robin Sabatino, Social Security Administration
John Sabo, Computer Associates
Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland, College Park
Dale W. Sopper
 , Social Security Administration
Terry Stradtman, Social Security Administration
Fritz Streckewald, Social Security Administration
Thomas Sutton, Immediate Past President, National Organization of
 Social Security Claimants™ Representatives
Tony Tullo, ADP Tax and Financial Services
Nancy Veillon, Social Security Administration
Don Watson, Social Security Administration
Reginald F. Wells, Social Security Administration
Bill Zielinski, Social Security Administration
Social Security Administration Staff Providing
 Information, Material, and Assistance
Sean Brune, Social Security Administration
Bruce W. Carter, Social Security Administration
Gerard R. Hart, Social Security Administration
Renee Trujillo, Social Security Administration
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.C  Social Security Administration 
 Major Of˜ce Missions
This information is quoted from material available on the Social Secu
-rity Administration (SSA) public Web site.
1OFFICE
 OF
 THE
 C
OMMISSIONER
 OF
 S
OCIAL
 S
EC
URIT
Y The Of˜ce of the Commissioner (OC) is directly responsible for all pro
-grams administered by SSA; for State-administered programs directed 
by SSA; and for certain functions with respect to the black lung bene˜ts 
program. It provides executive leadership to SSA. The Of˜ce is respon
-sible for development of policy, administrative and program direction, 
program interpretation and evaluation, maintenance of relations with 
news media, research oriented to the study of the problems of economic 
insecurity in American society; and development of recommendations 
on methods of advancing social and economic security through social 
insurance and related programs.
OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, COMM
UNICATIONS
The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Communications (ODCComm) 
is the SSA component responsible for the conduct of the Agency™s nation
-al public information/public affairs (PI/PA) programs.
  Performs SSA 
1 
The material in this appendix is quoted from mission statements in ﬁOrganizational 
Structure of the Social Security Administration,ﬂ http://www.ssa.gov/org/ssaorg.htm, 
 
accessed May 30, 2007.
137
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
Press Of˜ce function to ensure a uni˜ed and consistent message to SSA™s 
many publics.
  Provides guidance and direction from a PI/PA standpoint 
to the development of Agency policies and decisions and assesses their 
potential impact on SSA™s customers, stakeholders and employees.
  Cre
-ates, develops, facilitates, implements, oversees and evaluates all SSA 
communications and PI/PA activities, both internal and external.
  Cul
-tivates and maintains effective working relationships with a wide range 
of national organizations, advocacy groups, other Federal agencies, State 
and local governments, the White House,
  and the media.
  Promotes 
full and open participation in the communications process between and 
among SSA™s customers and stakeholders at all levels.
  Coordinates the 
non-English communications activities within SSA.
  Additionally, re
-sponds to high priority correspondence and public inquiries; maintains 
an evaluation program that measures efforts to meet the communica
-tions needs of SSA™s customers, stakeholders and employees; produces 
PI/PA material designed to provide SSA™s various audiences with timely 
information about Social Security programs, protections, rights and re
-sponsibilities and related issues; utilizes state-of-the-art media, methods 
and technology in product development and dissemination and fully 
supports headquarters and ˜eld employees who are directly or indirectly 
involved in SSA PI/PA activities nationwide.
OFFICE OF DISABILIT
Y ADJ
UDICATION AND RE
VIEW
The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner for Disability Adjudication and 
Review (DCDAR) administers the nationwide Disability Adjudication 
and Review program for SSA.
  Provides the basic mechanisms through 
which individuals and organizations dissatis˜ed with determinations 
affecting their rights to and amounts of bene˜ts or their participation 
in programs under the Social Security Act may administratively ap
-peal these determinations in accordance with the requirements of the 
Administrative Procedure and Social Security Acts.
  DCDAR includes a 
nationwide ˜eld organization staffed with Administrative Law Judges 
(ALJs) who conduct impartial hearings and make decisions on appeals 
˜led by claimants, their representatives, providers
-of
-service institu
-tions and others under the Social Security Act.
  The Appeals Council 
of
 DCDAR impartially reviews ALJ decisions, either on the Appeals 
Council™s own motion or at the request of the claimant, and renders the 
Commissioner™s ˜nal decision when review is taken.
  Reviews new court 
cases to determine whether the case should be defended on the record 
or the Commissioner should seek voluntary remand, and reviews ˜nal 
court decisions in light of the programmatic and administrative implica
-tions involved and makes recommendations as to whether appeal should 
be sought.
  Provides advice and recommendations on Social Security 
Administration program policy and related matters, including proposed 
Social Security Rulings.
 Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 C 
139
OFFICE OF DISABILIT
Y AND INCOME SEC
URIT
Y PROGRAMS 
 The Deputy Commissioner, Disability and Income Security Programs is 
the principal advisor to the Commissioner of Social Security on program 
policy issues and is involved in strategic planning, policy development, 
and analysis of SSA program policy.
  The Of˜ce of the Deputy Com
-missioner, Disability and Income Security Programs (ODCDISP) directs 
the formulation of program policy for SSA.
  It directs and manages the 
planning, development, issuance, and evaluation of operational poli
-cies, standards, and instructions for the Retirement and Survivors Insur
-ance, Disability Insurance, Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, 
and other SSA programs.
  The Of˜ce manages SSA™s disability and SSI 
policy and research agendas and long-term disability initiatives. The 
Of˜ce assists in achievement of consistency in program policy across 
programs administered by SSA.
  The Of˜ce is involved in analyses of 
legislative and regulatory speci˜cations and budgetary impacts of leg
-islation on programs administered by SSA.
  The Of˜ce produces data 
on the programs of the Agency.
  It is involved in the development of 
demonstrations and studies that provide recommendations on program 
improvements.
  The Of˜ce is responsible for the Agency™s Regulatory 
Program.
  Develops and implements policies and procedures and coor
-dinates activities relating to the operation of Social Security programs 
outside of the United States.
OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, 
 BUDGET, FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT
The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner Budget, Finance and Manage
-ment (ODCBFM) directs the administration of comprehensive SSA man
-agement programs including budget, acquisition and grants, facilities 
management and publications and logistics.
  The Of˜ce directs the de
-velopment of Agency policies and procedures as well as the management 
of the Agency ˜nancial management systems.
  OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, 
 HUMAN RESO
URCES
The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Human Resources (ODCHR) 
directs the administration of comprehensive SSA human resources pro
-grams including: human capital and planning initiatives, personnel man
-agement, labor management relations, employee relations, civil rights 
and equal opportunity, and training.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
0 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, 
 LEGISLATION AND CONGRESSIONAL AFFAIRS
 The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Legislation and Congressional 
Affairs develops and conducts the legislative program of SSA, serves as 
the focal point for all legislative activity in SSA, analyzes legislative and 
regulatory initiatives and develops speci˜c positions and amendments.
  The Of˜ce evaluates the effectiveness of programs administered by SSA 
in terms of legislative needs, and analyzes and develops recommenda
-tions on related income maintenance, social service and rehabilitation 
program proposals, particularly those which may involve coordination 
with SSA-administered programs, and on other methods of providing 
economic security.
  It provides advisory service to SSA of˜cials on legis
-lation of interest to SSA pending in Congress.
  It also provides legislative 
drafting to of˜cials within the Executive Branch, congressional commit
-tees, individual Members of Congress and private organizations interest
-ed in Social Security legislation.
  It establishes and maintains a working 
relationship with all Members of Congress.
  It serves as SSA™s informa
-tion gathering and dissemination staff on congressional activities affect
-ing SSA programs and handles certain claims and administrative matters 
that are particularly urgent or sensitive to Members of Congress.
OFFICE
 OF
 THE
 D
EP
UTY C
OMMISSIONER
, O
PERATIONS
 The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Operations (ODCO) directs and 
manages central of˜ce and geographically dispersed operations instal
-lations.
  It oversees regional operating program, technical, assessment 
and program management activities. It directs studies and actions to 
improve the operational effectiveness and ef˜ciency of its components.
  It promotes systems and operational integration and de˜nes user needs 
in the strategic planning process.
  It determines automation support 
needs for Operations components. It oversees the coordination and im
-plementation of SSA™s policies for the electronic delivery of Agency ser
-vices to the public. This Of˜ce de˜nes user concerns in the development 
of operational and programmatic speci˜cations for new and modi˜ed 
systems, including the evaluation and implementation phases.
  When 
mutually agreed, provides support to the Of˜ce of Disability Adjudica
-tion and Review (ODAR) and/or speci˜c State Disability Determination 
Services.
 Provides budget and management guidance for the disability 
claims activities as carried out by the State Disability Determination 
Services (DDS).
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 C 
141
OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, POLIC
YThe Deputy Commissioner, Policy is the principal advisor to the Com
-missioners of Social Security on major policy issues and is responsible for 
major activities in the areas of strategic policy planning, policy research 
and evaluation, statistical programs, and overall policy development 
and analysis.
  The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Policy (ODCP) 
serves as the Agency lead spokesperson in presenting policy proposals 
and analysis within and outside the Executive Branch.
  The Of˜ce directs 
the formulation of overall policy for SSA and ensures the consistency of 
policy development and implementation activities across all programs 
administered by SSA.
  The Of˜ce broadly formulates, promulgates and 
interprets programs, objectives, and policy.
  The Of˜ce directs research, 
evaluation and analysis, and development of demonstrations and studies 
supporting the policy development of SSA; provides recommendations 
on modi˜cation of social insurance and income assistance programs ad
-ministered by SSA; and conducts the statistical programs of the Agency.
  The Of˜ce is involved in developing legislative and regulatory speci˜
-cations and analyses of legislative and budgetary impacts.
  The Of˜ce 
works with the Department of Treasury on issues of policy relating 
to the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the Self-Employment 
Contributions Act, including such matters as de˜nition of wages and 
implementation of laws.
  It directs formulation of Agency policy re
-garding related government programs that affect SSA programs and/or 
operations and negotiates related agreements with other agencies.
  It 
evaluates the effectiveness of national policies in meeting both short and 
long-term program goals.
 OFFICE OF THE DEP
UTY COMMISSIONER, S
YSTEMS
The Of˜ce of the Deputy Commissioner, Systems (ODCS) directs the 
conduct of systems and operational integration and strategic planning 
processes, and the implementation of a comprehensive systems con˜gu
-ration management, data base management and data administration pro
-gram.
  Initiates software and hardware acquisition for SSA and oversees 
software and hardware acquisition procedures, policies and activities.
  Directs the development of operational and programmatic speci˜cations 
for new and modi˜ed systems, and oversees development, validation 
and implementation phases.
 OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ACT
UAR
YThe Of˜ce of the Chief Actuary (OCACT) plans and directs a program 
of actuarial estimates and analyses pertaining to the SSA-administered 
retirement, survivors and disability insurance programs and supplemen
-Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
tal security income program and to projected changes in these programs.
  Evaluates operations of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance 
Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund; estimates 
future operations of the trust funds; conducts studies of program ˜nanc
-ing; performs actuarial and demographic research on social insurance 
and related program issues; and estimates future workloads.
  Provides 
technical and consultative services to the Commissioner, the Board of 
Trustees of those two Trust Funds, and, as requested, congressional com
-mittees.
  Appears before congressional committees to provide expert 
testimony on the actuarial aspects of Social Security issues.
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER
The Of˜ce of the Chief Information Of˜cer (OCIO) develops the Informa
-tion Resource Management Plan and de˜nes the Information Technol
-ogy (IT) vision and strategy for the Social Security Administration.
  The 
Of˜ce shapes the application of technology in support of the Agency™s 
Strategic Plan including the Information Technology Architecture that 
outlines the long term Strategic Architecture and Systems Plans for the 
Agency and includes Agency IT Capital Planning.
  The OCIO supports 
and manages pre and post implementation reviews of major IT pro
-grams and projects as well as project tracking at critical review points. 
The OCIO provides oversight of major IT acquisitions to ensure they 
are consistent with Agency architecture and with the IT budget, and 
is responsible for the development of Agency IT security policies.
  The 
Of˜ce directs the realization of the Agency™s Information Technology 
Architecture to guarantee architecture integration, design consistency, 
and compliance with federal standards, works with other Agencies on 
government-wide projects such as e-GOVERNMENT, and develops long 
range planning for IT Human Resource Strategies.
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF STRATEGIC OFFICER
The Of˜ce of the Chief Strategic Of˜cer directs the administration of 
SSA™s comprehensive management programs including strategic plan
-ning, workforce analysis, and competitive sourcing.
  
 It directs the de
-velopment of the Agency™s tactical and strategic planning process, the 
Agency Strategic Plan, Annual Performance Plan and Annual Perfor
-mance Report; and tracks Agency performance in relation to established 
performance measures.
  Working with all components, the of˜ce identi
-˜es those priority initiatives needed to meet agency goals, objectives 
and outcomes and how to link these to budget input so that they can be 
funded and the outcomes achieved.
  It directs, develops and implements 
a comprehensive program of management studies, research and analy
-ses. This allows SSA to evaluate and determine the feasibility of imple
-menting major changes affecting the SSA organization, its administrative 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 C 
143
practices, its methods of operation and work processes and procedures, 
work˚ow and workload processing positions.
  It directs the Agency™s 
policies and procedure as well as the management of the Agency com
-petitive sourcing program.
 OFFICE OF THE GENERAL CO
UNSEL
The Of˜ce of the General Counsel advises the Commissioner on legal 
matters, is responsible for providing all legal advice to the Commissioner, 
Deputy Commissioner, and all subordinate organizational components 
(except OIG) of SSA in connection with the operation and administra
-tion of SSA. Responsible for the policy formulation and decision making 
related to the collection, access, and disclosure of such information in the 
records of the Social Security Administration; and processing of Freedom 
of Information requests and appeals (under the Freedom of Information 
and Privacy Acts). 
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
The Of˜ce of the Inspector General (OIG) is directly responsible for 
meeting the statutory mission of promoting economy, ef˜ciency and ef
-fectiveness in the administration of Social Security Administration (SSA) 
programs and operations and to prevent and detect fraud, waste, abuse, 
and mismanagement in such programs and operations.
  To accomplish 
this mission, the OIG directs, conducts and supervises a comprehensive 
program of audits, evaluations and investigations, relating to SSA™s pro
-grams and operations.
  OIG also searches for and reports systemic weak
-nesses in SSA programs and operations, and makes recommendations for 
needed improvements and corrective actions.
OFFICE
 OF
 QU
ALIT
Y P
ERFORMANCE
The Of˜ce of Quality Performance directs the development of innovative 
changes to the current Agency quality management program, including 
the program™s initiatives and mechanisms when they are not clearly 
delineated by statutory authority.
  Such changes may impact quality 
management Agency-wide in terms of its programs, policies, and pro
-cedures.
  The Of˜ce of Quality Performance is responsible for rendering 
formal advice and recommendations to Agency executives on a range of 
issues relating speci˜cally to in-line and end-of-line quality performance 
management in each of the Agency™s core business areas. It works with 
Deputy Commissioner-level components to direct the Agency-wide qual
-ity performance management program, its policies and initiatives involv
-ing one or more components of SSA. It also provides oversight for SSA™s 
computer matching operations.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.D Overview of Selected Legislation 
Pertaining to E-Government
The highest level of federal e-government policymaking is public 
law. Although some of the public law reviewed below predates 
the concept of e-government, these pieces of legislation are none
-theless still in place. The overview proceeds generally from broader to 
more speci˜c information policy and, where possible, links public law to 
government-wide policy.
THE
 P
APERWORK
 R
ED
UCTION
 A
CT
 OF
 1995
The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA; Public Law 96-511) was origi
-nally enacted 1980 as an outgrowth of the 1977 report of the U.S. Com
-mission on Federal Paperwork. The original act recognized the economic 
cost of the federal government™s imposing of paperwork burdens on the 
public and laid the groundwork for the creation of the Of˜ce of Informa
-tion and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) in the Of˜ce of Management and 
Budget (OMB) to manage federal information policy centrally. Over time, 
the PRA has been amended (i.e., in 1986 and 1995) and has resulted in 
related updates to OMB Circular A-130.
1 It is the PRA that compels fed
-eral agencies to get an OMB clearance number on information collections 
(including such things as forms, surveys, and regulations that require 
1 
See Executive Of˜ce of the President, Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB), 
OMB
 Circular
 No.
 A-
13
0 Re
vised
, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/
a130trans4.html, accessed June 9, 2006. OMB Circular A-130™s subject is management of 
federal information resources. 
144
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 D 
145
reporting) and for OMB to aggregate the amount of burden that federal 
agencies impose on the public annually through the Information Collec
-tion Budget. This landmark legislation also had practical implications for 
agencies, as it forced them to manage information collection as a resource 
much like they did ˜nancial and human resources.
THE
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y R
EFORM
 A
CT
In many ways, the Information Technology Reform Act (Public Law  
104-106; also known as the Clinger-Cohen Act)
2 provided some of the 
early underpinnings for the e-government movement by requiring agen
-cies to elevate the position of ﬁSenior Of˜cial for Information Resources 
Managementﬂ to that of ﬁChief Information Of˜cerﬂ (CIO). This law 
recognized the strategic importance of technology in meeting agency 
objectives, giving the CIO in a federal agency a prominent position that 
is supposed to report directly to the head of the agency. Consistent with 
this view, the act created the expectation that agency investments in IT 
would be evaluated on the basis of the attainment of goals and objectives 
laid out in agency strategic and tactical plans.
THE
 P
RI
VAC
Y A
CT
 OF
 1974
Although it is likely the oldest piece of federal information policy that 
shapes e-government implementation, the Privacy Act of 1974 (Public 
Law 93-579, as amended)
3 remains quite in˚uential. The Privacy Act is 
built on the fair information principles outlined by the then-Department 
of Health, Education and Welfare™s policy
4 to provide citizens with insight 
into their government™s stewardship of what the act de˜nes as ﬁsensitive 
information.ﬂ
5 Sensitive information includes ﬁinformation, the loss, mis
-use, or unauthorized access to or modi˜cation of, which could adversely 
affect the national interest or the conduct of federal programs, or the 
privacy to which individuals are entitled under . . . the Privacy Act.ﬂ
6 To 
2 
See http://www.cio.gov/Documents/it_management_reform_act_Feb_1996.html, ac
-cessed June 20, 2007. See also S.H. Holden and P. Hernon, ﬁAn Executive Branch Perspec
-tive on Managing Information Resources,ﬂ pp. 83-104 in P. Hernon, C.R. McClure, and H.C. 
Relyea, Eds., 
Federal
 Information
 Policies
 in
 the
 199
0™s:
 Views
 and
 Perspecti
ves
, Norwood, N.J.: 
Ablex Publishing, 1996.
3 
See http://www.usdoj.gov/foia/privstat.htm, accessed June 20, 2007.
4 
See Department of Health, Education, and Welfare Secretary™s Advisory Committee on 
Automated Personal Data Systems, 
Records,
 Computers
 and
 the
 Rights
 of
 Citizens
, Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1973.
5 
P.M. Regan, 
Legislating
 Pri
vacy:
 Technology,
 Social
 Values,
 and
 Public
 Policy
, Chapel Hill, 
N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1995.
6 
See http://www.atis.org/tg2k/_sensitive_information.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
the extent that federal agencies maintain ﬁsystems of recordsﬂ in which it 
is possible to organize, index, or retrieve the information about a citizen 
by unique identi˜er (typically a Social Security number), an agency must 
post public notice of how the data will be used through a ﬁroutine use 
notice.ﬂ If any agency wishes to disclose such sensitive data to a third 
party, the subject of the information must provide consent to such disclo
-sure. For agencies that are receiving or exchanging sensitive information 
about an individual, which is typical for most e-government transactions, 
they must take steps to comply with the Privacy Act. Appendix I of OMB 
Circular A-130 provides the more detailed requirements for agencies to 
follow when complying with the Privacy Act.
OMB has issued some privacy-related policy pertaining to the use 
of ﬁcookiesﬂ on federal Web sites that grows, in part, out of some of the 
philosophies of the Privacy Act. OMB issued Memorandum 00-13,
7 which 
sought to severely limit (and some believe prevent) agencies from using 
ﬁpersistent cookiesﬂ that track ﬁthe activities of users over time and across 
different web sites.ﬂ The memorandum stipulates that federal Web sites 
should not use persistent cookies unless agencies can meet the following 
four conditions: 
Ł The site gives clear and conspicuous notice;
Ł There is a compelling need to gather the data on the site;
Ł There are appropriate and publicly disclosed privacy safeguards 
for handling any information derived from the cookies; and
Ł The agency head gives personal approval for the use.
8THE
 F
EDERAL
 I
NFORMATION
  SEC
URIT
Y M
ANAGEMENT
 A
CT
 OF
 2002
The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; 
Title III of Public Law 107-347) has superseded the Computer Security Act 
of 1987. FISMA provides the analytical framework for agencies to assess 
risk and then to mitigate identi˜ed risks for ﬁsensitive informationﬂ in 
federal information systems. In this context, FISMA includes systems 
that are not national security systems but that contain sensitive informa
-tion. The following quote from FISMA provides the high-level risk-based 
security guide for agency decision making in this area. The act states 
7 
OMB Memorandum 00-13™s subject is privacy policies and data collection on federal 
Web sites. It is available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/m00-13.html, 
accessed April 14, 2007.
8 
OMB Memorandum 00-13, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/
m00-13.html, accessed April 14, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 D 
147
that agencies shall ﬁidentify and provide information security protec
-tions commensurate with the risk and magnitude of the harm resulting 
from the unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modi˜cation, 
or destruction of . . .ﬂ information or information systems maintained by 
federal agencies or by organizations on behalf of federal agencies. Explic
-itly in the law, agencies are expected to pursue the goals of the legislation 
with a cost-effectiveness standard in mind by ﬁimplementing policies and 
procedures to cost-effectively reduce risks to an acceptable level. . . .ﬂ
9 Appendix III of OMB Circular A-130 provides the more detailed require
-ments for agency compliance with FISMA. 
THE
 G
OVERNMENT
 P
APERWORK
 E
LIMINATION
 A
CT
 OF 1998
The law likely to have provided the most impetus to federal agency 
e-government efforts was the Government Paperwork Elimination Act 
of 1998 (Title XVII of Public Law 105-277). It required that individuals or 
entities that deal with the agencies have the option of submitting infor
-mation or transacting with the agency electronically by October 2003. It 
was intended to serve as a transition point from traditional paper-based 
government and governance at the federal level to the emerging ideals 
of e-government.
10 
Besides setting this target date for agencies to enable 
electronic information and transactions, it also de˜ned and established 
the legal suf˜ciency of electronic signatures necessary for agencies to 
move away from ﬁwetﬂ signatures on paper. What the law did not do 
was to specify particular technologies to implement electronic signatures. 
Instead, the law and subsequent OMB policy
11
 was technology neutral, 
giving agencies wide discretion to match the needs of their technical solu
-tions to the capabilities of their user base and risk mitigation that agency 
desired.
12
9 
See http://csrc.nist.gov/policies/FISMA-˜nal.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007.
10
 Of˜ce of Management and Budget, ﬁImplementation of the Government Paperwork 
Elimination Act,ﬂ available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg/gpea2.html, ac
-cessed April 14, 2007. 
11
 Of˜ce of Management and Budget, Dec. 16, 2003, ﬁE-Authentication Guidance for Fed
-eral Agencies,ﬂ available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/fy04/m04-
04.pdf, accessed April 14, 2007. 
12
 S.H. Holden, ﬁElectronic Authentication Initiatives in the IRS E-File Program: Enabling 
E-Government Through Electronic Signatures,ﬂ pp. 984-985 in M. Khosrowpour, Ed., 
Issues
 and
 Trends
 of
 Information
 Technology
 Management
 in
 Contemporary
 Organizations
, Hershey, Pa.: 
Idea Group, 2002.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
THE
 E-G
OVERNMENT
 A
CT
 OF
 2002
The E-Government Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-347) and the federal 
government™s strategic plan for e-government provide further impetus 
for e-government initiatives. The law reaf˜rmed the federal mandate for 
e-government by codifying the creation of the associate director for IT 
and e-government in OMB. It also imposed new annual reporting require
-ments for OMB to inform Congress of progress toward meeting the goals 
of the act. Recognizing the need to address public concerns about privacy 
and e-government adoption, the law required agencies to conduct Privacy 
Impact Assessments to make privacy considerations more explicit in the 
development of e-government systems.
13
 13
 S.H. Holden and L.I. Millett, ﬁAuthentication, Privacy, and the Federal E-Government,ﬂ 
The
 Information
 Society
 21(5):367-377.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EA Short History of E-Government 
Begun approximately a decade ago, e-government refers to the appli
-cation of the Internet and other information technology (IT) to 
provide governmental information and services electronically. It 
offers the potential of increased convenience to the public by making 
such services available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, coupled with the 
advantages of improved accuracy and also reduced cost to the govern
-ment, deriving from its requiring little or no direct interaction with a 
government employee. (See Box 1.1 in Chapter 1 of this report for more 
on the distinction between electronic services and e-government and on 
the terminology used in this report, generally.) This appendix offers some 
context for the Social Security Administration™s (SSA™s) e
-government 
activities and plans. The appendix consists of a brief look at the legal and 
policy background information as well as history of the federal govern
-ment™s experience with e-government, what the status of e-government 
is across the United States and to some extent internationally, and then 
how the SSA™s role and progress compare with those of other government 
agencies. 
E-G
OVERNMENT
 D
EPLO
YMENT
 IN
  THE
 U.S. F
EDERAL
 G
OVERNMENT
Until the 1990s the federal government, like much of the business 
world, used information technology to automate backroom operations, 
with little emphasis on automating ﬁcustomer-facingﬂ functions such as 
149
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
0 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
information dissemination or service delivery. In many ways, this strate
-gic focus re˚ected a mainframe processing mentality that had dominated 
federal IT policy and strategy since the 1960s related to the passage of 
the Brooks Act of 1949.
1 Under the Brooks Act, one federal agency, the 
General Services Administration (GSA), was responsible for acquiring IT 
on behalf of federal agencies.
2 Although the GSA had an elaborate pro
-cess for delegating this procurement authority to federal agencies, this 
degree of centralization in IT governance represented a focus on using IT 
to save money in backroom operations. As a result, the primary criteria 
for evaluating IT investments were economy and ef˜ciency, so all systems 
were justi˜ed on a ﬁleast costﬂ basis.  Interagency IT efforts focused on 
consolidation efforts such as the Department of Agriculture™s National 
Finance Center for payroll and accounting, which sought to standard
-ize ˜nancial systems based on commercial off-the-shelf products and to 
eliminate duplicative personnel systems.
3Starting around the late 1990s, attention began to shift away from 
simply backroom operations. The federal Chief Information Of˜cer™s 
Council began emphasizing IT projects that offered ﬁservice to the citi
-zen.ﬂ At about the same time, the administration was conducting the 
National Performance Review (NPR, otherwise known as Reengineering 
Government) effort, which placed strong emphasis on IT-enabled govern
-ment. Publication of the NPR report 
Access
 America:
 Reengineering
 Through
 Information
 Technology
 in February 1997 was one of the ˜rst occasions on 
which the federal government began addressing what is now referred to 
as electronic government.
4The projects identi˜ed in that report represented a departure from 
historical emphasis on internal ef˜ciency and economy. The very ˜rst 
initiative involved improving service delivery through technology. This 
shift from economy and ef˜ciency to service delivery culminated with 
the ˜rst presidential-level directive to federal agencies on e-government 
1 
Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, Public Law 89-306, 40 
U.S.C.
 759.
2 The Warner Amendment of 1982 (Public Law 97-86) subsequently exempted certain types 
of Department of Defense procurements from the Brooks Act and from Section 11 of the 
Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949. See U.S. Congress, Of˜ce of Tech
-nology Assessment, 
Issue
 Update
 on
 Information
 Pri
vacy
 and
 Security
 in
 Network
 En
vironments
, OTA-BP-ITC-147, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce, June 1995, p. 106.
3 
S.H. Holden, ﬁThe Evolution of Information Technology Management at the Federal 
Level: Implications for Public Administration,ﬂ pp. 53-73 in 
Public
 Information
 Technology:
 Policy
 and
 Management
 Issues,
 G. David Garson, Ed., Hershey, Pa.: Idea Group, 2003. 
4 
See http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/npr/library/announc/access/acessrpt.html, accessed 
June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 E 
151
in December 1999.
5 The FirstGov.gov Web site, which went online in Sep
-tember 2000, projected the vision that it was ﬁthe of˜cial U.S. gateway to 
all government information.ﬂ
6 In addition to this federal government activity, other groups were 
also articulating a vision for e-government. The National Science Founda
-tion (NSF), which adopted the term ﬁdigital governmentﬂ in its efforts, 
convened a group of prominent researchers in public administration, 
public policy, information systems, and computer science, along with 
government practitioners, to articulate a vision for what they called an 
agenda for digital government research.
7 The Council of Excellence in 
Government also convened a group of practitioners (from both public 
and private sectors) and academics to articulate a vision for e-govern
-ment implementation.
8 The National Research Council, with the support 
of NSF™s Digital Government program, convened a study committee to 
examine a number of broad technical areas where government investment 
in IT research would have an impact on the creation of advanced, innova
-tive e-government capabilities.
9 With the con˚uence of these visions for how to use IT to improve the 
delivery of public information and services, it appeared that e-govern
-ment was coming of age. The public sector saw opportunities for realizing 
the kinds of gains realized by the private sector™s use of e-business, the 
private sector saw opportunities to sell more products and services, aca
-demics saw many research and teaching opportunities, and the public™s 
expectations for how government should work began to evolve as all of 
these sectors of the economy became increasingly articulate about this 
new phenomenon. Further presidential highlighting of e-government 
5 
See history of FirstGov.gov, available at http://˜rstgov.gov/About.shtml, accessed on 
June 9, 2006; and William J. Clinton, ﬁMemorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments 
and Agencies (Electronic Government),ﬂ December 17, 1999, available at http://govinfo.
library.unt.edu/npr/library/direct/memos/elecgovrnmnt.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
6 
See ﬁAbout FirstGov.gov,ﬂ available at http://web.archive.org/web/20060707043959re_/
˜rstgov.gov/About.shtml, accessed August 14, 2007.
7 
Sharon S. Dawes, Peter A. Bloniarz, Kristine L. Kelly, and Patricia D. Fletcher, 
Some
 As
-sembly
 Required:
 Building
 a Digital
 Go
vernment
 for
 the
 21
st
 Century
, Center for Technology in 
Government University at Albany, State University of New York, 1999, available at http://
www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/some_assembly/some_assembly.pdf, accessed 
June 20, 2007. 
8 
Council for Excellence in Government, 
E-Go
vernment:
 The
 Next
 American
 Re
volution
, Sep
-tember 28, 2000, available at http://www.excelgov.org/index.php?keyword=a432c10480be
99, accessed June 20, 2007. See also Council for Excellence in Government, 
The
 Blueprint
 for
 e-Go
vernment
, September 2000 and January 2001, available at http://www.excelgov.org/
index.php?keyword=a4338d8c859fc5, accessed June 20, 2007. 
9 
National Research Council, 
Information
 Technology
 Research,
 Inno
vation,
 and
 E-Go
vernment
, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2000. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
institutionalized a strategic emphasis on the application of technology to 
change the way government works. 
With a change in administration in 2001, e-government continued to 
be a focus in federal agencies and the White House. Two events early in the 
Bush/Cheney administration cemented the importance of e-government 
for federal agencies. First, the role of e-government became more promi
-nent in the structure of the Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) with 
the creation of the position of associate director for information technol
-ogy and e-government, elevating e-government issues from their home at 
that time under the of˜ce responsible for regulatory affairs in OMB. Later 
in 2001, OMB drafted the ˜rst federal strategy for e-government, pulling 
together 24 ﬁQuicksilverﬂ projects.
10
 The federal strategy included four 
portfolios for the projects: government to citizen, government to business, 
government to government, and economy and ef˜ciency. 
Some speci˜c examples of initiatives from each of the portfolios help 
describe some of the e-government capabilities available across the fed
-eral government. One of the best-known government-to-citizen initiatives 
is the Internal Revenue Service™s (IRS™s) Free File initiative,
11
 which is a 
public-and-private partnership to offer free tax preparation and e-˜ling 
services to selected taxpayers who have an adjusted gross income of less 
than $50,000. More broadly, the IRS e-˜le program has resulted in more 
than half of all individual tax returns being submitted to the IRS electroni
-cally, often times with taxpayers ˜ling their federal and state taxes in one 
transaction. 
For the business-to-government portfolio, the Business Gateway pro
-vides a one-stop source of information for businesses seeking to comply 
with federal regulatory and paperwork burden.
12
 MSNBC recognized 
the Web site for Business Gateway, Business.gov, as its Web site of the 
week.
13
 In the government-to-government portfolio, E-vital is a part
-nership between the federal government (primarily the SSA) and state 
governments to share vital statistics, primarily death certi˜cates, elec
-tronically.
14
 Finally, the federal strategy for e-government also includes 
a portfolio of initiatives designed to increase the internal ef˜ciency and 
effectiveness of federal operations. For example, e-payroll is designed to 
consolidate payroll processes among all federal civilian agencies, thereby 
10
 Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
E-Go
vernment
 Strategy:
 Simpli˜ed
 Deli
very
 of
 Ser
vices
 to
 Citizens
, Executive Of˜ce of the President, Washington, D.C., 2002.
11
 See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/c-1-3-IRS.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
12
 See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/c-3-5-bg.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
13
 See http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/14718260/, accessed June 20, 2007.
14
 See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/c-2-4-evital.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 E 
153
simplifying and modernizing the disparate collection of systems that 
federal agencies now use to pay their employees.
15
 E-government is one of the elements of the President™s Management 
Agenda (PMA), with federal agencies being graded quarterly on achiev
-ing the goals of the federal strategy.
16
 A presidential memo was issued on 
the importance of e-government, emphasizing interagency cooperation 
as a means to provide cost-effective and ef˜cient government services.
17
 The inclusion of e-government in the PMA has raised the importance 
of this initiative in federal strategic management efforts. OMB uses the 
annual budget process and the ﬁExhibit 300ﬂ Capital Asset and Business 
Plan Case
18
 required as part of annual budget requests from agencies to 
OMB as a mechanism for the enforcement of agency e-government plans™ 
consistency with the federal e-government strategy and related policies. 
While e-government was gaining in importance in federal agency plans 
and administration, the stated goals for federal e-government shifted in 
2001 to emphasize data and service integration to support economy and 
ef˜ciency rather than service delivery.
The e-business experiences of telecommunications and other ˜rms in 
the private sector indicate that cost reduction and ef˜ciency goals alone 
are not suf˜cientŠthey must be coupled with effectiveness goals that 
tie the operational effectiveness of their lines of business directly to IT 
capabilities. However, in business as well as in government, de˜ning and 
quantifying effectivness measures can be dif˜cult challenges. Neverthe
-less, government agencies and the publics that they serve can bene˜t from 
formulating precise and measurable effectiveness goals.  
LEGAL
 AND
 P
OLIC
Y C
ONTE
XT FOR
 F
EDERAL
 E-G
OVERNMENT
The SSA™s electronic services plans and initiatives ˜t within a broader 
federal context for e-government. The Committee on the Social Security 
Administration™s E-Government Strategy and Planning for the Future 
acknowledges the complex legislative and statutory environment that all 
15
 See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/c-4-5-ePay.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
16
 President™s Management Agenda (PMA), 2002, available at http://www.whitehouse.
gov/omb/budintegration/pma_index.html, accessed June 20, 2007.
17
 George W. Bush, 
The
 Importance
 of
 E-Go
vernment
, July 10, 2002, available at http://www.
whitehouse.gov/omb/egov/g-2-memo.html, accessed June 20, 2007. 
18
 The OMB Exhibit 300 Capital Asset and Business Plan Case is used by agencies and 
by OMB to review the budget justi˜cation and business case for major IT investments. See 
Executive Of˜ce of the President, Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
OMB
 Circular
 No.
 A-
11
. Part
 7
: Planning,
 Budgeting,
 Acquisition,
 and
 Management
 of
 Capital
 Assets,
 June 2005, 
available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a11/current_year/s300.pdf, ac
-cessed June 20, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
agencies, including the SSA, must negotiate when looking to broaden or 
enhance electronic services. This section is a very brief description of some 
of that context. Like much of federal information law and policy, the legal 
and policy context for federal e-government across all agencies has been 
put in place over a number of years through various pieces of legislation 
and several executive branch initiatives. Appendix D in this report sum
-marizes selected key legislation; although it does not provide an exhaus
-tive review of all the relevant law and policy that might affect the SSA™s 
e-government strategy, it nonetheless provides an overview of legal and 
policy framework within which the SSA must operate. Rather than having 
been crafted with e-government in mind, this collection of public law and 
government-wide policy affecting e-government has accumulated over 
a period of nearly 25 years. Therefore, federal agencies like the SSA that 
seek to exploit the bene˜ts of e-government must attempt to do so within 
a set of legal and policy requirements and constraints that can sometimes 
be less than clear and consistent. As a general precept, public law is often 
abstract and somewhat conceptual. 
Legislation typically does not provide a statement of requirements 
that is suf˜ciently clear and detailed to enable straightforward imple
-mentation by agencies. One of the recurring themes in the legislative and 
policy framework outlined in Appendix D of this report is that agencies 
have wide latitude on 
how
 to comply with the 
what
 of federal information 
policy. It is also very rare for either public law or government-wide policy 
to specify particular technologies as part of policy compliance. (Indeed, 
such speci˜cation is suboptimal for myriad reasons.) As a result, the 
Of˜ce of Management and Budget, which has government-wide policy-
making and oversight responsibility, typically interprets the law through 
its OMB Circular A-130, 
Management
 of
 Federal
 Information
 Resources
.19
 Other federal agencies, including the General Services Administration 
(GSA) and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) also 
have government-wide information policy responsibilities. Federal agen
-cies then often further interpret government-wide information policy to 
˜t their organizational context. In multibureau federal departments, each 
bureau may even localize the policy further.
20
19
 See Executive Of˜ce of the President, Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB), 
OMB
 Circular
 No.
 A-
13
0 Re
vised
, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/
a130trans4.html, accessed June 9, 2006. 
20
 Stephen H. Holden and Peter Hernon, ﬁAn Executive Branch Perspective on Managing 
Information Resources,ﬂ pp. 83-104 in Peter Hernon, Charles R. McClure, and Harold C. 
Relyea, Eds., 
Federal
 Information
 Policies
 in
 the
 199
0™s:
 Views
 and
 Perspecti
ves
, Norwood, N.J.: 
Ablex Publishing, 1996. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 E 
155
STATE
 OF
 THE
 P
RACTICE
 IN
 E-G
OVERNMENT
The U.S. federal government is not alone in realizing the potential 
bene˜ts of e-government. E-government services are also offered by all of 
the states, many municipalities, and indeed by the governments of most 
of the world™s developed countries. A number of efforts by varied groups, 
including the United Nations (UN) and the American Society for Public 
Administration (ASPA), researchers at Brown University, and various con
-sultancies have begun to compare e-government offerings internationally. 
Typically, these groups have found that the quality of the e-government 
offerings of the U.S. federal government is among the best worldwide, 
although public adoption of such services has been found to be higher in 
some other countries.
21
 For example, Accenture™s January 2005 survey of 
people in the United States found that over 55 percent had made at least 
some use of e-government; the same survey found that almost 70 percent 
of those surveyed used the Internet at least once a month. Accenture also 
found that reported use of e-government was higher in Australia, Canada, 
and Singapore (with reported Internet usage levels similar to those in 
the United States), and in Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland (with 
higher percentages of people using the Internet at least monthly).
22
 A study in 2004 conducted by the UN and ASPA found that the 
United States offers the most sophisticated e-government services of all 
the UN member countries studied.
23
 However, the U.S. public still makes 
only a rather limited use of e-government services, restricting their uti
-lization primarily to electronic access to government information and 
publications. The great majority of the public™s interactions with its gov
-ernment is still either on the phone or in person. Signi˜cantly, at the same 
time, the public™s use of the Internet and electronic services for banks 
and other ˜nancial institutions, as well as for retail purposes, is far more 
substantive, generally centering on actual ˜nancial transactions, in addi
-tion to obtaining information.  One possible reason for this difference in 
the nature of the public™s interactions may be that current e-government 
services beyond provision of information do not meet users™ needs as 
effectively as the services offered by the private sector (see Chapter 2 in 
21
 A contributing factor toward greater usage in some other countries may be differing 
attitudes toward privacy and how personal information is handled by governments and 
the private sector. 
22
 Accenture, 2005 E-Government Report, ﬁLeadership in Customer Service: New Expec
-tations, New Experiences,ﬂ available at http://www.accenture.com/xdoc/ca/locations/
canada/insights/studies/leadership_cust.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007. 
23
 United Nations, 
Global
 E-Go
vernment
 Readiness
 Report
 2
00
4: Towards
 Access
 For
 Opportu
-nity
, New York: United Nations, 2004, available at http://www.unpan.org/egovernment4.
asp, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
this report for more on this topic).
24
 For instance, some e-government 
services require users to supplement electronic transactions with paper 
signature documents or do not offer the complete set of electronic trans
-actions that users might like to use. For example, in some places it is pos
-sible to apply for a duplicate birth certi˜cate online, but in other places 
it is not. In other cases, users still have to understand the interworkings 
of government agencies to know where to look to retrieve information 
electronically or to complete transactions. The success of the private sec
-tor in meeting public needs with electronic services surely heightens 
public expectations of government agencies such as the SSA. Increasing 
demands from users beyond individual bene˜ciaries, such as the states 
and other federal agencies, will increase the pressure on the SSA, as will 
increasing the pressures for cost reductions and ef˜ciency improvements.  
Taken together, it seems reasonable that all of these pressures will inevi
-tably cause the SSA to move toward increases and improvements in its 
electronic service provision. 
Empirical Studies
The SSA and other governmental agencies have begun to respond to 
these pressures, and their responses have been growing in both quantity 
and quality. Internal federal government evaluations, such as the quar
-terly PMA (described above), have both tracked and precipitated these 
improvements. Other external evaluations have done so as well. (Chapter 
4 in this report describes some empirical results on user attitudes and 
behavior generally.) The longest-running set of external evaluation stud
-ies of e-government deployment results have been published by Darrell 
West at Brown University™s Taubman Center for Public Policy.
25
 Dating 
back to 2001, these studies have evaluated e-government offerings, pri
-marily based on analysis of government Web site content. These analyses 
have compared Web offerings internationally (among national govern
-ments), nationally in the United States (across federal agencies), and also 
24
 Council for Excellence in Government, 
The
 New
 E-Go
vernment
 Equation:
 Ease,
 Engagement,
 Pri
vacy
 and
 Protection
, 2003, available at http://www.excelgov.org/usermedia/images
/uploads/PDFs/egovpoll2003.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007; and Elena Larsen and Lee Rainie, 
The
 Rise
 of
 the
 E-Citizen:
 How
 People
 Use
 Go
vernment
 Agencies™
 Web
 Sites
, 2002, available at 
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=57, accessed June 20, 2007. 
25
 See Darrell M. West, 
State
 and
 Federal
 E-Go
vernment
 in
 the
 United
 States
, Providence, 
R.I.: Taubman Center for Public Policy, 2005, available at http://www.insidepolitics.org
/egovt05us.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 E 
157
among the various U.S. states. There have been studies that examined and 
compared social security administrations internationally as well.
26
Those studies that looked speci˜cally at federal agencies gave
 positive 
weight to features such as online publications, online databases, and the 
availability of online transactions. They typically also examined features 
such as disability access, privacy policy, security policy, Web site personal
-ization, personal digital assistant (PDA) accessibility, and readability level. 
Features such as advertisements, premium fees, and user payments or fees 
were considered negative and detracted from an agency™s e
-government 
score. Such studies have typically given the SSA™s e
-government efforts 
very favorable evaluations compared with its public-sector peers.
27
  West 
also ˜nds that federal agencies continue to struggle with issues like bro
-ken links, poor compliance with accessibility standards, and readability 
levels that exceed the capabilities of average users. In general, federal 
agencies are putting more transactions online and are increasingly posting 
privacy and security policies on their Web sites.
28
 West™s ˜ndings seem to 
be con˜rmed by data obtained from the University of Michigan™s Ameri
-can Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI)Šsee below.
West™s ˜ndings suggest that agencies such as the SSA have much 
work to do. The agencies have steadily been taking steps to address short
-comings in their online presences. More effective grappling with broader 
issues is still needed, however, and a high score in the limited West evalu
-ation scheme can certainly not be taken as a cause for complacency. In the 
26
 A recent study examined the impact of automation on social security administrations 
across 13 countries. While all 13 would likely be considered developed countries, some 
countries had different philosophies on their approach to social services provision (i.e., 
whether they were Scandinavian ﬁsocial democratic,ﬂ European ﬁcorporatist,ﬂ or Anglo-
American ﬁliberalﬂ countries). The signi˜cance of this would be somewhat varied service 
availability online depending on the regime values of the country™s social security system 
under study. The historical perspective provided by the study is helpful in explaining that 
automation really came to these national-level social security organizations in the mid-1950s, 
with the U.S. SSA beginning around 1955, third on the list of countries studied. The report 
examined the goals for these automation efforts between 1985 and 2000 and found, not too 
surprisingly, that the primary aims initially were very focused on cost cutting and produc
-tivity improvement. Between 2000 and 2004, though, the list of goals grew considerably to 
include improving information for both in-house staff and outside users, preventing and re
-ducing program fraud, and responding to user demand for online information and services. 
A head-to-head comparison of the level of aggregate online functionality found the United 
States with the highest rankingŠ17 out of a possible 28 pointsŠand the Netherlands coming 
in lowest with a score of 10. See Michael Adler and Paul Henman, with Jackie Gulland and 
Sharon Gaby, 
Computerisation
 and
 E-Go
vernment
 in
 Social
 Security:
 A Comparati
ve International
 Study
, Arlington, Va.: IBM Center for the Business of Government, 2005, available at http://
www.businessofgovernment.org/pdfs/AdlerReport.pdf, accessed June 20, 2007.
27
 Darrell M. West, 
State
 and
 Federal
 E-Go
vernment
 in
 the
 United
 States
, 2005. 
28
 Darrell M. West, 
State
 and
 Federal
 E-Go
vernment
 in
 the
 United
 States
, 2005.
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 SOCIAL
 SECURITY
 ADMINISTRATION
 ELECTRONIC
 SERVICE
 PROVISION
committee™s view, ˜ndings such as these suggest that the efforts of agen
-cies such as the SSA that are seeking a forward-looking strategy in the 
electronic services arena should be compared not with other government 
agencies, but rather with those of the private-sector ˜nancial institutions 
that are shaping the expectations of the public, especially in regard to 
service levels expected from large ˜nancial institutions (as described in 
Chapter 2 of this report). While this comparison fails in some ways (e.g., 
aggressiveness and the role of competition, funding sources, client base, 
and frequency of interaction), there are useful lessons and insights to be 
gleaned. 
American Customer Satisfaction Index
Since 1994, the University of Michigan has published a series of snap
-shots of customer impressions of a variety of services in its American 
Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI).
29
 The ACSI provides government 
agencies (and commercial ventures) with an independent measure of 
consumer experience. The index relies on a model that includes data on 
customer expectations, perceived quality, perceived value of information, 
and on customer complaints and customer loyalty.
30
The ACSI started reporting separately on federal agency performance 
in 1999, about the same time that federal agencies started enabling and 
promoting their e-government offerings. The ACSI recently added an 
evaluation for e-government services among federal agencies. Not too 
surprisingly, the ACSI scores for federal government agencies have been 
going up gradually since the e-government index was created in late 2003, 
with the aggregate satisfaction score in September 2005 being 73.5, against 
an 80.0 score considered exceptional for online transactions either in the 
public or private sector.
31
 In the September 2005 reporting of the ACSI e-government satis
-faction index, the SSA did relatively well, ranking ˜rst of eight federal 
agency sites in the e-commerce/transaction category (with a score of 87) 
29
 See ﬁAbout ACSI,ﬂ available at http://www.theacsi.org/index.php?option=com_
 content&task=view&id=49&Itemid=28, accessed June 19, 2007.
30
 ﬁACSI reports scores on a 0-100 scale at the national level and produces indexes for 10 
economic sectors, 43 industries (including e-commerce and e-business) and more than 200 
companies and federal or local government agencies.
  In addition to the company-level 
 
satisfaction scores, ACSI produces scores for the causes and consequences of customer sat
-isfaction and their relationships.ﬂ See ﬁAbout ACSI,ﬂ available at http://www.theacsi.org/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=49&Itemid=28, accessed June 19, 2007. 
31
 ForeSee Results, ﬁAmerican Customer Satisfaction Index, E-Government Satisfaction 
Index,ﬂ Ann Arbor, Mich., December 15, 2005. Archived ACSI scores and commentaries are 
available at http://www.theacsi.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=68&
Itemid=57, accessed June 20, 2007. 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 E 
159
for the Web site ﬁInternet Social Security Bene˜ts Application
.ﬂ Of 44 
government Web sites rated in the news/information category, the SSA 
was ranked ˜rst (with a score of 91) for the Web site ﬁHelp with Medicare 
Prescription Drug Costsﬂ and seventh (with a score of 81) for the Web site 
ﬁSocial Security Business Services Online.ﬂ The SSA™s ﬁFrequently Asked 
Questionsﬂ
 customer-help page (with a score of 75) and its information 
for disability bene˜ts (with a score of 71) ranked in the middle and closer 
to the bottom, respectively, of the Web sites studied. In the March 2006 
report, the SSA had the top 4 (of 11) sites in the e-commerce/transaction 
category and the 2 top ratings in that category (with scores of 86), for 
ﬁHelp with Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Costsﬂ and ﬁInternet Social 
Security Bene˜ts Application.ﬂ However, the SSA™s main Web site (www.
socialsecurity.gov) ranked toward the bottom of the agencies™ sites stud
-ied, with a satisfaction score of 70 (the top-ranked site scored 82).
32
 There has been a similarly favorable response to the availability of 
online e-government transactions. A 2005 ACSI study of the IRS compared 
the public™s satisfaction with paper ˜ling of tax returns to the public™s 
satisfaction with electronic ˜ling.
33
 The ACSI score for paper ˜ling was 
50, while satisfaction with electronic ˜ling was 77. While there are distinc
-tions between the kinds of services that the SSA offers and its client base 
as compared with the services and client base of ˜nancial institutions, 
increased use of online ˜nancial services in the private sector may shape 
expectations, at least on the part of some, for a similarly broad availability 
of online transactions from agencies such as the SSA that provide impor
-tant ˜nancial services.
32
 Scores reported by ACSI can be found at http://www.theacsi.org/index.php?option=com_
content&task=view&id=27&Itemid=62, accessed June 20, 2007. 
33
 The IRS worked with third-party vendors to implement electronic ˜ling (see Chapter 4 
in this report). 
Social Security Administration Electronic Service Provision: A Strategic AssessmentCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.