DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/11999Strategic Management of Information and CommunicationTechnology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2K142 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-11128-7 | DOI 10.17226/11999Mark Haselkorn, Principal Investigator; Policy and Global Affairs; ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and PhysicalSciences; National Research CouncilStrategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2K   Mark Haselkorn, 
Principal Investigator
  Policy and Global Affairs   Computer Science and Telecommunications Board Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences     
 THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
Washington, D.C. www.nap.eduStrategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS    500 Fifth Street, N.W.    Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of 
the National Research Council, whose members 
are drawn from the councils of the National 
Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
neering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The principal investigator and members of the advi
sory committee responsible for the report were 
chosen for their special competences and 
with regard for appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by Contract No
. V101(93)P-1637, TO #17 between the National 
Academy of Sciences and the United States Air Forc
e and a grant from the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers, Inc.  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project. 

 
International Standard Book Number 13: 978-0-309-11128-7 
International Standard Book Number 10: 0-309-11128-5 
 
 
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, 

N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the 
Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu. 
 Suggested citation:  National Research Council (2007). 
Strategic Management of Information and 
Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2K.
 Mark Haselkorn, 
Principal Investigator. Policy and Global Affa
irs. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press.  Copyright 2007 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved.  Printed in the United States of America 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged 
in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furt
herance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.
  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president 
of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of 
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonom
ous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Scien
ces the responsibility for advising the federal government.  
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors e
ngineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes the superi
or achievements of engineers.
  Dr. Charles M. Vest is 
president of the National Academy of Engineering. 

The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academ
y of Sciences to secure the services of 
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  
The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the Nationa
l Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be 
an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initia
tive, to identify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad 
community of science and technology with the Academy™
s purposes of furthering knowle
dge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by th
e Academy, the Council has become the 
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
 Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the sc
ientific and engineering communities.  The Council is 
administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of 
Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicer
one and Dr. Charles M. Vest 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR 
Mark Haselkorn, University of Washington 
 ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Ernest J. Wilson III (Chair), Univer
sity of Maryland, College Park   Chris Demchak, University of Arizona   
Robert W. Lucky, Telcordia Technologies, Inc. [Retired]  

Anthony Valletta, SRA International, Inc.    Staff Thomas Arrison, Project Director, Policy and Global Affairs (2005Œ2007) 
Michael Cheetham, Project Director, 
Policy and Global Affairs (until 2004) Jo Husbands, Senior Project Director, Policy and Global Affairs Herb Lin, Senior Scientist, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Division 

on Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Shalom Flank, Consultant, Co
mputer Science and Telecomm
unications Board, Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences  Sponsors United States Air Force 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE)Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii     
 PREFACE  This report grew out of a National Research Council (NRC) project titled ﬁManaging Vulnerabilities Arising from Global Infrastr
ucture Interdependencies: Learning from 
Y2K.ﬂ  In mid-1998 the NRC initiated planning m
eetings to take advantage of what was 
then perceived as ﬁan extraordinary opportunity to learn–how various factors, including current management structures and practices, 
impact–risk that threatens serious damage to information and other critical infrastructur
es.ﬂ  The initial focus was on vulnerabilities stemming from ﬁthe interconnectedness of comple
x ‚systems of systems,™ﬂ with the goal 
to gather data on such systems both before and after the December 31, 1999, rollover to 
the Year 2000 (Y2K).  In early 1999 the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers became a 
sponsor of the project.  In mid-1999 the 
NRC began working with Air Force personnel from Information Warfare Defense (a unit attach
ed directly to operations in headquarters) and the Air Force Y2K Office to establish a case study. Dr. Mark Haselkorn of the University of Washington was appointed as prin
cipal investigator to conduct the research and write up the results of the case study. An
 advisory committee was also appointed to 
provide general guidance. In November and December 1999, Dr. Haselkorn conducted several sets of 
interviews at a stateside Air Force base and 
at an overseas Air Force base. After the end-
of-year rollover, in February and March 2000, he repeated the process.  These interviews involved not only base working groups but
 also policy-making units at the major 
command and headquarters levels. He also conducted supporting phone interviews throughout the project. On April 14, 2000, an all-day Air ForceŒwide Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop was held in Washington, 
D.C. (A detailed list of the groups interviewed is provided in Appendix B.)  In the 18 months following the workshop, Dr. 
Haselkorn compiled the results of the interv
iews and the workshop and summarized his 
findings. This paper represents the results of Dr. Haselkorn™s research. The views expressed are those of the principal investigator and do not necessarily represent positions of the advisory committee, the National Academies, or the sponsoring 

organizations. This paper has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
expertise, in accordance with procedures 
approved by the National Academies Report 
Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and 
critical comments that will ensu
re that the report meets institutional standards for quality.  
The review comments and draft manuscript rema
in confidential to protect the integrity of 
the process. In addition to external reviewers, two member
s of the original advisory committee also reviewed Dr. Haselkorn™s draft report. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii    We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this paper:  John L. King, University of Michigan; John Koskinen, U.S. Soccer Foundation; Bruce 

McConnell, McConnell International, LLC; David Mussington, RAND Corporation; 
Walter Scacchi, University of California, Irvine; Anthony Valletta, SRA International, Inc.; and Ernest J. Wilson III, University of Maryland, College Park.                                                          
 Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments 
and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its releas
e. Robert Frosch, Harvard University, oversaw the review of this report.  Appointed by the National Academies, he
 was responsible for making certain that an independent examina
tion of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional proc
edures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the principal investigator and the institution.
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ix    PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR™S NOTE  Most of the following report was written prior to the events of September 11, 2001, the 
Southeast Asian tsunami in 2004, and Hurricane 
Katrina in 2005, yet the lessons learned from Y2K are still relevant in the aftermat
h of these devastating events. September 11 
was a tragic demonstration of the need fo
r more comprehensive and dynamic strategies 
for managing our critical systems, as well as
 the need to base these strategies on an 
effective communication infrastructure that 
links and coordinates key participants from 
disparate organizational entities. Similarl
y, disasters like the tsunami and Katrina 
demonstrated the damaging effects that an in
complete plan for strategic management of 
information and communication systems could 
have on the coordination and delivery of emergency services. 
This is an account of the efforts of one large, highly diverse, technologically dependent global organization, the United States Air Force (hereafter simply USAF, or Air Force), to address a widely dispersed threat to its information infrastructure, namely 
the rollover to the Year 2000 (Y2K).  The specific information and communication 
systems discussed in this report are simu
ltaneously critical operational systems 
themselves and vital components of the communication infrastructure that supports other 

critical systems. In other words, these systems are simultaneously something to be 

protected and part of the system for protection. 
The Air Force response to Y2K evolved over mo
re than five years.  It ultimately 
involved thousands of people throughout the 108 USAF bases, interacting in varying, often nontraditional ways to address percei
ved threats.  In addition, hundreds more 
people at numerous major Air Force units
 were active in developing guidance and support packages and in monitoring their im
plementation, while personnel involved in 
the acquisition, design, development, fiel
ding, and maintenan
ce of systems and applications also responded from their particular perspectiv
es. Whatever the state of an 
organization™s strategic management of 
information and communications technology 
(ICT), Y2K stressed existing practices in ways they had never previously been stressed.  This report presents the lessons of 
the Air Force Y2K experience under three 
interrelated headings: (1) lessons for managi
ng ICT complexity, (2) lessons for aligning 
organizational and ICT strategies, and (3) lessons for minimizing 
ICT risk, including security, information assurance, and infrastruc
ture protection.  In each area, lessons are 
derived from the analysis of interrelated and dynamic responses of various Air Force 
elements to the perceived threats of Y2K.  These lessons are preceded by discussion of 

background issues that provides necessary context, particularly aspects of ICT in general, Air Force ICT in particular, and theY2K probl
em itself.  The report concludes by turning 
the lessons into recommendations for improving Air Force management of information 

and its supporting infrastructure and discussing the implications
 of these lessons for other organizations. Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. x     This report does not in any way constitute an evaluation of the Air Force™s 

response to Y2K.  Such an undertaking would have required a broader look at the entire organization and a deeper look at component units.  It would also require collecting sufficient data from other organizations to allow one to compare the Air Force response 

to institutions of similar size and complexit
y.  Such an exploration would have been 
worthwhile, but it was beyond the scope and resources available for this effort. The fact that Y2K did not result in widespread catastrophic failures has led many 
people to quickly forget the experience, yet the lack of obvious impact makes it a rich 
source of critical lessons for strategic management of information and communication 
technology. Rather than being an account of fundamental flaws and cascading effects, 
this report is about maintenance and modern
ization, life-cycle management of systems 
and software, functional interdependency and continuity, guidance policies and 
certification, system ownership and responsib
ility, training and organizational roles, security and information assurance, and syst
em vulnerability and robustness. Y2K tested 
the evolving Air Force system for mana
gement, modernization, and protection of 
information and its supp
orting infrastructure.  Without the contributions and generous involvement of numerous individuals, 
particularly the more than 100 people who pr
ovided me with information and support in 
setting up and conducting interviews, this study would not have been possible.  I would particularly like to thank Brig. Gen. Gary Am
brose, Lt. Col. Gregory Rattray, and Maj. John Bansemer of the USAF; Tom Arrison, 
Michael Cheetham, John Boright, and Jo 
Husbands of NRC Policy and Global Affairs; Herb Lin and Shalom Flank of the NRC 
Computer Science and Telecommunications
 Board; Dr. Joseph Bordogna and Dr. Kenneth Laker, 1998 and 1999 presidents of the IEEE, respectively; and Adam Peake of 
the Center for Global Communications in 
Tokyo, Japan.  I would like to thank Luke Maki of the Boeing Corporation for reviewing some early chapter drafts.  I would also 
like to thank the members of the project adviso
ry committee: Ernest J. Wilson III (Chair), 
Chris Demchak, Robert W. Lu
cky, and Anthony Valletta.   Finally, I would like to thank the project sponsors, the Air Force and IEEE.  
     Mark Haselkorn 
Principal Investigator 
     
   
  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xi     
    CONTENTS  SUMMARY          1 

 
1 BACKGROUND        13 

 Research on Y2K, 13 
ICT General Background, 15 
United States Air Force ICT, 19 
The Y2K Challenge, 27  2 MANAGING ICT COMPLEXITY      37 
The Need for New, Less Localized ICT Management Strategies, 37 

 
The Need for Wider, More Integrated Efforts to Define and  

Stratify ICT Problems, 39 

 
The Need to Shift ICT Management Focus from Hardware and 

Software to Data, Knowledge, and Organizational Goals,  42 
 
The Need to Align ICT Management with Operational and  
Strategic Goals, 44  
The Need to Manage ICT Cross-Functionally, 46 

 
The Need for an Overall Information Strategy Centered on People,  

Information, and Mission,  50 

 
Do Not Return to Business as Usual, 52 
 
 3 ALIGNING ORGANIZATIONAL 
AND ICT STRATEGIES  55 
 Balance Central Management and Local Execution, 57 
 Consider Evolution of the Problem Over Time, 58 
 Clarify Ownership and Responsibility, 60 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xii    Consider the Impact of Local Diversity, 61 
 Consider the Role of Local Autonomy, 62  Build Trust Between Local Administ
rators and Central Managers, 64  Strengthen Horizontal Relationships Across the Organization, 65  Overcome Funding Disincentives to Working Across  
Organizational Boundaries, 69  Clarify the Appropriate Level of Central Guidance and Role of Central Administrators, 70 
 Address Cross-Boundary Issues in Life-Cycle  
Management of Systems, 72 
 Tackle the Informational Effort Needed to Support Management 

of Integrated Systems, 80 
 
 Address Issues of Organizational Culture, 82 

 
 Empower Permanent Organizational Entities Focused  

 on Cross-Boundary Issues, 86  4 MANAGING ICT RISK       93 
 
 Understanding the Relationship Between  
 Y2K Risk and Response, 94 
 
 Application to Security, CIP, and Infrastructure Assurance, 102  
 5 TECHNOLOGY RISK AS A SOCIALLY EMBEDDED ISSUE  111 

 
REFERENCES         117 

 
APPPENDICES 
A  References to Workshop Discussions and Interviews   123 

B  Abbreviations and Acronyms      125 

C  Biographical Information on th
e Principal Investigator   128 
 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xiii   BOX AND FIGURES   BOX  
1-1    Overview of Research and Commentary on Y2K, 14 

 
 FIGURES  
1-1 System Layers and Y2K Problems, 28 

3-1 The Continuum of Information Control, 67
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1  SUMMARY  This report describes lessons learned from 
the efforts of the United States Air Force 
(hereafter simply USAF, or Air Force) to address a widely dispersed threat to its information infrastructure.  The Air For
ce™s response to the Year 2000 (Y2K) evolved over more than five years and involved 
thousands of people throughout the 108 USAF bases, interacting in varying, often nontraditio
nal ways to address perceived threats.  In 
addition, hundreds more people at numerous
 major Air Force units were active in 
developing guidance and support packages and in monitoring their implementation. 
This report is perhaps the most detailed
 publicly available case study of the Y2K response in a single organization and the lessons learned from that response.  Although a great deal was written about Y2K before th
e event, surprisingly little analysis was 
conducted after January 1, 2000 (see Box 1-1).  The fact that Y2K did not result in widespread catastrophic failures has led ma
ny people, particularly those outside the 
information and communications technology (ICT) 
field, to label it a nonevent or even a hoaxŠand doubtless discouraged extensive analysis after the fact. However, as this report makes clear, the e
xperience serves as a source of critical 
lessons for strategic management of ICT and 
echoes earlier findings of analysts in the field of information systems management.  In
 addition, other sources make it clear that 
enough problems were experienced in the cour
se of the Y2K rollover to demonstrate the reality of the problem and the importance 
of remediation efforts (GAO 2000). Serious known disruptions were avoided in the banking and insurance sectors, two NATO nation spy satellites went down for two days, and numerous other documented failures were 
either avoided or responded to in real time during rollover.  
These lessons and related recommendations
 are described in Chapters 2, 3, and 4, and they cover the management of ICT co
mplexity, aligning organizational and ICT 
strategies, and minimizing and mitigating ICT risk.  A final brief concluding chapter 

focuses on the general lesson of viewing technology risk within its social and organizational context.  Together, these chapters present gene
ral implications for large, 
complex organizations that rely on ICT to ach
ieve their mission in the face of risks in 
such areas as information assurance, information security, and critical infrastructure 

protection (CIP).  The recommendations, 
naturally, focus on the Air Force and its context, but they are applicable to other la
rge, complex, ICT-dependent organizations as well.   The fact that Y2K did not produce major su
stained disruption for the Air Force or 
other organizations makes it a 
more valuable source for long-term lessons for operational 
and strategic management of ICT systems. 
 Rather than focusing on fundamental flaws 
and cascading effects, the bulk of this analysis is relevant to the overall strategic 
management of ICT, including maintenance 
and modernization, life-cycle management 
of systems and software, functional interd
ependency and continuity, guidance policies and certification, system owners
hip and responsibility, training and organizational roles, and security and information assurance. 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2  Background of the Project  The report grew out of an effort by the National Research Council (NRC) and other groups, such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), to observe 
lessons from the Y2K experience that might 
be applied to CIP and other areas.  The assumption was that there would be a number 
of critical, highly visible failures.  Y2K could be studied as a surrogate for information warfare attacks, with the ultimate goal of 

making systems more resistant.  
Planning meetings were organized 
in mid-1998.  In mid-1999 NRC volunteers 
and staff began working with Air Force personnel from the Information Warfare Defense 
(a unit attached directly to operations in headquarters)  and the Air Force Y2K Office (AFY2KO) to establish the case study.  Interviews were conducte
d at a continental 
United States (CONUS) base and an outside the continental United States (OCONUS) base before and after the end-of-year rollover.  These interviews involved not only base 
working groups but also policy-making un
its at the major command (MAJCOM) and 
headquarters (HQ) levels.  Supporting telephone interviews were conducted throughout the project.  On April 14, 2000, an all-day Air ForceŒwide Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop was held in Washington, DC.     Staff turnover at the NRC resulted in significant delays in the completion and 
publication of the report.  Notwithstanding the delays, the 
author and the NRC believe that the insights generated by the project have long-term relevance and merit a wide 
audience.  The Air Force and Y2K: Shifts in Perception 
 ICT is critical to almost all Air Force 
mission and functional objectives, including 
maintaining readiness in the face of uncerta
inty.  While information warfare, offensive 
and defensive, may be a unique element of the military management challenge, the Air 

Force™s concern that increased functionality
 and connectivity can lead to increased 
vulnerability is relevant for any technology-dependent organization.  While security risks 
generally arise from outside threats to syst
ems, threats to information assurance often 
emerge from internal system complexities.  
The Air Force encompasses nine major commands and has a complex 
organization for managing and funding ICT.  Re
sponsibility lies in the Chief Information 
Officer™s office, but as in other large and diverse organizations, there is a wide gap between the executive agency and the distri
buted, frontline, operational management and 
use of ICT.   Ensuring the availability of experienced ICT personnel also presents challenges.  For the Air Force, these include competition 
with the private sector
 and regular shifting of personnel (temporary duty, or TDY).  As the Air Force is highly dispersed 

geographically, functional units may face ve
ry different environments, funding, and 
infrastructure, particularly CONUS versus OCONUS bases.   
A variety of perceptions became attached
 to the Y2K problem, both before and 
after.  The widespread attention and news coverage linking the event with the new 

millennium, along with frequent mention of 
possible catastrophic failures, fostered 
numerous misconceptions of the problem but wa
s helpful in ensuring that resources were Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3  available and that organizations put procedur
es in place to respond.  The coverage also 
produced anxieties and expectations that, fortunately, were not realized, but they may 
make it more difficult to apprec
iate the lessons learned.   Within the Air Force, perception and response strategies shifted over time.  The 
Air Force recognized the problem early b
ecause computer professionals working on 
specific systems brought it to light in th
e early and mid-1990s.  By 1997 awareness 
mushroomed, and the emphasis widened from ICT and electronic data to include 
embedded chips and traditional infrastructure.   
There was also a shift from a technological to a mission perspective.  It became 
apparent that the problem was too complicat
ed for any one functional area, including 
ICT, to handle by itself.  The first step was often to conduct an inventory with the goal of determining compliance, but system complexit
y, definitional uncertainties (for instance, 

what is ﬁcompliance?ﬂ), and a lack of cl
arity about ownership and responsibility complicated this.   
Early on, the Air Force played a key role in developing government-wide 
approaches focused heavily on finding, fixing, and testing mission critical systems. Over 
time, however, it became clear that it would 
be impossible to test everything in advance 
of the rollover.  Therefore, there was a shift from fixes to continuity planning.  By 1999 
complex efforts to complete and validate 
system renovations began to conflict with 
equally complex efforts to develop and prepare viable contingency plans. Finally, there was a shift in focus from technology to legal and political issues.  Early on, the legal staffs of corporations 
became involved.  In July 1998, the Year 2000 
Information Disclosure Act was passed, pr
oviding liability protection from inaccurate 
statements made by organizations acting in 
good faith when sharing Y2K information.  
Congressional and Government Accounting Offi
ce attention was part of the management 
environment.   
 Lessons for Managing ICT Complexity  Participants in the Air Force™s response to Y2K learned more about organizational 
operation and management than about technology.  It became clear that traditional 

management strategies based on localized re
sponse would not be effective and that a 
more comprehensive approach was needed. 
 For many organizations, including the Air 
Force, Y2K was the first time they needed to manage a single ICT project that cut across 

the entire organization.  The pervasiveness of the problem and th
e interdependency of organizations and systems meant that Y2
K could not be addressed by breaking the response into discrete components.  Interdependency also meant that no single group 
could fully control the response.  The Air Force, like many organizations, created a 
temporary Y2K office to manage the pr
oblemŠno existing office could do the job. 
While common objectives and deadlines across the entire organization made Y2K 
a unique ICT project, the issues
 and conditions it revealed are relevant to any strategic ICT project that goes beyond a given functional area.  Mergers, deployment of major 
systems in large organizations, and systems 
to facilitate interagency coordination are examples of efforts that are often under
mined by the failure to fully understand and 
appropriately address organizational and system interdependencies. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4  Fortunately, Air Force recognition of the Y2K problem was early and widespread.  
The perception that everyone would be impacted in the same way at the same timeŠ
there was a common enemy and a set dead
lineŠcontributed to this heightened awareness.  As the Air Force™s approach took 
shape, it reflected several lessons that are highly relevant to the management of
 ICT complexity in general.    
 • Enterprise-wide ICT management requires 
broader, more integrated efforts.  
 Early on, it became clear that it would be impossible for individual commands and units 
to define the problem, set priorities, a
nd track response efforts on their own.  For example, commands and units made attempts to
 stratify response needs by the criticality 
of the system, the likelihood of an adverse occurrence, local conditions, and optimal 
response strategies.  However, the translation from critical missions
 to critical systems 
was not straightforward, and classification schemes could not be developed that translated well across different commands and units.  No existing unit had the scope or authority to coordinate a cross-organizational ICT project.  • The focus of ICT management must sh
ift from hardware and software to 
data, knowledge, and organizational goals. 
 Over time, it became clear that the key priority for Y2K response was the protection of 
data as they serve organizational goalsŠfix
ing just hardware and software was not sufficient.  Once IT professionals recognized this, the focus of the Y2K response shifted 
to the operational use of data.  • The organizational information strate
gy must align ICT and operational goals.  As the Air Force response to Y2K took shape,
 operational and strategic managers who 
saw themselves on the periphery of ICT were th
rust into its center.  For the Air Force and others organizations, Y2K represented the first large-scal
e, formal effort to align ICT management with operational and strategic management.  The challenge of integrating ICT and strategic management was perhaps th
e most significant aspect of Y2K and is covered in more detail in the next section.  • ICT must be managed cross-functionally. 
 Information in organizations tends to flow al
ong functional lines.  The success of the Air Force™s Y2K response depended on overcoming 
this ﬁstovepipingﬂ tendency.  Even at early inventory and assessment stages, it 
was important to maintain a functional 
perspective toward ownership and responsibility.  This was difficult for several reasons: (1) the need to comply with multiple guidan
ce and unique reporting requirements; (2) the 
underbudgeting of man-hours; (3) an increased 
workload for communication; and (4) the 
need to keep up with directives and changes in directives.  Until a temporary cross-
functional entity to oversee the Y2K response was established and headed by someone 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5  who represented the core value of the organization (in the Air Force™s case, a 
pilot/general), no unit had the perspective and authority to coordinate this effort.   • The overall information strategy must 
center on people, information, and mission. 
 Y2K taught organizational ICT leaders that they needed to develop an enterprise-wide information strategy that would be aligned 
with the overall organizational strategy. Over time, Y2K caused these leaders to focus le
ss on specific technologies and more on the effective use of information by people in s
upport of overall organizational missions.  In 
doing this, ICT leaders demonstrated the va
lue of an integrated, cross-functional perspective beyond Y2K.  • Do not return to business as usual.  As a cross-enterprise activity, Y2K forced people to grapple with complex issues that 
were not fully under their control.  This is no
t a particularly comfortable position for most 
people.  With the passing of the crisis, there 
was a natural tendency to seek a return to 
more familiar methods and roles. Some changes made in response to Y2K have become 
part of new business as usual practice, while other changes that were lost need to be rediscovered.  Lessons for Aligning Organizational and ICT Strategies 
 Traditionally, the strategic management of 
organizations and the operational management 
of ICT in those organizations have displayed significant differences.  ICT management 
tends to focus on short-term needs, is technically based, and occasionally experiences 

failures as part of the job.  Strategic ma
nagement of an organization tends to be 
negotiated, focuses on longer-term and wider-ra
nge impacts, and can view failure as 
career threatening.   ICT and operational personnel were brought together in new ways by Y2K, as the Air Force example illustrates.  Early on, when 
Y2K was seen as an ﬁIT issue,ﬂ resources 
were hard to come by.  Later,
 attention from higher levels 
of management resulted in 
more resources being made available, but th
at attention also required ICT personnel to 
take account of a much lower toleran
ce for risk from upper-level managers.   
Complete, final alignment between orga
nizational and ICT strategies is not sustainable because the strategic context ch
anges constantly, as does the ICT portfolio. 
Nevertheless, achieving a dynamic alignment is
 increasingly important
 for both sides of the operational-ICT divide.  The Y2K experience highlights several key areas of emphasis and underlying tensions in this necessary process. 
 • Central management and local execution must be balanced.   Both central and local perspectives are ﬁrightﬂ and have va
lue, yet they are often in 
opposition.  The Air Force is aware of the desira
bility and complexity of balancing this 
tension (for example, ﬁcentral guidance/local
 executionﬂ).  Designating a single point of 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6  contact (POC) is helpful, but that POC must represent the multiple relevant perspectives 
on each major action or issue in order to ach
ieve a constructive, dynamic balance.   
 • Consider evolution of the problem over time.  Large ICT projects evolve over time.  Fo
r instance, Y2K evolved across Air Force 
organizational layers in two directions: init
ially, as locally identified problem-solving 
activities that evolved up into centrally managed initiatives, and later, as a centrally 
managed initiative that evolved down into loca
lly driven problem-solving activities. The 
evolution of ICT projects in both directions generates tensions across organizational layers.  • Clarify ownership and responsibility.  
 
Neither local nor central units alone can be fully responsible for a cross-organizational ICT issue.  Generally, local units attempt to 
assert control over the systems they rely on, 

but during difficult times such as Y2K, centr
al ownership of these shared systems was 
seen as desirable since it lessened local responsibility for assessing and addressing the 

problem.  One of the important benefits of th
e Y2K experience was that it forced diverse 
owners of systems and overlapping system 
components to communicate with each other 
in an effort to coordinate responsibility and action.  • Consider the impact of local diversity.  
 Central owners and maintainers of ICT syst
ems face the confusing task of understanding 
and managing a complex system of systems that
 spans significantly different functional and geographical environments.  Those w
ho acquire and develop systems may have 
difficulty anticipating how local conditions imp
act the fielding of those systems.  The 
Y2K response had to address this diversity of local ICT environments, yielding insights 
into the ongoing challenge to achieve 
strategic alignment of ICT.     
 • Consider the role of local autonomy.  
 During Y2K, locally developed software was seen as more problematic than commercial 
off-the-shelf (COTS) software.  Several feat
ures of Air Force management and funding 
practices foster local autonomy in ICT.  Fo
r example, military credit cards for flexible 
purchases (ﬁimpact cardsﬂ) al
low local users to respond quickly to local demands but can 
present general system problems (for instance,
 security).  On the other hand, systems and 
guidance were sometimes pushed from central to
 local units without dedicated funding in 
the hopes that the bases would ﬁfind a wayﬂ to support them.  The Y2K response created 
an environment in which issues involving c
oordination among central and local units had 
to be addressed.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7   • Build trust between local administ
rators and central managers.  
 Another example of a local versus a central issue that arose for the Air Force during Y2K 
was the perception by local units that central guidance was no
t appropriate for their local 
situation, or that central units were using them as a ﬁtesting groundﬂ rather than 
supporting their efforts.  It is important that central gu
idance be delivered at an appropriate level and that mechanisms ar
e maintained to foster stronger working 
relationships across horizontal organizational boundaries.  • Strengthen cross-functional relationships across the organization.  
 In addition to issues across the organizational hierarchy, Y2K also emphasized the need 
for clear mechanisms for coordinati
on and communication across functional organizational boundaries.  Specific efforts were employed to overcome the tendency of 
the organization to operate within functionally organized units.  • Overcome funding disincentives to working across organizational 
boundaries.  Using funding streams to identify project a
nd system owners can help accounting practice 
but leads to a piecemeal view of systems, addi
ng to the complexity of tackling a problem.  
Without specific funding, Y2K was not seen 
by some local users as their problem.  
Complications also arose because some parts of the organization work on a fee-for-
service basis and others do not.  Y2K created 
a precedent for cross-functional projects to 
receive significant resources and be
 managed in more creative ways.  
 • Balance the perspectives of central administrators and operational 

managers.  The Air Force Y2K response was characterized by an increased involvement of higher-
level administrators in ICT decision maki
ng.  This was both helpful and burdensome. 
Strategic ICT management cannot be achieve
d without the involveme
nt of higher-level management, but the value-added of some ne
w layers of decision making in operational 
issues is unclear.  Y2K demonstrated th
e need to find an appropriate balance.  • Address cross-boundary issues in the life-cycle management of systems.  The end-to-end testing required for Y2K was complex to design, but the approach gained confidence over time, although it seemed that 
there was always more to do.  Some Air 
Force ICT managers tried to build on this 
experience post-Y2K.  Yet, maintaining the 

resource stream and management practices (for
 example, the use of block release dates) 
that proved effective during Y2K proved difficult as central management focus shifted to 
other issues.  Y2K emphasized th
at life-cycle management of systems needs to be part of 
a strategic, cross-organizational effort. Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8   • Tackle the huge informational effort needed to support the management of integrated systems.   The first impulse in responding to Y2K was to 
inventory those systems in place, identify 
the owners of the systems, and have the ow
ners determine whether there was a problem.  
However, this is a huge, dynamic body of info
rmation that is often 
not available or not consistently maintained. It is impossible 
to manage what you don™t even know you have,  
and maintaining up-to-date information on ICT 
resources is a huge task.  Information of 
long-term value was created through Y2K, 
but little time or energy was available to 
leverage the response effort into an ongoing means of addressing informational needs.  
 • Address issues of organizational culture.  
 The Y2K response was often more impacted 
by informal patterns of communication than 
by formal directives and guidance distri
buted through regular channels.  Who a communication came from could mean more than what the communication said.  

Subculture differences, such as those that exist between the acquisi
tions function and ICT management, also played an important role.  
This split was reflected even at the top, with the Air Force™s CIO coming from the acquis
ition side and the deputy CIO the computing 
side.  User cultures also displayed differences, especially CONUS versus OCONUS units. In addition, the Air Force™s ﬁculture of perfectionﬂ affected its Y2K response.    • Empower permanent organizational entities focused on cross-boundary 
issues.  No permanent unit within the Air Force had 
the scope and authority to manage a cross-
organizational ICT project like Y2K.  For this reason a temporary unit was created.  The 
Air Force™s Y2K response demonstrated the 
value of a permanent entity focused on 
integrating organizational and ICT strategies.  The Y2K response enabled personnel to gain experience with crisis management and 
to build cross-functional teams.  A more 
permanent entity or entities would serve as a focal point for ongoing efforts to manage 
ICT-related risks, as well as assure a corporate memory in the ongoing balancing act that 
is strategic management of ICT. 
 Lessons for Managing ICT Risk  The experience with the Y2K response, both in the Air Force and in the wider world, 
provides a number of lessons for how ICT ri
sk management is understood and practiced. 

These lessons are instructive as organizati
ons develop capabilities in the areas of 
information assurance and CIP.  In general,
 these tasks have more to do with managing 
uncertain risks than with fixing things.  In addition, it is important to bridge the 
conceptual gap between external risk from an 
outside threat and internal risk from system 
complexity. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9   • Consider the role of perception of
 risk to appropriate response. 
 The Y2K response was impacted by a changing perception of risk.  As the visibility of the Y2K problem increased and senior managers became increasingly involved, the 
tolerance for risk was dramatically reduced. 
 This occurred across the U.S. government.  
Local managers sought to priori
tize, but central managers we
re far less willing to accept risk.  • Understand the limitation of industry assurances.  Naturally, ICT managers sought assurance 
from vendors regarding Y2K compliance.  
However, industry could not guarantee how products would behave when interacting with other components, so industry statem
ents failed to reduce uncertainties.    • Recognize the role of political
, legal, and media factors.  Attention from the political system (most 
notably Congress), legal factors, and media 
scrutiny all affected the Y2K response environment.  The Year 2000 Information 
Disclosure Act specified that a ﬁgood faithﬂ e
ffort to discover and address potential Y2K 
problems would immunize organizations from lia
bility.  The Air Force adopted a higher, ﬁdue diligenceﬂ standard.  This increased pres
sure to treat all problems equally.  Political 
and media attention were beneficial in bringi
ng a critical mass of re
sources to bear on the problem, but press writers did not fully unde
rstand the issues, and their coverage encouraged a broad, nonspecific zero-tolerance response.  • Distinguish non-ICT infrastructure from information systems. 

 The Y2K response was unnecessarily complicated by the inclusion of non-ICT 
infrastructure like automobiles and alarm syst
ems.  The small but legitimate risk from 
hardwired dates in embedded chips was difficult 
to locate and impossible to fix.  The risk 
of cascading effects was especially low.  
Yet this became the public focus of Y2K.  
Combined with a zero risk tolerance, this issue produced a huge effort with minimal 

impact.  
 • Explore existing risk management mechanisms.   The Air Force had preexisting risk manageme
nt mechanisms, such as continuity of 
operations plans (COOPs) and operational risk management (ORM), but these were 
generally not relevant to the Y2K response effort, in part because they did not address the challenges of managing cross-organizational 
ICT risk.  These mechanisms could have 
been extended and employed more effectively.    
  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10   • Evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of response. 
 Assessing the impact of risk management activ
ities is difficult, but based on the outcome, 
the Air Force™s Y2K response was found to be effective.  Nevertheless, it is very difficult to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of the effo
rt.  To mention just 
one factor complicating 
such an evaluation, a non-trivial fraction of what was spent on Y2K would have been 
spent on new systems and upgrades anyway.  
 The Social and Organizational Context of Technology Risk  Since Y2K was not an external hostile threat, it did not fit easily into existing categories of information security.  Y2K showed that 
threats can come not only from intentional 
actions of a conscious enemy but also from
 the unintentional consequences of our own actions, confounded by the complexities of the ICT system itself, the environments 

within which this system operates, and our inability to adequately manage these complex 
interactions.   
Uncertainties stemming from systemic risk
 can be as great, or greater, than uncertainties from the risk of hostile enemy attack. Both kinds of risk need to be managed 

within a coherent strategy.  Developing such a strategy involves a variety of trade-offs and expanded perspectives on the nature of technology risk. This case study of the Air Force™s response to Y2K raises several important 
questions about how our organizations and society can be most effective in a world where 
dependence on ICT, and the interdependency of ICT systems, is gr
owing.  It concludes by focusing on a single critical factor:  that technology is socially embedded, existing in 
the context of people and organizations.  Like other aspects of ICT, security, information 
assurance, and infrastructure protection must be managed from this perspective. 
This lesson has been demonstrated in ma
ny incidents both before and after Y2K.  In this sense the experience gained from the response to Y2K reinforces the lessons of the 

Three Mile Island and Chernobyl nuclear accidents, the 
Challenger and Columbia shuttle accidents, and the Bhopal disaster. The ﬁdecisi
onﬂ (however complex its evolution) to 
represent calendar years with two digits was human and organizational, not technical; just as the mismatch between metric and E
nglish measurement that destroyed the 
Mars Climate Orbiter in 1999 was a human and organizatio
nal error, not a technical or a mathematical one (or a terrorist attack). 
This report rejects the idea that the Y2
K problem was simply one of fixing the 
technology, recognizing that it was driven inst
ead by a concatenation of institutional, 
leadership, economic, social, and political fact
ors as well as technical ones.  The Air Force™s Y2K experience teaches us about soft
ware as a social system. It highlights the 
limitations and pathologies that
 typically grow out of social organization, training, and group complexity. 
Y2K reminded organizations that the ultimate goal of IT is not the continued 
functioning of local clusters of technology but, rather, the effective use of information in 
support of strategic missions and goals.  It for
ced organizations like the Air Force to take on the challenges of managing 
an enterprise-wide ICT project, teaching them that by 
becoming more process based and less technology based. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11  It is reasonable to believe that the 
lessons described in this report can be generalized, including the conditions that le
d to or exacerbated the problem, and what 
factors enabled or interfered with remediation.  Systems of
 all kinds are becoming more 
interconnected and interdependent.  If system architectures focus more on data and 
interaction and less on execution and specific procedures, if complex technology systems 
are also understood as components of social 
systems, then perhaps problems like Y2K 
can be left to the previous millennium.  Elim
inating all such risks is not possible, and 
would not be worth the massive amount of
 resources required even if it were.  Understanding these risks makes risk management and planning for mitigation far more 
productive. In the end, the Y2K experience helped introduce the Air Force and other technology-based organizations to a human, 
organizational and social perspective on technology risk.  The degree to which these organizations understand this perspective and choose to act on that understanding is a key question for the future.Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 13Chapter 1  Background  
  Why do I think some of this happened?–I think there was a lack of context given to the 
Y2K problem.  We did a great job of telling everybody that there was a Y2K problem, 

and we did a terrible job of putting it in context. (AMC/SCA) 
 The lessons  from the Year 2000 (Y2K) are 
not obvious solutions to straightforward problems, nor are they based on clear choi
ces among distinct options.  These lessons generally involve subtle distinctions and the balancing of complex, rational, though often competing, needs and aims.  This chapter provides the background and context to help 

you understand these difficult but critical lessons. It is presented in two parts:  (1) a review of the complexities of inform
ation and communication technology (ICT) management, for the world in general and 
for the United States Air Force (hereafter 
simply USAF, or Air Force) in particular, a
nd (2) a review of the complexities of the 

Y2K challenge, primarily as a problem to be 
addressed but also as a research opportunity from which to learn.  These areas provide 
the context for the lessons presented in 
Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5: ﬁManaging ICT Complexity,ﬂ ﬁAligning Organizational and ICT Strategies,ﬂ ﬁManaging ICT Risk,ﬂ and ﬁTechnology Risk as a Socially Embedded 
Issue.ﬂ  This chapter does not provide a detailed, chronological account of the diverse and 
dynamic response to Y2K, which lasted more than
 five years, either within the Air Force or around the world.  Instead, we present numer
ous response details here and within the discussion of results and lessons learned in the following three chapters. Over the course 
of this report, you are given a clear picture of the Air Force™s complex Y2K activities 
within the context of the events occurring around them.  
For a chronological, top-down description of the Air Force Y2K response, as well as details of the legislation, 
congressional funding, corporate approach, ma
nagement structure, and preparation for 
Y2K, refer to the Air Force Year 2000 Office (AFY2KO) Final Report (USAF 2000).  Much of the discussion in the following section (and the lessons learned) is relevant not only to the Air Force or the military but al
so to a wide range of private and public 
organizations.  It covers general aspects of the ICT world and specific aspects of ICT in 

the Air Force.  It also describes general aspects of the Y2K problem and basic trends in 
the response to this problem.  These trends pl
ayed out in the Air Force and in the world at large.   
 1.1   RESEARCH ON Y2K 
This report is perhaps the most detailed
 publicly available case study of the Y2K response in a single organization and the lessons learned from that response.  Although a great deal was written about Y2K before th
e event, surprisingly little analysis was 
conducted after January 1, 2000 (see Box 1-1). The fact that Y2K did not result in widespread catastrophic failures led many pe
ople, particularly those outside the ICT 
field, to label it a nonevent or a hoaxŠand doubtless prevented extensive analysis after the fact.   At the same time, the report should be read
 in the context of the broader field of information systems management, where many 
of the generic lessons arising from the 
Air Force experience of Y2K have already 
been documented in other settings. The 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 14critical need to align organizational and ICT strategies has been a concern of the information systems community for decades. 
 Box 1-1. Overview of Research and Commentary on Y2K
  Popular Literature and News Media During the late 1990s, in the run up to the millenni
um rollover, a substantial popular and business 
literature on Y2K appeared.  Although these sources pr
ovide context for the Air Force™s effort to 
address the Y2K problem, most of this popular lite
rature is not relevant to the issues discussed 
here.  Reporting in the general news media on Y2K w
as also extensive in the 
run up to January 1, 
2000, along with reporting in the immediate afte
rmath on the generally smooth transition and the 
relatively few problems that did occur. American RadioWorks produced a useful retrospective 
report on Y2K in 2004 (website address provided in the bibliography). 
 Government and Private Sector Reports 
The efforts of governments, international bodies, multinational corporations, and other 
organizations such as professional societies were very important to the ultimate success of Y2K 
remediation and contingency planning.  One pr
ominent example is the President™s Council on 
Year 2000 Conversion.  The regular status reporti
ng of federal efforts by the General Accounting 
Office is also a valuable resource (GAO 1997
, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c, 199
9).  These reports 
provide information about the extensive effo
rts undertaken across the U.S. government to 
coordinate remediation efforts across agencies.  Th
e efforts of the Department of Defense and the 
military services, in particular, complemented effort
s of the Air Force as described in this report.  In 2000, GAO performed a top-down, retrospective evaluation of Y2K.  One of GAO™s main 
recommendationsŠthat the capabilities created within 
and across organizations to deal with Y2K 
should be leveraged to address other ICT risksŠis consistent with this report. 
In a retrospective report for the Office of Sc
ience and Technology Policy, Mussington (2002) 
examines efforts to address Y2K and the implicati
ons for research and development in the area of 
critical infrastructure protection.  Mussington™s 
focus on the interactions between organizations 
and the broad ICT infrastructure complement this
 report™s findings drawn from the examination 
of a single enterprise.  Mussington also emphasize
s the importance of decentralized information-
sharing efforts that crossed organizational and national borders.   
 Academic Literature 
The existence and functioning of ICT systems in th
eir social and organizational contexts raise a number of research questions and issues that are in
terdisciplinary in nature and, taken together, 
might be termed ﬁsocial informaticsﬂ (Kling 1999).  This field has a long history (Kling and 
Scacchi 1982).  The conclusions of this report are 
broadly consistent with
 this literature, work 
from which is selectively referenced.  
Journal articles in management, information sy
stems, and software engineering contributed 
perspectives to Y2K planning or drew lessons from the experience after the fact. The 
Journal of Clinical Engineering, for example, which deals with medi
cal equipment engineering, devoted 
most of its July-August 1999 issue to Y2K prepara
tion, including case studies of particular health 
care institutions (for example, Mercado 1999).  
Information Systems Frontiers
 devoted its August 
1999 issue to exploring the ethical, legal, and risk management aspects of Y2K.  Included in this 
issue is a very useful piece on how to leverage 
capability created to address Y2K in the service of 
ongoing ICT management tasks (Isaacs 1999).  In the September-October 1998 issue of the 
Journal of Software Maintenance: Research and Practice
, Marcoccia provides a case study of 
how one organization built infrastructure to effectively deal with Y2K. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 15In contrast to what appeared before the Y2K 
rollover, retrospective, objective analysis of 
organizational responses to Y2K has been more limited.  One exception is an article in the 
September 2006 issue of 
Management Science
 that shows how companies that invested heavily in 
ICT in advance of Y2K were better positioned to take advantage of e-business opportunities 
following the rollover than were companies that invested less (Anderson et al., 2006).
      1.2 ICT GENERAL BACKGROUND 
 In March 2000, after a day of Y2K intervie
ws at Scott Air Force Base, the National Research Council (NRC) research team met with the commander of the 375
th Air Wing 
for a briefing.  As the team settled in, the colonel pointed across the street and described 

some problems he was having with a roof repa
ir  that had resulted from a construction 
project that did not meet code.  He expl
ained how the project funding complicated the situation: there were three or more gr
oups involved, and it was not clear who was 
responsible for addressing the code problem.   
As with the roof repair, funding issues had a significant impact on ICT systems on 
the colonel™s base.  However, the roof was a physical object whose use was visible and 

therefore obvious, and the components of the roof that did not meet specifications could 

be observed.  Moreover, changes to the roof across the street woul
d not affect all the other roofs on the base.  With the ICT sy
stems, it was far from obvious where a given 

system was located, where it began and ended, and even what it consisted of.  In addition, 

it was far more difficult to identify the things 
that needed to be checked or repaired, or how those repairs would impact other ICT sy
stems on the base.  It was not even clear who was using an ICT system and what they were using it for.   
Funding is only one of numerous co
mplexities that greatly complicate 
management issues in the ICT world.  Follo
wing is a discussion of some of the most 
important of these additi
onal ICT complexities.  
  
 1.2.1 ICT Is Pervasive 
 Another complicating factor–is the very pervasiv
eness of information te
chnology. Practically 
everybody in the Air Force has a computer–that 
is connected to a network from which they 
access information from everywhere
 in the world, and most people tend to take a somewhat 
parochial view of it. –So determining who actually is responsible for taking care of the various 
pieces of information technology
 can be a difficult and sometimes challenging process.  
(AMC/HQ)
   ICT is everywhere, yet it is nowhere in particular.  Most people work with only a small 
piece of the overall system. Because the inform
ation they receive from this system is 
essential to their work, people usually seek to maintain some control over their piece. Yet 
when problems such as Y2K occur, pervasiven
ess can work in reverse.  Rather than 
seeking to control their piece of the system, people view others as responsible for 
addressing an issue that exists only partially in the environment they control.   
The pervasiveness of ICT can create conf
usion not only for system users but also 
for policy makers and managers.  Who owns what, and how do one manager™s actions 

affect another™s?  Who is responsible for th
e network?  For firewalls?  For operating 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 16environments?  For data?  For information in electronic form?  For work practices and 
measures of success?  For ICT policy and long-
term strategy?  Uncertainty in these areas 
can lead to multiple lines of guidance and au
thority. ﬁIT is too available and redundant.  
There are too many ways to be task
ed.  Too many parallel worldsﬂ (374
th AW/XP). The 
pervasiveness of ICT makes it more like an environment than a discrete machine. 
 
 1.2.2 ICT Is Multipurpose 
 ICT is both pervasive and multipurpose.  Within
 an ICT system, it is not obvious who is using it or what they are using it for.  This is true at many levels of the ICT system.  At 
the content level, for example, designers of electronic information are keenly aware of 

the potential for multiple uses. ﬁA wide vari
ety of users can access a hypermedia with 
different purposes; thus, it is important to have 
different task models for different types of usersﬂ (Paterno and Mancini 1998).  Since different people can use the same system for 
different purposes, even dedicated and intelligent people who share the same overall 

strategic objective can disagree on the basic 
priorities for design and use of an ICT system.  
The honest differences that can exist ove
r what constitutes the best ICT system 
extend beyond use and content design to manage
ment issues at many other levels of the 
system.  At the operating environment level, for example, features that make ICT systems 

easier to field and maintain may at the same time make them more difficult to protect 

from outside threats.  Compare the following statements:  

 We need to do a lo
t of work on–common operating 
environments.  Because we are 
finding out that servers have different disk drives on them, different versions of Oracle, 
different versions of the operating system.  And as a result of that we can™t distribute 
software in a rational manner. (SSG) 
 From the information warfare perspective, diversity is not such a bad thing.  If every 
piece of software is absolutely standardized, 
one hole gets you in everywhere.  When an 
adversary has to figure out which executable is on which computer among 1,300 possible 

options, that makes his targeting problem hugely more difficult. (AF/XOIWD) 
 Just as end users have honest differences of perspective on the most 
desirable features of an ICT system, so do managers and ICT professionals.  

 
 1.2.3 ICT Elements Are Diverse and Often Dynamic 
 As the previous section mentioned, ICT infras
tructure consists of a wide diversity of 
levels and elements, each with unique attributes and issues.  Even a narrow view of these 

system elements includes such diverse elem
ents as computer hardware, communication 
devices, operating systems, application soft
ware, and data and database management 
systems.  A fuller view of the ICT infrastr
ucture, however, includes even more diverse elements, such as ICT policies and best prac
tices, relevant personnel and job categories, training and continuity plans, consequence management, security and information 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17assurance strategies, funding mechanis
ms, and the organizat
ion™s culture of communication.   System elements differ in many ways. One si
gnificant difference is in their rate of 
change. Hardware and operating software change at a tremendous rate, driven by a 
dynamic information technology (IT) industr
y that lives off rapid innovation and accompanying sales.  However, as the Y2K situation highlighted, data and databases 

change only with tremendous effort, if at al
l. Meanwhile, such complex interdisciplinary 
elements as ICT funding mechanisms and an
 organization™s communication culture may 
extend beyond a given organization™s control or have a life of their own. Thus, diversity and change are ongoing ICT issues.    Each [personal computer] has its own distinct version [of the operating environment].  If 
you compare what you have versus someone el
se in the office, you™ll find out they are 
different. –And in fact if you made them th
e same, your machines will not always work.  
Because if you buy your machines
 at different timesŠdiffere
nt times is just months 
apartŠfrom the same vendor configured with the same basic software, they will have 
changed to a new version of the BIOS (Basic
 Integrated Operating System) and they will 
have incorporated whatever is the latest in terms of the dynamic libraries and so on.  
That™s the industry and that™s 
the realm we™re in. (AMC/SCA) 
 While this statement is about one small el
ement of the overall ICT infrastructure 
(personal computer [PC] platforms), it give
s a good sense of the tremendous impact of 
diversity and change, particularly as driven by the IT industry.  ICT diversity and change issues involve organizational as well as system 
elements.  Different units within an organi
zation generally experience different rates and directions of change, often driven by diffe
ring functions and goals. For example, ﬁAMC 
is usually much better organized about their information technology than ACC–because 
AMC is information or commission drive
n.  AMC is constantly deployed–ACC is getting betterﬂ (AFCIC/SY).  Diversity and change issues at the system
 and organizational levels play important roles in the forthcoming discussion of le
ssons learned from the Y2K experience.  
 
 1.2.4 Traditional IT Is Less Reliable th
an Traditional Infrastructure  The Air Force is familiar with high-reliability
 software such as that used in avionics 
systems.  However, this high reliability comes 
at a great cost that is not compatible with 
the economics and pace of the mass-market soft
ware industry.   For a number of reasons, high-reliability software is the ex
ception rather than the rule.   
There is a much higher likelihood of error and downtime 
in the logistics software that tracks cargo than in the 
planes, trucks, runways, and roads that actually move it.  A key reason for this is 
that software in general, and commercial 
off-the-shelf (COTS) software in particular, 
is not really engineered, at least not in the way that engineers design, build, and maintain traditional infrastructure. 

Software development tends to have 
more in common with art than with 
engineering.  As a former Microsoft vi
ce president said, ﬁProgrammers are like 
artists. –It™s like a playŠthere™s motion, things work, it™s not static.  You know where you™re going. ...Things just flowﬂ (Corcoran).   
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 18However, it would be unfair to simply
 blame programmers or profit-driven 
software companies for the reduced reliabi
lity of ICT systems.  These systems are 
incredibly complex and, in some cases, perhap
s the most complex enti
ties ever created by human beings.  They can develop a life of thei
r own and evolve in ways that resemble the 
evolution of any complex organism.  History boo
ks indicate that the infrastructure for the 
industrial revolution took 300Œ500 years to fully develop.  We are about 50 years into the information age, so these systems are still not fully understood and developed. 
Whatever the cause, the end result is that
 users must learn to adjust to a lower 
level of reliability from their ICT systems th
an from the power in 
their buildings and the 
sound in their telephones.  Managers, too, need to distinguish between the reliability of their traditional infrastructure and that of th
e new information infrastructure.  As an Air 
Force software manager put it, ﬁWe don™t have
 any programs that don™t have something 
wrong with them.ﬂ 
During Y2K the lower reliability of information infrastructure as compared to 
traditional infrastructure led some people to see a need for new and different 

organizational tactics for developing, operating, and maintaini
ng ICT.  ﬁThe same system 
is used for buying planes and tanks as is used for buying IT and software.  But IT is more difficult to manage.  The development, operation, and maintenance modes are more 

difficult to determine for IT and softwareﬂ (AMC/SCA).  Many of these management 

difficulties stem from interdependencies among elements of ICT.  

 
 1.2.5 ICT Elements Are Interdependent 
 The considerable complexity of ICT stems, 
in part, from its ubiquitous and multipurpose 

nature, the diverse perspectives
 of ICT users and professionals, the diverse elements that 
constitute ICT systems, and the ways in whic
h those elements are developed and evolve.  
Yet, probably the most complex and conf
ounding aspect of ICT is the extensive 
interdependency of the various system elements.   
ICT interdependency issues are manifested at many levels, from the compatibility 
of hardware and software to the highest levels of intersystem inte
raction.  This highest level of ICT interdependency is often called 
the ﬁsystem-of-systemsﬂ perspective.  From 

this perspective, any given system can be seen
 as being composed of other interdependent 
systems and being a part of still others.   
Interdependency at the system-of-syst
ems level often extends beyond any given 
organization (not just users or units).  Therefore, this is an extremely difficult perspective 
for an individual or organization to maintain 
on a daily, operational basis. For instance:   We treat our systems today–on a system-
by-system basis and usually not on a system-
of-systems 
or mission basis.  And so there are disconnects
, not necessarily within–any one system, but 
where it affects the system of systems. –We rea
lly don™t understand the configuration of our 
system of systems.  That problem is exacerba
ted by the way systems 
are viewed and, more 
importantly, by the way systems are 
funded.  They™re funded individually as a system and so there 
is no real impetus to look at it as a system of systems. (MSG) 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 19As with the 375th Air Wing™s roof repair, funding cont
ributes to management difficulties, 
but with ICT the funding issue is interwoven wi
th numerous other complexities, such as 
those presented here.   ICT management is a special challenge, and there is no magic formula for any 
given organization to meet this challenge.  
That is because in addition to general ICT 
complexities, each organization must consider un
ique issues that are intimately connected 
to its particular mission, strate
gic objectives, environment, and 
culture.  For this reason, it 
is particularly helpful to continue the ICT background within the context of a specific organization.  As faced by the Air Force, the ICT management challenge is particularly 
illustrative and intriguing.  The Air Force is a large, multifunctional organization that 
relies heavily on its new information infrastructure to accomplish a complex global 

mission.  It has particularly high requirem
ents for ICT flexibility, security, and 
information assurance.  The following focu
s on the USAF is intended to make this 
discussion of particular use to that organization.  However, the availability of the Air Force™s experience with Y2K also increases the value of this work for anyone interested in strategic ICT management.  

 
 1.3 United States Air Force ICT 
 Like any modern organization, the Air For
ce must meet the ge
neral challenges of managing its ICT resources within the context of more specific challenges associated 

with its unique mission, strategies, and organi
zational environment.  For the Air Force, 

these more specific ICT challenges stem largely from  
• the nature of its mission 
and functional objectives • heightened security and inform
ation assurance considerations 
• particular organizational makeup, estab
lishment of policy, and decision-making 
practices • special personnel and training issues • large size and geographical dispersion   
 1.3.1.  Mission and Functional Objectives  The current Air Force vision for its national s
ecurity mission is closely tied to successful 
management of its ICT assets.  ﬁInformation 
superiorityﬂ is a central building block of this vision (USAF 2000b). Leadership recogn
izes that successfully managing ICT and 
related interdependent systems means estab
lishing, maintaining, and evolving a general, 
flexible capability rather than achieving a specific objective.  
3  We have been thinking a lot about the future of the Air Force in the twenty-first century. 
The next two decades will present many u
nknowns. Our challenge will be to create a 
system of integrated aerospac
e systems that will be able to meet the full spectrum of 
future national security requirementsŠwithout being able to predict today precisely what 

those requirements will be. (Peters 2000) 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 20To accomplish its mission of readiness in th
e face of uncertainty, the Air Force must 
maintain a multifunctional organization.  ICT an
d the information it provides are critical 
to almost all of those functions.  Perhaps 
most obvious is the actual combat activity. 
ﬁWith advanced integrated aerospace capabili
ties, networked into a system of systems, 
[the Air Force will] provide 
the ability to find, fix, assess, track, target and engage 
anything of military significance, anywhere. 
–Information superiority will be a vital 
enabler of that capabilityﬂ (USAF 2000b).  Less visible but more complex to manage ar
e the wide range of Air Force logistic and support activities.  These have always b
een vital activities, but they are becoming 
even more critical and complicated with
 the Air Force rest
ructuring around an expeditionary force concept.  Aerospace Expeditionary Forces (AEFs) present numerous 
advantages for readiness and rapid deployment, but support capabilities are not 
organically assigned to these forces.  In the logistics area, this means an even greater 
reliance on ICT systems for flexible, just-in-
time support activities. ﬁEffective, efficient 
logistics will be key to sustaining expediti
onary forces.  [The Air Force] will harness 
information technology, rapid transportation a
nd the strengths of both the organic and industrial logistics base to ensure responsive, dependable, precise supportﬂ (USAF 2000b).  However, logistics systems (an increa
sing number of which are COTS) are not 
engineered to the level of reliability of avi
onics or special purpose weapons systems (see 

Section 1.1.4).  This further complicates the 
challenges faced by the people and units who 
field, use, and maintain Air For
ce logistics and support systems.  
AEFs may present special considerations
 that make Air Force logistics ICT 
particularly challenging, but the logistics chal
lenge is shared by all the military branches 
(as well as any organization that incorporates just-in-time delivery in
to its operational and information strategy).  For example, a recent 
Pentagon study of the Gulf War revealed the 
need for faster ways of deploying Army logistics and support units.  Logistics was ﬁhard-pressed to keep up with the rapid pace,ﬂ and if victory had not been so swift, ﬁmaneuver 
forces would have outrun their fuel and other supportﬂ (Rosenberg 2001).  ICT is the 

backbone of the effort to rapidly deploy logistics support.  Despite the many challenges associated with achieving and maintaining 
information systems that are reliable, timely, 
flexible, and secure, the national security mission of organizations like the Air For
ce leaves little margin for error.  
 It's all about information. The need to provide war fighters the information they needŠ
information they can trustŠis a key comp
onent of the Expediti
onary Aerospace Force 
concept. How effective we will be in the future is derived from our ability to rapidly 
collect, process, analyze, disseminate, retr
ieve and protect information while denying 
these capabilities to our adversaries. (Co
mmander AFCIC, reported in USAF 2000c) 
3  Therefore, the conduct of information warfare,
 both defensive and offensive, is a unique part of the Air Force IC
T management challenge.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 211.3.2 Security and Information Assurance 
 The critical value provided by Air For
ce ICT systems comes with an accompanying 
serious risk.  3  Military operations today are heavily dependent on globally shared critical 
infrastructures.  Technological advances have
 interconnected these infrastructures, better 
enabling mission accomplishment an
ywhere in the world.  Wh
ile this connectivity better 
enables mission accomplishment, it also increases our vulnerability to human error, 

natural disasters, and physical or cyber attack. (USAF 1999a) 
 While this statement focuses on the communi
cations component, the recognition that 
increased complexity leads not only to increased mission capabilities but also to 
increased risk holds for all of ICT™s many 
diverse elements.  Incompatible data or 
ineffective practice can lead to mission failure as quickly as bad communications, as the 

lost Mars Climate Orbiter vividly demonstrated.  A wide range of issues is associated with ICT risk, including risk to systems from 
the outside and risk from internal system complexities. 
 As a military organization, the 
Air Force must address intentional threats stemming from the deliberate acts of people 
intending to harm Air Force information capab
ilities.  These threats may be physical (for 
instance, destroying communication lines) or may occur in 
cyberspace (for instance, denial-of-service attacks), and they may arise 
from the political motivations of an enemy 
state or simply the adolescent demonstrations of
 a hacker™s ability.  These security issues 
are generally covered under the term critical infrastructure protection, or CIP  (EOP 1998a).  For the Air Force and other high security organizations, there is a special 
challenge to maintaining secure operati
ons while simultaneously achieving the full 
capabilities of ICT systems. 
 The functional strength of
 modern ICT systems often 
depends on an environment where informa
tion flows freely, fostering the innovative combination of data from disparate sources 
to create new information value.  Security 
and CIP considerations generally run counter to this functional ideal: ﬁThe tension is between continuing IT management for usabil
ity and not giving your adversary the keys to your kingdomﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  
To take advantage of its ICT assets, the Air Force must link people, units, and 
their systems, both within and outside the service.  These linkages introduce security 
concerns, but they also introduce another critical class of ICT risk.  This second class of risk stems not from the intentional actions 
of an adversary but, rather, from the very 
system complexity and interdependency required to accomplish the mission.  As stated 

earlier, most people see and touch only a sma
ll piece of the overall system.  This means 
that as people and systems are increasingly lin
ked, they can increasi
ngly do things that, while sensible from their perspective, ma
y have unintended impacts on others or the mission.  These impacts may not be felt imme
diately, but they may play out over time 
and in concert with a sequence of other actions and modifications.  Y2K is a member of 
this class of systemic problems (as was the 
loss of the Mars spacecraft mentioned earlier).  
There are clear differences between security
 and systemic issues.  While security 
focuses on outside threats to functionality, systemic risks are often an aspect or cost of that functionality.  While security involves 
deterrence of an outside adversary, addressing Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 22systemic risks involves effective manage
ment, communication, and coordination among 
those within the system.  For this reason, some people see 
these two classes of ICT risk to be distinct, even competing, priorities.  
Despite these differences, systemic 
and security risk share important 
commonalities. Specifically, systemic risk represents weak points in the system that can 
be exploited by those seeking to do harm.  In
 addition, efforts to make ICT systems more 
robust through improved contin
uity and consequence manage
ment must consider both 
types of ICT risk.  Perhaps most importantly, 
efforts to increase confidence in the output 
of ICT systems, often called ﬁinformation assu
rance,ﬂ must consider and even integrate 
both security and systemic risk since the cau
ses of data and information corruption are 
both intentional and unintentional.  As discussed in Chapter 4, there are lessons from the Air Force Y2K experience 
not only for general information assurance e
fforts but also for addressing ICT security issues.    
1.3.3 Organization, Policy, and Decision Making 
 Where are the organizational homes of Air Force ICT, and how do they contribute to 

policy and practice?  Air Force leadership r
ecognizes the importance 
of these and related issues that constitute part of the extended 
ICT infrastructure: ﬁWe will ensure [that] 
technological innovations continue to be
 accompanied by innovations in doctrine, 
organization, and trainingﬂ (USAF 2000b).  Achieving this vision, however, will not be 
easy.  The complexities of Air Force organi
zational structure and 
of ICT can greatly complicate organizational and policy issues.  
The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 called for each federal agency to designate a 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) with
 three general responsibilities:   providing advice and other assistance to the head of
 the executive agency and 
other senior management personnel of 
the executive agency to ensure that information technology is acquired and 
information resources are managed 
[appropriately]  developing, maintaining, and facilita
ting the implementation of a sound and 
integrated information technology arch
itecture for the executive agency  promoting the effective and efficien
t design and operation of all major 
information resources management processes for the executive agency, 

including improvements to work proce
sses of the executive agency. (IMTRA 
1996)  While, in one sense, final responsibility for ICT policy and practice lies with the 
CIO™s office, the language of the act is fo
cused on advising and improving the executive 
agency.  In a large and diverse organization such as the Air Force, there is a wide gap 

between the executive agency and the distri
buted, frontline operational management and 
use of ICT.  In addition, the act™s language about technol
ogy acquisition and architecture 
may not be interpreted as including responsib
ility for more human issues such as best 
ICT practices and alignment between ICT management and organizational strategy.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23During Y2K and as of the writing of this report, the Air Force CIO™s office was divided among the Secretary of the Air Force and De
partment of the Air Force, the CIO in 
acquisitions (SAF/AQ), and the Deputy CIO 
in communications (HQ/SC).  Units under 
acquisitions and communications, with a centr
al focus on ICT, include: the Electronic 
Systems Center (ESC) and (under ESC) the Standard Systems Group (SSG) under AQ; 
the Air Force Communications Agency (AFC
A) and the Air Force Communications and Information Center (AFCIC) under SC.   
Additional background for nonŒAir Force re
aders will help them understand the 
lessons-learned sections.  At the operational level, the Air Force is organized into nine 
major commands (MAJCOMs).  Seven of thes
e are functional (combat, space, mobility, 
materials, special operations, education 
and training, and reserves) and two are geographical (Europe and the Pacific).  ESC and SSG are under the materials command 
(AFMC); AFCA and AFCIC are attached directly to HQ/SC.  Another unit with particular focus on ICT is Information Wa
rfare Defense (IWD), which is attached 
directly to operations in headquarters (HQ/XO).  Bases are attached to MAJCOMs and can house various tenants.  For example, AFCA is a tenant at Scott Air Force Base 
(AFB), which is att
ached to the mobility command (AMC), while the 630th Air Mobility Squadron is an AMC tenant on Yokota Air Base in Japan, which is attached to the Pacific Command (PAC
AF).  Base tenants may also be joint command units that serve the combined military services; for example, 

Scott AFB houses the U.S. Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) and Yokota AFB houses the headquarters for joint services in Japan (USFJ).  CINC refers to combined service units or operations under the Commander in Chief.  
The overall Air Force management stra
tegy can be summed up as centralized 
management with decentralized execution.  In
 practice this means that central guidance 
from Air Force headquarters is interpreted 
by each MAJCOM for its particular functional situation.  This continues down the line as
 bases receive guidance from their MAJCOM 
or a headquarters unit and interpret these orders for their local situation.  The goal is a 
single point of contact (POC) for any given 
activity.  But as this brief overview of relevant Air Force units implies, a single 
POC can be difficult to achieve for cross-
functional activities such as ICT.   At times it is not easy, even for those di
rectly responsible, to explain precisely where Air Force ICT policy resides within 
the organization and how it actually is 
managed. For instance, during the Air Fo
rce Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop, the 
facilitator asked, ﬁWho
 sets IT policy, for example, the creation of a certificate to 
operate?ﬂ Because each participant™s response 
was different, the conclusion was that ﬁthe 
answer is very complicatedﬂ (AFCA). Speci
fically, ﬁwhere the policy starts and who owns it are two different thingsﬂ (SSG), ﬁespecially when an organization always operates across boundariesﬂ (AFCA). The cross-functional nature of ICT makes it 
particularly difficult to manage within an or
ganization that is primarily organized along 
functional lines.  Funding is another complicating factor in
 Air Force ICT organization and policy management.  The funding necessary to im
plement system modifications does not 
generally accompany the central guidance calling for those modifications.  This issue is 

further complicated by the fact that changes 
to ICT systems do not occur in isolation.  
Rather, they require that an appropriate infrastructure be in place.  This infrastructure Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 24includes not only technical elements, such as
 an appropriate operating environment and 
sufficient bandwidth, but also human elements, 
such as appropriate personnel to field and maintain the change.  Since all bases and units
 do not have the same level and type of 
ICT infrastructure, they will be
 in a better or worse position 
to make centrally specified 
changes.  Where sufficient funding and support do not exist, bases can choose not to execute central ICT guidance.  
There are many challenges to effective Air Force organization and management 
of its ICT assets.  Some of 
the most difficult of these ch
allenges involve striking an appropriate balance between the differing f
unctions and perspectives of the various people and the units involved in ICT management
 and practice.  Balances must be struck, among others, between: 
• acquiring systems and linking networks 
• functional and cross-functional needs • central standardization and local flexibility 
• managing more traditional aspects of
 the infrastructure and managing newer ICT components 
• information sharing and information security 
 As discussed in the lessons-learned sections, the Y2K experience brought all these trade-offs to the forefront.  
  1.3.4 Personnel and Training 
 As Air Force leaders often emphasize, people 
are the most important element of USAF 
operations.  This is true whether the technology they operate flies in the air or processes information on the ground. ﬁThe most important
 part of [the Air Force] vision is the people. We need to develop aerospace l
eaders who can take co
mmand of–information 
assets, which is going to be one of the most
 important things we do over the next two 
decadesﬂ (Peters 2000).  
Air Force leaders also recognize that the tight market for ICT professionals 
represents a special personnel challenge, part
icularly with uncertain and uneven military 
demands. ﬁWe will size, shape, and operate the 
force to meet the needs of the nation.  We 
must also manage the effects of tempo on our people.  This is particularly important for 
those elements of the force currently in s
hort supply, but in high demandﬂ (USAF 2000b).  
There are many challenges to ensuring the c
onsistent availability of experienced Air Force ICT personnel.  These include appropria
te job classifications and work conditions, effective training, improved retention, and adjusting these conditions to a rapidly 

changing environment.  
Despite the complexities of their jobs and 
their critical importance to effective use 
and management of information and comm
unication technology, frontline Air Force ICT 
personnel can often be undertrained and overworked. For example, personnel with previously unrelated job positions and training are retrained to IT (374
th AW/LG).  
Others, such as wing system administrators, wo
rk extensive hours (for example, 5 a.m. to 
midnight) because of the complexity of their jobs (374
th AW/XP).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25Surprisingly, there is no formal Air Force 
job classification equi
valent to system 
administrator (SA). This is particularly stri
king considering the critical role of an SA.  [System administrators] perform activities 
which directly support the operations and 
integrity of computing systems and their us
e and which manage their intricacies. These 
activities minimally include system installation,
 configuration, integration, maintenance, 
performance management, data management, s
ecurity management, failure analysis and 
recovery, and user support. In
 an internetworked computing environment, the computer 
network is often included as part of the complex computing system.
  (SAGE 2006) 
 In many cases, Air Force personnel with margin
ally related training receive short courses on specific aspects of their systems and then 
are expected to handle complex and varied 
SA tasks.  These unofficial system administra
tors work long, intensive hours to maintain 
their systems, and many of thos
e interviewed were tired and frustrated.  They must cope 
on a daily basis with a growing number of system upgrades and security changes (AFCERTS) even as they work on ongoing major projects such as the Defense 
Messaging System (DMS).  Yet they mu
st often rely on on-the-job informal 
communications to acquire the necessary skills. 
 This was particularly evident in the 374
th AW/OG, where only one staff member 
had a background in medical network 

information, even though most of the st
aff worked on communications and system 
administration.  
Whether formal or informal, the trai
ning Air Force ICT personnel receive is valuable.  This contributes to another personnel issueŠretention.   Many Air Force ICT 
personnel look forward to retiring early to lucrative positions in the commercial sector once they gain sufficient experience. For example, SSG established permanent training 
centers at every installation and then lost trained personnel to such companies as Cisco 
Systems.  Salary and competition from industry 
are key issues in attracting and retaining 
capable Air Force ICT professionals.  In 1999, mean salary for U.S. system 
administrators was $64,271 and mean total cash was $70,565 (SAGE 2000).  Whereas 

ﬁ–it was hard to keep staff in IT; a four-year senior airman made $18,000 a yearﬂ (374
th AW/LG).  
Turnover of ICT personnel comes not only from retirement but also from 
personnel cuts and the general practice of regularly shifting Air Force personnel to different bases (temporary duty, or TDY).  
Sometimes, personnel cuts stem from an 
assumed efficiency gain from the ICT its
elf: ﬁWe don™t have the people that we 
had–There have been [numerous] aircraft
 maintenance cuts based on IMDS [a 
maintenance system]ﬂ (AFCIC/SY). Moreover, 
while there is obvious value to the wide experience and other benefits of regular TDY, the lack of consistent personnel can be particularly damaging to achieving good IC
T practice and management.  Given the 

dynamic and often idiosyncratic 
nature of most ICT system
s, extensive and long-term 
practical experience with the various aspects of that system is a vital commodity.  

As discussed in the lessons-learned sections, the Y2K experience greatly impacted 

already stressed Air Force ICT personnel.  

 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 26 1.3.5 Geographic Dispersion 
 A final important set of Air Force ICT issues
 stem from the wide 
geographical dispersion of units and systems.  Thes
e issues include important 
differences between the ICT situation at continental United States (CONU
S) bases and at outside the continental 
United States (OCONUS) bases.  Many differences between CONUS and OCONUS ICT 
are the result of general differences in non-ICT areas, such as organization, mission 
priorities, and dependency on local foreign infrastructure.  CONUS bases are attached to functional MA
JCOMs, while OCONUS bases are attached 
to geographical MAJCOMs.  This does not mean that the functional activities represented 
by the MAJCOMs do not occur on OCONUS bases.  It does mean, however, that tenant 
functional units on OCONUS bases may be 
treated differently from their CONUS 
counterparts.  There may be funding differen
ces, or, as occurred during Y2K, functional 
MAJCOMs reaching out to their bases ma
y reach only to the CONUS level.  
In the ICT realm, these organizational differenc
es can significantly im
pact the effect of central guidance, for example, efforts to establish common operating environments and to 

clear POCs and lines of authority. ﬁThe A[ir] F[orce] is moving towards having one IT 
[organizational structure].  The CONUS IT structure looks like the AF wants it.  The OCONUS IT structure falls under the host uni
tﬂ (AMC/SCP). In the ICT area, OCONUS units tend to have greater local autonomy than
 CONUS units, and this can lead to an even more idiosyncratic ICT infrastructure.   
 Because they are geographically an
d politically separated, OCONUS ICT 
personnel face additional challenges to fielding and maintaining 
state-of-the-art systems.  
There can be an almost rural aspect to OC
ONUS bases.  Training is more costly and 
difficult to obtain, funding may be more
 difficult to obtain, and existing base infrastructure may be less up to date. ﬁWe™re
 at the end of the–chain.  Our computer 
systems are way behind those at stateside basesﬂ (374
th AW/CS).  
Some of this difficulty is 
mission related.  Being closer to the front lines, Air 
Force personnel at OCONUS bases see themse
lves as under greater operational urgency, with an accompanying reduction in time and 
attention for what can be perceived as secondary activities. ﬁOperationally, a CONUS 
base is not that close to the enemy. The 
sense of urgency is greater at an OCONUS ba
se because there is less time to do things, 
such as inventoryﬂ (374th AW/XP). In an OCONUS environment, ICT security issues are 
also complicated by geographical and political
 separation, which may mean less attention 
and fewer resources for other aspects of system maintenance and evolution. 
  Some OCONUS ICT challenges stem from base interdependencies with the local 

infrastructure of a foreign country.  It is mu
ch easier to interact with the state government 
of Illinois, for instance, than
 with the government of Japan or Korea.  Interdependencies 
with foreign systems most obviously involve power, transportation, and other traditional 

infrastructure elements, but technical elements of the ICT system itself can be affected as 

well. For example, in Japan, personnel canno
t use the handheld scanners other bases use because they cannot get a frequency assigned (630
th AMSS).   Some of the most difficult challenges for an OCONUS base involve cu
ltural and political differences with the host country.  These were especially visible during the Y2K experience and are discussed, along with other CONUS/OCONUS issues, in Chapter 3.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 27   
1.4 The Y2K Challenge 
 Just as ICT systems are complex, so was the challenge presented by Y2K.  During Y2K 

there were a variety of perceptions as to what was occurring, and after Y2K the variety of perceptions persisted.  To many people, Y2K wa
s a pervasive threat to
 all ICT activities, with a firm deadline for averting that thre
at.  ﬁThe difference between Y2K and normal day-to-day operations and software roles was that Y2K presented a problem that was 

going to affect everybody at the same time,
 whereas in the day-to-day world, random 
problems affect different peopl
e at different timesﬂ (MSG).
  To others, Y2K was more 
like a heightened state of the usual ICT ac
tivity. ﬁThese problems were not unique to 
Y2K. –They exist as part of the normal in
formation technology day-to-day business.  
They just became more obvious
 under the intense spotlight that we saw with Y2Kﬂ (AMC/HQ).  Whatever the relationship between Y2K pe
rceptions and realities, efforts to address Y2K challenged organizational ICT mana
gement in ways that it had never been 
challenged previously.  For the Air Force, it wa
s the equivalent of a test flight of their evolving prototype system for strategic and operational ICT management.  To understand 
the lessons of this unique test, it is necessary to better understand the Y2K challenge itself.  

 
 1.4.1 The Y2K Problem 
 In Uruguay in the late 1960s, power engineers had trouble managing their power output, 
in part because of uncertainties in the water 
levels and flow of the river on which the power depended.  They decided to write a software program to help predict river flow.  In 
the Montevideo city records, the engineers di
scovered a wealth of historical data on river levels, weather conditions, and so forth, dating back to 1890.  Unfortunately, their 

database used just two digits to represent th
e year.  If they did not want to discard a decade of useful data, they n
eeded a way of using two digits to distinguish between the 
years that began with an ﬁ18ﬂ and those that began with a ﬁ19.ﬂ  They did this using a coding scheme (for example, 01 = 1890) and crea
ted a useful predictive tool.  Then they went about their business of power production and management.  
The point is that in the late 1960s in Montevideo, Uruguay, a group of power engineers faced and addressed (for their situ
ation) an instance of
 what, three decades later, came to be called the Y2K problem.  In this case, it had nothing to do with the year 

2000 or the closing seconds of a passing millennium.  However, as with Y2K, it had 

everything to do with a range of dates that crossed a century barrier
 (in this case, the 
19th) and a date representation scheme that 
used only two digits because it (incorrectly) assumed the two digits were preceded by 19.  
Despite the hundreds of billions of dollars spent on the problem and intensive 
media coverage of it, Y2K was a highly misunderstood event.  Much of the 

misunderstanding stemmed from the popular 
linking of this event with the new Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 28millennium.  Such names as ﬁThe Millenni
um Bugﬂ and ﬁThe Year 2000 Problemﬂ were 
misleading, since they incorre
ctly implied a single, once-every-thousand-year event occurring at a specific point in time.  Peopl
e pictured a time bomb ticking away within 
computers and other date-dependent mach
ines.  Whatever the accuracy of these 
perceptions, they became an important aspect of the Y2K challenge.  
The omission of the century digits in th
e representation of a year was neither unusual nor tied to technology.  People always rely on assumed knowledge in the 
representation and interpretation 
of dates and time.  For exampl
e, in the United States the 
date ﬁ10/02/00ﬂ is October 2, 2000; in other countries, it is February 10, 2000.  To know what 10/02/00 represents, you need to know the country you are in and the schema that 
country uses to represent day, month, and year
.  To know what date is referred to in the 
phrase ﬁThe Spirit of ™76,ﬂ you need to know something about the American Revolution.  
Humans created computers, and humans wo
rking around the middle of
 a century did not see the need to keep repeati
ng the obvious century digits.   As introduced in Section 1.1.3, an ICT sy
stem comprises a wide diversity of 
elements.  Because dates can occur within a
ny of these elements, Y2K was actually a set 
of different potential problems
 (see Figure 1-1).  For example, such system elements as 
chips and operating systems are concerned with 
system time
 (that is, What time is it 
now?).  These elements might experience a Y2
K problem when ﬁnowﬂ changed in such a 
way that the assumed 19 was no longer correc
t, that is, when 1999 rolled over to 2000 (namely, midnight December 31, 1999).  However, 
system elements such as applications 
and databases are concerned with functional time
 (that is, What time range do I need to 
understand to conduct my business?).  These elements might experience a Y2K problem 
whenever they needed to process a date that 
crossed the century barrier, whether that date was in the futureŠas with projected cargo sc
hedulingŠor in the pastŠas with the power engineers in Montevideo.    
 
 Figure 1-1.  System Layers and Y2K Problems 
  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 29 The most difficult of the set of relate
d potential problems that were called Y2K 
was concerned with sharing data among interdependent systems.  This was especially 
true when those linked systems resided in
 different units, organizations, or even countries.  In this case, the source of the da
te misinterpretation c
ould reside not within any of the individual systems but 
between them.  Since data shared between systems 
could include dates, what was correctly understood by one system might be 
misinterpreted when translated by another. 
 Even more problematic, a change in date 
representation by the maintainers of one system, perhaps in response to a Y2K issue, 
could result in a problem within another system, even though
 there had been no previous problem with that system and nothing within
 that system had been changed.  The only 
sure solution was careful understanding of and coordination across the system of systems.  
(The Mars Climate Orbiter failure, which resulted from 
the different interpretation of distance data across systems created by two di
fferent organizations, was similar to this 
type of Y2K problem.)  
These and other complexities of the Y2K 
problem were not always understood.  It was particularly difficult to craft a response that discriminated among the different types 
of Y2K problems, especially within the c
ontext of ICT management complexities and 
perceived insufficient time and resources. 
 The following section provides a brief 
overview of various trends that played out over the course of the Y2K response period.     
 1.4.2 Y2K Response Trends 
 During the multiyear period during which organizations and governments were 
recognizing and responding to the Y2K challenge, the problem changed in several ways, in terms of both general per
ceptions and response strategies.  Four significant trends could be seen in the world at large and in the Air Force in particular.  There were shifts in 
focus from: (1) computers and ICT to chip
s and traditional infrastructure, (2) a 
technological to a mission perspective, 
(3) fixes to continuity planning, and (4) technology to political and legal issues.  
 
 1.4.2.1.  From Computers and ICT to Chips and Traditional Infrastructure 
 For decades, selected computer professiona
ls had recognized two-digit years as a potential problem.  On January 27, 1988, the Federal Information Processing 
Standards (FIPS) Publication (PUB) 4-1 superseded the FIPS PUB 4, which had 
been established on November 1, 1968.  Th
e new FIPS PUB 4-1 stated that ﬁfor 
purposes of electronic data interchange in any recorded form among U.S. 

Government agencies, NIST [National 
Institute of Standards and Technology] highly recommends that four-digit year elements be used. The year should 
encompass a two-digit century that preced
es, and is contiguous with, a two-digit 
year-of-century (for example, 1999, 2000, etc.).ﬂ  Why the previous FIPS PUB 4 had specifi
ed a two-digit year is part of another story.  What is important here is 
that more than five years before most 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 30organizationsŠincluding the Air ForceŠhad a formal Y2K program, the issue had 
been clearly identified, at least as a ne
ed for a four-digit standard for date representation when sharing data.  For mo
st organizations, however, the cost of adjusting their data (and therefore the 
databases and processing software and the systems that shared the data) s
eemed to far exceed the threat.  
Generally, computer professionals worki
ng on specific systems first brought to 
light the urgency of the two-digit date issue (at least in their immediate environments).  In the Air Force, this happened in late 1993 at Cheyenne Mountain and again in early 1995 with the Airborne Warning and Control Syst
em (AWACS).  As computer professionals 
recognized the complexity of changing what ha
d been a widespread data standard, they were forced to seek additional resources from managers who neither understood the 
problem nor saw an immediate benefit to th
e bottom line or mission in addressing it.   
 In 1995 at the Air Force level–there were three people working the issue–from the 
point of view of [researching] what industry
 was saying about it; not from what the Air 
Force mainly had to do. ... We felt [as if
] we were vacuum cleaner salesmen. –[We 
would say to leadership] ﬁWe™ve got a problem here and this is what the problem is.ﬂ  

And most of the leadership [viewed it as just] another program to throw on the burner. 
–It took quite a while, even within the SC community, to raise it to a level of the number 

one [issue]. – It was a very interesting mushrooming experience all along. (AFCA)  
 As awareness increased and the search for potential date-related problems 
gathered momentum, people realized that date
s existed at many levels of the system, all 
the way down to hardwired dates on computer ch
ips.  The chips issue seemed particularly 
compelling: they could not be 
fixed, only replaced, and there were so many of them.  The 
tiny time bomb, hidden in any machine with a date component, became the image of 

Y2K for many people.  
In the first half of 1996, the Government Reform and Oversight Committee and 
the Science Committee began a joint review 
of the ﬁYear 2000 Computer Problem,ﬂ but 
by mid-1997 the focus was already shifting bey
ond the computer to a more traditional infrastructure.  In her opening statement at
 a joint hearing on July 10, 1997, Chairwoman 
Constance Morella listed four specific concerns, the fourth being ﬁthat inadequate 

attention government-wide is being paid to 
other date-sensitive systems, such as the 
embedded computer chip problem.ﬂ  The media in
 particular was attracted to this issue, 
and soon these ﬁotherﬂ systems became the major focus for many IT people, particularly 

those at the facilities level.   
For ICT professionals this was a double-edged development.  On the one hand, 
major attention was brought to the Y2K problem that might otherwise not have occurred.  

On the other hand, the focus on a more trad
itional infrastructure could be a major 
distraction from what they viewed
 as the central data issue.  
  In August 1998 the first guidance was to 
look at computer-type equipment. –Three 
months later there was a shift from looking at
 interfaces to opening things up and looking 
for chips. –Not only did it increase workload but [also] it was another realm. 
(AMC/HQ)   
 The chip was the focus. ...When we shifted 
away from the IT side–we put everything on 
the inventory that could possibly have a date problem with it.  We had the traffic lights on 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 31it.  We had railroad crossings outside the main gate.  ﬁAre the bars going to come down?ﬂ  
They had to test for that. (375th AW/Y2K) 
 Generals had questions about embedded chips from what they had seen on 
20/20
, 60-
Minutes. –That™s what increased the workloadŠthe
se kinds of external factors coming 
in. (AFCA) 

 
There needs to be a difference 
between IT and [traditional] infrastructure in the way they 
are handled. –There are 1,000 times more in
frastructure items.  AMC units were advised 
to let the bases worry about th
e infrastructure. (AMC/HQ)   
 The ICT-versus-chip issue is relevant to a number of the lessons learned presented in 
Section 2.5.    
 
 1.4.2.2. From a Technological to a Mission Perspective  Even as the increasing focus on chips took th
e Y2K response deeper inside the machines 
(though away from ICT), another trend was taking the Y2K response away from the 

technology itself and toward the organization and its mission.  In part, this occurred 
because Y2K was getting too complicated for any one functional area, including the 

computing and communications people, to handle.  

 We started out doing business as usual.  ﬁIt™s a COMS problem.  Let the computer people 
deal with it.ﬂ  And as gradua
l knowledge came in of just how big this thing was turning 
out to be, we then started getting more people on-line and eventually we got operations to 
–look at it as an operational type of problem. (AMC/HQ) 
  Many computer professionals backed away from Y2K as their problem.  
They did not see it as being primarily a
bout their systems (that is, computers and 
how they operated or were connected).  Instead, many computer
 professionals saw Y2K as being about operational data and how it was stored and used or about chips in cars and alarm systems or about legal and 
political issues.  To some people, this 
was an unexpected narrowing of the computer
 community™s field of responsibility. For instance, ﬁAs we went through the Y2K process, I found that the original owners of equipment or policy or procedur
es or issues within the COM community 
were backing away from what I saw as thei
r area of expertise.  Once Y2K came into 
place, they stepped back from the area 
they were working on or their area of responsibilityﬂ  (375th AW/CG). 
 Additional impetus for the shift 
from a technological to a mission 
perspective came from political and lega
l pressures (see Section 1.3.2.4.). ﬁPrior to the Air Force Audit Agency coming th
rough, it was a COMS squadron problem; 
after the AFAA came through, it was an ope
rational problem beca
use that™s what the AFAA highlightedﬂ (374
th AW/CS).  
Perhaps most importantly, the shift from a technological to an operational 
perspective occurred as part of a learning process.  In response to the Y2K threat, more 
people than ever before were forced to face 
the complexities of ICT and the ways it is 
increasingly interwoven into the accomplishmen
t of an organization™s mission.  Initially, 

most organizations attempted to address Y2K through a ﬁtechnology firstﬂ approach.  A Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 32typical first step was to conduct an inventory of all 
information and communication 
technology with the goal of determining whet
her that technology was Y2K compliant or 
not.  However, the limitations of this appr
oach quickly became clear.  For example, 
identifying all the ICT that was used in a large organization was no trivial matter, and 
even more difficult were complications of
 system complexity and ownership and 
responsibility for compliance.   

 Who says whether it™s compliant or not?  If it wasn™t owned by the Air Force, we called 
the vendor. –We have stacks up
on stacks of compliance data
 from manufacturers.  And 
they all say the same thing on the very bottom, ﬁThis is just what our compliance testing 

has proven.  We in no way confirm that this product will continue as functional after the 
rollover.ﬂ (375
th AW/Y2K) 
 As the required testing phase approached, the impossibility of testing all systems for all 
possible glitches became increasingly clea
r, and operational test boundaries became 
necessary.  Given these issues, most organizations ch
anged from a technical to an operational 
perspective over the course of their Y2K efforts.  Instead of asking what technology they had and whether it was at risk, they asked what the critical activities
 of their organization were and what the role of informati
on and communication technology was in those activities.  Instead of placing a technical person in charge of Y2K, they placed an operating officer.  By early 1999, as stated in the Air Force Assessment Master Plan for 
Operations in the Year 2000, ﬁpreparations for the year 2000 have now shifted to focusing on ‚missions™ rather than systemsﬂ (USAF 1999b).  
We return to this trend in other lessons-learned sections, particularly in Chapter 2.  
  1.4.2.3.  From Fixes to Continuity Planning  Related to the shift from tec
hnological to mission perspectiv
e was a shift of focus from fixing problems to preparing for continued func
tion in the face of uncertain impact.  For 
U.S. government organizations, this shif
t began in early to mid-1998 and gained 
momentum as both the complexities of th
e problem (particularly testing) and the demands of starting up contingency plans for ICT-dependent mission-critical activities 

became clear.  

 The evolving official government fi
ve-phase plan (Awareness, Assessment, 
Renovation, Validation, and Implementation) 
for managing a Y2K response program was 
initially developed in 1996; critical input came from Air Fo
rce planners at the ESC and the MITRE Corporation.  The plan was disseminated in early 1997 by the Year 2000 
Interagency Committee of the CIO Council (on 
an Air Force website) and by the General Accounting Office (GAO, now the Governme
nt Accountability Office) (OMB 1997 and 
GAO 1997).  While contingency planning was 
mentioned, the plan initially focused heavily on the ﬁmassive undertakingﬂ of 
finding, fixing (converting, replacing, or retiring), and testing all mission-critical systems, and pe
rhaps even more. ﬁAgencies must 
determine what systems are mission-critical and 
must be converted or replaced, what systems support important functions and 
should be converted or replaced, and what 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 33systems support marginal functions, and 
may be converted or replaced laterﬂ (GAO 1997).  The early 1997 GAO assessment guide focused on project management and 

organized the five-phase plan into 52 key processes.  Of those, only two (2.16, under Assessment, and 5.6, under Implementation) rela
ted to developing contingency plans.  One year later, the situation was already viewed quite differently.  GAO released a guide devoted entirely to business continuity and contingency planning that began, ﬁTime is 
running out for solving the Year 2000 problemﬂ (GAO 1998b).   

 As the Y2K response moved into its final year, complex efforts to complete and 

validate system renovations began to run up against equally complex efforts to develop 

and prepare viable contingency plans: ﬁWhen we did the original studies in the spring of 
1999, we realized the difficulty of fixing a serious, mission-critical problem within the 
time constraint for initiating the continge
ncy planﬂ (Air Force Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop speaker). Many organizations shifted their primary focus from fixing and 
testing code to developing and monitoring con
tingency plans, or continuity of operations 
plans (COOPs) as they were called in the Air Force.  (We return to the issue of COOPs in 
the lessons-learned sections, particularly in Chapter 4.)   
 1.4.2.4.  From Technology to Political and Legal Issues  For ICT professionals, Y2K first came to li
ght as a technology issue concerning date representation.  For the many other people w
ho were increasingly drawn into the Y2K process, however, the primary motivators were 
more likely to be legal and, especially for government agencies, political.  This was pa
rticularly true for corporate executives, agency administrators, and their staffs. For the AFY2KO, the impetus was not from the 
scientific community.  Instead, ﬁit came fr
om the political side.  Senator Bennett and 
others had the foresight to make this
 thing the issue that it becameﬂ  .  
Given the huge potential for liability, early in the Y2K process corporations began sending queries about the readiness of their products through their legal rather than technical staff.  By early 1998 this practice, in conjunction with the growing realization that Y2K preparation often called for high levels of coordination and cooperation across organizations, led to serious concerns that legal pressures would inhibit the flow of informa
tion vital to the success of these efforts.  
For example, the 375
th AW/Y2K could not get any information from the vendors:  
ﬁThey just wouldn™t say yes or no to the compliance status of anything because they 
didn™t want to be held liable.ﬂ  On July 30, 1998, at the request of the White House, Sen. Robert Bennett (R-
Utah) introduced the Year 2000 Information Disc
losure Act.  This bill, passed early in October, provided liability protection from 
inaccurate statements made by organizations 
acting in good faith when sharing Y2K information.  
While no additional federal Y2K legislation was passed, many organizations 
extended the focus on good faith beyond informa
tion disclosure to general Y2K response activities.  The perception was that if good faith precautions were taken in addressing 

Y2K risks, legal protection would follow.  There were calls for due diligence in 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 34addressing Y2K, though the meaning of this term
 was not always clear.  For example, it 
often was interpreted as ﬁif you saw some
thing you could do, you had better do it.ﬂ  The mandate came down under due diligence. – This was interpreted to mean that almost 
anything anybody could mention, 
you had to do that. – Because of the fear of being legally 
responsible– the only way you could not do something was if you could guarantee zero 

probability that there would be the possibility of an error. – Nobody could do that. (AMC/SCA) 
  In many cases, this trend led to the use of auditing agencies and other legally 
focused means of monitoring Y2K response 
efforts.  ﬁWe did whatever we could 
but then we thought, what if they ask whether we have done enough?  Well, we 
could call out the audit agency, which we 
did on three different occasions. – Then of course the DOD IG (Inspector General) [wanted] to get involvedﬂ (AFCA).  

 Government agencies were especially impacted by the increased political 

scrutiny of Y2K. In September 1997, Rep. Stephen Horn (R-Calif.) began issuing a 

congressional Y2K report card that produced such headlines as ﬁYear 2000 Report 
Flunks 3 Agenciesﬂ and continued to get considerable attention throughout the Y2K effort, from the media and the agencies th
emselves (Barr 1997).  The Department of 
Defense [DOD] received a C- on the first 
report.  ﬁRepresentative Horn probably 
did more to spur this whole proc
ess on than anybodyﬂ (AFCA).    
 GAO reports also had a major impact.  While these reports often focused on 

technical aspects of the problem, they al
so emphasized the legal and legislative 
motivations. For example, ﬁDOD™s quarterly
 readiness reports do not fulfill the legislative reporting requirements under 10 
U.S.C. 482 (the section of the U.S. Code that mandates such reporting) because th
ey lack specific detail on deficiencies and remedial actions; as a result, these 
reports do not provide information needed 
for effective oversight of military readinessﬂ (GAO 1998a). 
As might be expected, there was a wide
 range of reactions to congressional 
involvement in the Y2K response effort 
including, among others, the following:  
 A large part of what you are talking about–wasn
™t driven by any sort of need other than 
the political pressure. (AMC/SCA) 

 
External pressures caused us to have to report a lot of things we had never reported 
before.  Some of which, now that we™ve come 
to grips with it, is not a bad thing. (AFCA) 
 Is it rationally needed from a technical standpoint?  No.  But the measure of merit, in 
many cases, is you™re doing things to satisfy the political institution and the political 
pressures. –Political pressure is why we spent our time looking at everything as opposed 

to looking at the really important things. (AMC/HQ) 
 Politics is part of the environment.  It™s a rea
lity of the environment that should not be put 
in pejorative terms.  You know political lead
ers are not technologist
s; therefore, when 
these sorts of things happen, they naturally
 are not going to react with what is the 
engineering rational response.  They are go
ing to react with wh
at is the politically 
rational response.  It™s just as rationa
l in their decision-making frameworks.  
(AFXO/IWD)  
 We return to political and legal issues in ot
her lessons-learned secti
ons, particularly under the discussion of risk and response in Chapter 4. Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 35  
 1.4.3.  How the Research Opportunity Changed 
 Just as perceptions of and responses to Y2K changed over time, so did Y2K as a phenomenon to be studied and an opportunity 
through which to learn important lessons.  
The NRC, working with the Air Force and with the support of the IEEE, began early in 1998 to position itself for a before-and-after study of lessons to be learned from the Y2K 

experience.  Many of the early study aims we
re based on the assumption that there would 
be a number of critical, highly visible Y2K infr
astructure failures.  For example, one Air Force study aim was to use Y2K disruption 
as a surrogate for information warfare 

attacks.  The hope was to develop a better understanding of how interdependent systems 
fail and then use that understanding to help ma
ke those systems more resistant to outside 
attack.  The level of disruption assumed for this study goal di
d not occur.  (Why it did not 
occur is addressed in Chapter 4 under lessons related to minimizing risk.)  
Interestingly, that Y2K did not produce major sustained disruption to critical 
infrastructure actually makes it a more valuable source of long-term lessons for the 

operational and strategic management of complex ICT systems.  Y2K studies evolved 

from a focus on fundamental flaws and cascadi
ng effects into an analysis of impact on 
overall strategic management of inform
ation and communication technology. This analysis included issues such as maintenan
ce and modernization, life-cycle management 
of systems and software, functional interd
ependency and continuity, guidance policies and certification, system owners
hip and responsibility, training and organizational roles, and security and information assurance.  
The worldwide Y2K response effort was of incredible magnitude and evolved 
over many years.  It confronted organizationa
l systems for managing ICT with situations 

they had never faced.  People who played significant roles in this Y2K effort were 
changed in significant ways.  Yet because little happened,  the tendencies to return to 

business as usual were strong.   We hope that people and organizations do not ignore the valuable, if difficult, lessons gained from the expenditure of hundred
s of billions of dollars and countless hours 
of human effort.  We also hope the follo
wing sections of this report contribute significantly to the useful disseminati
on and application of these lessons.Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 37Chapter 2  Managing ICT Complexity 
 Modern technology and society have become so complex that traditional ways and means 
are not sufficient any more but approaches
 of a holistic and generalist or inter-
disciplinary nature become necessary. (Bertalanffy 1976) 
 Y2K is not about hardware, firmware, and operating software (platforms). It is not about 

application software and–data.  It is not even about users, organizations, economies and 
nationsŠit's about all of them together.
 (IEEE 1999)  
 The previous chapter presented complexi
ties associated with information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems in gene
ral, and within the United States Air 
Force (hereafter simply USAF, or Air Force) in
 particular.  It also presented an overview of the Year 2000 (Y2K) problem and response e
fforts.  This chapter and the two that 
follow bring these areas together by looking at the Air Force Y2K experience as a source of information for improving the operational 
and strategic management of complex and 
critical ICT systems.  This chapter focu
ses on ICT management challenges stemming 
from system complexities.  Chapter 3 focuses on organizational issues, particularly the 

role of organizational entities in the esta
blishment and execution of ICT management 
strategies.  Chapter 4 focuses on risk, respons
e, and security issues.  As will be seen, 

there is critical linkage across these 
three areas of ﬁlessons learned.ﬂ  
On the surface, the whole Y2K story seems incredible:  Between 1995 and 2000, 
a problem about assumed century digits in da
te representation came to be seen as the 
most significant challenge facing many, if not most, organizations in the world.  For many people in the Air Force, it became ﬁt
he #1 thing we™ve got goingﬂ (AFCA).  Even more surprisingly (and far less well known) was that the problem with century digits 
ultimately taught those who worked on it mo
re about their overall organizational 
operation than about their technology.   What follows is a discussion of the lessons learned by people and organizations as they attempted to address Y2K within the c
ontext of general ICT system complexities.  

These lessons are relevant to the ongoing ma
nagement of other current and future ICT 
problems and opportunities.  
  
2.1  The Need for New, Less Localized ICT Management Strategies 
 The magnitude of the Y2K response was greatly increased by less than optimal efforts to 

manage the situation.  Y2K represented a 
class of ICT issues that go beyond the 
functional management of individual systems 
or localized clusters of technology.  Thus, traditional localized management strategies were often defeated not only by the particular 

pressures of the problem at hand but also by th
e intermingling of that problem with other 
ongoing pressures stemming from the increasin
g complexity of and reliance on ICT 
systems.  
It was difficult to break down Y2K activ
ities into clearly bounded efforts under local control.  The interdep
endency of ICT elements and 
the varying roles of ICT in 
achieving organizational missions
 meant that no single group could fully control the Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 38issues. Enterprise-wide perspectives and nontechnical environmental impacts had to be 
considered.  ICT managers recognized that 
these challenges were not unique and that the difficulties of Y2K management were sy
mptoms of difficulties with the ongoing 
management of ICT: ﬁThese problems were not
 unique to Y2K. –They exist as part of the normal information technology day-to-day business. –We were doing business as 
usual, but we need to come up with a 
better business as usualﬂ (AMC/HQ).  The ICT infrastructure of a large modern
 organization is extremely complex.  The 
more an organization relies on information w
ithin that infrastructure to achieve its 

mission, the more complex its management task.  In simple terms, a complex system is 

one in which the whole is greater than the sum of its part
s.  Traditional management 
strategies assume that the systems being 
managed can be broken down into discrete 

component parts and clear, causal relations
hips among those parts.  However, this assumption is no longer valid for systems th
at have reached a sufficient complexity. 
ﬁCompared to the analytical procedure of
 classical science with resolution into 
component elements and one-way or linear ca
usality as basic category, the investigation of organized wholes of many variables requir
es new categories of interaction, transaction, organization, teleology, etc., –ﬂ (IEEE 1999). 
Neither ICT systems nor the organizations 
within which they reside are closed 
systems; in other words, they cannot be 
understood and managed independent of their 
interactions with other systems and, part
icularly, with their environment. ﬁTo 
conceptualize an organization as an open system is to emphasize the importance of its 
environment, upon which the maintenance, survival, and growth of an open system 

dependﬂ (Malhotra 1999). Under the pressures of Y2K, the need to manage ICT systems as organized 
wholes was even stronger than during periods of business as usual.  In addition to the general complexity of ICT systems, Y2
K brought into play two additional major 
complicating factors.  First 
was the perception that everyone would be impacted in the same way and at the same time. ﬁDuring Y2
K we were doing so much sharing because 

we had a common enemy and a common deadlin
eﬂ (MITRE).  Second was the perception of a specific, fixed deadline for the effort.  ﬁY2K was different. –We had a compressed 
time; we had some milestones that weren™t 
going to change or move and [they were] 
related to coding and dates and what the impact
 would be if we didn™t fix those problems 
embedded within the code.  Out of that we™v
e learned so much more about the way we 
really do business and rely on one anotherﬂ (AFY2KO).  The perceived combination of a common enemy and a common deadline 
contributed to an increased awareness 
of the interdependencies and shared responsibilities of the various ICT efforts across an organization.  (Additional elements of 
the Y2K experience that contributed to this aw
areness are discussed below.)  This in turn 
helped foster the idea that these functional 
elements of the Y2K effort needed to be 
brought together under a single, more encompa
ssing management perspective, at least for 
the duration of the effort.  Y2K helped teach organizations that ICT 
management was not a piecemeal effort.  
Under the added stresses of the Y2K situation, the limitatio
ns of focusing on localized clusters of technology became more evident.
  As efforts to respond to Y2K within business-as-usual management practices were 
found to be insufficient or impractical, new Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39strategies and tactics arose that were more 
representative of the complex, interdependent 
aspects of ICT systems.   
The following lessons discuss many of 
the shifts away from traditional 
information technology (IT) management that 
were instigated or emphasized by the Y2K 
experience.  Chapter 3 explores these shifts
 further in terms of specific organizational 
entities and roles.   
 2.2  The Need for Wider, More Integrated Efforts to Define and Stratify ICT 
Problems  During Y2K, breakdowns in traditional management of the situation began at the most 

basic, definitional levels.  Efforts to decompose the Y2K problem and organizational 

responses into discrete components were larg
ely unsuccessful.  As a result, attempts to 
carry out a Y2K response strategy based on classification and stratification of ICT systems and problems, though not without some benefit, generally had minimal impact 

on frontline response activities.  Difficulties in breaking down the problem stemmed not 
only from technical complexities but also from conflicting multiple perspectives and the 

impacts of nontechnical environments.  
At different times during the Y2K respons
e process, most organizations made 
efforts to stratify the various potential problems according to such identified criteria as 
criticality to mission, likelihood 
of occurrence (see the discussion of risk in Chapter 4), local conditions, and optimal response strategi
es.  For example, a common component of 
strategies for dealing with Y2K (or any widespread threat that taxes available resources) was an attempt to classify systems by thei
r criticality to the organizational mission and 
then focus efforts on those systems deemed most 
critical.  In the Air Force, this ﬁtriageﬂ 
strategy led to central guidance asking units to classify systems into categories C1, for 

most critical, through C4, for least critical.  ﬁAir Force Core Capabilities form[ed] the 
basis for determining critical missions 
and functionsﬂ (USAF 1999b), but complexities 
like those discussed in Section 1.1 meant that
 the translation from critical missions and 
functions to critical systems was not straightforward.  As a result, Air Force Y2K activities found it difficult to tailor their response tactics to individual classes of Y2K problems or to local environments.  Instead, 
Y2K was treated as a generic threat rather 
than what it wasŠa set of specific interdepe
ndent threats, each with varying factors of risk and impact and each best addressed usi
ng varying response tactics.  ﬁI™ve been doing this job for two and a half years.   The Y2K orders have been–consistently ‚check everything™ with no real shiftﬂ (374
th OG).  There were benefits from efforts to classi
fy systems and problems, particularly at 
the most critical, ﬁthin lineﬂ
1 level, as well as in focusing people™s attention on organizational aspects of the Y2K situation. 
 However, as a guide for the overall Y2K response activities, these classification efforts generally proved ineffective.                                                   1 ﬁThin lineﬂ refers to a cross-service operational 
thread at the Commander in Chief (CINC) level. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 40 Our only stratification really came along the line of thin line systems.  But once you got 
past ﬁis it a thin line system,ﬂ for all practical purposes every system went through the 
same level of scrutiny. –You could look at the specific date-related type of errors that 
could occur and see that the impact would be negligible.– [It] didn™t matter.  

(AMC/SCA) 
 The lack of problem stratification was particularly felt in 
the complex logistics area.  
 We applied Y2K fixes evenly, although the problem actually is manifested 
asymmetrically. –If I print out on an in-transit visibility that I moved cargo by a C5 in 
1949, that™s not a big problemŠit™s–obvious and there certainly is a way to handle 
immediate mission impact.  We shouldn™t hold it at the same level of urgency as other 

programs, where miscalculation across a date
, maybe miscalculation of fuel flow, would 
cause some severe problems.  And for those we would need to give greater scrutiny.  The 

point is that all scrutiny was equal, because you had to address Y2K first. (AMC/SCA) 
 At times, this lack of problem stratifi
cation could be extremely frustrating, 
especially given the effort put into classification.  We spent all this time and effort categorizing 
stuff, then we promptly paid absolutely no 
attention to categorization and painted everything with the same paintbrush. – We did 

the exact same process for everyt
hing, from the most critical C
2 system that we have in 
the command to a system that is nothing more than a CD produced by a promotion 
company made to train people on how to ru
n aerial cargo ports.  We treated those two 
things the same way when it was quite apparent that they shouldn™t have been.  
(AMC/HQ) 
 Why did efforts to stratify Y2K systems 
and problems have limited impact?  Air 
Force efforts to categorize systems by thei
r mission criticality were hampered by both 
technical and nontechnical factors.  On the technical side, system complexities made it 
difficult to isolate ownership and roles of specific system features and elements.  This 
complicated the task of determ
ining both responsibility for and criticality of systems.  
Many were concerned about fragmentation of management res
ponsibility.  ﬁWhat if we 
had had a bunch of Y2K failures?  What kind of finger-pointing would have gone on initially between saying ‚Oh, that was an a
pplication problem.  No, that was an operating system problem.  No, that was a hardware problem™ﬂ (MSG).   
Even more significant, however, were the 
nontechnical factors.  With the lack of 
clear technical criteria, political, financial,
 and other systems that composed the ICT 
environment became central to the definition of mission critical. 

 What is mission criticality?  A lot of our Y2K reporting got skewed or clouded by the 
fact that at first everybody was mission cr
itical.  But then the 
OSD (Office of the 
Secretary of Defense) requirements came 
down and said if you are mission critical 
you™ve got to do all the following by a certain date.  Suddenly a lot of things were no 

longer mission critical.  Then later on it came 
out that if you were mission critical we™re 
going to prioritize how this money is used as it comes out from Congress.  Whoa, then 

everybody™s mission critical again.  And then it came out that you weren™t going to get 
money for certain things, and definitions changed again.  So really it was a lot of 
oversight and funding that drove the mission criticality demands. (AFCA) 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 41System criticality could not be assessed usi
ng purely technical or mechanistic means.  
Even as ICT complexity made it difficult to
 identify the boundaries and roles of any given system, the interplay between technical systems and their nontechnical 
environments dynamically affected basic de
finitions, such as the notion of what constituted a mission-critical system.  
Similar to the difficulties in clarifying 
the definition of mission-critical systems 
were key definitional uncertainties surrounding the concept of ﬁY2K compliant.ﬂ  In other words, how was anyone to know when a system was okay or had been fixed?  The 
certification of a system as Y2K compliant was 
seen as an essential step in the overall 
Y2K remediation effort, and the media used 
this phrase incessantly.  Yet, despite its 
perceived importance and wide use, the interplay of multiple systems and perspectives 
made it extremely difficult to define 
and apply this critical concept.  
Why was it so difficult to recognize the behavior of a system that was free of Y2K 
problems?  Remember, compliance is not an abst
ract idea but, rather, is about complying 
with something (that is, a guideline
 or standard).  Yet most pe
ople, particularly the media, 
used the phrase ﬁY2K compliantﬂ simply to mean ﬁfixed,ﬂ without any notion of the 
guideline being met.  The people responsible
 for certifying systems, however, required 
more precise definitions and test procedures for determining Y2K compliance.  
Specifically, they needed a clearly specified, te
stable definition of the desired behavior; a specified period of time (that is, 
range of dates) over which this behavior needed to occur; and specified conditions under which this behavior could be expected.  In the United States the most comm
on definitions of Y2K compliance were 
adopted from language in the Federal Acquisition Requirements (FAR).  Under FAR 
compliance, the desired behavior was ﬁable 
to accurately process date/time dataﬂ; the period of time was ﬁfrom, into, and between 
the twentieth and twenty
-first centuries, and the years 1999 and 2000 and leap year calculationsﬂ; and the conditions were ﬁto the extent that other information technology, us
ed in combination with the information 
technology being acquired, properly exchanges date/time data with itﬂ (FAC 1997).  

While this language was useful from an ac
quisitions perspective, definitions of Y2K compliance adopted from the FAR were not very 
useful for the testing and certification of systems.  Acquisition is a critical ICT activ
ity and organizational component, but it is 
only one of many perspectives that must be
 balanced in the management of ICT.  
First, the FAR definition of desired behavior relied on such words as ﬁaccuratelyﬂ and ﬁproperly,ﬂ which were not sufficiently defined for use in testing and certification.  Did ﬁaccurately processﬂ mean ﬁgive correct
 answersﬂ or ﬁnot break downﬂ?  ICT 
systems often give incorrect answers and 
often break down, independent of any Y2K issues.  These vague words may have been us
eful in government contractual agreements, 
perhaps allowing for broad interpretation between parties, but they were
 not useful to ICT professionals seeking to test system behavior.  
Second, the FAR language on the time peri
od, while vague, could be interpreted as requiring systems to accurately proce
ss for two centuries (1901Œ2100).  Again, this 
broad coverage may have made sense from an 
acquisitions perspective, but it made little 
sense from a technical one.  The most comm
on operating systems of that time could not 
meet this requirement, with the operati
ng range of Windows beginning on January 1, 
1980, and the operating range of UNIX ending January 19, 2038.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 42Third, the conditions under which accurate processing was expected to occur 
included ﬁproperﬂ date exchange with ﬁthe information technology being acquired.ﬂ  
Again, the language was too broad to support specific testing.  Even more important was 
the assumption that the technology under c
onsideration was being acquired.  This certainly made sense within the context of the FAR, but when this language was adopted 
in general definitions of Y2K compliance, it
 contributed to misunderstandings.  Y2K was 
often seen to be primarily about modernizati
on (that is, acquisition), when in most cases 
it was about maintenance (that is, keeping 
existing ICT functioning in a predictable manner).  This is another example of how the multiple perspectives of people involved 

with ICT complicated not only the resolution of Y2K problems but also the 

understanding of the problems to be addressed.  
Particularly during its early stages, Y2K was more about understanding the 
problem than addressing it.  And throughout
 the dynamic Y2K experi
ence, definitional complexities stemming from localized, loosely coordinated management strategies 

continued to make it very difficult for orga
nizations to establish and apply precise problem definition and stratification.  For th
ese and other related reasons, there tended to be a generic, relatively uniform response to
 anything labeled as Y2K, even though Y2K 
consisted of a set of nonuniform problems occurring within nonuniform environments. 

Hence, Y2K helped teach organizations th
at even at the definitional level, ICT 
management can be more about balancing multiple perspectives and environmental 

impacts than it is about precise
 technical specifications.   
 2.3  The Need to Shift ICT Management Focus from Hardware and Software to 
Data, Knowledge, and Organizational Goals 
 In addition to definitional issues, Y2K highli
ghted other ICT complexities that challenged 
existing management practices.  Many of th
ese called for a shift in ICT management 
focus from hardware and software to 
data, knowledge, and organizational goals.  It is not surprising that traditional IT professionals and the organizations they work for see hardware and software as the central elements of their systems.  These IT 
professionals come from an educational 
and training background where the difficult subject of computing (namely, hardware and so
ftware) has been their primary element of 
concern.  This knowledge is critical, but people involved in Y2K remediation efforts 
found they could not limit their activities to issues involving computers,
 communication 
devices, operating environments, and app
lication software (see Section 2.3.2.2.).  Increasingly over the course of their Y2K experience, these people were called on to address issues involving the generation, capture, manipulatio
n, sharing, and use of data and knowledge in the pursuit of organizational missions.   
From the computer-centric perspective 
of traditional IT professionals, the 
operational use of data is separate from the sy
stem that is their pr
imary concern: ﬁWithin 
AMC [mobility command] the SC [communications] organization actually does the 

command and control systems.  We develop th
em; we operate them; we maintain them.  
We™re not the ones who put the data in–we have an operational organizationﬂ (AMC/SCA). From this perspective, data 
simply ﬁfeedﬂ the system.  But Y2K reminded 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 43us that data are more than numbers being 
eaten, crunched, and spit out by hardware and software.  Many complications in the Y2K remediati
on effort stemmed from the fact that 
data exist within a database and that data
bases do many things.  Of course, databases 
specify data formats, which was a 
central aspect of the Y2K problem.
2  However, databases are also a compilation of the data types an organization considers worth capturing and specifying.  In other words, data
bases represent the entities of interest to 
the organizations that use them.  Databases 
also represent the relationships among those 
entities.  They represent the questions that an
 organization wants to be able to answer and how they go about answering them.  In the 
largest sense, a well-constructed database represents how an organization views th
e world and how it conducts its business.3  Over the course of Y2K, it became clear
 that changes made to hardware and 
software generally did not address the central Y2K data and database issues.  Early on, Y2K was often viewed as a technology mode
rnization issue involving older mainframes 
and legacy software created decades earli
er.  The problem was ﬁa vestige from the 
bygone times of computer technology, when memory was expensiveﬂ (USA Today 
1997).  But organizations that took on Y2K within the context of general efforts to modernize technology found themselves facing 
two highly intractable and only loosely related problems.  Arthur Gross, then Chie
f Information Officer (CIO) of the Internal 
Revenue Service, said that combining Y2K 
and modernization efforts reminded him of 
the scene in the movie 
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid when Butch and Sundance find themselves trapped by Mexican soldiers on 
a high cliff overlooking a river.  ﬁI just 
remembered I can™t swim,ﬂ says Sundance.  
ﬁIt doesn™t matter.  
The fall will kill you,ﬂ 
replies Butch.  While both efforts were critical, 
they were distinct and often incompatible.  
Y2K was about maintaining a consistent
, predictable existing function, while modernization was about replacing old equipment or adding new technology and 
function.  While changes to hardware and software did not generally address fundamental Y2K issues, changes to data formats in da
tabases required associated changes in any 
module that read, processed, or transferred the newly formatted data.  For this important 
class of problems, the flow of data was th
e driver, not hardware, operating systems, or 
software.  Thus, Y2K fostered a perspective in which data held the central position, with 
hardware and software needing to be adjusted to continue serving that data.  (This perspective is consistent with the fact that
 hardware and software change rapidly, while data and databases change rarely and only at great cost.)   
Furthermore, Y2K reminded us that probl
ems with data can have disastrous 
implications independent of whether the 
hardware and software are performing as 
intended or not. Data corruption could be a greater concern than system failure.  ﬁJACAL 
is a warning system, and if data [are] in
tentionally corrupted–and then sent to an installationŠthat™s what we do our maintenance on.  If 
it™s the wrong informationŠa 
                                                 2 It had become common practice in databases to specify the calendar year as consisting of two 
characters defined as the last two digits of a year in
 the twentieth century.  Such a specification needed 
modification (directly or indirectly) in order to handle years outside the twentieth century.   
 3 It was largely on this basis that many consulting companies (for example, SAP) saw Y2K not as 
an opportunity to modify existing code and to plug in new machines but, rather, as an opportunity to 
convince clients to adopt an entirely new system for handling their data and information processing. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 44slight miss torque on an egress line on an A-
16, that could kill a pilot. –I™m concerned 
about somebody getting bad information into 
a system that we rely on for operationsﬂ 
(AFCIC/SY). Here, the central dr
iver goes beyond the data  to see how people use data to generate information that is essential to
 accomplishing an organizational mission.  Over 
the course of the Y2K effort, the central focus 
shifted from hardware and software to data 
and information and, ultimately, to how people use information to achieve organizational 
goals.  Y2K encouraged organizations to reverse the commonly held perspective of computer-centric IT management by emphasizing 
the central nature of data as they are 
used in the accomplishment of organizationa
l missions.  Data and 
the databases within 
which they reside represent the core knowledge of an organization, and an organization faced with saving either their processing syst
ems or their data will choose the data.  For 
many IT professionals this 
represented a new perspective on their systems.  Data, 
databases, and the knowledge they represent were increasingly seen as holding a stable central position, with computers and software constantly evolving to assure that people 
could use the data and knowledge to achieve organizational goals.   
 2.4  The Need to Align ICT Management 
with Operational and Strategic Goals 
 The increasingly information-centric perspectiv
e of ICT fostered in part by Y2K did not 
just mean that traditional IT profession
als began to view data, information, and 
knowledge as holding a more central position in their world.  It also meant that many 
operational and strategic managers who had pr
eviously seen themselves to be on the 
periphery of the ICT world (if not completely outside it) suddenly found themselves 

thrust into its center.  This coming together
 of operational and ICT managers was one of 
the most significant outcomes of Y2K.  
For many organizations (including the Air 
Force), Y2K instigated the first large-scale, 
formal effort to align ICT management with 

operational and strategic management.  
Generally, IT management and the strategi
c management of an organization have 
differed significantly.  IT management
 has focused on acquisition and keeping technology working within an imperfect worl
d where failures and fixes are a common 
occurrence.  In this world, correct decisions about hardware and software, based primarily on technical knowledge, result in relatively short-term system improvements, 

such as restored or improved functionali
ty, increased compatibility, and easier 
maintenance.   
On the other hand, strategic organizational and business decisions are seen as 
being more pervasive, with longer-term impact on a wider range of the enterprise.  

Strategic decisions are generally the result of a negotiate
d consensus process within a 
dynamic context of shifting economic, legal, and political forces.  The 
goal is to achieve an accepted best direction base
d on appropriate trade-offs and compromises.  While the 
nature of this decision is complex, once it is made there is little tolerance for error and 

miscalculation.  To a strategic planner, failu
re is a career-threatening event; to an IT manager, failure is part of the job.  This is 
one example of the differences in perspective, 
focus, and knowledge that can result in a gap between ICT and strategic management, 
and both sides can help create this gap. ﬁManagers have often delegated or abdicated Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 45decisions to information technology prof
essionals– [while] poor specification of strategic objectives often leads to the information 
technology group setting an information technology strategy in isolation 
from the businessﬂ (Weill and Broadbent 
1998). Where gaps between ICT and strategic management existed, Y2K highlighted 

both the difficulty of bridging them and the critical importance of doing so.  
As Y2K evolved from a primarily technol
ogical to a primarily mission-oriented 
issue, IT and operational personnel were drawn together in new ways.  These two groups, generally with differing backgrounds, perspectives, and corporate cultures, found themselves sharing responsibility for wh
at had become a complex, dynamic, high-

priority, organization-wide project.  Not surprisingly, this coming together of IT and 
operational managers under difficult and st
ressful conditions was not without its problems. ﬁY2K was not just a common com
puter problem but also a mission problem. 
–When we got all the different functionaries 
involved in it, that tended to complicate 
things.  There were times when coordinati
on between the different functionaries was 
difficult, at best, or lacking, at worstﬂ (AMC HQ).  Coordination issues were complicated 
by the fact that IT professionals and operational managers had differing perceptions 
of the Y2K situation and response effort.  Of particular relevance was the considerable difference in their understanding and 

acceptability of risk and error.  As menti
oned earlier, IT profe
ssionals were in an environment where risk, and even breakdown, was far more prevalent and acceptable. 

For these professionals, any change raised the possibility that, even with testing, catastrophic problems could follow.  ﬁEver
yone who™s dealt with software knows that [but] senior leadership–has an absolute unawareness that this is the reality–we live in 
every dayﬂ (AMC/SCA).  Over the course of Y2K, the wide range of perspectives on ICT caused different 
people to have very different responses to the same situation.  For example, when Y2K 
was still seen primarily as a technical pr
oblem, frontline Y2K workers found it extremely 
difficult to obtain resources from higher-lev
el IT managers who were used to dealing 
with potential failure and whose primary focus was on keeping their technology 
functional.   Why would or should a CIO or MIS (Management Information Systems) director with a 
two-to-four-year life expectancy
 at any one organization–say, ﬁGive me $40 million and 
I™ll disrupt our whole information infrastructure
, put all of our current operations at risk 
and, if I™m lucky, do something no one else has ever done and prevent a problem many 

people think is not real and will not in any case happen for years, and otherwise 

contribute nothing to our bottom line?ﬂ (IEEE 1998)  
 Later, as Y2K evolved into an operational issue, another set of differences developedŠthis time between these same 
IT managers and the more mission-focused 
operational managers who gradua
lly took over leadership of the Y2K process.  The far lower tolerance for uncertainty of operational managers contributed to a far greater 
availability of resources devoted to Y2K.  But this reduced tolerance for risk could be extremely irksome to IT managers, who 
lived on a day-to-day basis with the development, operation, and maintenance of 
highly sensitive and often unreliable ICT systems (see Section 1.1.4). ﬁDuring Y2K ther
e was zero tolerance of risk because of 
ignorance on the part of people looking for certainty. An engineer knows that there is Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 46always a probability that things might not
 workﬂ (AMC/SCA). (Risk and response are discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.)  While the differences between traditional 
IT managers and operational managers 
could be significant, something even mo
re significant was strongly emphasized by the 
Y2K experience: the absolute necessity of
 bringing together these two groups under a 
single strategic umbrella.  This recogniti
on became clear even to those who most 
experienced the difficulties of trying to make it happen.  As
 sAMC/HQ stated: ﬁWe need 
to take the information sharing we hadŠtake 
the things that we learned from getting the 
operational people involved in it and looking at it not just as an IT problem but, everybody uses it, it™s a problem throughout 
the business that we doŠand we need to manage it that way.  And we need to make that business as usual.ﬂ  
The growing perception of Y2K as a mission problem served to emphasize the 
cross-functional nature of ICT and the increasingly central role of the new information 
infrastructure in achieving the strategic goals of an organization.  The overriding lesson was that the organization had to incorporate its management of ICT within its overall 
operational and strategic management: 
ﬁThe entire information technology 
portfolio–must be managed by a partnership of business and technical management to 
create business value. –In most busi
nesses, deciding on information technology 
capabilities is far too important a strategic deci
sion to be left to the technical people or, worse, to the outsourcer with its own busine
ss objectives and need to make a profit–ﬂ (Weill and Broadbent 1998). To align ICT 
and operational management, organizations 
need an effective enterprise-wide informa
tion strategy based on achieving organizational goals.  As Y2K evolved from a primarily technol
ogical to a primarily operational effort, 
it brought home the need to align ICT and st
rategic management.  The experience of 
addressing Y2K reminded organizations that
 the ultimate goal of ICT was not the 
continued functioning of local clusters of technology but, rather, was the effective use of information in support of strategic goals.  
This lesson was particularly important to 
government and military organizations less driven by the demands of private enterprise 

and more likely to think of ICT as secondary 
support rather than as a major component of 
their operational product.  The USAF was a prime example of an organization that faced 
this lesson as its Y2K effort evolved from 
IT leadership to operational leadership.  
 
 2.5  The Need to Manage ICT Cross-Functionally 
 Differences between traditional IT managers and operational managers were not the only 

organizational gaps that needed to be bridged in order to effectively address Y2K (or, more generally, to effectively manage ICT). 
 The complexity of ICT makes it easy for 
people with differing perspectives to view the same system very differently.  
Probably the most common per
ceptual barriers that had to be overcome during the 
Y2K effort stemmed from the organization of
 most corporate, governmental, and military 
entities into functional units.  A worker™s func
tional location impacts nearly every aspect 
of her or his organizational life.  Information 
flow is a major component of this impact.  
In most organizations, information shari
ng ﬁis usually up and down the structural hierarchyŠup to superiors and down to subordinatesŠwithin functional boundariesﬂ Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 47(Davenport 1997).  While there are many situati
ons where it is entirely appropriate for 
workers to focus on their particular functi
onal niche, most high-level operational and 
strategic objectives re
quire integration across functional 
lines.  In these situations, ﬁstovepipeﬂ perspectives can result in damaging operationa
l and communication barriers. The Y2K situation emphasized that ICT is one  
such critical cross-functional activities, in which success often depends on overcoming 
stovepipe perspectives and actions. Because of their structure and culture, 
military organizations are particularly 
susceptible to the problems that can result 
from the stovepipe effect.  Fortunately, when 
faced with achieving cross-functional goals, 
leaders at the highest levels of these 
organizations recognize the importance of getting people to look and act beyond their 
particular area of the overall operation. For instance, ﬁthe 
integration of our aerospace forces and people is a critical element of our plan. This process will break down 

stovepipes between air and space, leading to 
integrated solutions with air and space 
systems that are more effective and effici
ent than separate systemsﬂ (Peters 2000). 
Nevertheless, even with this high-level recognition of the issue, cross-functional management of enterprise-wide projects 
can be extremely difficult to achieve.  
During Y2K, the need to overcome func
tional barriers in the management and 
operation of ICT was particularly evident.  As Y2K progressed, issues initially viewed as 
isolated within a particular technology under the control and responsibility of a particular functional area became increasi
ngly intractable as those issues cut across technologies 
and functions.  These cross-functional compli
cations generally began at the level of ownership and responsibility issues and progressed to operational, strategic, and legal issues.   For example, most organizations bega
n their Y2K efforts with a unit-by-unit inventory and assessment of at-risk technology (for the USAF this was called the  Air 

Force All Systems Inventory, or AFASI).  Yet, 
even at this early st
ep, it could be difficult to maintain a functional unit perspective,
 particularly where ownership of and responsibility for systems were unclear.  Whos
e name went into th
e inventory as owner of a given system that was paid for and 
developed (in conjunction with an outside vendor) by one functional unit, used by a number of different functional units, and 
supported by yet another functional unit?  Who 
was responsible for certifying this system 

as Y2K compliant?   
Given the pervasiveness and interdepe
ndency of system elements, tensions 
could arise that were difficult to resolve through central guidance. For instance, ﬁ[AMC] had an argument with ESC (Elect
ronic Systems Center) that lasted for 
months over who the ‚owner™ [of certain software] was.  Other systems have had 
the same argument over ownershipﬂ 
(AMC HQ). Or, ﬁIn AFASI there was a 
Sponsor, Owner, and PMO (program manageme
nt office) field.  Folks sorted out who these were on their ownﬂ (AFCA). During Y2K, functional unit perspectives were further blurred by the central role of data.  Section 2.3 discusses how changes to data formats were greatly complicated 
because databases not only contain instan
ces of data but also represent how an 
organization views the world and conducts its business.  Beyond this, database change 

was further complicated by the fact that data are commonly shared across systems.  This 

meant that changes to one database owned by one functional unit could lead to the need 

for coordinative changes in other databases owned by other functional units (as well as Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 48coordinative changes in all the software that read, manipulated, and transmitted that 
data).  Another complicating factor coul
d occur when one functional unit owned a system, but another unit owned the database (SSG).  
All of these interdependent complicati
ons contributed to a highly uncertain atmosphere wherein no single functional unit coul
d declare with absolute certainty that its 
systems would work in the face of Y2K.  When
 these units turned to the makers of their 
system components to provide some answers,
 the same uncertaint
y, again stemming from 
the interdependencies of those component
s, was evident in the highly qualified statements of Y2K complianc
e that were provided.   All CCRP controls and servers rely on serv
ices provided by the underlying operating 
system. While we have observed the behavior of CCRP controls and servers with dates 
above and below the Year 2000 rollover, as well as during a simulated rollover, it is not 

possible for us to fix bugs in the compiler, that compiler's run-time library, or operating 
system. Therefore, the accuracy
 of this, or any other product claiming compliance, may 
be affected by the operating system in use. (CCRP 1999)  
 We had to assume that we would be operating in uncertainty. (374
th AW/LG) 
 The fear of the unknown is what drove the way business was conducted. (AMC HQ) 
 (Chapter 4 looks more closely 
at the impact of this atmo
sphere of uncertainty on Y2K risk assessment and response tactics.)  
Another complication of the Y2K effort was the common occurrence of multiple 
sources of guidance.  This complication st
emmed from the application of functional 
perspectives to what was a cross-functional issue.  Stovepipe Y2K management efforts 
often meant that Y2K workers had to be 
aware of and respond to numerous overlapping 
sets of directives.  In many cases, this contri
buted to a significant in
crease in workload.   There was an awful lot of redundancy from the stovepiping within the different 
functional communities for data gathering and reporting. –AMC had three reporting 

chainsŠthe MAJCOM, the Air Force, and 
the unified commandŠeach with their own 
unique reporting requirements, their own unique reporting format that covered a lot of the 

same data.  We™d get guidance on the same issue from all three chains at different points 

in the process.  We were continually having to stop, go back, and look at what we™d 
already done.  We had to try and match the latest set of guidance with other guidance that 
we already had.  If there were any problems, we had to figure out what to do about it and 

how to deal with it all. (AMC HQ) 
 One medical division was particularly imp
acted by underbudgeting man-hours for Y2K.  
As of December 1999, this division estimated
 more than 4,000 hours of additional Y2K-
related effort.  More import
antly, they indicated that they had to respond to guidance from five different units, and 
they estimated that approximate
ly 50 percent of their effort was spent in dealing with multiple guidance and policy.  This was not an isolated 
situation nor was it limited to the Air Force. 

          ﬁA lesson from Y2K is th
at we have underestimated the workload, the 
amount of tasking involved in communicat
ion, and the work involved in keeping up with directives and changes to the di
rectivesﬂ (USFJ). In part, multiple Y2K 
guidance occurred because no single functional unit could adopt a response strategy Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 49that adequately addressed the spectrum
 of uncertainties stemming from cross-
functional interdependencies.  For 
this reason, many large, multifaceted 
organizations found it necessary to establis
h a temporary cross-functional entity to 
oversee Y2K efforts (for example, the President™s Council on Year 2000 
Conversion).  These entities tended to be operationally oriented, focusing more on 
mission capabilities than on specific tec
hnology within functional domains.  As 

stated in the Department of Defense Y
ear 2000 Management Plan, this meant that 
ﬁprogress will be measured not in terms of
 numbers of systems 
fixes, but in terms 
of warfighter mission readiness unimpeded by Y2K glitchesﬂ (USAF 1999b). 
Through the use of these temporary cross-
functional entities focused on ﬁmission 
threads,ﬂ attention could be paid not only to the functional nodes of an organization™s information system but also, more importantl
y, to the links between those nodes.  In the Air Force, this temporary entity was calle
d the Air Force Year 2000 Office (AFY2KO).  Chapter 4 looks more closely at the ro
le of the AFY2KO and other Air Force 
organizational entities involved in Y2K, including examination of the issue of whether 

such a cross-functional entity is desirable on a more permanent basis.  

 There were many reasons for the ofte
n fragmented, piecemeal organizational 
perspective on Y2K.  Faced with a complex, 
uncertain situation, people tended to fall 
back on what they understood bestŠtheir own particular corner of 
the organizational and ICT world.  In addition, day-to-day operational issues and functional demands made it 
extremely difficult for individuals to keep in
 mind the cross-functi
onal interdependencies of their systems as well as their roles in 
the overall flow of data and information to 
achieve organizational goals.  Finally, organizational territorial issues and the 
mechanisms for funding systems worked agains
t a cross-functional perspective, as with MSG: ﬁWe really didn™t understand the configur
ation of our system of systems.  That 
problem is exacerbated by the way systems ar
e viewed and, more importantly, by the way 
systems are funded.  They™re funded individua
lly as a system, and so there is no real 
impetus to look at it as a system of systems.ﬂ  

 In many cases, these same issues con
tinue to contribute to a fragmented 
approach to the ongoing management of 
ICT in general. ﬁThe Air Force™s [information] efforts may not be as well 
integrated as they should be, which may 
result in duplication of effort and ineffi
ciencyﬂ (USAF deputy chief of staff for air 
and space operations, reported in USAF 2000c).  

 Fortunately, the Y2K experience confront
ed many key people with the limitations 
of relying on piecemeal, functional perspectives to manage information and 

communication technology.  Managers of the overall Y2K effort came away realizing 
they had been forced to fill in gaps that ex
isted in the business-as-usual management of 
ICT.  They realized that, from a mission-
oriented perspective, ICT management was 
more about sharing ideas, developing appropriate trade-offs, and balancing competing 
ﬁgoodsﬂ than it was about making correct technology decisions. In other words, people 

need to be taught about teaming, sharing id
eas, and working with one another cross-functionally as they enter the business. To do this: ﬁwe have to break down the barriers and walls both organizationally and procedurally, from a policy standpoint and from a 
security standpoint.  There are some thi
ngs that we™ve created over the last 50 years–that will keep us from being flexible in
 how we adapt to this kind of business in 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 50the futureﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO). Thus, Y2K helped teach organizations the necessity of 
breaking down functional barriers in the strategic management of ICT.  
  2.6  The Need for an Overall Informat
ion Strategy Centered on People, Information, and Mission   The media portrayed Y2K as an issue centered on computer technology,
4 but managers 
on the Y2K front lines knew that far more was at stake.  Previously, they had focused on specific components of their technology; now th
ey were being called on to consider the role of that technology in the overall organizational operation.  They were seeing that the interdependent elements of the ICT infrastr
ucture were not fully under their control and could not be addressed in isolation.  They were seeing that data issues could not be adequately understood independently of the interpretation and use of that data.   As this more holistic perspective grew 
(and as the new century approached), a 
change occurred in specific Y2K project goals.  Whereas early on the goal had been to fix every possible glitch, the approaching deadline and increased focus on mission meant 

that glitches with little or no impact on operati
onal goals could be ignored.   Issue: The Real Time Operating System (RTO
S) embedded on the Tadpole Technology 
SBC (system bus controller) does not recogni
ze that the year 2000 is a leap year.  
 Resolution:
 The only CompuScene SE application software that is affected by this issue 
is the DBLOAD off-line utility. Any files created
 or modified on 29 Feb. 2000 will have 
an incorrect date stamp. The data contained in
 the file [are] not affected. Since there is no 
operational impact due to the date stamp error, LMIS (Lockheed Martin Information 
Systems) plans to take no action on this issue. (LMIS 1999) 
 As organizations increasingly put their Y2K efforts within an operational context, they 
were doing more than simply changing specific Y2K project goals.  They were also shifting the role of ICT managers from a support activity into the operational mainstream 
of the organization.  As Y2K progressed, ICT managers were in
creasingly placed in positions where 
their efforts were meaningful not so much
 because their technology worked, but because 
they enabled people to use data and information to accomplish operational missions.  

With this came a growing rec
ognition of how the systems they 
managed fit into the larger 
organizational picture: ﬁPeople saw for the first time that this information does fit 

together.  Systems do support missions and missi
ons do rely upon certain things.  So that at least at a very high level the operational system world–suddenly came togetherŠ
central management, mission funding, personnel,
 all these kinds of thingsﬂ (AFCA).  
Despite this recognition, it remained a di
fficult proposition to develop and implement 
new long-term strategies for managing ICT systems.   
For most technology managers, Y2K was 
a new organizational experience.  Under previous business-as-usual practice, the investment in ICT had been essentially 
uncoordinated across the enterprise.  During Y2K, the ICT community was called on to 
                                                 4 For example, the representation of Y2K on the cover of the June 2, 1997, issue of 
Newsweek
 depicted a computer screen breaking into pieces.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 51play a major role in a coordinated, strategic,
 mission-oriented activit
y.  As with any new role, it was not always easy, as illustrated in the following excerpts:  
 For the first time the SC community ran a command and control effort.  We didn™t do that 
real well in the beginning.  We didn™t understand how to do command and control the 
way other operators do it.  And that is something we are going to have to evolve into if 
we are going to do what SSG is talking about, an active monitoring and command and 

control of this network asset. (AFCA)  
 We do it now but it™s fragmented. – We™re do
ing it in bits and pieces.  It needs to 
be–uniform. (SSG) 
 There™s a huge amount of confusion at the bases and MAJCOMs. –We™re not consistent.  

Not just at–[our] level but across the rest of the Air Force. (AFCA) 
 The fragmentation and inconsistency of IC
T management stemmed in part from the 
operational community having a strategic perspective the ICT community lacked and 
needed.  The Y2K experience emphasized the 
need for an integrated ICT strategic 
perspective that started not with technology but, rather, with the people in the organization who created and used information, 
with the nature of that information, and 
with the missions that people accomplished through the use of that information.  
ﬁInformation and knowledge are quintessentially
 human creations, and we will never be 
good at managing them unless we give pe
ople a primary roleﬂ (Davenport 1997).   
Y2K taught many ICT leaders that they n
eeded to develop an enterprise-wide 
information strategy that would be aligne
d with the overall organizational strategy. ﬁLeaders who were actively engaged in this process, they essentially 
‚saw the light.™  I think those individuals in leadership positions
 will carry that throughout the rest of their 
careersﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO).  This recognition among organizational leaders helped stimulate efforts to develop an overall information strategy centered on people, 

information, and missions.   
In the Air Force, steps toward developing such an overall information strategy 
began shortly after the New Year.  

 Recognizing the importance of information s
uperiority, Air Force leaders from a variety 
of functional areas met [on] March 7 [2000] to chart the future course of Air Force 
information operations. –Currently, the Air For
ce™s efforts may not be as well integrated 
as they should be, which may result in duplication of effort and inefficiency. Creating an 

integrated Air Force approach to information operations is the goal of the Air Force IO 

(information operations) steering group [Headquarters USAF]. –Representatives from 
many functional areas were invited to par
ticipate. –This was the first time the [Air 
Force] Office of Special Investigations, we
ather, space, intelligence, surveillance, and 
reconnaissance, legal, communications and information, public affairs, Reserve, Guard 

and other key area representatives met at this level to develop a plan to integrate all of 
their individual information operations efforts. We didn™t want to exclude any significant 

information operations stakeholders. –The representatives also discussed the legal 
issuesŠdomestic, international and intelligence oversight lawsŠthat affect the planning 
and execution of information operations. (USAF 2000c) 
 Clearly, the lessons of cross-functional management and attention to system 
environments were not lost on this gr
oup of Air Force information leaders.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 52Similarly, on April 14, 2000, the Air For
ce held a workshop on the lessons of Y2K for ICT management.
5  Again, cross-functional managers who had previously not 
come together found that they shared importa
nt pieces of the ICT management puzzle.  
They also found that these pieces would continue to be important for ongoing issues 
beyond Y2K.  ﬁThere are some things we can do with CIP (critical infrastructure 
protection) and with information assurance– 
that will carry forth from the lessons that 
we learned from Y2K.  Prior to this works
hop that discussion really hadn™t taken placeﬂ 
(AFCIO/AFY2KO). It is no simple task to keep ICT t
echnology functioning effectively on a daily basis, and it is not surprising that ICT ma
nagers must often focus on the continued 
functioning of local clusters of technology.  However, Y2K helped remind organizations 

that ICT was an enterprise-wide activity a
nd that ICT management needed to focus on 
more than technology.  It needed to focus on 
the effective use of information by people in 
support of overall organizational missions.   
Unfortunately, the struggle to understand and manage the critical relationships 
among technical, human, and organizational as
pects of ICT systems is a difficult and 
never-ending process.  Not surprisingly, there are strong tendencies to revert to a less comprehensive business-as-usual approach.   

 
 2.7  Do Not Return to Business as Usual  Many middle-level managers learned the less
ons of Y2K firsthand, but some doubt the 
long-term impact of those lessons on the 
organization.  ﬁThose of us at mid-level 
management will carry forward the lessons that
 we learned during Y2K, but I™m skeptical 

about how we will carry these things forward as an organizational enterprise.  Because I 
don™t feel that we had the full buy-in throughout the or
ganization on this problemﬂ 
(AFCIO/AFY2KO). There were a number of reasons why peopl
e who were not on the Y2K front lines would continue to view ICT management 
as a loosely connected, technology-focused business-as-usual activity.  For one thing, mo
st people not directly involved with the issue saw Y2K as a nonevent or, even worse,
 as a hoax.  There had been threats of catastrophe, yet ﬁnothingﬂ happened.  How could it be viewed as a watershed event with important lessons to teach?  
Perhaps even more significantly, the crisis
 of Y2K forced people to grapple with complex issues that were not fully under th
eir control.  This is not a particularly comfortable position for most people.  With
 the passing of the crisis came a natural 
tendency to seek a return to more familiar 
methods and roles.  ﬁY2K made people do 
some uncomfortable things.  Now that Y2K is 
over there will be a tendency to go back to doing it the old wayﬂ (MSG).  Despite this tendency, one of the most important themes of 
this work is the need to retain and build on 
the lessons of Y2K, to resist the seemingly 
easy path of a return to business as usual. Air Force ICT managers involved in d
ealing with the complexities of Y2K 
saw that existing business-as-usual practice could not deal with the situation, even                                                  5 This workshop was part of the National Research Council study that produced this report.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 53as they experienced the benefits of changing that practice. Furthermore, they 
recognized the ﬁneed to take some of the 
things we™ve been talking about [in the Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop] and make 
that the new business as usualﬂ (AMC HQ). This call for changes in ICT management 
practice did not suggest an absence of useful procedures in place before Y2K.  On the contrary, at the tactical level, staff 
complained that the new processes they were pressed to use for Y2K duplicated existing 

structure (374
th AW/CS).  
At the strategic level, however, Y2K leaders saw a clear need for change.  They 
had struggled to fill the gaps in the overall management of ICT.  They had developed an 

organizational context for what had been an essentially fragmented management activity.  

With the Y2K effort complete, they grew c
oncerned that their newly developed context would not result in ongoing benefits, specifically, that the enterprise as a whole was not 
being considered. Even with a new mana
gement and policy, the strength from an 
enterprise standpoint was being lost, and the momentum gained through Y2K was rapidly 
falling away.  In short, they were ﬁlosing–[their] opportunity to maintain the enterprise 
perspectiveﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO).  A critical issue was that temporary organi
zations and money had been used to guide 
the Y2K effort, and as a result, no perman
ent homes had been established for the 
arduously developed policies and practices. 
 We get into this issue of spinning up special organizations to deal with problems with unclear 
integration plans.  Once we know that organization is going to go away, what happens to the 
policy that came out of that program?  What happens to the funding that was tied to that 

program?  What happens to requirements that were associated with that program?  I know for 
a fact that in the case of Y2K none of
 that was put in place. (AFCIO/AFY2KO) 
 Despite the barriers to implementing an 
ongoing integrated plan for managing ICT 
systems, some leaders saw the lessons of Y2
K to be both compelling and even inevitable. 
 We now recognize the interrelationships between organizations and functional areas – we 

would be remiss in our responsibilities if we turn around and go back to doing business as 
usual. – Organizations have to – see changes as they occur and make adaptations – learn 

from the mistakes they made and the things they
 did right. – To turn around and try to go 
back to business as usual is not only impossible, it™s the wrong thing to do. 

(AFCIO/AFY2KO) 
 The general lessons of Y2K were felt strongly by many who participated in the 
experience, and these lessons are critical
 to the successful management of ICT. 
Nevertheless, without accompa
nying organizational change, these lessons cannot provide ongoing benefits.  It is far simpler to ca
ll for an enterprise-wide ICT management 
strategy than it is to make 
it happen within a complex, dynamic organization.  The next 
chapter examines organizational aspects of 
the Air Force Y2K experience, with a focus 
on institutionalizing the general lessons of Y2K.Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 55Chapter 3  Aligning Organizational and ICT Strategies 
 While the organization as a whole is becoming more and more 
interdependent
, the parts 
increasingly display choice and behave 
independently
.  The resolution of this dilemma 
requires a dual shift of paradigm.  The first shift will result in the ability to see the 
organization as a multiminded, sociocultural system, a voluntary association of 
purposeful members who have come together to serve themselves by serving a need in 

the environment. –The second shift will help us see through chaos and complexity and 
learn how to deal with an interdependent set of variables. (Gharajedaghi 1999)  
 Chapter 2 focused on general lessons of the Year 2000 (Y2K) that establish a need and indicate an overall framework for an in
tegrated, enterprise-wide information and 
communication strategy.  This chapter focuses on more specific lessons of Y2K that can 
be used to translate that general framework into organizational practices and tactics.  This 
can be an extremely difficult task.  Li
ke information and communication technology 
(ICT) systems, organizations are dynamic ope
n systems consisting of ﬁorganized wholes 

of many variablesﬂ (Bertalanffy 1976).  Anyone
 involved in managing the coevolution of 
these two highly complex, fundamentally differe
nt yet interdependent systems (that is, 
ICT and the organization itself) is engaged in a never-ending effort to improve a 
situation, not a grand scheme to achieve final victory.  
Given the complexity of managing ICT 
within the context of a specific 
organization, the notion of an organization™s ﬁinformation ecologyﬂ has been gaining 
visibility (Davenport 1997).   
 Complete alignment [between the information technology portfolio and the business 
strategy] is usually nonsustainable because strategic context constantly changes and 

because information technology portfolios are assets that take
 a long time and significant 
investment and expertise to develop. – Alignment is dynamicŠa change in any one of 

the ingredients usually requires another shift elsewhere.  The goal is for information 

technology investments and the portfolio to be heading in the right direction to maximize 
the value of those investments to the business. (Weill and Broadbent 1998)   
 Although this is a business school perspective, it nevertheless sounds more like tending a 
garden than balancing a financial spreadsheet. 
Many United States Air Force (hereafter simply USAF, or Air Force) 
leaders already share a vision in which major elements across the service will 

operate within a single integrated system.  This vision acknowledges the open 
nature of commanding such an integrated environment, calling it an art.  There is 
even the recognition that achieving this vision requires organizational change, as 
stated in the Air Force Vision 2020. ﬁWe ope
rate aircraft and spacecraft optimized 
for their environments, but the art 
of commanding aerospace power lies in integrating systems to produce the exact eff
ects the nation needs. To meet this need, 
we™ve modified our command organizations to
 take full advantage of air, space, and information expertise.ﬂ  
With slight modification, this Air Fo
rce vision statement could serve equally 
well as a vision statement for managing ICT:  We operate ICT systems optimized 

for their environments, but the art of ma
naging ICT lies in integrating systems to 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 56produce the exact effects the organization needs. To meet this need, we will modify 
our organizations to take full advantage of mission and information expertise.  
When most people hear the phrase ﬁsystem integration,ﬂ they think of technical 
issues, such as machine compatibility a
nd achieving common operating environments.  
From this computer-centric perspective, 
two systems are integr
ated if they are electronically linked and can communicate 
with each other.  However, the Y2K experience demonstrated that cross-functi
onal ICT challenges, 
particularly those involving the interpretation and use of data and information, cannot be defined solely or 
even primarily in terms of technology.  Li
ke Y2K, current ICT management challenges 
such as system integration, information assu
rance, security, and life-cycle management 
cannot be met on purely technical grounds.  Becau
se ICT is pervasive, yet personalized; 
affects everyone, yet has no single owner; and is intimately tied to organizational 
missions, broad-based ICT issues inevita
bly generate tensions across various organizational boundaries. Y2K was a warning that technical solutions to broad-based ICT problems that fail to consider thes
e tensions are unlikely to succeed.  Under the added strain of Y2K, the impact
 of cross-organizational tensions on Air Force ICT policy and practice became increasingly evident.  While the tensions and 

related issues were exacerbated by Y2K, they are a fact of organizational life even during 

periods of business as usual.  In most cas
es, these tensions represent competing yet 
mutually desirable ﬁgoodsﬂ (for example, additional functionality versus tighter security), each of which needs appropriate representation 
within the organization.  For this reason, 
attempts to solve these problems by eliminating the tensions that caused them are 

generally unrealistic and even undesirable.  One-dimensional cures aimed at establishing 
enterprise-wide ICT uniformity can be worse th
an the problem.  Rather than seeking to eliminate ICT tensions, management strategies 
and tactics need to carefully consider and appropriately balance these dynamic multidimensional demands.  Such strategies and 
tactics must be based on an enterprise-wide vi
ew of the varied ways that information is 
used to achieve organizational goals.  The remainder of this chapter explores 
specific organizational lessons of the Air 
Force Y2K experience that clarify and expand on the art of managing integrated ICT 
systems.  These lessons are discussed 
under the following general headings:   3.1  Balance Central Management and Local Execution 
3.2  Consider Evolution of the Problem over Time 

3.3  Clarify Ownership and Responsibility 
3.4  Consider the Impact of Local Diversity 

3.5  Consider the Role of Local Autonomy 

3.6  Build Trust Between Local Admi
nistrators and Central Managers 3.7  Strengthen Horizontal Relationships across the Organization 3.8  Overcome Funding Disincentives to 
Working across Organizational Boundaries 
3.9  Clarify the Appropriate Level of Central Guidance and the Role of Central Administrators 

3.10  Address Cross-boundary Issues in Life-Cycle Management of Systems 
3.11  Tackle the Huge Informational Effo
rt Needed to Support Management of 
Integrated Systems 

3.12  Address Issues of Organizational Culture  3.13  Empower Permanent Organizational Ent
ities Focused on Cross-boundary Issues  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 57 These organizational lessons of Y2K can help guide not only the Air Force but also any organization seeking to integrate ICT system
s and to align management and use with 
organizational goals and strategies.  
 
 3.1  Balance Central Management and Local Execution 
 Probably the most pervasive or
ganizational ICT issue is the 
intricate and dynamic tension 
between central management and local units or
 departments.  Neither
 the central nor the 
local perspective is right or better, and it would be neither feasible nor appropriate to attempt to eliminate the differences between
 them.  Achieving an effective balance between central management and local exec
ution is a critical component of any 

organizational information strategy.  During Y2
K these tensions were especially evident and had significant impact.  In 
fact, nearly all the lessons discussed in this chapter relate 
in some way to tensions across the hori
zontal layers of an organization.   The Air Force is well aware of the desirability and complexity of balancing these 
tensions, since its overall management strategy, commonl
y referred to as ﬁmanage 
globally, execute locally,ﬂ depends on it.  This popular strategy extends far beyond the Air Force.  At many organizati
ons in the public and private sectors, top-level managers 
use some version of this strategy as they 
simultaneously attempt to coordinate action 
toward a common goal while freeing individual groups to adjust tactics to their specific conditions.  In the Air Force, the manage globally, ex
ecute locally strategy is implemented by 
designating a single point of 
contact (POC) for each major 
action or issue.  The POC 
provides general guidance to local units who act on that guidance within the context of 
their individual situations.  Y2K demonstrated 
that ICT presents special challenges to this 
strategy.  Over the course of its Y2K effort, the Ai
r Force found it very difficult to establish consistent guidance under a single POC. 
 This was evident across numerous levels, 
functional areas, and locations. For instance, 
ICT staff received guidance from and were 
accountable to several POCs, or bosses. The di
fficulties with this arrangement included a 
lack of organization and format (AFY2KO)
, the dynamics of dealing with multiple 
bosses (AMC/SCA), and demands for the same data in different formats (375
th AW/MDG). In some cases, this resulted in ex
cessive use of man-hours: ﬁWe put in about 20,000 man-hours overall. It should
 have been about 12,000ﬂ (375th AW/MDG).  
During Y2K, many complicating factors made 
it difficult to implement and effectively 
employ standard Air Force management prac
tices based on central guidance and local execution.  These factors are important to unders
tand as part of a postmortem to Y2K, but 
far more importantly, they are general facets 
of ICT that continue to complicate ongoing 
management of this critical resource.  As le
ssons learned from Y2K, they must be taken 
into account in the implementation and main
tenance of any enterprise-wide information 
strategy.  These lessons are discussed in the following sections. 
 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 583.2  Consider Evolution of the Problem over Time  One set of factors that comp
licated the effort to mana
ge globally, execute locally stemmed from tensions generated by the wa
y Y2K evolved over time.  Chronologically, 

Y2K™s evolution ran counter to this standard management st
rategy.  Rather than evolving from central awareness and management 
to local execution, the Y2K experienceŠas with most large ICT problemsŠevolved from 
local identification a
nd action to central awareness and management (AFCA). For inst
ance, MITRE first became involved in the Air Force Y2K effort in 1993 (Cheyenne Mount
ain) and then again in 1995 (AWACS), 
before the organizational issues with Y2K were prominent. This process was similar to 
the evolution of Y2K in industry.  
 Once the Y2K problem reached a certain cr
itical mass, management efforts rose 
up the chain of command and out across the military and government. Specifically, ﬁin 

October 1997 there was no Y2K policy or guidance; in November 1997 the original guidance was that everybody should report to the host units; –[by] spring 1998 the policy was that everyone should report up the chain of command.  This caused problemsﬂ 
(AMC/SCP). As higher levels of comma
nd became involved, so did Congress and 
accompanying oversight staff, each with ﬁtheir
 particular view of
 [Y2K]ﬂ (MITRE).  For AMC/SCP, the process for Y2K fixes was ﬁ(1) MAJCOM discovers the problem and 

finds a solution;– (2) policy is created; (3) three months later the Air Force comes out 
with a [different] policy–to fix the problem;– (4) three months later the DOD 

[Department of Defense] comes out with a pol
icy that again forces us to do Y2K checks 
but in a different format–.Those after-the
-fact policies–led to the MAJCOM being 
hesitant to put out policy.ﬂ  Similarly, from the perspective of the 374
th OG, ﬁWe 
couldn™t tell who was asking what.  We just had to do things again and again.ﬂ From the local perspective, the gradua
l upward and outward shifting of problem 
management produced a changing and, at time
s, redundant policy, making it difficult for 
local Air Force Y2K managers and staff to fi
nd a way of coping with the situation. Even as local Y2K staff struggled with the uncertainties of an evolving policy environment, 
central managers were experi
encing their own growing uncertainties.  In this case, 
uncertainty grew over time as managers became
 increasingly aware of how Y2K risk was complicated by the cross-functiona
l, interdependent aspects of ICT.  These managers saw 
the need to achieve consistency and accountability in the service-wide Y2K response, but this was greatly complicated by the divers
ity of local ICT activities.  ﬁNumerous 
places–[use] Air Force personnel to do systems development.  They have their CDA 
(central design activity); we have our CDA.  They don™t use our tools; we don™t use 
theirs.  We don™t talk to themŠmaybe 
at conferences sometimes. MAJCOMs do their 
own development.  Even the National Guard does its own development in some small 

partﬂ (SSG).  The difficult task of managing interdepe
ndencies was often heightened by a lack of global information at the local level. ﬁT
here was a lack of understanding in the functional community of how–systems–wor
ked together.  The functional world understood the processes their systems went through, but because of manpower 
downsizing and people changing jobs,– the people who really understood that System A 
passed its information to System B th
rough System C weren™
t thereﬂ (MSG).  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 59Although problems at the local and centra
l levels were different and could therefore lead to tensions, they were both related to the ways Y2K evolved over time.  In 
this context it is instructive to compare larg
e ICT problem-solving activities to large ICT 
central initiatives.  While pr
oblem-solving activities such as the Y2K effort tend to 
evolve from local recognition and activity to
 central management, large ICT initiatives 
tend to follow a reverse evolutionary pattern, one that more 
closely resembles the manage 
globally, execute locally principle.  Nevertheless, the initiative™s pattern of central management to local execution generates its
 own set of tensions between central and local units.  With Y2K we saw that local identifica
tion and execution existed before global management was established (or even seen as
 necessary).  On the other hand, with large 
ICT initiatives, such as the Defense Messaging System (DMS),
1 the concept is usually 
generated centrally, while the reality of that idea is subsequently identified and tested locally. ﬁUsually ideas come from top dow
n– but feasibility must filter up from the 
bottomﬂ (375
th AW/NCC).  In addition, at any gi
ven time there are generally numerous 
overlapping system initiatives, forcing bases to ﬁjust field [them] and then try to figure 
[them] outﬂ (374th AW/SC). 
In this situation, local executors become testers for centrally developed projects, 
often bringing to light unanticipated problems 
that then filter back up the layers of the organization, perhaps leading central managers to
 adjust their initial plans.  This not only 
occurs with big programs but also with rela
tively small, highly frequent changes. For 
example, patches are function-specific, but wh
en loaded onto a local system, they often introduce a new problem, one that may not 
be easily resolved. In some cases, 
unanticipated local problems can force central management to abort a patch load 

altogether (374th AW/OG).  
Bases do not generally like to see themselv
es as a testing ground for central ICT initiatives.  Local units are focused on their functional missions; they
 expect that those 
missions will be enabled, not disrupted, by their ICT.  Thus, when the central idea does 

not match the local reality, it can generate 
strong responses and loss of support at the local level (375
th AW/NCC).  
ICT issues can evolve across organizational layers in two directions: large 
problem-solving activities evolving up into centr
ally managed initiatives, and centrally 
managed initiatives evolving down into locally 
driven problem-solving activities.  Each 
related pattern has the potential to generate tensions across those layers.  In addition, given the often rapid pace of ICT change, central ICT management can face a difficult 
task just in keeping up with the current version of these dynamic issues.  
While Y2K was primarily a problem-solving ac
tivity, the tensions associated with 
central initiatives were also
 visible in the Y2K response effort both because Y2K itself 
evolved into a centrally managed initiative and because Y2K efforts became closely 

interrelated with ICT initiatives in such areas as version control, certification, configuration management, tes
ting, continuity planning, and security. (The first four of these areas are discussed in Section 3.10, the last two, in Chapter 4.)   Despite the various tensions from differen
ces at the local and central levels, it is important to keep in mind that each represen
ts critical and compatible strengths.  Local                                                  1 DMS is an initiative led by the Department of De
fense to establish secure e-mail throughout the 
department. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 60units more quickly recognize and respond to sp
ecific evolving issues, while central units more easily understand and respond to the need for compatibility and coordination of 
effort over time.  For these strengths to be in
tegrated, the tensions that can arise between 
central and local perspectives must be
 constantly and creatively managed.  
  3.3  Clarify Ownership 
and Responsibility  Another source of the organizational tensions that complicated the management of Y2K 
(and continues to complicate 
ongoing ICT management) was a 
lack of clarity in the ownership of and responsibility for ICT systems.   ﬁIt™s never one person who owns a 

systemﬂ (374
th AW/XP).  Generally, local units attemp
t to assert control over the systems 
they rely on.  During difficult times such 
as Y2K, however, central ownership of these shared systems could be seen as desirable, since it lessened local responsibility for 

assessing and addressing the problem.  The 374th AW/CS, for instance, viewed ﬁ70 
percent of systems–[as being] out of local 
control; that is, the managing unit–[was not] 
on base.  Therefore, 70 percent of assessment was already done.ﬂ Central ownership could be viewed as meaning central responsib
ility for a system™s functioning.  ﬁWe have 
no access into C2IPS (Command and Control Information Processing System), so we 

have to take [central™s] word on Y2K complianceﬂ (374
th AW/CS). 
 If other units owned their systems, then 
local units were free to interpret central 
Y2K policy as best suited their needs.  This was especially visible at overseas 

(OCONUS) bases, where stressful frontline 
conditions and limited resources increased the incentive to minimize the demands of the 
Y2K response. This is illustrated by such statements as: ﬁIt was a moot point to fr
eeze our systems because systems are centrally 
controlled,ﬂ and ﬁWe didn™t have to do mo
st DOD tests because we™re at the end of 
the–[system] chainﬂ (374th AW/CS).  Yet even
 at major stateside (CONUS) bases, 
unclear ownership and responsibility could be a complicating 
factor. ﬁWe argued with the 
Audit Agency over who is responsible for making sure the base has updatesŠthe base or 

PMO (Program Management Office)ﬂ (375
th AW/CG). In addition, like their OCONUS 
counterparts, CONUS bases could interpret cen
tral ownership as meaning that primary 
responsibility for assessment wa
s not with the local units. ﬁC2IPS is on the infrastructure spreadsheet.  Systems like this that are used
 but not owned appear on the database – but aren™t inventoriedﬂ (375th AW/CG).  
In actuality, neither central nor local units alone can be fully responsible for shared ICT systems.  Even when central units
 are solely responsible for development and 

fielding of organization-wide off-the-shelf systems (whether government or commercial), 

these systems invariably require ongoing ad
justment for implementation, operation, and 

maintenance under local conditions and need
s.  For this reason, a comprehensive 
assessment of shared ICT requires an appr
opriate integration of central and local 
evaluation.  Another aspect of unclear ownership of and responsibility for ICT systems is that 
different componentsŠand even parts of comp
onentsŠcan be viewed as being owned or under the responsibility of different units. For instance, ﬁthe last 50 feet of wire belongs to AMC (Air Materiel Command), and anythi
ng that belongs to AMC is reported through Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 61AMC channelsﬂ (AMC/HQ).  This can result in potentially confusing arrangements that 
impact ICT management practices.  
In particular, local users of ICT syst
ems can face a confusing picture when 
deciding with whom responsibility lies. Fo
r a system problem, users may contact the 
functional system administrators; for a Window
s problem, they contact another technical 
group. Each group has a local expert who discerns whether problems have resulted from 
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware or
 the system itself. The result of having 
different agencies responsible for different pa
rts of an end user™s system is less than 
optimal (374
th AW/CS).  
One of the important benefits of the Y2K experience was that it forced diverse owners of systems and overlapping system 
components to communicate with each other 
in an effort to coordinate responsibility.  Unfortunately, much of this valuable 
information and communication is being lost. 
 (See Section 3.6 for 
further discussion of information needs in support of integrated ICT management.)  

  3.4  Consider the Impact of Local Diversity  Closely related to ownership and responsibility issues are issues that stem from the 
diversity of local ICT environments and re
sources.  Multiple 
ownership and guidance may confuse individual users as to who is 
responsible for the different parts of the complex systems they rely on, but central owners and maintainers of those systems face 

the equally confusing task of understanding and managing a complex system of systems 
that spans significantly different functional and geographical environments.   
During Y2K the effort to provide central guidance was greatly complicated 
by the diversity of local ICT conditions.  Even central management of a specific 
piece of software with a common function had to account for complications that 
could stem from differences in local and 
mid-level management. ﬁFor Scott [Air 
Force Base], supply is under AMC; at Yokota, supply is under PACAF [Pacific Command].  But each base uses the same system, SBSS (Standard Base Supply 

System)ﬂ (374
th AW/CS). 
These differences in ICT management 
contributed to diversity in response activities as central guidan
ce filtered down to local execution.  The divergence of 
interpretation of central gui
dance sometimes began at high 
levels and involved cross-service entities, creating potential confusi
on well before it reached the even greater diversity of frontline conditions. In one inst
ance,  the Commander in Chief (CINC) and 
PACAF received the same guidance, but by the 
time a base (under PACAF) and a tenant 
at that base (under CINC) received it, the guidance was different (USFJ).  In addition to management differences, 
local diversity of ICT resources was another important complicating factor fo
r central managers.  These differences 
occur across many units and at many levels
, but they were particularly evident during Y2K within the operating environments at OCONUS bases. Even though 

systems staff had been ﬁtold that all base
s had new equipment,ﬂ old equipment (for 
example, copper wires and low-bandwidth 
modems) was still in use and could not 
support many of the new systems. Updating 
all the bases was a six-year project, which meant that some bases would not re
ceive new equipment for several years: Yokota, for instance, was the second-to-the-last base to be updated.  Differences Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 62like these mean there is great variability
 by location in the demands during a large 
ICT problem-solving activity such as Y2K. 
 This issue continues to impact such 
service-wide ICT efforts as DMS (374
th AW/SC).  
Complications that arise from the dive
rsity of local environments can be greatly exacerbated by the way systems are 
viewed.  The risk of disruption from 
local diversity greatly increases when syst
ems are developed and fielded in isolation 
rather than as a piece of a larger system of systems. ﬁIdeally, programs should be 
tested higher up.  The programs are time line 
driven rather than event driven, so the engineering and installation ends up happening at the basesﬂ (374th AW/CG).  
This is more than just an Air Force issue.  The success record of large ICT 
projects throughout government and industry 
is very poor (see Section 3.13), and many 
of these difficulties can be traced to a failure
 to anticipate the impact of local changes on 
the overall system.  This occurs even w
ithin the most technically perceptive 
organizations: for example, in 2001 the isolat
ed test of a WorldCom employee ﬁcrippled 
NASDAQ™s networkﬂ (Weinraub 2001).  (This 
issue of cross-boundary interdependency is discussed further in Section 3.10.)   
 3.5  Consider the Role of Local Autonomy  Local diversity issues can be further comp
licated by a high degree of local autonomy.  
This autonomy stems from facets of the organi
zation and of ICT itself.  In the Air Force, 
local autonomy is fostered in part by the ways ICT is funded or, as is often the case, not 
funded. Many times, ﬁsystems are fielded wit
hout funding in hopes that bases will find 
their own funding for themﬂ (375
th AW/CG). As a result, regard
less of certification or policy, if a base lacked the funding to implem
ent a system, implementation did not occur.  
Without accompanying funding, there can be only limited confidence in the 
effectiveness of central guidance.  However,
 the wide diversity of local conditions and infrastructure greatly complicates any effort 
to centrally fund ICT guidance.  (See further discussion of ICT funding in Section 3.8.)  Where central funding does not accompany central guidance, local units may be unable or unwilling to follow th
at guidance.  On the other hand, the existence of flexible money can enable loca
l units to do what they want outside of central guidance.  Thus, International Merchant Purchase Authorization Cards 
(IMPACs), military credit cards for flexible 
purchases, represent the other financial 
side of local autonomy.  In the case of 
ICT purchases, local initiatives outside of central guidelines can greatly complicat
e the central management effort. For 
instance: ﬁfolks use IMPAC cards to buy stuff and hook it up to the network. – We 
have no central way of knowing what™s on the networkﬂ (374th AW/CG).  In 
addition, because the use of IMPAC cards bypasses the standard purchasing processŠand therefore the standard appr
oval processŠsecurity
 problems may be 
detected after the 
fact (if at all). Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 63 There is a problem with the 
use of IMPAC cards and not us
ing the standard process.  
Operational commanders listen to the local IT expert in their units, and he says, ﬁWe 
really depend on the network and if we put a modem on this box we can go out and back 
up the network on the Internet.ﬂ  And the commander signs off on it.  Next thing you 

know I detect a security problem and I™m investigating it.  And then I™m asking them 
where their approval is. – (375
th AW/CG) 
 On the other hand, the use of IMPAC cards to support local ICT initiatives can be seen as a local user™s response to rapidly changing needs within the context of a slowly changing bureaucracy.  ﬁGovernment tends to 
be very slow and makes it very hard to 
change direction, yet the entire information technology field is characterized by very 
rapid change. – So users go off and do their own thingsŠthat™s why IMPAC cards came 
out.  People couldn™t do what they wanted quick enough through our means, so they 
purchase and build–miscellaneous little [uti
lities] on their own–because that meets 
their needsﬂ (MSG).  While funding is a critical contributor to local autonomy, it is not
 the only one.  Inconsistent ICT guidance, quite evident during Y2K, also frees local units to choose their own courses of action.  For example, ﬁlast year we refused to install [a business system]– because [we] got conflicti
ng guidance from SSG and PACAFﬂ (374
th AW/CS). 
Sometimes, questions about central guidan
ce are raised by the use of less formal, 
individualized communication channels that appear to be quicker and more reliable to 
local ICT managers.  This occurred freque
ntly during Y2K as local managers sought 
additional information and clar
ification of central policy that was often changing or unclear.  For instance, ﬁ[Our] guidance came–
through PACAF.  However, I was part of the AFCA newsgroup so I™d get to see their spin was on what PACAF saidﬂ (374th AW/SC).  These informal communication chan
nels could be very helpful, but they 
further increased the likelihood that local units would find their own ways to interpret 
central guidance. 
Another issue related to local autonomy is the creation and use of locally 
developed software and systems.  Because thes
e systems are motivated by and tailored to 
specific situations they can ofte
n better address local needs, including ease of use, at least in the short term.  However, these systems can
 easily result in duplication of effort, such as double entry of data, and difficult mainte
nance problems when the local developer 
leaves the unit (374
th AW/CG). 
          Locally developed software was a particular concern during Y2K.  Date formats 
could be idiosyncratic, and data processing and flow could be difficult to understand, especially if the developer was no longer available.  In addition, many Y2K fixes came 
from commercial providers,
 not in-house staff, so they did not address these ﬁhomegrownﬂ systems. 

          Addressing the concerns about locally developed software became another side 
benefit of the Y2K effort in that less visible problems were noti
ced and potential long-term problems were identified.  For exam
ple, AMC/SCA was required to upgrade a program written in an old version of Acce
ss to be Y2K-certified. Fortunately, this 
coincided with the imminent retirement 
of the staff member who had written the 
program.  
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 643.6  Build Trust Between Local Administrators and Central Managers 
 For many reasons, including those already di
scussed, local system administrators can 
develop considerable skepticism about central
 ICT guidance.  This can make it difficult to predict the outcome when central gui
dance meets local execution. During Y2K a 
master sergeant at an OCONUS base wa
s under additional pressure to deliver 
administrative system reports.  He preferred 
to use an alternative software package to 
generate the reports rather than the approved package he was told to use in central 
guidance received through his major comma
nd (MAJCOM).  (See discussion of system certification in Section 3.10.)  He had experienced considerable problems in working 

with the approved software, problems that he attributed to insufficient bandwidth on his local network.  He concluded that this was yet another case of central managers not 
understanding his local conditions.  There was no one he could turn to for support of the approved software, so he went to people he knew within the local systems group and got 
them to sign off on his use of the alternate 
system, and he got his reports in on time. 
While the master sergeant™s
 general concernsŠthat is, lack of local support for the system, too-low bandwidth, and generality of central guidanceŠare important to 

consider, there is another version of this story as told by a captain in the systems group 

responsible for system configuration.  From 
the captain™s perspective, a master sergeant has invested in learning a software package that facilitates his work.  He then is told he 
should be using a different package.  The sergeant halfheartedly tries the approved package and experiences a variety of problems.
  He receives a quick approval from some 
systems staff to use his preferred package, 
without the knowledge of the captain, who is responsible for network configurations.  (One office within the Network Control Center [NCC] provided one level of approval without
 the other office being informed.) In 
addition, the captain disagreed with the sergeant™s view of the specific problems, 
attributing them not to insufficient bandwidth 
but, rather, to incompatibilities between the 
approved and non-approved software packages. A number of possible issues
 are involved in this scenario.  The approved package may or may not be the best option for the local
 environment.  There are cases where local 
personnel appropriately consider critical aspects of their unique situation that global management does not anticipate.  In such 
cases, it is important to consider whether 

central guidance is being issued at an appropriate level, focused on enterprise-wide 

organizational goals that allow for a greater diversity of local execu
tion to achieve those goals.  (For further discussion of this issue, see Section 3.9.)  On the other hand, there are less desirable (though no less important) reasons for 
local resistance to central policy, including lack of communication, failure to develop 
local investment in desired changes, lack 
of training, and user investment in existing 
successful practices. Local management and st
aff recognize their accountability to central authority; sometimes, however, new policy 
or procedures are counter to accepted practices or legacy versions at a particular base. Therefore, local staff may refuse to 
implement them (374
th AW/XP). At other times, local
 system administrators may 
consider new policy a less than optimal solutio
n for their situation, and in these cases, they develop their own solution or work-around (374th AW/SC). Other relevant issues to address include:   • Was the approved package too difficult to install?   
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 65• Was NCC™s role as a mediator between the MAJCOM and the local user 
clear and effective?   
• Was there sufficient training and local support?   
 From one perspective, staff who circumvent central policy are likely to create 
difficulties for others; from another perspective,
 people like the master sergeant (trained 
in logistics, with only occasional short courses in system admini
stration) are showing initiative in the face of an expanded mission. 
One conclusion is clear, however: within ICT, numerous conflicting and 
interrelated factors make it difficult to anti
cipate what will happen when central policy 
meets local execution.  This unpredictabi
lity greatly complicates central ICT 
management activities in such areas as conf
iguration management a
nd version control.  This became clearer during Y2K, when central
 software managers had a greater need 
than usual to track the version 
of software packages in use.  ﬁ‚Versions released™ does not always equate to ‚versions in use,™ especially in the client-server environment.  Some 
versions were–not installed.  Some were in
stalled wrong.  Some of the program offices 
were allowed to release their own software, –[which was] almost impossible to 
install–ﬂ (SGG).   (Version 
control and related ICT life-
cycle issues are discussed further in Section 3.10.)  Because of the many tensions that can ar
ise between central ICT management and 
local execution, the complications associated with the way ICT problems and initiatives evolve over time, and the diversity of cond
itions and rapid rate of change, it can be extremely difficult for central managers to st
ay current on a given overall situation.  In many cases, central management finds itself gr
appling with what are actually earlier 
issues that have evolved into new challenges at the local level.  This can result in further 
rifts between local administrato
rs and central managers.  Trust between local and central 
administrators is needed to break th
is potentially destructive cycle.  
While problems with communi
cation and trust between local administrators and 
central managers were evident during Y2K,
 they extend far beyond it.  Any broad-based 
ICT initiative or problem-solving activity runs 
the risk that centrally driven activities will 
break down into a set of local tests and solutions.  To minimize this risk, organizations 
need enterprise-wide information strategies a
nd tactics that mediate the tensions between 
central and local ICT personnel.  In particular, stronger relationships across vertical organizational boundaries can reduce risk and unpredictability by increasing trust, facilitating communication, and focusing de
cision making on shared organizational 
investments, goals, and missions rather than
 on individual and diverse technologies or conditions.     3.7  Strengthen Horizontal Relati
onships across the Organization 
 In addition to vertical tensions across hierarchical organizational layers (for example, 
Headquarters [HQ], MAJCOM, base), there are equally critical horiz
ontal tensions across functional organizational lines.  During Y2K these horizontal tensions also worked against effective global management and local 
execution of Air Force IC
T.  In fact, some 
managers who went through the Y2K experien
ce and faced the many ongoing ICT issues 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 66discussed in this chapter considered horizontal
 issues to be even more problematic than 
vertical ones. In many cases ﬁ–the vert
ical structures for management and  
policy–[were] being maintained or strengthened
 to a certain degree, while the horizontal relationships–[were] not.  The investment–[was] not clear.
 –[There was no] strategy for relating that investment across the en
terpriseﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO). Given the overall 
focus on functional groupings in most orga
nizations, the lack of strong horizontal relationships is an extremel
y common barrier to effective 
cross-organizational ICT policy and practice.  Communication paths generally run up and down functional lines, the well-
known ﬁstovepipeﬂ problem.  (This issue resu
rfaces throughout the remaining lessons of 
this chapter.)  
However, while some aspects of horizont
al tensions are unique from vertical 
ones, both are generally intermingled within
 the context of a given ICT issue.  In addition, both require a common integrated so
lution based on an organization-wide ICT 
policy that increases cross-boundary trust, facilitates cross-boundary communication, and 
focuses decision making on enterprise-wide goals and missions.  
Who owns ICT policy?  How is it prom
ulgated and maintained throughout a 
complex organization?  How does this policy ch
ange as it travels across horizontal (and 
vertical) organizational boundaries?  A large, diverse, ICT-dependent organization such as the Air Force can find these kinds of questions extremely difficult to answer, as is 
illustrated in the following interview:  
 Interviewer:
 Who sets IT policy?  Let™s take a specific exampleŠthat there will be a 
certificate to operate
2 and that it will be negotiated between SSG and the MAJCOM.  
Where did that guidance come from? 
MSG:
 The CIO? 
SSG: I think it probably started with General ___.  
Interviewer:
 It sounds like the answer can be complicated.  
AFCA:
 The answer is very complicated.  
SSG: Where it starts and who owns the 
policy are two different things.  
AFCA:
 It™s very complicated, –especially wher
e an organization has to always operate 
across boundaries, which we do.  It™s
 chaos.  It™s almost anarchy.  
 The Air Force Communications Agency™s (AFCA™s) sense of ﬁalmost anarchyﬂ when 
ICT policy must operate across organizational boundaries is revealing, particularly in light of an analysis of the continuum of
 organizational approaches to controlling 

information (see Figure 3-1). 
                                                 2 It was proposed that no software be run at a 
base without a certificate 
to operate issued by the 
MAJCOM in consultation with SSG.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 67  Figure 3-1  The Continuum of Information Control 
   Source: Information Ecology,
 by Thomas Davenport, p. 69 
 In his research, Thomas Davenport (
1997) found a continuum marked by four 
general states of information control in or
ganizations:  (1) monarchyŠﬁone individual or 
function controls most of a company™s in
formationﬂ; (2) federalismŠﬁrepresentative 
democracy, a weak central government, and a high level of local autonomyﬂ; (3) 

feudalismŠﬁbusiness unit managers control thei
r information environments like lords in 

so many separate castlesﬂ; and (4) anarc
hyŠﬁevery individual fends for himself or 
herself.ﬂ  These descriptive states are neith
er good nor bad by themselves.  Different 
combinations and states of control can wo
rk well in different organizations and under different circumstances.   
If the Air Force attempted to
 articulate its overall ideal information strategy along this continuum (a highly beneficial activity), it might fall closest to federalism.  Anarchy 

would likely be an undesirable state.  Yet during Y2K, as AFCA points out, anarchy nearly resulted when central policy broke down under the strain of working across organizational boundaries.  Few formal m
echanisms existed for developing and 
maintaining a shared cross-organizational 
vision of ICT policy and practice.  Such mechanisms are needed to support strong hor
izontal (and vertical) relationships and communication.  During the April 14, 2000, Y2K Workshop, a discussion among managers from a 
wide range of functional units (from MAJCOMs to HQ) revealed some of the 
multifaceted strain that results when ICT policy makers attempt to work across 

organizational boundaries without strong existing relationships and cross-functional communication mechanisms.  Without such mechanisms, it is extremely difficult to 

develop clear, shared enterprise-wide strate
gies and tactics.  While the people who took part in this discussion impact each other in
 their organizational roles, they had rarely 

interacted as in the workshop and, in many 
cases, were meeting each other for the first 
time.   
The discussion centered on policies for assuring that Y2K problems (or problems 
resulting from Y2K fixes) did not surface dur
ing 2000 and covered a number of tactics.  
These included: (1) block releasesŠrequirements for releasing software on a fixed 

schedule (for instance, once a qua
rter) rather than as the indi
vidual system is ready; (2) code scansŠapplying an automated tool to 
check code for errors; (3) certificationŠ
formal approval after certain de
fined criteria (which could include code scanning) have been met; and (4) continuity of operations 
plans (COOPs)Šwhich are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.  
The participants began with a well-intentioned effort to explore new ways of working together across functional boundaries; however, local considerations quickly Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 68took over, complicated by unclear policy, va
gue practices, funding barriers, disputed 
definitions, and the impact of players outside
 the organization.  Tensions arose during the 
exchange, which is paraphrased below. 
 Air Force policy states that for every bl
ock release throughout 
calendar Year 2000, 
those systems would be re-code scanned and re-Y2K certified.  Could we use this as an 
opportunity to move a little further toward an enterprise view and find homes for these 
activities? 
It would kill us if you told us we had to do that. 
Well, that™s a signed policy. 
That™s for users.  I can tell you right now we™re not doing it. 
That was my questionŠare we going to do it?   
If the Air Force were to mandate this to us, then the Air Force would have to come 
up with the money to pay for it, because US TRANSCOM isn™t going to pay for a 
requirement that isn™t on a joint command. 
Maybe you can refresh my memory, but I thought that was a mandate.  Here we go 
with mandates and funding. 
I think it was, but I™m not sure.  I™ll have to go back and check it.  We need to clarify 
which policies were to be carried through the Year 2000. 
Re-code scanning and Y2K certification of block releases were signed off and were 
supposed to go through the Year 2000. 
I think that™s half correctŠthe policy does state that you will code scan block 
releases throughout Year 2000 or well into the Year 2000, but the part about certifying is 

not there. 
We were not going to re-certify, I know that. 
The code-scanning requirement is still there by Air Force policy. 
What do you mean by code scanning? 
Just what you did before when you gave it to SSG. 

Determining whether you inadvertently introduced a bug that would now make it 
non-Y2K compliant. 
 [Lots of simultaneous discussion, at which point the moderator stepped in and asked 
for additional clarification as to ho
w Y2K policy had been established.] 
Let me explain why there is some confusion about that.  At times, half of a policy 
would get signed off and half of it wouldn™t.  We put the plan together and sent it up and 
they never signed.  Yet MAJCOMs took the guidance and followed itŠhow to use the 
database, how to use the Air Force spreadsheets, how to use all those kinds of things.  It 

was a mechanism for people to do something but it was never signed.  The COOP 
guidance 10-232 was signed, but in other cases there was a lot of confusion because 
policies would go up and sometimes they would be signed and sometimes they wouldn™t 

be.  Yet they™d still be followed to a certain extent. 
When you say that part of the policy isn™t fully developed or doesn™t have clear 
funding, that™s got far-reaching impacts.  
For example, we just fielded an emergency 
release of our in-transit visibility system 
about a week ago, and I know it didn™t go 
through code scanning because we fielded it in the space of about a week or two. 
I can speak to that.  We were working on the latest version of our system and got 
results back on the code scan from two or three versions ago.  We were asked to respond 
to these comments, but it™s kind of pointless 
when you™re already two or three versions 
later.  We offered to send a new version down and have it scanned.  The answer we got 
back was ﬁwe™re out of money so don™t bother.ﬂ  So even though we may have a bug and 
even though there may still be Air Force polic
y out there that says scan every 6 months 
through the end of 2000, it isn™t going to happen because there™s no money. 
 As discussed in previous sections, some
 of the tensions manifested in this 
exchange are between central policy and local execution (although earlier we often saw Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 69the base in the local role and the MAJCOM as
 representing central guidance; here we see the MAJCOM in the local role and centra
l guidance generally at the HQ level).  However, this discussion also reveals tensions that stem from a l
ack of cross-functional communication and ongoing horizontal relationships.  This is
 visible in a number of 
waysŠin the lack of shared understanding of how policy is enacted, interpreted, and maintained, in the way managers focus on thei
r local objectives and funding, in the strong local autonomy and great degree of latitude
 in the way each group chooses to interpret 
and follow (or not follow) unclear ICT policies and goals.  This discussion reveals many factors 
that can complicate and distort ICT 
guidance.  These factors include incons
istent assumptions, locally motivated 
interpretations, misalignment, confusing prac
tices, and considerable leeway for local 
response.  Factors like these need to be a
ddressed through formal mechanisms for cross-
boundary communication and interaction. Without clear mechanisms for coordination 
and communication across both horizontal and vertical organizati
onal boundaries, ICT policy cannot be fully developed nor clearly funded.    
 3.8  Overcome Funding Disincentives to Working across Organizational Boundaries 
 As shown in Section 3.7, funding is one of the more visible sources of ICT tensions.  As 
with other ICT-related tensions, funding issues generally represent competing desirable ends.  For example, accounting practices, wh
ich are driven by the need for fiscal 
responsibility, call for projects that can be defined, tracked, and managed through a 
clearly identified owner.  However, cross-functional ICT projects and activities often do not have an easily identifiable owner.  Nevertheless, funding is often used to identify ownership of ICT projects, even though those projects serve a range of purposes for a wide variety of users and units. ﬁOwnership of systems is driven by resources as opposed 
to day-to-day operationsﬂ (375th AW/ CG). 
Unfortunately, identifying complex ICT 
projects on the basis of narrower funding practices can lead to a piecem
eal view of these highly interdependent systems. During 
Y2K this piecemeal view added to the complexity of tackling a problem that existed not 
only within functional and hierarchical units but also across those units.  Since funding is usually attached to functional activities, ther
e generally are clearly identified owners of 
the functional nodes of an enterprise-wide ICT system.  Y2K was a reminder that 
problems also occur along the links between 
these nodes and that it is far less clear who owns and is responsible for those links.  This uncertainty contributed to the complexity of 
addressing the Y2K problem and continues 
to complicate numerous aspects of ICT 
management.  
In addition to this central perspective, funding issues also complicated the Y2K effort at the local level. ﬁThe functional users™ imperative was 
to make sure they got their 
functional changes in, and they sometimes saw Y2K as an annoyance or as an absolute 

roadblock to being able to do their job.  The functional users–had to pay for the work being done, so in many cases they saw Y2K 
as siphoning off funds to fix problems that 
the–[technology] world created and that weren™t going to help them in the long run–  
this problem [may] still exist todayﬂ (MSG).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 70In this example, competing demands fo
r funds exacerbated the tension between 
local users and central ICT managers.  Local 
users did not readily see Y2K as directly 
linked to their functional mission.  Even wo
rse, following central Y2K guidance would shift resources away from those missions.  Or
ganizations need to bridge the gaps between central efforts to achieve technology consistency and local efforts to use information for 
specific purposes.  Unfortunately during Y2K, local funding issues served to widen these gaps.  Additional complications can occur when
 ICT funding practices are not uniform 
across the organization.  Many Air Force units
 ﬁare funded to do their business over and over again,ﬂ whether or not they can demonstr
ate improvement, ﬁbut 
that™s not true for the whole Air Force.  I™m in an organization that puts out a profit and loss statement 
every single year.  That impacts whether we™re
 going to have some
 people working next year or notﬂ (AMC/SCA).  Distinct differences exist between
 those parts of the Air Force that operate on a fee-for-service basis and those that do not, and these differences can 
complicate efforts to achieve c
onsistency of ICT management. 
Perhaps the biggest funding lesson of Y2
K, however, can be seen in how this 
issue was able to attract sufficient attention, critical organizational mass, and significant 
funding such that, although it was temporary, it was tied specifically to addressing an enterprise-wide ICT issue.  In
 this sense, Y2K set a precedent in ICT funding.  When it 
ended, many who had been involved were conc
erned that since Y2K turned out not to have as great a negative impact
 as anticipated, it could be mo
re difficult to get the senior levels to recognize and fund other large, cr
oss-functional problems such as critical 
infrastructure protection (CIP) (AF/XOIWD). 
 (Of course, the subsequent events of September 11 have eliminated 
any concern in this area.) 
Whether or not there were negative impacts from the perception that Y2K was benign, the experience of having gained such a high level of public and political visibility, and the funding that went with this visibility, left a strong impression on many 
ICT leaders. They realized th
at in order for other broad ICT efforts to be successful, a very high level of leadership, support, and funding was necessary.  ﬁThe real lesson of 
Y2K was gaining a very high level of vi
sibility, support, and, ultimately, fundingﬂ 
(AMC/SCA).  
 3.9  Clarify the Appropriate Level of Central Guidance and the Role of Central 
Administrators 
 While funding issues tend to be visible, other, less visible issues can be equally critical to effective ICT management.  One 
such issue is the need to gear central 
ICT guidance to an appropriate level: if too high, there may be a disconnect with 
local execution; if too low, local execut
ors may be overburdened and have little 
room to adjust for individual circumstances
.  During Y2K, the subtleties involved in gearing central guidance to an appropri
ate level were further complicated by the 
increased involvement in ICT decision maki
ng of higher-level administrators with 

little or no ICT management experience. 
Once the focus of Y2K efforts moved beyond technical performance to the 
ability to complete missions, higher levels of
 review were seen as necessary.  This 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 71increase in levels of review and approval could be dramatic, often involving high-
ranking officers with experience and responsibility in operational, rather than infrastructure, areas. ﬁFor all–major sy
stems and some–characterized as fairly 
minor, the review process for certificati
on got to a very high level. – the norm 
being 5-7 levels of review on every change with final approval by an O9 (lieutenant general)ﬂ (AMC/SCA).  
Despite the increased burden and opportunity costs associated with higher-level review, many ICT managers saw this grow
ing awareness and involvement of upper 
management in ICT decision making as positiv
e, overall, and an indication that the Air 
Force view of information t
echnology (IT) had matured (375
th AW/CG).  These 
managers knew that Y2K was not their only cr
oss-boundary ICT effort and that other ICT 
initiatives (such as DMS) required them to address issu
es that extended beyond their ability to control.  To these managers, an increased involvement of upper-level 
administrators in ICT management meant 
an increased focus on cross-boundary and organizational goals rather than technical objectives.  
Before Y2K, system problems were in the domain of system or program 
managers and generally stayed there. But 
because of the importance of identifying and 
resolving mission-related problems, the imperative with Y2K was to involve upper 
management. ﬁAnd since top levels of mana
gement are the ones primarily concerned 
with customer satisfaction, –the service organizations had to be more sensitive to 

satisfying their customers and assuring that th
e senior management of those organizations 
was able to address customer concernsﬂ (MSG
). In this way, Y2K helped stimulate not 
only the awareness of upper management 
to the importance of ICT but also the integration of ICT goals with organizational goals.  While these potential benefits are critically important,
 other managers 
viewed Y2K as demonstrating that at the ta
ctical level, the impact of higher-level 
administrative scrutiny could be burdensome. ﬁIn one extreme case, our developers 

had to add a carriage return 
to one line of code on a [certified] program that had 
about 500,000 lines of code in it.  And we went through that entire [recertification] process.  We did Y2K testing and had it independently verified, all the way up to the O9 [level] to get approval for that release.  And that™s a lot of workﬂ 

(AMC/SCA).  These managers expressed concern that
 the higher level of scrutiny during Y2K would be extended into other ICT ar
eas. In the Air Force, good leadership 
generally means pushing decisions down to the lowest level possible and delegating responsibility.  Many managers felt critic
al concerns such as systems breaking 
networks and programs spamming a network co
uld be handled at functional levels.  ﬁSenior-level review of all the changes to
 every system is not efficient problem 
solvingﬂ (AMC/SCA).  Central management of ongoing ICT practi
ce is a highly problematic activity.  
The layers of review and approval needed to achieve such control are extremely resource 

intensive, and the benefit from this additional review is often unclear.  For instance, 

based on the success of Y2K, AMC/SCA felt pre
ssure to carry forward a procedure much like that proposed for Y2K; that is, a higher-level organization would review their configuration charts. In this case, decisions normally made by an Air Force captain would 
be made by a brigadier general, including al
l the layers needed to staff the effort.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 72According to personnel at one AMC/SCA: ﬁWe had no history–of–having fielded 
something that broke the defensive transporta
tion system or caused an interface problem 
with anything–in TRANSCOM.  So–what is the value added?ﬂ  Generally, the demands of ICT management
 do not require tactically specific 
central orders, but during Y2K there were times when the increased central control 
manifested itself in specific, relatively low-le
vel guidance that could leave little room for 
individual adjustment to local conditions
.  For example, as the new millennium 
approached, central guidance called for a de
monstration of mission readiness by putting 
planes in the air across the New Year time boundary.  ﬁDirections came down from 
MAJCOM that they wanted all planes up at 00:01.  Local folks here said they wouldn™t do it because all their flying is done with handheld GPS systemsﬂ (374
th AW/CG).  In this 
case, the local environment did not support the centrally defined tactics.  What were the higher organizational goals behind the guidance calling for planes to be in the air during the century change?  Could this guidance have been 
geared to a level that allowed individual bases to meet this higher goal using more 
individualized tactics?  Whatever th
e answers to these questions, the Y2K 
experience demonstrated that effective central guidance on a cross-organizational 
ICT problem could not be focused on a blanket policy covering individualized technical issues.  Instead, central ICT 
management needs to focus primarily on 
common information strategies and their 
alignment with organizational missions. 
Beyond Y2K there are numerous othe
r ongoing cross-organizational ICT 
problems that need this level of central 
attention.  ﬁI would love to see greater senior-level involvement, not
 trying to solve the individual problem, but taking on 
the basic problem as a whole.  For instance,
 if–[the Air Force is] serious and really 
want[s] to operate on a common backbone 
as a weapons system, then let™s do it 
reliably.  We haven™t gotten very good at itﬂ (AMC/SCA). Nevertheless, this central 
focus must be balanced by the awarene
ss that central guidance is limited in 
managing a distributed, individualized IC
T system.  Those who oversaw the Air Force Y2K effort came to understand that th
e lessons of Y2K could be realized only through the combined actions of 
empowered local organizations. 
 Don™t rely on headquarters to tell you what to do or how to do it with regard to the Y2K 

experience.  There are too many things that 
each individual organization has learned that 
could benefit you in your own situation. – You™re the ones who know how to do your 

jobs.  You™re the ones who know where the n
eeds are.  You™re also the ones who are 

going to be responsible for funding those changes in the way you do business.   I can only 
think that is the proper approach.  (AFCIO/AFY2KO) 
  Thus, central guidance needs to strike an appropriate balance between generating and maintaining an enterprise-wide information 
strategy and fostering individualized local execution of that strategy.  
 3.10   Address Cross-Boundary Issues in Life-Cycle Management of Systems  The need to balance enterprise-wide informa
tion strategies with individualized local execution is particularly evident in life-cyc
le management of systems and software.  
During Y2K there was a heightened awareness 
(even within upper administration) of the 
need to know that systems were okay (testing 
and certification), that systems were current 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 73(version control), and how a given subsystem fit into the larger system picture 
(configuration management, or at least an 
area that configuration management should 
include but often does not).  In raising awareness of the importance of these ongoing life-
cycle management concerns, the Y2K experien
ce also helped emphasize the importance of 
addressing cross-boundary organizational issues in these areas.    3.10.1  Certification and Testing 
 Y2K provided a strong incentive to take control of the myriad ICT systems that 
proliferate over time throughout a tec
hnology-dependent organization.  The Y2K 
response effort involved a wide range of tasks that were generally organized into a five-phase program:  (1) awareness, (2) assessm
ent, (3) renovation, (4) validation, and (5) implementation.  As this effort progressed, th
e validation phase loomed as increasingly 

daunting.    Once systems have been renovated, testing in a controlled environment is required prior 
to placing them into operation.  The reader should be aware [that] testing and validation 

is projected to be a time-consuming and extremely expensive phase in the resolution 
process.  The Gartner Group estimates testing and validation will encompass 40 percent 
of the total Year 2000 effort for most organizations.  Through the years, testing has often 

been looked at as an area where money and time could be saved.  To do so with Year 
2000 testing may make for a very unhappy New Year™s Day in 2000. (USAF 1997) 
 Despite the perceived importance and ma
gnitude of the validation phase, the complexity of testing and diversity of lo
cal conditions made it difficult to generate 
specific central guid
ance on validation.   Most organizations will already have a vali
dation process in place for ensuring [that] 
systems operate as designed prior to bein
g placed in production.  As a result, little 
guidance will be given in this area other th
an recommending [that] each organization 
closely evaluate test beds and processes to ensure [that] the infrastructure exists to test 

systems on a large scale. (USAF 1997) 
 Much of the difficulty of Y2K testing was tied to the complexity of the ICT systems 
themselves, particularly the interdependent na
ture of components and subsystems.  In its 
November 1998 testing guide, the General A
ccounting Office (GAO) outlined four types of validation testing:  
 1. Software unit testing
 to ﬁverify that the smallest defined module of 
software ([namely], individual subpr
ograms, subroutines, or procedures) 
work as intended.ﬂ  2. Software integration testing
 to ﬁverify that units of software, when 
combined, work together as intended.ﬂ  
3. System acceptance testing to ﬁverify that the complete system ([that is], 
the full complement of application software running on the target 

hardware and systems software infrastructure) satisfies specified 

requirements (functional, performance, 
and security) and is acceptable to end users.ﬂ  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 744. End-to-end testing to ﬁverify that a defined set of interrelated systems, 
which collectively support an organizational core business area or function, interoperate as intended in an operational environment (either actual or simulated).ﬂ  (GAO 1998c) 
 These four test types run the gamut from th
e workings of an individual, isolated 
component to the intricacies of a full-blo
wn, cross-functional, cross-organizational mission thread.  Thoroughly covering this wide
 range of tests was extremely difficult, 
particularly in the relativel
y short time available.  To facilitate this daunting task, most organizations, including the Air Force, 
turned first to the use of testing tools.  These tools existed primarily at the unit testing 

level, generally scanning code to identify problematic occu
rrences of date formats and 
date-based calculations.  Even at this le
vel, these tools required significant human 
analysis.  "We code scan – it pops up thousands of instances – then it™s necessary to eyeball and go through and pick out thingsﬂ (MITRE).  In addition, the tools lacked the 
specialized knowledge about particular systems and environments that was needed to 
augment tool-based testing.  ﬁA
 commercial vendor is sell
ing the silver bullet Y2K fix. The reality is he™s going to find a few real issues, but very often he™s going to raise more 
questions than he™s going to solve. –For example, we used windowing3 [to fix dates] but the testing software, rightly, would say ‚You™ve got a two digit year here.™  Well we 
knew thatﬂ (AMC/SCA). The use of code-scanning tools revealed not only disconnects between Air Force units and their vendors but also disconnects among Air Force units themselves.  When 
these tools were employed at Air Force central
 ICT facilities, the 
need for specialized 
system knowledge was demonstrated again. 
 SSG tested our software for Y2K issues and – th
ey did find some.  But they needed to know 
more about the program.  So that required furthe
r resources on our part to help them in order 
to get it to run [and] to make sure they knew what they were looking at.  In some cases they 
would say ﬁyou have these issuesﬂ but when we looked, it wasn™t really a problem. 
(AMC/SCA) 
  In addition to specialized system kn
owledge, the use of code-scanning tools needed to incorporate the environmen
t in which the code operated and its interdependencies with other systems.  
Without these, Y2K certification based on 
these tools was highly problematic: ﬁWe 
didn™t trust ESC™s (Electronic Systems 
Center™s) certification.  AMC looked at certification from a systems viewﬂ 
(AMC/SCP).  Given the short time frame, the 
limitations of unit testing, and the 
complexities of integration and accept
ance testing (for example, How do you 

measure whether systems are acceptable to e
nd users?), attention soon shifted to the 
opposite end of the testing spectrumŠend-to
-end testing.  This was an extremely 
involved effort requiring the coordinated interaction of a wide range of people 
across various inter- and intraorganizational boundaries. In particular, ﬁGAO™s Year 2000 guidance recommends that in pla
nning and managing end-to-end tests, 
                                                 3 A technique for converting two-digit dates to four-digit dates without explicitly changing the 
date format. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 75agencies define test boundaries, secure the commitment of data exchange partners, 
prepare test procedures and data, define exit criteria, and document test results, 
among other steps–ﬂ (GAO 1999).  
Not surprisingly, the required interaction among professionals from across 
organizational boundaries was difficult and produced its share of surprises. ﬁDesigning–end-to-end testing became a 
very excruciating process of sitting down with a lot of people.  And even–[with] 
the experts in the room, literally just 
before–test–[kickoff],ﬂ someone would 
discover that the system worked 
differently. As a result, the tests had to be reconfigured (MSG).  
Nevertheless, end-to-end testing was the most direct way to address the basic 
issue; namely, could technol
ogy-dependent critical missions
 be carried out after the change of century?  To coordinate across the Air Force and with other military branches, 

a cross-organizational Y2K entity had to be 
establishedŠthe Air Force Year 2000 Office 

(AFY2KO) (see Section 3.13).  As the century change approached, considerable confidence was gained through the activities of
 this coordinating en
tity and the shift of focus to end-to-end testing.  Nevertheless, as the deadline approached, there always seemed to be more to do.  
 Overall end-to-end test efforts within three of
 the four functional areas were reported to 
be largely on schedule and expected to be completed by October 1999; however, at the 
time GAO briefed the Communications functional area on the results of GAO's review, it 

could not provide complete progress information; and while information was 
subsequently provided by Communications, it showed that the functional area had not yet 
developed plans to test 31 mission-critical systems. (GAO 1999) 
  
Testing and certification were two of a number of softwa
re life-cycle management 
activities that became increasingly centrali
zed during Y2K. Coding, testing, distribution, 
and support functions were moved from the pr
ogram offices into a so-called software 
factory, which included the Communications
 Environment Test Laboratory (CETL).  
ﬁCode that is released goes through a test process before it is certified. –One of the major benefits of Y2K was that we built up the CETLﬂ (SSG). 
A risk of centralized testing and certification is that it may not adequately account 
for the impact of diverse operating environm
entsŠa risk exacerba
ted by the fact that system components do not operate in isolation. 
To address this risk,  CETL began testing 
in a laboratory network environment inst
ead of testing the software solely for functionality. For this testing, software is run against other programs, across routers, and 
through firewalls. Testing scenarios cannot duplicate all possible cases, but CETL activities were fairly comprehensive (SSG).  
Some ICT managers see the increase
d focus on centralized testing and certification that came out of Y2K as positive, and they want to build on it. For 

instance, the Standard Systems Group (SSG
) envisions that the CETL testing  will evolve first into a certificate of net wo
rthiness and then into a new ﬁcertificate to 
operateﬂ that would be granted by the MAJCOM. ﬁNo software will be allowed on ACC bases without the ACC certificate to operate.  AMC promises to do that, and 
we hope that all the rest will do that as wellﬂ (SSG).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 76While some ICT managers are attracted to
 the idea of certifi
cation of worthiness for systems and acceptable operating conditions, 
others are less sure about this trend 
toward higher-level, centralized certification. They worry that an expansion of the Y2K certification philosophy means that the level of
 authority making decisions will be higher 
than pre-Y2K, when the different levels within the configura
tion control boards addressed different problems. With certificat
ion, ﬁyou need to set up some threshold or 
criteria to escalate the level of leadership. 
Changing the screen from blue to green will 
require an O7™s (brigadier 
general) review.  In the past there was no certification–ﬂ 
(AMC/SCA).  As with other areas of ICT management
, numerous perspectives on ICT testing 
and certification need to be
 balanced. For example:  
 The only good part of negotiating with the MAJCOM for a certificate to operate is [that it 
is]– subject to a very high level of scrutiny,
 testing, and verification.  We still use the 
IV&V [Independent Validation and Verification] 
tools; the code scanning is still part of 
the process; and the certificate to operate pu
ts everything out in the open and makes 
everything very controlled.  The problem is–bureaucracy and paperwork. –FTP [file 
transfer protocol] is a problem for some 
programs because we can™t verify secured 
channels.  FTP is required for remote administration, and that probably results 
in–having to get waivers to a certificate to operate. (SSG) 
 [At]–Scott Air Force base–USTRANSCOM has their own network because they could 
not [operate]– the DTS (Defense Travel System) under Air Force rules.  And the 
certificate of net worthiness, certificate to 
operate, and so on just exacerbates that 
problem further.  So they–got their own network–separate from the base.  To send e-
mail from them to us, we go outside the base–and come right back on, even though it is 
just across the street. (AFCA) 
 From the base level, we–like [the] process of getting the MAJCOM 

certification–because–we also have to task
 out the users who are complaining that 
they™ve already got too much to do. –[So] it helps a lot to move that to the MAJCOM 
level. (374
th AW/CS) 
 From my perspective, the big problem come
s when either operational need or some 
external force drives youŠmaybe the aircraft industry or FAA wants things done 

differently.  We now suddenly have to get–[a
 lot] of other people to agree, and– it 
takes months [to reach agreement], even if
 it™s a waiver. –We find that they™re not 
binding–a MAJCOM will say, ﬁH
ere™s what it is.ﬂ  Then you™ll get to some base and 
they™ll say, ﬁNo, we™re not the same thing 
at all.ﬂ  So you can™t install. (AMC/SCA) 
 Too many folks–have to ﬁblessﬂ the software before its release.  AMC and GATES 

(Global Air Transportation Execution System) have about 150 geographical sites with 

hardware and software.  Does a change require all sites to agree?  We™ll never lose local 
authority. (AMC/SCA) 
   Like many other issues raised by Y2K, th
e topic of certification and testing likewise 
calls for ongoing organizational mechanisms
 that support cross-boundary communication and coordination.  Certification and testing issues are also 
tied to issues of acceptable ICT risk and appropriate response, which are discussed in Chapter 5.   
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 77 3.10.2  Version Control and Configuration Management  Not only did the massive effort to assure 
that systems were Y2K certified increase 
an organization™s focus on testing and certification, it also increased its awareness 
of the need to track which versions of software and configurations of components were currently in use.  Software fixes a
nd system certification would mean little if 

the approved software and configurations were not actually implemented.  Under 
this increased scrutiny, numerous difficulties
 were revealed in the mechanisms for 
tracking and controlling software versions and system configurations. For example, 
when systems had been Y2K certified a
nd fielded, but were not yet installed everywhere, confusion and problems o
ccurred during aud
its, configuration assurance, and so on (AMC HQ), and the only way to verify whether people were 

using patches was to receive verbal confirmation (375
th AW/ CG).  
While these difficulties were particularly visible during Y2K, they are an 
issue for ongoing ICT management. 
  We send things out with certain configurations
, and when we distribute them to the units, 
we don™t know if they are loaded or not.  So 
we need to do a lot more work in terms of 
assuring that configuration is managed right down to the end site. Version control is part of 
our major business function, so Y2K probably didn™t change us that much, though it did 
allow us to identify some issues and problems.  Some of the resources allowed us to get 
better and build capacity. (SSG)  
 As with certification and testing, the increased focus during Y2K on version control 
and configuration management contributed to
 an increased effort to centralize these 
activities.  One approach was to work towa
rd a single, electronical
ly based distribution mechanism: for instance, access to the latest software versions from a web page (passive) 

or electronically distributed (active).  We™ve set up a single point source for distribution.  So if you want the latest version, you go 
to the [web] page.  That™s where a
ll the latest versions are. (SSG) 
 We are responsible for version control.  We used to send out a live person to do this; now we 

are trying to push it all out electronically. (AMC/SCA) 
 The effort to centrally track and electronically manage software and system configuration 
is complicated by an extremely diverse and he
ctic environment of system change.  Some 
of the factors that contributed to this diverse change environment included the many 
types of changes that were occurring (for example, Y2K fi
xes, security patches, new software releases, user-requested changes), the high rate of change, the variety of ways in which these changes occurred, the variety of units involved, and the variety of roles these units played.  Both local and central units
 saw difficulties in this diversity.  
 Y2K is a symptom of configuration management. There are too many hands in the pot. 
(374
th AW/CS) 
 Updates happen different ways: at log on, posted at a website, some are done by a team of 
guys who go out to each base.  Nobody and everybody owns it. (AFY2KO)
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 78 Change management at the local level 
could border on the chaotic. ﬁSpecific 
groups were responsible for specific programs, and they had to make sure that 
patches were loaded.  In one case, Logist
ics didn™t load a patch. –The functional versus operational chain of command had issued c
onflicting instructions.  Operational commanders aren™t aware of SSG tasking–so they won™t enforce itﬂ (374th AW/XP). 
 Central units could be equally frustrated, which often led to tensions between central guidance and local execution. In some cases ﬁthere were 
complications in the extension configur
ation management–some folks having six 
configuration messages each week, and othe
rs having only two.  Basically, it™s a 
struggle between local autonomy and cen
tral management. We™re looking for 
‚positive™ control with co
nfiguration managementﬂ (A
MC/HQ). In another case, ﬁMSG knew the configuration of its application software but did not necessarily know the configuration of the mainframe that
 ran that software, as well as all the 
other software in those domains. – So
 there was not one big picture–and we found–domains [that] were configured differently because there were different 
applications running–depending on who the customer was and who they were 
servingﬂ (MSG).  
Since change management is an ongoi
ng issue, the situation was further complicated by related problems that exte
nded beyond Y2K. For example, AFCA saw 
configuration management of 
COTS infrastructure to be something the Air Force was 
either willfully behind on or not focusing on well. However, ﬁwith the Nortel switch, 
fiasco configuration management came to th
e forefront for many se
nior leaders because [it] caused people to have to backtrack up to two years into configur
ations and pay for itﬂ (AFCA). In another case, the Cargo Movement Operation System (CMOS) was a 
problem for SSG because multiple versions we
re not being completely installed and the 
program office was releasing patches off th
eir own web page, which was not known to the version control staff.   As we have seen in many other areas, often the tensions between central guidance 
and local implementation can be traced to di
fferences in perspective that need to be continuously balanced.  From a central pe
rspective, the key issue during Y2K was assuring that local installations were using the approved, Y2K-compliant release or 
configuration.  However, local users were far more focused on completing their many 
functional and strategic projects, not on whether they had the approved version or configuration.  End users wanted change to be as quick and smooth as possible.  They 
wanted to continue to use their software and systems in the manner to which they had 
become accustomed.  In short, ICT was there to
 facilitate their tasks, not to replace them 
as the central focus.  An approach to managing change contro
l that potentially benefits both local and central units is to reduce the hectic and unpredictable pace of change.  One way to accomplish this is to hold changes for a set release date, that is, to block release. 

ﬁWith block releases we would have once-
a-month releases where everything gets 
approved, certified, –tested and goes out in a single release package from SSG.  
That– would fix a lot of the version control problems–ﬂ (SSG).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 79During Y2K there was the additional pressure of assuring that the great pace of change did not inadvertently undo already completed Y2K fixes or introduce new Y2K-
related problems.  Therefore,
 central Y2K managers went
 a step beyond block release and instituted a freeze during the latter half 
of 1999 and into 2000.  This meant that once 
systems were declared Y2K compliant, addi
tional changes before the century rollover required considerable justifica
tion and additional layers of approval.  This increased level of oversight considerably slowed the p
ace of change. For instance, before Y2K, 
AMC/SCA ﬁaveraged more than one software
 release per week on an AMC critical command control system. –[With the freeze, 
the average decreased to] less than one 
change every three to four months.ﬂ  
The high level of review that accompan
ied the freeze frustrated many software 
managers. 
 Some oversight is good, but it should be at the Program Manager level, not at TRANSCOM 
or in D.C.  We probably would have made 2 new version releases by now.  We won™t 
submit the paperwork for certification because 
it wouldn™t get through until March, which 
is when the freeze is going to be over anyway.  (AMC/SCP) 
 These managers viewed the high degree of chan
ge as being responsive to user and system 
needs.  Some predicted that putting off these changes would result in future difficulties. 
 The impact of a slowdown in software releas
es is a backlog of changes. – And as they 
are delayed, the changes become larger, which in turn increases the risk we™re going to 
have problems with the changes.  We™re trying 
to field these things all around the globe.  
It™s not easy to do.  So that creates greater
 integration issues.  That impacts life-cycle 
management.  (AMC/SCA) 
 These predicted difficulties apparent
ly did not materialize, however. 
 In terms of the configuration 
and certification freeze that wa
s in effect from November 
through March 15, that bothered all the program officesŠthat put them off schedule.  
We were worried that on March 16 all of these programs were going to be dumped on 

the field and we were going to have a huge support tail.  And it turns out that hasn™t 
been a problem. (SSG) 
  Perhaps slowing the pace of change me
ans that new versions and patches are more thoroughly tested.  Or perhaps all this change is not so clearly beneficial to users.  Perhaps the drive to stay current with technology through constant change is driven more by the ICT industry and central ICT manage
rs than by obvious benefits to local operations and users. Whatever the reasons, the Y2K experience emphasized the need to 
balance the many competing perspectives 
on ICT life-cycle management issuesŠfor 
instance, version control, certification, documentationŠas well as increasing the focus on 
these activities (SSG, 374
th AW/XP).  
Change management activities also have a 
clear impact on such issues as security, 
critical infrastructure protection, and information assurance (which are discussed in 
further detail in Chapter 4).   Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 803.11 Tackle the Huge Informational Effort Needed to Support Management of Integrated Systems  Another key set of issuesŠrelated to change management and highlighted by Y2KŠwas 
the difficulties faced by people attempting to acquire and maintain necessary information 
about the organization™s ICT systems and information environments.  It is difficult to 
manage, protect, or fix a system when its com
ponents and configuration are not clear.  At the outset of Y2K, as organizations decided they were facing a widespread, generic threat, their first impulse was to inventory wh
at was in place, who was responsible for it, and whether there was a problem that
 needed to be addressed.   Seemingly basic information, such as the st
ate of the installed equipment base and 
how it is used, was not readily available nor being constantly maintained. 
Unfortunately, in a large, complex, a
nd diverse organization, it is extremely 
costly and time-consuming to meet comprehensive ICT informational needsŠso 
much so that these activities are often limited to local databases for local purposes.  

Maintaining the big picture is an extrem
ely difficult task complicated by rapid 
change (for example, constant upgrade
s from the highly dynamic ICT industry, 
often exacerbated by an organizational fo
cus on staying abreast of the latest 
technology) and distributed ownership.  The big hang up is that data go out of date very quickly.  Since the Y2K rollover, I haven™t 

made one update to the [comprehensive inventory], and we were making them on a daily and 
weekly basis in many cases.  The data are al
ready starting to get out of date.  (AMC HQ) 
 Since we™ve gone to a distributed client serv
er environment and everybody at every base can 
run their own systems, they dropped a centralized inventory and it just wasn™t tracked any 

more.  (SSG) 
 Y2K provided the incentive to tackle a huge ICT information inventory, and 
considerable ICT information with potentia
l long-term value was 
generated.  Air Force efforts initially focused on two comprehensive databases: the Air Force All Systems 
Inventory (AFASI) and the Air Force Evaluation Database (AFED).  Later, in support of ﬁmission threadﬂ tests, these databases we
re augmented to capture how the various 
systems worked together to accomplish operational tasks.   
From many different perspectives, the huge 
Y2K informational effort was seen as 
capturing critical information that met 
several ongoing ICT management needs. 
Specifically, those needs were: (1) understand
ing the relationship among systems (AMC 
HQ); (2) building a permanent operations reporting status for information systems (SSG); 
(3) knowing the infrastructure and how to work with it (AFCA); and (4) generating a cross-functional inventory and incorporating all the inventories onto one spreadsheet (375th AW/CG). Many people thought this effo
rt should be maintained beyond Y2K.  
The pressures of the Y2K threat, however, coupled with ongoing operational demands, left little time or energy for leve
raging this effort into an ongoing means of 
addressing comprehensive ICT informational 
needs. ﬁThe databases could possibly be used for version control, configuration management, and information assurance, 
but–[staff]–don™t have time to keep it mainta
inedﬂ (AFCA). In addition, ﬁthe level of information exchange will go away. –There
 will only remain documents documenting 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 81the details of the process. Motivating causes 
will not be recorded, because there™s no time 
to do soﬂ (USFJ).  
In addition to basic time pressures, the Y2
K informational effort remained focused 
on short-term benefits because of numerous 
other difficulties and barriers that further 
complicated such a large job.  One issue wa
s clearly establishing the usefulness of the collected information and incorporating that
 usefulness into ongoing activities. Thus, to ensure that the data are maintained accuratel
y, the organization must provide an incentive 
to the owners of the data.   Having data collection is great, but if we don™t 
have something useful to do with the data, we 
are never going to get people to keep them updated.  We proved this during Y2KŠasking 
people to gather information for information™s™ 
sake is a waste of time and effort.  (AMC HQ) 
 Other complications were related to the 
lack of organizational homes, operational 
structures, and ongoing funding in support of a comprehensive ICT information effort. Over time, without a structure in place, much 
of the information becomes out of date or is 
lost (AMC HQ). Some people 
see critical infrastructure
 protection and information 
assurance activities as the natural homes for these informational efforts (see further 
discussion in Chapter 4). As with many IC
T issues, however, no single, natural home 
covers all aspects of the situation, and funding cross-functional resources remains an 
issue. 
 I have tried to look for a home for AFED.  Do you guys want it? (AFCA)   
Somebody needs it.  Actually I would argue that
 AFCIC/SY needs it more than anybody else.  
If the CIP program is not going to take ownership of it, we™ll figure out something. 

(AF/XOIWD) 

 We™re using AFASI right now.  I just used it yesterday.  And actually AFASI and AFED 
probably need to be us
ed together. (AFCIC/SY) 
 
If you want to get to the mission tasks and war fighter needs, the AFED starts to map that out. 

(AF/XOIWD)   
 Yes, we probably need to get that. –Sometimes I wonder why the XO hasn™t stepped up here. 

(AFCIC/SY)   
 I agree– this needs to be an operational con
cern as opposed to a COM community concern. 
– The problem is it™s a resource-intensive activity to do properly, and no one has got the 
resources committed to it like we
 did with Y2K. (AF/XOIWD) 
 Despite the generally perceived value of ICT information, without clear organizational 
homes, accepted information structures, a
nd dedicated resources, it was difficult to 
maintain a coherent, comprehensive da
ta-gathering effort following Y2K.   Another important challenge to Y2K, or any large informational effort, is 
maintaining consistency in data-reporting 
practices.  One of the Y2K problems was 
inconsistent terminology across the numerous 
units and users. ﬁSystems were identified 
in a variety of pet names, acronyms, codes,
 verbal descriptions. –The Fusion Center– had as much work identifying [information 
on] tickets as – taking the tickets and 
following up on themﬂ (SSG). In addition, ﬁthe
 [inventory] databases were hard to 
manage with multiple users [because] the inputs were too variableﬂ (AFCA).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 82Technology issues also affected the consistency of data-gathering practices. During Y2K, bases lacked the software other organizations used 
to gather data; the 
AFASI interface was difficult to use, which re
sulted in inaccurate data; the functional 
managers experienced problems in accessing th
e database; and the capacity problems in 
Excel were not anticipated (AFCA).  Equally critical were issues of organizational politics and information control that 
led to inconsistencies in the execution of data-gathering plans. For instance, 130 people from different communities developed a pl
an for reporting Y2K information to the 
Fusion Center. They used large group process techniques to create an acceptable 
reporting structure and vetted the plan across various other groups and organizationsŠsome liked it and some did not.   One MAJCOM
 ﬁtold its world, ‚Don™t report directly to 
the Fusion Center.  Report to us.  We™ll massa
ge the information and give it to the Fusion 
Center™ﬂ (SSG).  
Geographical and cultural differences, especially between CONUS and OCONUS bases, could also impact the consistency 
of information-gathering efforts. OCONUS 
bases were required to go through the State DepartmentŠspecifically, the embassiesŠto 
obtain information from host governments. Th
e information received from these sources 
was much different from the information 
received from stateside sources. Other 
information originated from intelligence and similar networks that pooled information 
(374th AW/CS).  
 The barriers to effective data gatheri
ng were not limited to the Y2K effort; they 
continue to complicate ICT informational activities to the present.  Despite these 

challenges (including additional information secu
rity issues discussed in Chapter 4), this huge and complex effort is necessary to s
upport effective high-level ICT management. 
The Y2K exercise gave the Air Force a much
-improved grasp of the systems it has, the 
purpose and functions of those systems, and 
the systems and organizations with which 
they interface. The next step is to develop processes and procedures that maintain that data and use them constructively (AMC HQ). 
To do this, organizations need to give information issues a proper home (see 
Section 3.13), sufficient priority and organizational visibility, and adequate resources. Continuity over information inventories 

developed during Y2K must be retained (AFCIO/AFY2KO). Over time, organizations 
need to make information gathering and maintenance part of their ongoing 

communication culture.   
 3.12  Address Issues of Organizational Culture 
 Beyond technology that is well designed and appropriately used; 
beyond data that are current, relevant, and readily manipulated; 
even beyond information that is alive and 
useful, there is communication among peopl
e and the culture within which that 
communication occurs.  Information is not ne
utral.  Existing relationships with an information source, for example, can mean more than the specific message content. In the 

Air Force, receiving information from one organization rather than another (for instance, 

OPS [operations] versus COMS [commands]) can determine 
whether the issue is dealt 
with by the base or delegated to one functional group (374th AW/XP).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 83Similarly, existing informal patterns of interaction can mean more than formal 
plans of operation.  While formal communication plans were in place, verbal agreements 
among the program offices assured them that if
 a critical Y2K failure occurred, everyone would ﬁget a callﬂ (MSG). Because of its pervasive effect on how people perceive and 

practice communication, organizational culture impacts all aspects of ICT management, 

from specific tactics to
 overall strategies.  
Y2K was neither the first nor the last ICT project in which cultural issues played a 
central role.  This is generally the case for any major, cross-organi
zational change in ICT such as occurs during mergers or strategic 
realignments.  In 1995, when changes in the 
economics of health care forced Johnson & J
ohnson to move toward a more integrated 
delivery system involving doctors, hospitals, 
patients, and insurance companies, the 
president of their customer support center
 found himself in a countercultural effort: 
ﬁJohnson & Johnson has over 100 years of history authorizing operating companies to 
manage all business facets to maximize th
eir brands™ [profits 
and losses]. –We are 
learning how difficult it is to break those paradigms and work togeth
er to leverage the strength of the firm with larger reta
il customersﬂ (Weill and Broadbent 1998). 
The Air Force, too, has a long history of functional autonomy, and Y2K similarly 
brought out the need to break down cultural barriers, to balance differences, and to work together while maintaining the benefits of that autonomy.  
 There has been a tug of war between the networ
k view and the systems view.  Y2K taught us 
that both are good. – The AF needs to continue to have folks be cross-functionally focused 
while maintaining stovepipe functionality.  (375
th AW/SC) 
 Some cultural traits are ge
nerally pervasive throughout an entire organization.  The Air Force, for example, has a common ﬁcultu
re of perfectionﬂ that impacted the 
organization™s tolerance for risk during Y2K (see Chapter 4). Most cultural issues, however, involve differences among organizational subcultures, for instance, those that 
are information or commission driven (AMC) 
versus those that are not (ACC); those 
focused on system capabilities and performance (acquisitions) versus those focused on 

compliance and version change issues (c
omputing operations). These subculture 
differences were especially visible during Y2K.  Perhaps the most visible cultural diff
erences during Y2K were those between 
acquisitions and computing.  Even at the t
op level of management, the Air Force Y2K 
effort was split between these two perspec
tives.   The Air Force Chief Information 
Officer (CIO) came from acquisitions (SAF
/AQ), while the deputy CIO came from 
computing and communications (HQ/SC).  W
ithin these two areas, units that were 
particularly active in providing Y2K leader
ship included, on the acquisitions side, the Standard Systems Group (SSG) and the 
Material Systems Group (MSG) and, on the 
computing side, the Air Force Communicati
ons Agency (AFCA) and the Air Force Communications and Informa
tion Center (AFCIC).  On the one hand, the acquisitions culture fostered a more hierarchical approach to 
Y2K.  Those with an acquisitions orient
ation focused on centrally administered 
correction and testing of large systems acquired and main
tained through contractual agreements.  As discussed in Section 3.10.1, 
they saw Y2K as a demonstration of the 
need for more uniform, centralized software 
development and testing.  The key to this 
was an increased emphasis on contractually 
based ICT management. On the other hand, 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 84the computing culture fostered a more distri
buted response to Y2K, with local SC units working at each base.  The emphasis was 
more on networking and managing nodes of 
activity focused on local, ongoing operational and maintenance issues.  During Y2K, SC 
provided leadership and support to the various Y2K working groups that tackled the frontline efforts at bases and facilities acro
ss the service.  Counter to the acquisitions™ 
perspective, those with a more computing pe
rspective saw Y2K as a demonstration that 
central developers often fail to adequately consider the realities of
 local conditions and ongoing operational and maintenance issues (374
th AW/XP, AFY2KO).  
Different perspectives, combined with the co
mplexities of ICT systems, led to some 
confusion during Y2K over ownership of system
s, responsibility for assuring compliance, 
and guidance on how to achieve it.  However, it is neither surprising nor disturbing to discover that SSG primarily saw Y2K as an
 Air ForceŒwide acquisitions and fielding 
problem, while SC units primarily saw Y2K 
as a functional, operational support and maintenance problem.  Each of 
these activities is highly complex and equally critical, yet 
each is fundamentally different.  Even when acquisition decisions do consider 

maintenance, it is only one of a large set of 
other equally compelling issues (for example, 
cost, platform, function, training, scheduling, past performance, existing agreements, 
future acquisition plans).  This is very different from the ongoing activity of maintaining 
systems under local conditions and needs w
ith dynamic operational demands.  In the 
current operational and organizational environment, acquisitions and computing could not be accomplished without the distinct cu
ltural mechanisms that each activity has 
developed to support their differing relationships and practices.  Nevertheless, acquisitions and operational support and maintenance are interrelated 
ICT management activities.  Central acquisitio
ns decisions impact the operational support 
effort, and the operational support situation impacts acquisition decisions.  These 

activities need to be integrated, and for this 
to occur, bridges must be built between the two cultures that support them.  It is critical that there be formal organizational mechanisms for supporting communication acros
s these cultures, as well as regular occasions for that communication to occur. 
 (For more discussion on this, see Section 

3.13.)  Other cultural differences also surfaced during Y2K.  Users have their own culture, 
too, which is different from that of either
 system developers or computing support 

personnel.  An analysis of user needs and environments is a complex activity, generally 
associated with the design phases of softwa
re and other information products.  Although 
a detailed analysis of Air Force system users is not within the scope of this report, it is 
important to note that user backgrounds, pur
poses, perspectives, and environments differ 
from those who acquire, develop, or support 
the systems.  Unique relationships and 
practices lead to a distinct user culture, and 
this can contribute to tensions that make it 

difficult to work with other interrelated activities, such as acquisitions and support.  For instance, what works for system devel
opers in the development stages does not 
necessarily work for users in day-to-day operations.  ﬁFrom the 600,000-foot view, 
C2IPS works.  But in the trenches it doesn™t wo
rk.  The real test is day-to-day operations.  It takes a while to make a system run consistentlyﬂ (374
th AW/OG).  While users can see 
developers and high-level managers as out of touch with the realities of frontline system 

operations, developers and system mainta
iners can see users as untrained and Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 85unpredictable, prone to individualized actions that can defeat carefully conceived central plans (375th NCC).  Some Air Force managers even see conf
licts between the culture of technology users and that of government itself as contribut
ing to the tensions they experienced with users.  Government tends to be very slow and makes it very hard to change direction–yet, the entire 
information technology field is 
characterized by very rapid ch
angeŠchange in the technology, 
change in terms of our users™ needs. –Everyone else looks to information technology as a solution 

to their own internal problems.  So they™re trying to do more things with information technology.  

That creates an inevitable conflict because as part 
of a government bureaucracy we can™t always do 
the things that we would like to do, so we tend to be unresponsive to those users. (MSG)  
 It is vital to understand and link user culture to the other cultures that impact ICT 
management activity.  Users are not only the 
system™s reason for being but also the first 
to notice (and are most affected by) ICT problems. For the 375
th AW/CG systems, 
customers find 99 percent of system degradation. During Y2K, for example, users were 

in a far better position to recognize certain data corruption issues than were developers and others working on the central Y2K effo
rt. AMC/HQ asked its users to monitor any 
special processing that occurred 
infrequently to be sure that 
the results made sense. Only 
thoughtful and alert users could catch these kinds of data corruption issues early.  As with the acquisitions and computing 
cultures, the user culture is complex, 
functionally beneficial, and an inevitable part of ICT use.  High-level ICT management 
needs to balance tensions stemming from cu
ltural differences and to provide bridges across these various interrelated cultures so that users become part of the conversation 
and part of the solution.   Like cultural differences, geographical differences in both physical and organizational location also impact ICT management.  During Y2K these differences 
were particularly visible between stateside and overseas bases. For OCONUS staff, a 
major challenge was presente
d by the cultural differences of the host government: ﬁToo 
many people wanted to ask too many questi
ons and it damaged relationsﬂ (USFJ). In 
addition, Air Force ICT managers located in 
non-U.S. environments 
were generally more concerned about the impact of
 Y2K on the foreign culture they depended on than on their own ICT systems. Given the extensive DOD, MAJCOM, and system group scrutiny 
generated by Y2K, OCONUS staff were confident that th
eir own system™s potential problems would be identified and fixed. Thei
r concern was focused on the host country™s reaction and ability to provide dependable utility support. To that end, they spent 1999 preparing for the worst case (374th AW/CS). ﬁThe experience was more challenging 
because of our unique situation to be dependent
 on an electrical power source outside of 
U.S. territory.  Your main power source ma
y not be there no matter how prepared your 
systems are.  Host country data/parts were 
not readily available when needed.  The base prepared higher-level contingencie
s because of these limitationsﬂ (374
th AW/MDG).  
Another geographical factor that impacted ICT manageme
nt was physical proximity 
to major organizational units.  This impact could be both positive and negative.  On the 

one hand, Air Force units on a base that hosts a MAJCOM headquarters, for instance, increase their likelihood of informal interac
tion with that unit a
nd, therefore, access to central guidance and related communications.  
ﬁIt was nice to have AMC next door.  We 
looked at reports sent up to the MAJCOM that other folks didn™t get to see.  We were 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 86guinea pigs for inspectors so they could get a first run-through for inspectionsﬂ (375th AW/CE).  On the other hand, the impact of organizational proximity to major commands 
could preclude certain activities, such as total blackout tests (375
th AW/CG).  
Finally, cultural and geographical issues impact ICT management at the highest, 
most strategic levels.  Like Johnson & Johnson, the Air Force had a deep-rooted history of functional autonomy that had to be overcom
e in order to address the cross-functional aspects of Y2K.  Those who went through Y2K, especially from a leadership perspective, 

were profoundly impacted by this experien
ce. They acknowledged the difficulty in implementing change; however, they also
 recognized the potential for making a 
significant difference in the way ICT is 
managed, and that to do so was their 
responsibility (AFCIO/AFY2KO).   It™s going to be difficult to change some of 
the perspectives of the current leadership. – We 
won™t recognize what really happened culturally to us individually and to our organizations.  

The potential is there for us to do some significant things.  But it™s going to be incumbent 
upon those of us who participated in this process to continue to bear the flag. – We™re facing 
a tremendous amount of cultural change in the way we go about tackling problems, and the 

way we go about finding solutions and executing things is going to change.  It changed with 
the way we dealt with 
Y2K. (AFCIO/AFY2KO) 
 At the top level, ICT management is about
 the space between functional areas.  It is 
about fostering cross-cultural communicati
on and balancing the dynamic tensions that 
arise across organizational boundaries.  It is therefore critical to recognize and address the 
many organizational subcultures that sustai
n these various functional homes.  To 
accomplish this, the ﬁspace betweenﬂ requires an organizational home as well.  
  3.13  Empower Permanent Organizational Entities Focused on Cross-Boundary 

Issues  Once Y2K was perceived to be a general, widespread threat to ICT infrastructure, many 
organizations found it necessary to establish temporary organizational entities to 
spearhead their Y2K response efforts.  Efforts to solidify central management of Air 
Force Y2K activities culminated in the 
creation of the AFY2KO in mid-1998.  This 
temporary office not only faced a large problem 
with a short deadline but also came into 

being at a time when a variety of Y2K activities and levels of ma
nagement had already 
existed for several years.  Thus, while the AFY2KO was well positioned to provide 
coherent leadership to culminating activities, such as the final CINC-level assessments of 

mission threads, there was little time, resource
s, or incentive for establishing itself as the 
single POC responsible for providing consistent Y2K guidance across the myriad of Air 
Force Y2K activities.  
Similarly, numerous other organizations 
established temporary Y2K management 
entities, such as the President™s Council on Year 2000 Conversion and the United Nations™ International Y2K Co-operation Cent
er.  These entities were created not so much because the problem was large and impor
tant, but because existing entities did not 
encompass the cross-functional, cross-hierar
chy, cross-organizational, and cross-system issues involved.  During Y2K, temporary or
ganizational entities were used to gain perspective on interdependencies across units and subsystems, as well as to foster 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 87communication where existing channels did not exist or were insufficient.  The 
President™s Council, for example, focused much
 of its energies on leading a series of meetings that brought together
 key people from various sect
ors, as well as creating an International Communication Center to gather and distill information on national and 
international Y2K incidents.  Were such temporary entities filling a 
need for integration and communication that existed only during the Y2K situation?  
Based on everything discussed previously in this chapter, the answer is no.  The creation of these temporary entities represented a 
missing element in ongoing ICT management: ﬁT
here are a large number of IT-related 
issues that need to be worked similarly to 
the way we did it in Y2K. – It™s been looked at as unique in a number of ways
, but it shouldn™t beﬂ (AMC HQ).  Organizations already have permanent hom
es for functional parts of their ICT 
system of systems; they also need perman
ent homes for the space 
between those parts. Complex systems such as ICT are more than th
e sum of their parts. 
 Partial perspectives 
are often sufficient for day-to-day operationa
l activities, but as has been shown in this 
chapter, high-level, strategic ICT manage
ment needs to integrate and balance the 
ongoing, dynamic tensions between the various parts and perspectives.  This holistic 
perspective represents a different kind of knowing than knowledge of the parts.  Both are essential to the understanding of a complex system.  ﬁMore than one way of knowing is possible. –Without the development of an over-
all perspective, we remain lost in our 
individual investigations.  Such a perspective is a province of another mode of 
knowledge, and cannot be achieved in the same wa
y that individual parts are explored.  It 
does not arise out of a linear sum of i
ndependent observationsﬂ (Ornstein 1975).  Many ICT managers who went through the 
Y2K experience came to recognize the 
necessity of permanent organizational entities
 focused on enterprise-wide, holistic aspects of ICT systems.  They saw that the toughest 
problems occurred not so much within areas 
under their responsibility but, rather, within areas that cut across those responsibilities.  These more holistic problems were not so 
much about technical issuesŠthey involved 
integration of and communication across the entir
e system of systems, that is, the overall 
infrastructure (AMC/SCA). 
  There are a number of areas that are very soft 
and it would be wonderful if they got a greater 
emphasis.  The programs have their problems, but largely those are being worked.  What isn™t 
being worked is the overall infrastructure. (AMC/SCA) 
 Yet, as difficult as it had been to focu
s on enterprise-wide ICT management during 
a crisis situation, managers kne
w it would be even more difficult to maintain this focus 
under normal conditions, especially sin
ce funding and other mechanisms for 
institutionalizing change had not been put into place. ﬁY2K was a hybrid organization and it was set up to run for this period of time. – Now we step forward past the rollover and –[nothing] has changed within our own organization. –Y2K has imploded itself 
back into the organization–ﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO).   ICT has become a less visible issue, resulti
ng in a return to bu
siness as usual with normal (namely, pre-Y2K) funding. Therefore, 
mandates to solve information assurance 
and security problems will not be fulfilled (MIT
RE).  (Of course, the events of 9/11 have 
changed this.) Because Y2K was not expected 
to have a long-term effect or enterprise-
wide impact on the Air Force, professional fi
nancial managers were not brought into the 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 88program. Such a group could have been car
ried over into a new ICT management 
environment (AFCIO/AFY2KO).  
As Y2K ended with seemingly little long-term impact, ICT managers worried 
that the critical cross-boundary focus was rapidly being lost. ﬁThe enterprise as a whole is not being looked at.  We may ha
ve management and policy, but strength 
from an enterprise standpoint is lost
. – Momentum– that we gained through Y2K 
is rapidly falling awayŠwe™re losing our opportunity to maintain the enterprise 
perspectiveﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO).  Even a cursory look at the ongoing state of ICT management leads to the 
conclusion that organizations should not need a crisis to stimulate cross-enterprise ICT 
coordination and communication.  There are staggering organizational losses every year that can largely be traced to incomplete a
nd ineffective ICT management.  Overall, ICT 
projects have an extremely poor completion and success record.  The following describes 

the situation immediately prio
r to the Y2K effort (1994/95):  In the United States, we spend more than $250 billion each year on IT application 
development of approximately 175,000 projects. The average cost of a development 

project for a large company is
 $2,322,000; for a medium company, it is $1,331,000; and 
for a small company, it is $434,000. A great 
many of these projects will fail. Software 
development projects are in chaos, and we can no longer imitate the three monkeysŠhear 
no failures, see no failures, speak no failures. 
     The Standish Group research shows a staggering 31.1% of projects will be canceled 
before they ever get completed. Further results
 indicate 52.7% of projects will cost 189% of 
their original estimates. The cost of these 
failures and overruns are just the tip of the 
proverbial iceberg. The lost op
portunity costs are not measurab
le, but could easily be in the 
trillions of dollars. ...  

     Based on this research, The Standi
sh Group estimates th
at in 1995 American 
companies and government agencies will spend $81 billion for canceled software 

projects. These same organizations will pay an additional $59 billion for software 
projects that will be completed, but will exceed their original time estimates. Risk is 
always a factor when pushing the technology 
envelope, but many of these projects were 
as mundane as a driver™s license database, 
a new accounting package, or an order entry 
system.
 (Standish Group 1994) 
 Since these ongoing estimated losses are co
mparable to expenditures during Y2K, 
the need for a central home of ICT manageme
nt appears not to be limited to times of 
crisis. Because so many ongoing ICT issues we
re interwoven with the Y2K effort (for 
example, version control, certification, system ownership and responsibility, 

configuration management, system maintenance,
 continuity planning, security), there was a relatively brief time during Y2K when the AFY2KO became the Air Force™s home of 

enterprise-wide ICT management.  As a te
mporary office, however, the AFY2KO had no 
mandate for developing and implementing l
ong-term approaches to these ongoing ICT 
challenges.  However, it did recognize the importance and complexity of these evolving 
issues and that permanent homes were needed for managing them. ﬁWe need to find 

homes for issues like configuration manageme
nt and certification and version control and 
we need to put them into policy and procedureﬂ (AFY2KO). 
While the AFY2KO and similar Y2K-focuse
d entities have disappeared, there are 
legacies of Y2K aimed at addressing this 
ongoing situation.  Most significant are the rapid growth of a relatively new corporate position, the Chief Information Officer (CIO), 
and the creation of an even newer cohort, the Chief Knowledge Officer (CKO).  ﬁAgents 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 89of change are–rewiring corporate culture one technology project at a time. These direct 
descendants of Y2K crisis management team
s are more highly disciplined and closely managed than past IT teams. –The CIO ha
s emerged as the driving force behind these collaborative implementations of
 technologyﬂ (McCartney 2001).  While CIOs and CKOs have increasingly been charged with managing an 
organization™s information and knowledge systems, there has been considerable 
uncertainty as to the exact nature of and appropriate skills for these positions.  What is 
enterprise-wide management of an organization™s information and knowledge systems?  

What does an entity devoted to this activity do?  
As with the Air Force, many organizations
 initially saw the CIO™s office as an 
extension of already influential acquisitions and development functions.  This fostered 
two related perspectives: (1) technology was the central component of an organization™s information and knowledge activities, and (2) 
the CIO™s primary role was as owner and 
manager of that technology.  Thus, many CI
O offices centered their information and 
knowledge management activities on standard
izing and keeping up with new information 
and communication technology.  This focus was not only aligned with existing ICT units but also was economically beneficial to th
e many technology companies with products in 
this area. ﬁTechnological
 perspectives of knowledge management are popular because of 
the power and resources often held by technology departments.  Furthermore, some of the 
most widely distributed knowledge management periodicals (
KMWorld and Inside Knowledge magazine, for instance) are sponsored 
almost exclusively by the advertising 
dollars of technology companies mark
eting their productsﬂ (Wick 2000).  
 As Y2K demonstrated, enterprise-wide 
ICT management is not primarily about 
functionally organized technology.  If the CIO owns anything, it is the space between 
these nodes of responsibility, the conversation and interactions that link the functional parts into a strategic whole.  As such, one of the primary activities of the CIO™s office 
must be team building. ﬁIt's no longer the 
case that companies are just forming teams 
within their own walls. Now they're doing 
teams across company lines. So you have 

teams that are cross-organizational, cross-co
mpany, cross-culture, 
cross-hierarchy, cross-technologies, cross-languages, cross-functionalŠcross-everythingﬂ (Jessica Lipnack, 
quoted in McCartney 2001).  Team building was a critical issue during 
the Air Force Y2K response effort.  In addition to the AFY2KO, Y2K spawned unique working groups at bases across the 

service.  These working groups took cross-functional interaction to a lower level than most workers had ever experienced. The working groups, where the decisions were made, were composed of the organizations™ la
bor forces, which do not usually work with each other. Consequently, people from the va
rious organizations came to recognize that 
they have a mutual dependency (375th AW/Y2K, 375
th AW/CE).  
However, team building and coordination 
are difficult tasks, especially when 
teams operate out of the normal channels.  
Many saw these lower-lev
el working groups 
to be impaired by a lack of leadership 
and traditional rank.  ﬁWe had a COMS Tech Sergeant running the [base] Y2K program–not 
only didn™t he have the rank but he didn™t have the experience or background of taking all the players on a base and getting them involvedﬂ (374th AW/CS).  Therefore, ﬁit was– difficult to get [Y2K work group] 
members involved–the effort™s success depends on the level of involvement.  It depends 

on each functional commander™s opinion; if they
 are behind the effort, then there is good 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 90involvement.  While the strength of the effo
rt was the cross-functionality, there was no 
central, formal power behind itﬂ (AMC HQ).  
Others gave a far more positive appr
aisal of the Y2K working groups, though 
even these people acknowledged the critical ro
le of high-ranking leadership and authority 
behind the groups. For example, before Y2K it could take up to three weeks for 
information to be routed up through the wing 
chain of command.  But during Y2K, ﬁthe 

worker bees could take the raw data, streamline 
it just a little bit, and present it right to 
the wing commander.  And we did that weekly at the stand ups. – I don™t think it™s something that™s ever happened beforeﬂ (375
th AW/Y2K). Perhaps this occurred because 
ﬁwing commanders were personally called to task for Y2K. –That™s why the low-level 

organizational matrix workedﬂ (375
th 
AW/ CG). For others, cross-functional teams could 
be advantageous if they had a defined function. It was noticeably effective to have cross-functional problems addressed by people from
 different parts of an organization 
(AMC/HQ).  Whatever the success of the Air Force Y2K working groups, cross-functional team building is a complex activity, one 
where organizational CIOs charged with 
enterprise-wide ICT management need to play
 the central leadership role.  This, alone, 
impacts the desired skill set for the CIO pos
ition. ﬁGiven the high risk for failure of 
teams, the CIOs who lead [collaborative]
 groups require business, technology, team-
building, project management, and communicati
on skills to be effectiveﬂ (McCartney 
2001).  What else must the CIO do?  The CIO 
needs to distinguish functionally bound ICT issues from enterprise-wide ones.  Wh
ere the issue resides within a functional 
responsibility, the role of the CIO is greatly minimized or nonexistent.  But the CIO 
needs to be extremely sensitive to the interd
ependencies of the overall system.  When an 
error is made, it is likely to be the incorre
ct assumption that a cr
oss-functional issue is bounded within a particular functional responsibility.  When an ICT issue is identified to be
 enterprise wide, the CIO must take 
ownership.  While this means assuring that th
ere is a single point of contact providing consistent guidance at the appropriate level, it does not mean the CIO™s office should be 
that POC or should own the problem parts. 
 The CIO owns the space between the partsŠthe space that makes it a cross-enterprise, strate
gic issue.  In this case, his or her primary 
role is to identify the relevant organizational perspectives, to determine the best available 

representatives of those units and perspectives, and then to link, guide, and empower 
those people and units to ma
nage the issue.  Under the CIO™s guidance, a cross-boundary entity defined to represent the relevant organizational perspectives on an issue becomes 
the POC.  Only such an entity, acting with the guidance and authority of the CIO™s office, 

can take on the delicate task of balancing the competing organizational goals that 
surround a cross-boundary ICT issue.  The CIO is the fulcrum in this balancing actŠ
team building, facilitating cross-boundary 
communication and activit
y, assuring that ICT activities are aligned with organizational goals and strategies, and institutionalizing desired change.  Sometimes, however, the CIO must go beyond 
the fulcrum role to one of greater 
authority and stronger leadership.  Specifically, during times 
of critical activity like Y2K or security threats, the CIO ma
y be required to assure speed and flexibility in the face of 
traditional methods for doing things. ﬁThere ar
e bureaucracies that are designed to slow 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 91down decision making and there are places wher
e you want to do thatŠbut in this case 
[Y2K], because of time urgency, the bureaucraci
es were either pushed aside or stepped 
aside and allowed that rapid reaction to take place.  And you need to be able to adapt your organization to do some 
of those thingsﬂ (MSG).  For an organization such as the Air Fo
rce, the CIO would be responsible for assuring whatever ICT flexibility was required for national defense. In addition, the CIO™s office should serve as the single point of contact for ICT coordination outside the organization.  This was a successful aspect of the AFY2KO effort but may be less clearly 
achieved in noncrisis cross-service initiatives. For instance,
 ﬁthe Y2K strategy was to develop the relationship with DISA (Defense Information Systems Agency) early 
on–create a service-level agreement. –We 
probably worked on that relationship as much as anything else to make things
 function smoothly. –[However,] DMS is–not being run that way–ﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO).  Finally, the CIO must foster
 the use of ICT systems themselves as part of the 
solution to the problems they generate.  
These systems are increasingly the primary 
medium for the cross-boundary
 conversation and activity the CIO must establish and 
guide. During Y2K much of the sharing of
 information among the Air Force, the 
services, the federal government, and other governments took place over the World Wide 

Web, which was not business as usual. In the future, ﬁsimilar approaches will be needed 

for other equivalent issuesﬂ (MITRE). In th
is vein, the AFCIO/AFY2KO is working with the Air Force Materiel Command to develop a knowledge management website to host 

the Y2K lessons learned.  Given the ability of modern ICT to empow
er individual users and groups of users, some wonder whether decentrali
zation is an inevitable feature of ICT activity.  They wonder whether we must focus on the strengths 
of local flexibility to achieve our goals, even under crisis conditions. For instance, IT support during the Gulf War was essentially 
a kludge; that is, a flexible and decentralized system composed of very different parts 
was organized into a working system that successfully served a critical yet temporary 
need. ﬁAnd that™s effectively how we™re going to do it in the futureﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  
Even though there is considerable validity and strength to this perspective, it must 
be coupled with the strengths of enlightened central leadership.  A recent Pentagon study 
of the Gulf War found that Army logistics 
and support units ﬁwere hard-pressed to keep up with the rapid pace,ﬂ and if the victory ha
d not been swift, ﬁmaneuver forces would 
have outrun their fuel and other supportﬂ (Rosenberg 2001).  As difficult as it may be to 
achieve, without a single point of responsibility for the ove
rall ICT system, without the cohesion an appropriately focused CIO™s office can provide through central authority and the creation and use of formal 
cross-boundary entities, we may 
not be as fortunate in the future.  Managing ICT systems means managing risk. 
 In battling the risks of Y2K, there were lessons for the current struggle with risks associated with information assurance, 
critical infrastructure protection, and security.  ﬁWhat we did during Y2K is going to continue into the information assurance and the CIP program as we move toward better 
and better ways of managing ITﬂ (AFCIO/A
FY2KO).  Chapter 4 focuses on applying the lessons of Y2K to managing ICT risk.
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 93Chapter 4  Managing ICT Risk 
 Out of Y2K we™ve learned so much more about the way we really do business and rely 
on one another. –We have to find a way to flow this into the next level of what we™re 

going to work on. And whether it™s CIP (critical infrastructure protection) or whether it™s 
information assurance, they™re all part of the same problem.  We need to maintain that 
continuity. –It™s going to be up to those of us who participated in Y2K to see to the 

success in critical infrastructure protection 
and information assurance and information 
warfare... that™s the future for our organization and, in a sense, for our country. 

(AFCIO/AFY2KO) 
 Many managers saw considerable linkage
 between their Year 2000 (Y2K) response efforts and ongoing efforts to manage other 
widespread, generic threats to critical infrastructure in general and informati
on and communication technology (ICT) systems 
in particular.  The central aspect of this 
linkage was the recognition that these efforts 
were more about managing risk than 
they were about fixing things.   Not every threat to the security and a
ccuracy of information systems can be 
eliminated or anticipated; they must be 
managed as an unavoidable cost of increased 
reliance on these systems. ﬁMilitary operations today are heavily dependent on globally shared critical infrastructures.  Techno
logical advances have interconnected these 
infrastructures, better enabling mission accomplishment anywhere in the world.  While 
this connectivity better enables mission 
accomplishment, it also increases our 
vulnerability to human error,
 natural disasters, and physical or cyber attackﬂ (USAF 1999a).  Similarly, the Y2K effort evolved from a focus on fixing ICT systems to a focus 
on how to manage an uncertain risk to critical information infrastructures.  The 
unpredictability of Y2K stemmed from nume
rous interrelated sources, including the complexity of information technology (IT) syst
ems and lack of clarity as to exactly how 
they worked, uncertainty surrounding the nature of the problem itself and how it could be identified, and uncertainty concerning the effectiveness and secondary impact of preventative measures.  ﬁFear of the 
unknown drove the way Y2K was conductedﬂ 
(AMC). Given this high degree of uncertainty, mu
ch of the Y2K effort evolved into a massive risk management project.  For near
ly five years, people across the entire organization worked not so much to eliminate 
the Y2K threat as to limit the risk of its 
anticipated impact.  ﬁEvery effort under Y2K was done to lower risk. – That drove all the decisions we madeﬂ (AFCA). 
Yet, despite this overlap between Y2K and ongoing security and information 
assurance efforts, little formal effort wa
s made to leverage the Y2K ﬁinvestmentﬂ to 
improve management of these related critical
 ICT issues. ﬁThat™s a fundamental flaw–a 
matter of the Air Force™s priorities. –We™re
 missing an opportunity to invest wisely– 
[so as to] sustain some of the good th
at we had from Y2Kﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  
This chapter clarifies and analyzes potential benefits from the Y2K experience for 

ongoing management of ICT security, CIP,
 and infrastructure assurance (IA).1  It does                                                  1 IA more commonly refers to ﬁinformation assurance,ﬂ but as discussed throughout this work, the 
Y2K experience argues for an expanded notion of ﬁICT
 infrastructureﬂ that includes not only hardware, 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 94this in two parts:  (1) a discussion of the nature of the Y2K risk and the relationship between that risk and the responses it engendered, and (2) the drawing of lessons from 
Y2K for ongoing management of IC
T risk and vulnerability.     4.1  Understanding the Relationship Between Y2K Risk and Response 
 During Y2K, organizations had great difficultly 
clarifying the risks they faced.  This had 
a major impact on the nature of
 the response to those risks.  One striking aspect of the Y2K response was a highly reduced tolerance for risk.   
 4.1.1.  Reduced Risk Tolerance  As discussed in Chapter 2 (in particular, see Section 2.2), much of the difficulty in 

clarifying the risk to ICT fr
om Y2K stemmed from issues involving the complexity of 
ICT systems and their environments.  This co
mplexity contributed to uncertainties about 
the nature of the Y2K problem itself.  ﬁThe problem wasn™t understood.  We had to 

assume that we would be operating in uncertaintyﬂ (374
th AW/LG).  In turn, uncertainties surrounding the nature of Y2K led to uncertainties about the threat to critical systems and 
the operations they supported.  ﬁPeople couldn™t quantify the riskﬂ (AFY2KO). Faced with an uncertain threat to highly critical operations, organizations 
significantly reduced their tolerance for Y2K 
riskŠin some cases, to zero. This occurred 
ﬁnot just within the Air Force but DOD [D
epartment of Defense] wide, and probably 
even government wideﬂ (AMC/HQ).   Th
e difficulty of quantifying a complex, multifaceted problem with a fixed deadline, c
oupled with an extremely reduced tolerance 
for risk, led to a response that approached anything associated with Y2K with a broad effort to eliminate as much risk as possibl
e.  ﬁIf you could identify a problem you had to 
fix it.  If you could theorize a problem you had to go after itﬂ (AMC/SCA). This broad and exhaustive effort led to frustration among those ICT managers 
who saw a need to distinguish specific Y2K threats by their likelihood and criticality. For example, the AMC/SCA ﬁinstituted a review 
board to have the programs in a technical 
sense try to defend why they should be certified. –[The board probed] the changes and how the program worked to determine the prob
ability from the technical standpoint that 
they™d missed something or created some other problem–ﬂ (AMC/SCA). In other words, 

based upon an understanding of its programs and 
of the nature of the problem, the board 

could have made a specific response, but 
because of other reasonsŠspecifically, the inability of senior leadership to accept less 
than zero riskŠit had to apply a general, zero 
risk response.  ﬁI found it very difficult to explain [differing levels of risk] to more senior 
leadership. – I can™t tell you how much time 
I could have saved.  They basically said ‚Any risk at all, forget it™ﬂ (AMC/SCA). 
Most ICT managers had never operated under a policy of zero risk tolerance, and they saw it as inappropriate for their situa
tion.  ﬁBecause of the atmosphere of paranoia, 
any kind of information that appeared would ge
nerate [exaggerated responses]. . . .ﬂ  If                                                                                                                                                  data, and information,but also its use and management.  Therefore, unless specifically noted otherwise, IA 
stands for the more encompassing no
tion of ﬁinfrastru
cture assurance.ﬂ 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 95completion percentages were less than 100 perc
ent, offices would ﬁspend the next several weeks writing current reports on all the bases–and providing twice-a-week status reports 
to senior management listing every single pie
ce of infrastructure that wasn™t complete, 
where it was, what the expected due date was, what the fix action was, and who the POC 
working it [was].  And most of that–was 
category 4 [lowest priority].ﬂ  This was considered wasted time; they could have
 been working on more important problems 
(AMC/HQ).  ICT middle managers were sometimes ca
ught between the broad requirements of 
senior leaders and the efforts of local workers to minimize efforts by focusing on high 
priority systems and issues. 
 We spent a lot of time categorizing all of 
our systems according to the mission criticality 
categories. – Nevertheless, on several occasions I spent two or three days answering 
questions from OSD about category 4, non-mission-essential systems. – I had to call the 

people who manage these systems for this inform
ation and they said, ﬁWho cares?  If it breaks 
we get out a pencil and piece of paper and no
body knows the difference.ﬂ  I™d say, ﬁI 
understand that, but I have to put this information together so it can go up to OSD next week 

for a big conference that™s going on.ﬂ (AMC HQ) 
 Clearly there were differences between the risk tolerance of ICT managers and that of 
senior leadership.   4.1.2.  Risk Tolerance of ICT Managers versus Senior Leadership  
To a great extent, the frustrations of 
ICT managers stemmed from fundamental 
differences in their tolerance for risk versus 
that of senior leadership.  As discussed in Section 2.4, ICT managers and senior strategi
c managers have signi
ficant differences in training, experience, work environment, and pe
rspective.  These differences led to very different responses to the uncertainty surrounding Y2K risk.   On the one hand, to the more politically motivated senior administrator, failure 
can be a career-threatening event. Senior mana
gers saw Y2K as a predictable risk.  From this perspective, the clear response was to anticipate the worst-case scenario and work to eliminate as much of this ri
sk as possible. On the other hand, ICT managers saw failure 
as part of their job; someth
ing they understood and dealt with every day. As engineers, they viewed senior decision makers as trying 
to force an unrealistic level of software 
reliability and assurance on Y2K (AMC/S
CA). ICT managers found it difficult to 
understand why levels of risk they routinely accepted were now unacceptable and, even 

worse, causing a considerable drain on thei
r time and resources.  One manager reported 
being required to go through a week™s worth of effort to recertify a system after a minor 
change, despite having informed his senior 
officer that it had virtually no chance of 
causing a Y2K failure, because he could not 
guarantee that a failure 
would not occur. As senior managers took responsibility for Y2K, however, they also became 
frustrated.  In their case, frustration stemme
d from the inability to get clear, concrete answers to what they saw as basic questions, 
such as, ﬁIs this system Y2K compliant?ﬂ or 
ﬁCan you assure me that this will not experience a Y2K failure?ﬂ 
  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 964.1.3.  IT Industry Compliance Statements  Given the uncertain atmosphere surrounding Y2K and its accompanying risks, most 
organizations (including the United States Ai
r Force, hereafter simply USAF, or Air 

Force) sought assurance from the IT industr
y itself.  In developing their operational definition of Y2K compliant, these organi
zations relied heavily on Y2K compliance 
statements provided by system component ma
nufacturers.  Y2K workers either obtained 
these statements from individual system points of contact (POCs) 
(a highly duplicative 
effort) or found them posted in organization-wi
de inventories, such as the Air Force All 
Systems Inventory (AFASI).  
Unfortunately, whether industry Y2K-compliance statements were applied bottom 
up or top down, they generally failed to reduce the uncertainties su
rrounding Y2K risk.  Specifically, compliance of parts, components,
 and subsystems carried no guarantee of 
reliability when interacting with other co
mponents of the larger system, and industry 
Y2K-compliance statements were careful to state this.  For example: 

 Our products depend on many aspects of your computer system for their correct 
operation. They will not be Year 2000 Compliant if the rest of your computer system, 
including software, hardware, firmware, and other aspects of the system or service 

including the operating system and BIOS, is not Year 2000 Compliant or is adversely 
affected by the Year 2000
. (QLogic Corporation 1999) 
 In addition, component manufacturers could 
not be viewed as fully objective, since noncompliance of older products could lead to
 increased sales of newer ones.  Here 
again, senior managers could not 
find the assurances they sought.  
 4.1.4.  Legal Factors  Another set of factors that greatly impacted senior manage
ment tolerance of Y2K risk 
and further fueled the broad and exhaustive 
Y2K response was legal concerns related to 
faultfinding if disruption from Y2K occurred.  The Federal Y2K Act, passed in July 1999, specified that   A defendant who wishes to establish the 
affirmative defense of Y2K upset shall 
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant 
evidence thatŠ(A) the defendant previously made a reasonable good faith effort to 

anticipate, prevent, and effectively remediate a potential Y2K failure. – (Y2K Act of 
1999) 
 The Air Force™s good faith effort was couched under the even stronger phrase ﬁdue diligence.ﬂ ﬁThe responsible individuals, in this case–leadership, had to take an attitude of due diligence and awarenessﬂ (AFCIO/AFY2KO). However, due diligence was not formally defined; rather, it became 
a general sense of doing everything possible 
to assure operational capabilities.  Neve
rtheless, due diligence became a fundamental 
aspect of the Air Force Y2K response, filtering down from senior leadership to all 
participants in the effort. 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 97Due diligence will probably be the most importa
nt tenet after the dust settles. If your 
mission-critical or mission-essential system should fail due to a Y2K problem, you may 
find yourself testifying in court. Without evidence of due diligence, those involved could 
be held liable for the damage created by system failuresŠthis is the case in the Air Force 

because the certifier must sign documentati
on to certify the system is Y2K compliant. 
(Ashton 1998) 
 Unfortunately, people charged with addressing what was already an unclear Y2K threat 
now had the added vague legal threat of due diligence to consider.  This led to even more extreme efforts to eliminate wh
at was viewed as a nonquantifia
ble risk.  In other words, the only time workers were allowed not to fi
x a problem was when they ﬁcould guarantee 
zero probability that there would be the possibi
lity of an error,ﬂ which was impossible to 
do (AMC/SCA). These due diligence concerns made it di
fficult to control the scope of the Y2K 
response.  ﬁBecause of due diligence, there was a fear that if we didn™t try something, 
then somebody could accuse us of not doing ever
ything possible if anything at all went wrong (AMC/SCA).  The legal (and political) pressures of due diligence drove certification approval to higher levels, involving more auditing and inspection groups.  These groups further advocated a broad response that treated all potential aspects of the Y2K problem equally, whether they were missi
on critical or not.  According to the 375th AW/LG, the AMC Audit Agency™s positi
on was, ﬁIf it™s got power, check it.ﬂ 
  4.1.5.  Politics and the Media  Even when not directly linked to due diligence, outside political and media pressure 

further heightened the level of Y2K response.  On the one hand, this pressure was beneficial in helping to bring together the critical mass of 
people and resources needed to address the cross-functional, cross-organizational Y2K problem. On the other hand, this 
outside pressure, particularly in the form in 
which it came from the media, helped fuel the 
broad nonspecific response and zero tolerance policy. ﬁIn the beginning, there were basically two types of press coverage on Y2K.ﬂ These were one, the kind that predicted 
disaster, and two, none.  ﬁIn that kind of environment–the only information–[being 
disseminated is about] the next disaster th
at™s going to destroy western civilization. –That brought to bear all the political pressure that helped driv
e the zero tolerance 
policy and guided everything we did from there onﬂ (AMC HQ).  
Reports from the media could particularly 
affect senior administrators who lacked 
the familiarity with ICT that
 would allow them to discern media hype from accurate 

reporting.  ﬁGenerals read press reports and called down, wondering about their carsﬂ (AFCA).  Whether or not it was the media who brought non-ICT infrastructure to the attention of senior leaders, this focus also had a major impact on Y2K risk management. 
  4.1.6.  The Inclusion of Non-ICT Infrastructure  The inclusion into Y2K of non-ICT infrastructure was another significant factor in the heightened effort to eliminate Y2K risk. The 374
th AW/LG ﬁspent months going through 
inventory–[including checking] if a Toyota Land Cruiser was Y2K compliant.ﬂ This 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 98expansion of Y2K to include more traditi
onal infrastructure went far beyond cars to include power generators, alarms, refrigerat
ors, traffic lights, air conditioning, and sprinklers.  The uncertainty that drove this
 expansion stemmed from a tiny but legitimate 
risk from hardwired dates in embedded chip
s.  The likelihood of having an embedded 
chip relying on a hardwired date was sma
ll; the likelihood of that date having a Y2K error was even smaller; the likelihood that th
e chip™s function required sensitivity to the 
century was even smaller (a sprinkler, for example, might be sensitive to the day of the 

week or hour of the day); the likelihood of a century-sensitive chip failure having a critical cascading functional impact was even sm
aller. Yet, because a faulty chip was so 
difficult to locate and impossible to fix (it required replacement), this issue became the 
public focus of Y2K, the so-called ticking 
time bomb widely reported in the media and 
discussed in Congress.   In the context of zero risk tolerance, m
eeting the embedded chip threat required a 
huge, almost never-ending effort.  ICT 
managers recognized that this was a 
fundamentally different issue from the Y2K data and ICT systems issues they had been 

dealing with.  Since traditional infrastructure items varied
 greatly by location and were generally managed at the local level, many Air Force ICT managers passed this burden 
on to the bases. Not surprisingly, delegating the chip issue to the bases had a significant impact on the Y2K effort at the local leve
l. For some bases, this meant checking 

ﬁanything with possible date ramifications.  We
 received inquiries a
bout refrigerators and 
sprinklersﬂ (375th AW/CG). Even though one base may have had the same systems as 
another base, each chip was considered uni
que and therefore was checked. Thus, the 

effort was extremely arduous (ﬁI wa
sted 10 months of my lifeﬂ [374
th AW/LG]) and could require what appeared to be considerable duplication. Were there existing organizational mechanisms for managing risk 
that could have brought greater order to this effort?  
  4.1.7.  COOPs and ORM  An organization such as the Air Force has considerable experience with conducting operations under risk conditions.  How di
d existing mechanisms for managing risk 
impact the Y2K effort?  Two related mechanis
ms that came into play to varying degrees 
during Y2K were Continuity of Operations Plans (COOPs) and Operational Risk Management (ORM).  
Risk of disruption from a predictable th
reat can be reduced not only by addressing the threat itself but also by a
ddressing its potential impact.  As the perceived deadline for 
Y2K approached, the response effort shifted focus from fixing systems to preparing for 
continued function in the face of uncertain
 impact (see Section 1.3.2.3).  In August 1998, 
GAO released its Year 2000 report on ﬁBusiness Continuity and Contingency Planning,ﬂ which stated:  
 Time is running out for solving the Year 2000 problem.  Many federal agencies will not 
be able to renovate and fully test all of their mission-critical systems and may face major 
disruptions in their operations. –Because of 
these risks, agencies must have business 
continuity and contingency plans to reduce the risk of Year 2000 business failures.  
Specifically, every federal agency must ensu
re the continuity of its core business 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 99processes by identifying, assessing, managing, and mitigating its Year 2000 risks. (GAO 
1998b) 
 As an organization familiar with opera
ting under threat of disruption, the Air Force already maintained plans for assuring 
continuity of operations if a disruption occurred.  Faced with the need to establis
h Y2K continuity plans, Air Force leaders 
looked to its existing COOPs (as well as, to some extent, its ORM, as discussed below).  
 Review and exercise your continuity-of-operations plans: A Y2K test at Keesler Air 

Force Base, Miss., showed we couldn't simply
 rely on assurances that systems are Y2K 
compliant. During that May 11 and 12 test
, compliant systemsŠincluding commercial 
off-the-shelf software, encountered Y2K anomalies. Ensure your COOPs cover your 
mission-critical processesŠthe ones you can't af
ford to shut down.  Use operational risk 
management to assess which of your critical pr
ocesses are most likely to be affected and 
how they would be affected. Review your COOPs to ensure you can get the job done 

even if computers fail. Ensure [that] your 
COOPs are resourced, particularly if you're 
depending on goods or services you don't control.  Finally, ensure [that] you've 
thoroughly tested your workarounds. Think of Y2K as ability to survive and operate. 
(Ambrose 1999)  
 The effort to apply COOPs to Y2K continuity planning revealed inadequacies in the COOPs as plans for minimizing uncertain risk 
of widespread disruption.  First, given the high degree of personnel turnover and reassi
gnment in the military, COOPs tended to be 
more about job continuity than consequence management.  The focus was on individual 
unit activity, not overall mission ope
ration with the possibility of uncertain disruption.  There was little uniformity in the various unit or
 even base plans and little attention to 
interdependencies outside a given unit™s control. ﬁEach squadron and group had a COOP, but we needed an overall plan for the baseﬂ (374th AW/CS).  
Second, given reductions in personnel and the accompanying increased effort to 
meet ongoing operational needs, COOPs were 
given extremely low priority and were 
rarely reviewed; in some cases, they could not even be located during base visits.  In most cases, the backup plan was ﬁjust do things like we were doing them using pen and paperﬂ 
(374th AW/OG). 
Nevertheless, Air Force Y2K leaders made
 a concerted, though initially ad hoc, effort to build on the existing COOP structure to develop a cross-organizational plan for continuity of critical missions while facing 
uncertain Y2K disruption. The focus of this centralized effort was interdependencyŠhow
 to continue mission accomplishment with 
the possibility of disruption to mutually depend
ent, separately controlled entities.  Over 
time, this focus was extended to include or
ganizations and communities outside the Air 
Force.  For example, a logical extension 
of a COOP was a community outreach program 
based on the president™s program (AFCA).  
Once Y2K managers began looking at inte
rdependencies, it became difficult to 
delineate where these interdependencies st
opped.  Like other aspects of the Y2K response, the effort to use COOPs to redu
ce the risk of disruption became exhaustive, 
especially as the new century approached. To
 help prioritize the ever-widening range of 
continuity efforts, some Y2K leaders looke
d toward another Air Force mechanism for 
managing risk, namely, ORM.  ﬁOperati
onal Risk Management was applied to contingency planningﬂ (375th AW/SC). In the Air Force, ORM had been a recent 
development focused on predictable risks to sa
fety. ﬁThe [Air Force] always deals with Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 100risk, but–the culture has become not to take
 any predictable risk. Aircraft crashes are predictable, so the [Air Force] will try to
 reduce them to zero. –ORM–[is] a systematic 
approach to get the risk out in the open for evaluationﬂ (AFCA). Since Y2K was 
considered a predictable risk, it made sense 
to attempt to use ORM as a tool to guide 
response efforts by evaluating the various levels of risk.  Unfortunately, efforts to guide the Y2
K response strategy based on such ORM classifications as criticality of impact and likelihood of 
occurrence, though not without some benefit, had minimal impact.  As discussed in Section 2.2, these efforts were 
hampered by the technical complexity of 
ICT systems and nontechnical factors of the 
ICT environment.  Other than at the highest
 level Commander in Chief (CINC) thin line 
systems, it became too difficult to discriminate different levels of Y2K problems and 

responses; thus, ﬁfor all practical purposes, every system went through the same level of 
scrutinyﬂ (AMC/SCA).  
While complexity issues were central to the difficulties in applying ORM to Y2K, 
there were organizational issues as well.  OR
M was seen as a process applied by specific 
offices associated with safety.  It was difficult to suddenly turn ORM into a general way of thinking that could guide a cross-organizational risk reduction effort. ﬁThe Office of 
Primary Responsibility (OPR) is usually re
sponsible for ORM training.  Safety and Manpower usually apply ORM to most things
 to assure a common understanding in the 
case of, for example, accident investigations
.  ORM should be decentralized.  It™s a concept, not an applicationﬂ (375th AW/SC). 
 Though little formal effort was made to 
apply ORM to addressing potential Y2K 
problems in ICT systems, there was a more
 formal effort to apply ORM to Y2K 
continuity planning.   We told people in the guidance for making COOPs to go through an ORM process.  Deal with 
your safety guys and find out how to do [it].  We didn™t do that in the software; we didn™t do 
that in the infrastructure; we did it basically in the COOPs.  (AFCA) 
 However, since ORM categories and procedures were not clearly defined or understood, the uneven application of ORM to COOPs coul
d actually confuse rather than clarify the 
continuity planning effort. AFCA asked bases to use an ORM approach to COOPS using prioritized risks, such as complete loss of
 service and generation of bad data, but ﬁthe development of COOPs occurred at different le
vels, some of them very high and some of 
them very low. And what we found on a lot of
 our strike teams was a marrying of those 
levels [that] became a cloud [of general assu
mptions that everything would work out]ﬂ  
(AFCA). 
 In fact, some local units used ORM 
to justify a reduced focus on their ICT systems.  Since central management was al
ready working on most of the systems on a 
base, an ORM analysis could lead a base to focus more on traditiona
l infrastructure, such 
as power and telecommunications, especially when those systems were not under their 
control (that is, they were provided by off-base facilities).  
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1014.1.8.  Effectiveness and Appropriateness of the Response 
 Many lessons for ongoing management of ICT ri
sk can be drawn from the overall story 
of Y2K risk and response.  Before drawing out the most important of these lessons, 

however, it seems appropriate to briefly addr
ess what was once a highly visible issueŠ
the effectiveness and appropriateness of the Y2K response.  While this study was never geared toward formally assessing the effec
tiveness of the Y2K response, this section on the relationship between Y2K risk and response might be viewed as incomplete without a 

few general comments on this complex a
nd potentially controversial subject.  
At the most basic level, the questi
on could be asked, Was the Y2K response 
effective?  If ﬁeffectiveﬂ is defined simply by 
outcome, than the answer is yes.  There was 
a complex problem; changes were made; in the 
end, there was little impact. If ﬁeffectiveﬂ entails a sense of how much change was 
made, however, the answer would depend on 
how change is defined and counted. The anec
dotal evidence indicates there was far more 
change to IT equipment and systems than to non-IT infrastructure.  Changes to IT 

infrastructure may have impacted up to half 
of the IT inventory items; changes to more 
traditional infrastructure items probably ranged between 2 and 5 percent (AFCA). As 

discussed throughout this report, changes to operational and management practice could 
be far more significant, though less easy to quantify.  
Did some of the resources to address Y2
K go toward changes that were needed outside of the Y2K effort and would have occurred anyway?  Given the 
interconnectedness of ICT systems, changes to 
one part of the system invariably impact 
other parts.  Therefore, it is extremely hard 
to separate changes that addressed Y2K from 
other associated problems in the system.  Th
is was especially true where upgrades were seen as part of the Y2K solution. For instance, hardware could become obsolete from 

software upgradesŠlike taking an e-mail sy
stem from Microsof
t Mail to OutlookŠor firmware upgrades could require the replacement of routers (374
th AW/CS).  Some of 
these upgrades and replacements, made w
ith Y2K resources, addressed maintenance 
issues that existed independently of the Y2K situation. For instance, the 374th AW/CES 
replaced generators 
dating back to 1948. This leads to perhaps the most difficult 
question: Was the magnitude of the Y2K 
response proportional to the Y2K risk faced? 
 It is extremely difficult to tie specific 
remediation efforts to the eventual outcome 
or to precisely quantify the costs of those efforts. To some, ﬁthe real loss was the func
tionality that we didn™t have because we were 
working on Y2K. –All the manpower [not account
ed for in the costs] that we spent on 
Y2K [could have been allocated to more mean
ingful tasks],ﬂ such as implementing new 
functionality (AMC/HQ).  Given all the factors discussed thus far, it certainly was difficult for Y2K managers to determine when their efforts 
were cost-effective.  The combination of 
reduced risk tolerance and a situation where 
risk could never be eliminated meant that 
there was little rationale for declaring a 
Y2K activity to be completed.  Instead, Y2K workers ran a race against the clock to con
tinually reduce risk, w
ith little basis for determining when a given effort was sufficient.
  Toward the end, the questions were coming down from on highŠﬁHave we done enough?  
How sure do you feel?ﬂ– A contractor came forward at one of the OSD meetings and said, 
ﬁWe™ve tested a couple of your systems and we™ve 
found a couple of errors.ﬂ  That just drove 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 102people crazy.  ﬁYou mean we haven™t solved 
every error?ﬂ  Then we expanded this risk 
aversion out to the overseas bases.   There™s nothing wrong here [but] let™s check the countries 
that are giving any kind of infrastructure support to the host base. ... Even to the last 
moment– if you had any resources left, [you had to find] something else to do. –How much 

risk [should we have been] willing to accept [giv
en our] mission operation?  I can™t answer 
that, but if you take that train of thought you™re going to lead to that same paranoia we had. – 

I don™t know what enough is. [At some point] you have to say, ﬁThis is enoughﬂ and then live 

with that. (AFCA) 
 Thus, from the perspective of many ICT wo
rkers who were used to dealing with constant risk to software and systems, the unusually reduced tolerance for risk in the face 
of Y2K uncertainty led to an excessive 
response. ﬁIt was a due diligence action that–wasted–[a] lot of time a
nd money doing things that were completely unimportantﬂ 
(AMC HQ). With IT, risk is assumed just 
by using it, something upper management did 
not understand. ﬁEvery one of our programs ha
s a number of problems that are always 
being uncovered and always being fixed. ...Wa
s the cost of the response equal to the potential cost of harm? –Absolutely not. 
 I think we spent a lot more than was 
necessary–ﬂ (AMC/SCA).  ﬁThere was a ge
nuine risk,ﬂ but because of the publicity 

surrounding it and the abundance of funding available, ﬁit was overstatedﬂ (374th AW/CS). 
For numerous reasons, however, many of 
which had little to do with technology, senior leadership took the position that disruption was not acceptable and that if it did occur, it would not be for lack of attention or effort.  Viewing Y2K primarily as a 
predictable and potentially highly disruptive threat, this was a reasonab
le stance to take.  An effort that went beyond the usual cost justification was acceptable as long as disruption was minimized, which it was.  If a 
similar degree of success could have been 
achieved with less effort, that does not negate Y2K as a real problem, nor does it mean 
that future efforts to manage risk should re
ceive not comparable attention and support.  
Far more important than trying to de
termine whether the Y2K response went 
beyond cost-effectiveness is the recognition that Y2K was an important new experience 
and that we need to learn from it.  For most se
nior leaders, it was their first experience in 
being responsible for an enterprise-wide, mission-driven, highly uncertain ICT problem.  
The goal at this point should not be to determine the cost-effectiveness of the Y2K effort 
but, rather, to continually improve handling 
what is an extremely complex and dynamic 
jobŠmanaging ICT in general and ICT risk in particular.  
 We need to treat CIP and information warfare 
and where we go post-Y2K in some of the 
same ways we treated Y2K.  We have to– bring it to the attention of the leadership in 
such a fashion that they understand it, so that these don™t fall off the table like Y2K 
almost did. (AFY2KO)
   
 4.2  Application to Security, CI
P, and Infrastructure Assurance  Even though Y2K included a massive, multiyear ICT risk management effort, that 
effort did not significantly impact the ongoing 
programs for addressing threats to ICT. 
One of the main reasons for this was that 
Y2K represented a different kind of ICT risk that did not fit neatly under the existing categories of ongoing effort:  security, critical Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 103infrastructure protection, and infrastructure assurance.  Security and CIP focus on deterring hostile threats, while infrastructu
re assurance focuses on mitigating the impacts 
of those threats.   Infrastructure Assurance
: Preparatory and reactive risk management actions intended to 
increase confidence that a critical infrastructur
e™s performance level will continue to meet 
customer expectations despite 
incurring threat inflicted damage.  For instance, incident 
mitigation, incident response, and service restoration. (PCCIP 1997) 
 Probably the central lesson of the Y2K experience for ongoing management of ICT risk 
was the recognition that serious and costly threats could stem not only from the intentional action of a conscious enemy but also from the 
unintentional consequences of our own actions, confounded by complexities of the ICT system itself and our inability to 
adequately manage those complexities.  Y2
K argues that we should expand our notion of infrastructure assurance to include th
ese unintentional, systemic threats.  
 
 4.2.1.  Intentional versus Systemic ICT Risk  The 1997 report of the President™s Commissi
on on Critical Infrastructure Protection 
focused on issues stemming from inten
tional actions of hostile enemies. ﬁA 
threat is 
traditionally defined as a 
capability linked to hostile intent
ﬂ (PCCIP 1997).  In the 
commission™s report, the categ
orization of risk was based primarily on the nature of 
the target.  Physical threats were threats to
 such physical assets as power stations, pipelines, telecommunications facilities, bridges, and water supplies.  Cyber threats were threats to computer systems, esp
ecially the informati
on-carrying components of those systemsŠdata and code.  ﬁThe Commission focused more on cyber issues 

than on physical issues, because cyber i
ssues are new and not well understood.  We 
concentrated on understanding the tools required to attack computer systems in 
order to shut them down or to gain acce
ss to steal, destroy, corrupt or manipulate 
computer data and codeﬂ (PCCIP 1997).  
In its consideration of physical vulnerabilities, the commission 
acknowledged both natural and man-made th
reats: ﬁInfrastructures have always been subject to local or regional outages resulting from earthquakes, storms, and 
floods. – Physical vulnerabilities to man-ma
de threats, such as arson and bombs, 
are likewise not newﬂ (PCCIP 1997).  
Similarly, in its consideration of ne
w cyber vulnerabilities, the commission 
acknowledged natural threats in the form of
 accidents and negligence while focusing its 
energies almost entirely on man-made threats,
 which range ﬁfrom prankish hacking at the 

low end to organized, synchronized attacks at the high endﬂ (PCCIP 1997).  Following 
this report, the next year™s Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 63 focused on 
intentional man-made ﬁatta
cksﬂ on cyber systems (even as Y2K was increasingly 
expanding our awareness of and attention to the more ﬁnaturalﬂ systemic components of 
ICT risk).   II. President™s Intent:  It has long been th
e policy of the United States to assure the 
continuity and viability of critical infrastructures. President Clinton intends that the 
United States will take all necessary measur
es to swiftly eliminate any significant 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 104vulnerability to both physical and cyber att
acks on our critical infrastructures, including 
especially our cyber systems. (EOP 1998b) 
 No one can deny the importance of ICT security, CIP, and the high degree of 
attention required to address intentional thr
eats to critical systems.  Nevertheless, Y2K 
illuminated the magnitude of another category 
of cyber threatŠunintentional threats from 
the complexity of the system itself and our in
ability to fully manage it.  As discussed 
throughout this report, the Y2K systemic thr
eat went far beyond accidents and negligence 
to the heart of how ICT systems evolve over 
time and are used to achieve organizational 
goals and accomplish mission objectives.  
The Y2K experience also revealed fundame
ntal differences between intentional cyber threats and systemic ones.  Hostile intentional threats originated primarily from 
outside the ICT system (although this includes
 outsiders who gain access to the inner workings of the system); systemic threats orig
inated from the nature of the system itself, 
including the complexities of its interrelated subsystems, the environments within which 

it exists, and the ways it is managed and main
tained (as discussed in Chapters 2 and 3). 
Intentional threats presume an adversarial rela
tionship, with a general goal of deterrence; systemic threats presume an interdependent 
relationship, with a general goal of improved 
communication and coordination of multiple perspectives, objectives, and tactics.  
These two types of threat generate two categories of ICT risk: (1) intentional risk 
from outside disruption of functionality, and (2
) systemic risk that is often the price of 
increased functionality itself.  Y2K was a symptom of the second type of risk. 

Furthermore, Y2K revealed that the uncertain
ties surrounding systemic risk could be as 
great, if not greater, than the uncertainties 
surrounding hostile enemy attack.  For one 
thing, responsibilities for addressing intentional risk are easier to identifyŠit is primarily 
an us-versus-them scenario.  Responsibiliti
es for addressing systemic risk are much 
harder to identify.  In fact, identifying respons
ibility for systemic risk can be the toughest 

issue to address, particularly when there is a mismatch between functional nodes of 
responsibility and a potential problem located between those nodes.  Despite the differences between intentiona
l and systemic risk, ICT managers need 
to address both types of risk within a coherent strategy.  In some instances, these two 
elements of risk overlap, allowing a single tact
ic such as continuity planning to minimize 
the potential impact of both.  
In other instances, efforts to 
address these types of risk become competing desirable ends that need
 to be balanced along with the many other 

competing desirable ends of ICT, such as 
functionality, usability, and maintainability.  
 
 4.2.2.  Enterprise-wide ICT Risk Management 
 As with ICT management in general (discusse
d in Chapter 3), management of the various 

types of ICT risk requires an enterprise-wide perspective that carefully considers and 
appropriately balances the many competing dynamic demands on ICT systems.  This 

means that efforts to manage intentional and sy
stemic risk need to 
be integrated not only with each other but also with other desirable 
ICT goals.  For example, user behavior that 
increases ICT risk can stem from tensions be
tween security and desired functionality, as 
when users punch a hole in or even take out altogether a firewall in order to accommodate a legacy system that cannot deal with it (AFCIC/SY).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 105Conversely, actions taken to increase security can adversely affect user functionality. Much of IT security tends to degrade capability, and often with unknown consequences. For example, when an e-mail attachment or signature 
profile is infected 
with a virus, it is blocked. For a war-fighting CINC, this loss of in-transit visibility means 
that the information on an airplane™s conten
ts (namely, cargo or personnel) is lost. When 
users detect a virus, their Simple Mail Tran
sfer Protocol and Internet Protocol  are blocked. For a 24-hours-a-day, 7-days-a-week operation, this denial of service can mean 
the loss of an enormous amount of data. Furt
her compounding these issues is the breadth 
of activity that is affected
: Many units operate outside of Air Force bases and even outside the DOD (AMC/SCA). ﬁWe™re still not
 organized in how we will deal with balancing security and information flow needsﬂ (AF/XOIWD). 
In addition to interdependencies between security and functionality, there are also 
interdependencies between efforts to manage 
ICT risk and efforts to acquire, develop, 
and field systems.  Sometimes these interd
ependencies can lead to tensions in the relationship between the risk management a
nd development communities.  For example, 
units responsible for fielding new systems can be frustrated by the lack of uniformity 
across the organization, especially in the diverse operating environments. Different 
servers in the same environment may have diffe
rent disk drives, use different versions of the database management system, and run di
fferent versions of the operating system.  
ﬁAs a result of that we can™t distribute software in a rational mannerﬂ (SSG). 
On the other hand, units responsible for risk management can take a different 
view of this situation. From 
the perspective of information 
warfare, diversity makes it 
more difficult for an adversary to figure out how to breach a system. ﬁIf every piece of 
software is absolutely standardized, one hole gets you in everywhere. –That™s a fundamental point that™s almo
st always missedﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  ﬁUsing the same system 
on every base is a double-edged sword. – They figure out what to do with it, and they™re going to attack everybody. – That™s one of the reasons why we want some variety out 
thereﬂ (AFCERT). Still other potential tens
ions can be seen between the goals of risk management and the informational needs 
for management of integrated systems 
(see Chapter 3, Section 3.11).  ICT managers cannot handle such issues as version control and configuration management without regul
ar gathering and dissemination 
of system information, yet the restriction of
 this same information may be necessary 
for security.  Y2K informational efforts 
brought out this tension. ﬁThe cause and tension that really needs to be acknowledged with the issue of classifying the 
AFASI is that while this database is useful [for ICT managers], it also is your 
adversaries™ targeting database; therefore, there is a rationale for classification.  The tension is between usability for continuing IT management and not giving your 
adversary– the keys to your kingdomﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  
These various interrelationships and tensions indicate that strategic risk management, like strategic ICT management in 
general, is a cross-organizational activity 
best approached from an enterprise-wide pe
rspective.  This lesson was learned during Y2K, but even though many ICT managers saw 
its relevance to ongoing security and risk management efforts, there was little actual
 transfer. ﬁAlhough we learned that Y2K was an operational problemŠnot just the purview of the SCŠwe fundamentally have handed 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 106CIP to the SC to do.  This means that with CIP, people are fighting the same battles we 
had to fight [with] Y2Kﬂ (AF/XOIWD). 
Clearly, the Y2K experience was relevant to ongoing ICT risk management, 
though that relevance still needs to be captured and assimilated.  To help in this effort, the 
following section includes lessons of the Y2K experience that can be incorporated into 
strategic ICT risk management efforts.   
 
 4.2.3.  Lessons of Y2K for Strategic ICT Risk Management  Based on the discussion thus far, two central lessons for the ongoing, strategic management of ICT risk can be drawn from the Y2K experience.  
 1. Expand the notion of infrastructure assurance to include unintentional, systemic risk, and integrate efforts to address systemic risk with more 

established efforts to address hostile, intentional risk.  
 2. Manage ICT risk from an enterprise-wide perspective, balancing and 

incorporating efforts to achieve the goal
s of security, CIP, and infrastructure 
assurance with the many 
other interrelated efforts to achieve ICT goals.   In addition to these two general lessons, additional lessons of Y2K can be applied to the ongoing management of ICT risk.  Many are vers
ions of the general management lessons 
discussed in Chapter 3, applied to the issues of security and risk.   3. In risk management efforts, increa
se the focus on the use of data and information to achieve organizational goals.  
 As discussed in Chapter 2, Section 2.3, strategic ICT management needs to shift its 
central focus from hardware and software to
 data, knowledge, and organizational goals.  Similarly, risk management needs a greater
 focus on data and information corruption 
issues, which span both intentional and systemic ICT risk.   
As we move increasingly into a world 
where critical actions are taken based on 
electronic output, corruption of data and information (whether from hacker maliciousness 
or systemic complexity) becomes the element 
of ICT risk that has highest impact and is most difficult to recognize.   4. Integrate risk management with life-c
ycle management of ICT systems.  
 
Section 3.10 discussed the impor
tance of addressing cross-boundary organizational issues in the life-cycle management of systems.  Fo
r risk management, this means that life-cycle 
issues such as version control and configuration management 
need to be integrated with 
security and infrastructure assurance efforts. 
 ﬁThe real basis of information assurance– 

is maintaining accurate inventory systems, maki
ng sure that configurations are controlled 
and managed and making sure that all the se
ttings on the firewall are the same on every 
Air Force baseﬂ (SSG).  ﬁYou need to know what you™re defending in order to do critical 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 107infrastructure protection. –This [knowledge] has the possibility of atrophying very 
quickly–[without a] resource stream to s
upport its continued viabilityﬂ (AF/XOIWD). 
Y2K showed the importance of knowing not onl
y what is being protected but also the current state of that protection.  The information needed to support life-cycle
 management of ICT also represents a 
security risk, however, as discussed in Section 3.11.  ﬁWe have to have an up-to-date 
inventory.  But there again, it™s a double-edged sword.  We have to protect that 
information; otherwise, somebody else is 
going to use itﬂ (AFCERT).  This further increases the need to integrate ICT risk 
management with life-cycle management.  
 5. Clarify how risk information is disseminated. 
 
Another information issue associated with ri
sk management is the dissemination of risk-
related information.  Y2K demonstrated that 
there could be considerable confusion about how this occurs, especially in a large, security-conscious organization. Therefore, the dissemination of risk-related information n
eeds to be a coherent component of the 
enterprise-wide, strategic management of ICT.  

 6. Extend collaboration on risk mana
gement beyond the organization.  
 Y2K emphasized the importance to risk mana
gement of collaboration and information 
sharing outside the organization. As discussed in Section 3.13, the Chief Information 
Officer™s (CIO™s) office should serve as the single point of contact for ICT coordination outside the organization.  Actual cooperation and communication among organizations, 
as coordinated by the CIO™s office, might 
well be undertaken at various levels.    7. Address funding barriers to enterprise-wide risk management.  
 Just as funding issues can become a barrier 
to overall ICT management (as discussed in 
Section 3.8), so too can they represent a barrier to enterpri
se-wide ICT risk management.  
Security is an area where funding is often available and where ﬁstovepipeﬂ efforts to gain 
that funding can work against cross-organizational coordination. In most cases, an 
enterprise approach to risk management is
 both functionally superior and more cost-
effective. ﬁUntil SPOs (system program offices) and requirements writers and 

commanders understand information assurance, we
™re not going to have it built into the 
system. – [Some say] security 
is too expensive to build in 
up front, but it™s a lot more 
expensive to put in laterﬂ (AFCIC/SY). 
 8. Distinguish day-to-day functional issues from enterprise-wide issues.  
 Y2K demonstrated the importance of distinguishing day-to-day opera
tional issues from cross-organizational strategic issues.  The strategic approach of senior leaders was not always applicable to individual issues of ICT risk, nor was the functional approach of ICT managers always applicable to enterprise
-wide strategic risk issues. In adopting an enterprise-wide approach to risk management, it is important to distinguish day-to-day 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 108functional issues that can be handled better and more efficien
tly at the local level from 
higher-level, cross-organizational issues that require more cen
tral, strategic management.  
 9. Adopt and apply existing safety-oriented approaches to ICT risk management.  
 As discussed in Section 4.1.7, safety-oriented approaches to risk management, such as 
COOPs, ORM, and Operationalizing and Professionalizing the Network (OPTN) were 
only marginally applied to the Y2K situati
on.  With modification, these approaches can 

help formalize cross-organizational risk management, but the transition from safety to 

ICT is not trivial. 
For many, the Y2K effort that was most
 clearly relevant to ongoing ICT risk management was the COOP initiative.  While this effort revealed a number of 

inadequacies in the creation and maintenance 
of existing COOPs, the Air Force can build on this learning experience.  COOPs are a hi
ghly applicable way to minimize ICT risk, 
whether from hostile enemy action or systemic complexity, but problems were revealed 

during Y2K.  Specifically, COOPs need to be far more rigorous in both creation and 

maintenance. In addition, given their bac
kground in traditional disaster planning, COOPs need to be more sophisticated in accounting for the complexities of ICT systems. 
 10. Do not return to business as usual.   As discussed in Section 2.7, after Y2K there were many reasons why managers sought a 
return to more comfortable, less ente
rprise-wide methods of managing ICT.  
Nevertheless, the crisis mentality of Y2K s
timulated enterprise-wide approaches to ICT 
that produced benefits for related security and infrastructure protection issues.  ICT risk is always with us, and even in the absence of immediate crisis, 
it is critical to resist the 
seemingly easy path of a return to business as
 usual.  Certainly the events of 9/11 have cemented this lesson.   

  11. Recognize the possible need for special regulations in support of ICT risk management.  
 Y2K helped the Air Force recognize that, in many ways, ICT risk management was 

different from managing risk in a more tradi
tional infrastructure.  
These differences could require special regulations and more centr
alized, cross-functional management.  For 
example, stricter regulations are needed on 
the use of International Merchant Purchase Authorization Cards to make ICT pu
rchases outside the funding cycle.   12. Recognize the need for special training on ICT risk management.  
 Y2K demonstrated that ICT risk management could require both the need for special 

regulations and the need for special training, particularly in support of users.  For example, some units recognized the need to 
give users more exposure to network issues, 
since they represented ﬁan internal vulnerabilityﬂ (374
th AW/XP).  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 109 13. Consider not only the question of why complex systems fail but also why 
they do not.   One of the hidden lessons of Y2K was that complexity increases system vulnerabilityas 
well as reduces vulnerability through redundancies and other inherent backups and alternative functions.  As an organization with
 experience in attacking infrastructure, the 
Air Force knows that disrupting critical infrastructure is not a trivial undertaking.  Y2K revealed that the Air Force is not yet comple
tely dependent on ICT systems, and perhaps 
that it does not want to be.  Most units are trained in operating without computers, and they perform quarterly exercises that involve using manual fo
rms. This, of course, slows 
down the procedure and causes a slight degradation of service; moreover, during wartime 
it would be ﬁan enormous manpower dr
ain.ﬂ However, it can be done (374th AW/LG). In 
part, this is an issue of trust in technology as well as a realization that, ultimately, people 
enable our systems to function.  
Understanding why systems are resistant to 
failure is an important component of 
learning to better protect them.  The rhetoric 
of cyber warfare is that infrastructures fail rapidly, yet Y2K indicated that ﬁinformation infrastructure may be more robust than 
people assumeﬂ (AF/XOIWD).  Did the sma
ll scale of Y2K disruption result from 
organizations solving all their problems, or 
did the infrastructures have an inherent robustness that we need to better understand?  More study is needed to explore this question.  14. Establish a permanent, enterprise-w
ide point of contact for ICT risk management.  
 Finally, the difficulty in capturing and applying the lessons of Y2K, even after a multiyear, multibillion-dollar, cross-organizational effort, indicates the need for better 

methods of absorbing new ICT policies and pr
actices into organizational structure and culture.  As ICT systems open new operational po
ssibilities, they also call for increased 
coordination and organizational flexibility. Like the many other aspects of ICT mana
gement discussed throughout this report, 
ICT risk management requires a permanent, cr
oss-organization point of contact under the guidance and auspices of the CIO (as discussed in Section 3.13).  Only such an entity, bringing together not only knowledge of security issues but also multiple perspectives on 

the organizational roles and goals of ICT, can take on the complexity of enterprise-wide, 
strategic ICT risk management.
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 111Chapter 5  Technology Risk as a Socially Embedded Issue  Y2K was a massive meta-experiment that t
ouched on the core processes of the new digital millennium that was dawning.  It offers
 us valuable perspectives on the nature of 
software, our vulnerabilities in a computer-d
ependent world, the future evolution of information technology, and the relationship of 
these with people and organizations.  If 
Y2K was a threat to the trustworthiness of cr
itical infrastructure, what lessons from Y2K 
are relevant to other threats, such as blackouts, terrorism, or
 software reliability? Can the 
Air Force™s Y2K experience help us understand those vulnerabilities and better appreciate their differences and the effectiveness of potential responses?  Going even 
further, does the Y2K experience provide lessons that will better 
enable us to take 
advantage of the increased capabilities of
 networked information and communication 
systems while minimizing the inherent risk
s in this increasingly connected world? 
The ﬁdecisionﬂ (however complex its evolut
ion) to represent calendar years with two digits was human and organizational, not
 technicalŠjust as the mismatch between 

metric and English measurements that destroyed the 
Mars Climate Orbiter in 1999 was a human and organizational error, not a techni
cal or a mathematical one (or a terrorist 
attack). Thus, a key perspective reinforced by this study is that technology is socially embedded.  It exists in the context of people and organizations.  Ineffective organizations with great technology will usually produce ineffective results, while effective organizations with less than state-of-the-art technology can get by just fine. As in many other organizations, Y2K instig
ated the Air Force™s first enterprise-
wide, formal effort to integrate IT ma
nagement with organizational missions and 
functions.  This large-scale alignment of
 operational and strategic management (see 
Section 2.4) reinforced the importance of r
ecognizing the social nature of technology.  For example, continuity planning was an 
element of the buildup to Y2K and is an 
essential part of preparations for natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and other threats and 
disruptive events.  This planning requires deciding what functions are vital and identifying who depends most crucially on wh
at systems, decisions that necessarily 
involve social, organizational, and political issues.  History repeatedly shows us the necessity of incorporating a human, social, and 
organizational perspective on technology security and reliability.  For example, even a mathematically 
perfect encryption system (the ﬁone-tim
e padﬂ) is vulnerable to the 
human element when people decide to reuse pa
ges. (Benson).  Similarly, the widespread 
electricity grid failure in August 2003 has been attributed in part to an analyst who fixed a data error for an automated tool assessing the health of the grid, then forgot to reset it to 
run automatically and left for lunch (U.S.-Ca
nada Power System Outage Task Force).  
This set of conclusions is actually a point of view: large-scale complex IT systems must 
be viewed through the lens of a social system, giving priority to management and other 
ﬁpeopleﬂ issues.  
The Air Force™s Y2K experience teaches us 
about software as a social system. It 
highlights the limitations and pathologies that 
typically grow out of social organization, training, and group complexity.  It also illust
rates that some technical approaches are 
better adapted than others to the social system
s currently in use.  Y2K thus enables us to ask what alternative approaches to softwa
re development, deployment, maintenance, 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 112testing, and security may be more successf
ul, recognizing the endur
ing impact of people on technical systems. 
This report rejects the idea that the Y2
K problem was simply one of fixing the 
technology, recognizing that it was driven inst
ead by a concatenation of institutional, 
leadership, economic, and political factors, as 
well as technical ones. As the introduction to Chapter 2 observes, ﬁthe problem– taught
 those who worked on it more about their 
overall organizational operation than about their technology.ﬂ A key organizational issue identified by this report is that no single unit ﬁownedﬂ the problem, that ﬁno single group could fu
lly control the issues.  Enterprise-wide perspectives–had to be considered.ﬂ  This meant, for example, that ﬁefforts to 
decompose the Y2K problem and organizational 
responses into discrete components were 

largely unsuccessful.ﬂ1  Cross-unit interdependencies were the single biggest challenge to remediation. 
As the report observes, these problems we
re not unique to Y2K.  They just 
became more obvious under its intense spotlight
.  We should therefore understand the Air 
Force™s Y2K experience not as a freestanding phenomenon but as ty
pical of large-scale software systems embedded in a complex in
stitutional setting.   As the Air Force gradually discovered (see Section 2.3), this meant shifting the focu
s from hardware and software to organizational issues. The extent to which remediation efforts were successful can be attributed in part to a shift in perspectiveŠan evolution from techno-determinism to a broader social 
understanding.  A ﬁtechnicalﬂ problem like Y2K may initially be seen as 
sui generis, to be described only in its own terms.  Its e
ffects are seen as direct, widespread, and determinative of other social 
outcomes.  Eventually, these initial erroneous enthusiasms 
are subdued and put into perspective when traditional paradigms of analysis in the social 
sciences, engineering, or even the humanities 
reveal this ﬁuniqueﬂ thing to be a member 
of broader social categories with their own determinants and well-known laws of motion.  
This general trajectory has been true for the Information Revolution as a whole.
2  The arc of understanding starts with an unhealthy dose of techno-determinism. As the 
report notes, ﬁOver the course of Y2K it becam
e clear that changes made to hardware and 
software generally did not address the central Y2K – issues.ﬂ
3  The shift to a broader contextual focus on knowledge, management, a
nd institutions, away from a more narrow 
hardware and software focus, is imperati
ve for successful action, whether in Y2K or beyond.  This experience underscores that mo
re research is needed to understand and support individuals and organizations shifting from a techno-perspective to a strategic and managerial one.  
Related examples from the safety field 
reinforce the hazards of treating large technological systems as consisting purely 
of technology.  Consider the most notorious technology-heavy accidents of the past quarter-century: Three 
Mile Island and Chernobyl, the Challenger and Columbia 
shuttles, the USS Vincennes, and Bhopal.  In                                                  1  Section 2.2 in the current draft. 
2 This perspective was provided by Professor Ernest Wilson of the University of Maryland. 
3 Section 2.3 in the current draft. 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 113each case the accidents occurred despite the pr
esence of sophisticated safety systems and 
devices, whose effectiveness in each case wa
s cancelled out by social, managerial, and organizational issues.  Similarly, computer-b
ased automation of key safety tasks can 
paradoxically increase the risk of failure.  An expert system introduced for aircraft 
maintenance at a leading airline saw a rise 
in mechanical problems, apparently because 
maintenance staff came to depend more on the system and less on their own experience, 
powers of observation, and personal initiative.  When the software was changed to provide just information, not decisionsŠand 
even that only on requestŠquality again rose (Leveson). The inextricably intertwined nature of so
ftware and organizational issues is not new, yet it is still not well understood, even after many decades. Thomas Hughes 
describes the development of the first larg
e-scale real-time gene
ral purpose digital computer (SAGE, the first machine that we w
ould recognize today as being a computer at 
all), observing that ﬁsystem builders in th
e 1950s were learning that the managerial 
problems of large-scale projects loomed as larg
e as engineering ones.ﬂ  Even in this early system, software development and project management became a prominent issue, as the 

number of programmers grew from a handful
 to more than 800, and as the programming group at the RAND almost outnumbered al
l other RAND employees.  One striking 

recollection that Hughes relates is that ﬁWhen we all began to work on SAGE, we 
believed our own myths about softwareŠtha
t one can do anything with software on a general-purpose computer, that software is 
easy to write, test, and maintain. –We had a 
lot to learnﬂ (Bennington, as quoted in Hughes). Cross-organizational issues during real-time operations played a key role in the buildup to the August 2003 blackout (see Section 3.7).  Several IT problems triggered automated pages to the IT staff at the key 
Ohio utility (FirstEnergy).  While the staff 
responded and thought they had restored full functionality, there was no communication 
between the IT staff and the control room ope
rators.  The IT personnel therefore did not know that some functionality had been 
restored to the immediately previous 
defective
 state, and control room personnel did not know 
that they were relying on out-of-date data or frozen systems (U.S.-Canada Po
wer System Outage Task Force). 
Y2K reminded organizations that the ultimate goal of IT is not the continued 
functioning of local clusters of technology but, rather, the effective use of information in 
support of strategic goals.  Why 
does this horrific gap continue to persist, even as Y2K is viewed as a temporary blip?  Will the lessons learned from Y2K have lasting effects (see 

Sec 2.7)? A critical issue was th
at temporary organizations and money were used to guide 
the Y2K effort, and as a result, no permanen
t homes were established for the arduously 
developed policy and practice.  Nevertheless, there has been a historical trend in the 
direction of better alignment 
between mission objectives a
nd IT, and Y2K helped this transition.  The CIO offices that grew out of Y2K have expanded in their scope and mission, while new data standards make it far 
easier to share information (that is, data 
integration instead of application integration, as discussed in Section 2.3).  SOAP, XML, message-oriented middleware, Enterprise Ja
vaBeans, and similar standards focus on 
mission-critical data, both technically and ma
nagerially, helping to address integration and organizational issues.  Still, considerable follow-up research is needed. 
Y2K tells us that the Air Force, or any other IT-dependent organization, can 
mitigate risk by becoming more process base
d and less technology based.  Process-based 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 114tools focus on training people to do their j
obs by providing procedures that mitigates 
risks.  While the procedures are adopted at 
the enterprise-wide level, they can guide the creation of more specific, site-variant processes and desktop procedures that would mitigate the risk that uniformity might intr
oduce. (As described earlier by an information 
warfare defense officer,4 relying on one system could be a risk in itself.)  If the right 
metrics are selected, this  approach can also 
enable better tracking of the health of the organization as well as the IT infrastructure..  However, this approach must consider 
organizational and technology changes and the ongoing need to modify procedures and to 
continue learning. The perspective that ﬁbuilt
ﬂ or self-consciously designed systems need to fit 
harmoniously with their full context is not
 new (Alexander).  Its transition from 
traditional fields such as architecture into
 supposedly modern fields like software 
engineering has been inconsistent: ironically, the more t
echnologically sophisticated endeavor is undertaken with a more sociol
ogically naive approach. The Air Force Y2K experience can be compared with curren
t business writing on the important ﬁpeople 
questionsﬂ to consider when executing a big 
software project.  Representative of this category is Tom Demarco 
and Timothy Lister™s 
Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams (1999).  The primary thesis in 
Peopleware is expressed as: ﬁThe major problems 
of [implementing large-scale IT systems] are 
not so much technological as sociological in 
nature.ﬂ Demarco and his team have been studying failed software development since 

1979, and ﬁfor the overwhelming majority 
of the bankrupt projects we studied, there was 
not a single technological issue to explain the failure.ﬂ  Rather, managerial, 
organizational, and other ﬁpeopleﬂ issues are usually the underlying cause (Demarco and 
Lister).
5 Clearly, the issues described in this report apply well beyond Y2K.  Anyone who thinks they can carry out an IT project without thinking about organizational and social systems is heading for failure.  As this report 
shows, it is essential to ask these questions, 
among others:  
• What are the relationships with ma
nagement and other organizations? 
• What incentives are people responding to as the software is developed, deployed, and maintained? 
• What are the different skill levels, needs, and assumptions of users, implementers, and supervisors? 
• Who decides what™s important? 
• Who decides what gets doneŠwhen, and how?  
• Who gets to contest those decisions? • Who controls the resources needed to get it done? • Who else is competing for those same resources? 
These are the same questions facing a compa
ny planning to launch a new product, a local 
government planning an airport expansion, or
 a federal government planning a national 
incident management system.   
                                                 4 Section 4.2.2 in the current draft. 
5 Other well-known works that incorporate similar conclusions have been written by Hughes, 
Brooks, and Collins.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 115Certainly there is a need to understand specialized design and implementation 
issues and a need for skilled workers and expensive tools.  But any IT-dependent organization also needs to understand its users (whether war fighters, customers, or 
random people impacted by a disaster) 
and to choose the right executives and management structure.  They need to get al
l the relevant stakeholders on board before starting a major project.  Just as a real es
tate developer needs to know what kinds of 
newly built communities will attract home buyers
 and sustain property values before they 
can succeed in the technical task of building houses, so the Air Force, faced with the Y2K 
threat, needed to look at its information a
nd communication systems from the perspective 
of their use and evolution in an organizational context.   The Y2K experience helped introduce the Air Force and other technology-based organizations to a human, organizational, and 
social perspective on technology risk.  The degree to which these organizations understand its repercussions and choose to act on that understanding is a key question for the future.Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 117REFERENCES 
 Alexander, Christopher. 1964. Notes on the synthesis of form. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.  
Ambrose, Brig. Gen. Gary A. 1999. Top 10 tips for handling Y2K. Air Force News. 

August 4. 
 
Anderson, Mark C., Rajiv D. Banker, and Sury Ravindran. 2006. Value Implications of 
Investments in Information Technolo
gy. Management Science. 52(9): 1359Œ1376. 
September. 

 
Ashton, Thomas V. 1998. Year 2000 
certification: Air Force tenets to success. Crossfire: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering. August. 
 
Barr, Stephen. 1997. ﬁYear 2000ﬂ Report Flunks 3 Agencies, Lawmakers Urge Special 
Aide to Handle Looming Computer Probl
em. The Washington Post. September 16. 
 
Bennington, Herbert D. 1983. Production of large computer programs. IEEE Annals of 
the History of Computing. 5(
4): 350Œ361. OctoberŒDecember. 

 
Benson, Robert L. 2001. The Venona Story. National Security Agency.  
 
Bertalanffy, Ludwig Von. 1976. General System Theory: Foundations, Development, 
Applications. New York: George Braziller.  Brooks, Frederick. 1995. The mythical man-m
onth: Essays on software engineering. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 20
th anniversary edition.   
CCRP (Common Controls Replacement Pr
oject). 1999. CCRP Statement on Year 2000 
Compliance. March.  

 
Collins, James. 2001. Good to great: Why some
 companies make the leapŒand others 
don't. New York: HarperBusiness. 

 
Corcoran, Elizabeth. 1998. Inside Microsoft: An edgy, driven world. The Washington Post. October 18.  
 
Davenport, Thomas H. 1997. Information Ec
ology: Mastering the Information and 
Knowledge Environment. New York: Oxford University Press USA. 

 
Demarco, Tom, and Timothy Lister. 1999. Peopl
eware: Productive projects and teams.  
2nd edition. New York: Dorset House Publishing Company. 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 118EOP (Executive Office of the President). 1998a. Protecting America™s Critical 
Infrastructure: Presidential Decision Directive 63. May 22.  
EOP (Executive Office of the President). 1998b. White Paper: The Clinton Administration™s Policy on Criti
cal Infrastructure Protection: Presidential Decision 
Directive 63. May 22. 
 
FAC (Federal Acquisition Circular). 1997. FAC No. 97-01. August 22.  
Farrell, Chris, Ochen Kaylan, and Catherine Winter. 2004. The Surprising Legacy of 
Y2K. Radio broadcast and website. Ameri
can RadioWorks. Accessed online March 6, 
2006 (http://americanradioworks.publicra
dio.org/features/y2k/index.html). 
 
 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 2000. Y
ear 2000 Computing Challenge: Lessons 
Learned Can Be Applied to Other Management Challenges. GAO/AIMD-00-290. 
September. 

 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 1999. De
fense Computers: DOD Y2K Functional 
End-to-End Testing Progress and Test Event Management (Letter Report). GAO/AIMD-
00-12. October.  
 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 1998a. Mili
tary Readiness: Reports to Congress Provide Few Details on Deficiencies and Solutions. GAO/NSIAD-98-68. March.  
GAO (General Accounting Office). 1998b. Y
ear 2000 Computing Crisis: Business 
Continuity and Contingency Planning. GAO/AIMD-10.1.19. August. 
 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 1998c. Y
ear 2000 Computing Crisis: A Testing 

Guide. GAO/AIMD-10.1.21. November. 

 
GAO (General Accounting Office). 1997. Year
 2000 Computing Crisis: An Assessment 
Guide. GAO/AIMD-10.1.14. September. 
 
Gharajedaghi, Jamshid. 1999. Systems Thi
nking: Managing Chaos and Complexity. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Butterworth-Heinemann. 

 
Hughes, Thomas P. 1998. Rescuing Prometheus: 
Four monumental projects that changed 
the modern world. New York: Pantheon Books. 

 
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). 1999. Year 2000 Technical Information Statement. July 30.  

 
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). 1998. The Y2K date problem: A 
bad moon rising. The Institute. February.  
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 119Isaacs, Charles. 1999. The Value of Leve
raging Y2K Inventory Information for 
Corporate Risk Management and Model-
Based Contingency Planning. Information 
Systems Frontiers. 1:2 (163-172). August.  
 
ITMRA (Information Technology Management 
Reform Act) of 1996. Pub. L. No. 104-
106. Section 5125.  
 
 
Kling, Rob. 1999. What Is Social Informatics 
and Why Does It Matte
r? D-Lib Magazine. 
5:1. January. Accessed online March 6, 2007 
(http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january99/kling/01kling.html). 
 
Kling, Rob, and Walter Scacchi. 1982. The Web 
of Computing: Computer Technology as 
Social Organization. In Yovits, Marshall, editor, Advances in Computers, 21, 1Œ90. New 
York: Academic Press. 

 
Leveson, Nancy G. 1994. High pressure steam 
engines and computers. IEEE Computer. 
27(10): 65Œ73. October. 
 
LMIS (Lockheed Martin Information Sy
stems). 1999. Year 2000 Issues. Statement 
accessed on company website during 1999. 

 
Malhotra, Yogesh. 1993. Role of Informa
tion Technology in Managing Organizational 
Change and Organizational Interdependence. Brint Institu
te. Accessed online May 18, 2006 (http://www.brint.com/papers/change/). 

 Marcoccia, Louis J. 1998. Building Infrastructure for Fixing the Year 2000 Bug: A Case 
Study. Journal of Software Maintenance:
 Research and Practice.  10(5): 333Œ325. SeptemberŒOctober. 

 
McCartney, Laton. 2001. Trends: Change ag
ents. CIO Insight. May 1. Accessed online 
May 18, 2006 (http://www.cioinsight.com/article2/0,1397,1438214,00.asp). 

 
Mercado, Rachel C. 1999. YaleŒNew Have
n Hospital Remediation Plan: Medical 

Devices and the Year 2000. Journal of Clinical Engineering. 24(4): 16Œ22. JulyŒAugust. 
 
 
Mussington, David. 2002. Concepts for Enhancing Critical Infrastructure Protection: Relating Y2K to CIP Resear
ch and Development. Sant
a Monica, Calif.: RAND. 
 
Newsweek. 1997. The day the world shuts down (cover story). June 2. 
 
OMB (Office of Management and Budge
t). 1997. Year 2000 Interagency Committee 

Best Practices Guide. Draft document. 

 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 120Ornstein, Robert E.  1975. The Psychology of Consciousness. Gretna, La.: Pelican 
Books.  
Paterno, Fabiano, and Cristiano Mancini. 1998. Developing adaptable hypermedia. In 
Proceedings of the 4th international conferen
ce on intelligent user interfaces. New York: 
ACM Press. 
 
PCCIP (President™s Commission on Critical 
Infrastructure Protection). 1997. Critical Foundations: Protecting America™s Infrastruc
tures. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. October. 
 
Peters, F. Whitten. 2000. Remarks by the Secr
etary of the Air Force at the American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics International Global Air and Space 2000 Forum 
on Future Space in th
e Military. May 12.  
QLogic Corporation. 1999. Y2K complian
ce statement, Version 1.1. Accessed on 
company website during 1999. 

 
Rosenberg, Eric. 2001. Studies of Gulf War re
veal U.S. military deficiencies. Seattle 
Post-Intelligencer. January 18.  
 
SAGE. 2006. SAGE website. Accessed online May 14, 2006 
(http://www.sage.org/field/). 
 
SAGE. 2000. SAGE System Administrator 
Salary Profile 1999. Berkeley, Calif.  Standish Group. 1994. The chaos report. West Yarmouth, Mass. Accessed online May 
18, 2006 (http://www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/chaos_1994_1.php). 
 
USAF (United States Air Force). 2000a. Air Force Year 2000 Final Report.   
USAF (United States Air Force). 2000b. Global vigilance reach & power: America's Air 
Force Vision 2020. Washington, DC. 

 
USAF (United States Air Force). 2000c. Air Force Policy Letter Digest. April. 
 
USAF (United States Air Force). 1999a. Air Force Critical Infrastructure Program, Air 
Force Policy Directive 10-24. December 1. 
 
USAF (United States Air Force). 1999b. Air Force Assessment Master Plan for 
Operations in the Year 2000. May 15. 
 
USAF (United States Air Force). 1997. Air Force Communications Agency Year 2000 
Guidance Package. April 1. 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 121U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task
 Force. 2004. Final Report on the August 14, 2003, Blackout in the United States and Canada: Causes and Recommendations. April.  USA Today Tech Report. 1997. For some co
mputers 2000 will never come. August 22.  
 
Weill, Peter, and Marianne Broadbent. 1998. 
Leveraging the New Infrastructure. Boston, 
Mass.: Harvard Business School Press. 
 
Weinraub, Mark. 2001. NASDAQ fixes system but traders struggle. Reuters. July 2. 
 
Wick, Corey. 2000. Knowledge management a
nd leadership opportunities for technical communicators. Technical Communication. 47(4): 515Œ529. November. 

 
Y2K Act. 1999. Pub. L. No. 106-37.    
 
 
 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 123APPENDIX A: REFERENCES TO WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS AND 
INTERVIEWS  The study process involved several interview sessions and a workshop aimed at gathering 
perspectives and lessons learned from the Air Force™s Y2K response effort.  These 
sessions were held as follows: 
 
Interviews at Yokota Air Base (Japan), November 29ŒDecember 3, 1999 

Interviews at Scott Air Force 
Base (Illinois), December 13Œ15, 1999 Interviews at Scott Air Force 
Base (Illinois), February 24Œ25, 2000 Interviews at Yokota Air Base (Japan), March 13, 2000 
Air Force Y2K Lessons Learned Workshop (Washington, DC), April 14, 2000 

 
This report draws extensively on quotations and other information from the workshop 
and interview sessions.  Rather than use actual 
names in the citations, abbreviations of the 
organizational affiliations of speakers are given.  This is a key of the cited organizational 

affiliations. 

 
374th AW  374th Airlift Wing 
(Yokota Air Base, Japan) 
 
374th AW/CES 374th Airlift Wing, 
Civil Engineering Squadron  
374th AW/CS  374th Airlift Wi
ng Communications Squadron  
374th AW/LG  374th Airlift Wing Logistics Group 

 374th AW/OG  374th Airlift Wing Operations Group 
 
374th AW/SC  374th Airlift Wi
ng Systems and Computers 
 
374th AW/XP  374th Airlift Wing Plans and Programs 

 
375th AW   375th Airlift Wing (Sco
tt Air Force Base, Illinois) 
 
375th AW/CE  375th Airlift 
Wing, Civil Engineering 
 
375th AW/CG  375th Airlift 
Wing Communications Group 
 
375th AW/MDG 375th Airlift Wing Medical Group 

 
375th AW/NCC 375th Airlift Wi
ng Network Control Center  
375th AW/Y2K  375th Air Wing Y2K Program Office 

 
630th AMSS 630th Air Mobility Support Squadron (component of 374th AW) 

 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 124ACC   Air Combat Command 
 
 
AFCA   Air Force Communications Agency 

 
AFCIC/SY  Air Force Communicat
ions and Information Center 

 
AF/XOIWD  Air Force Director of 
Intelligence, Reconnaissance and   
   Surveillance, Defensive Information Warfare Division  

 
AMC/HQ   Air Mobility
 Command Headquarters 
 
AMC/SCA   Air Mobility Comm
and/Support Center Atlantic 
 
AMC/SCP  Air Mobility Comm
and/Support Center Pacific 
 
Cheyenne Mountain Cheyenne 
Mountain Operations Center 
 
HQ/SC   Headquarters United States Ai
r Force Deputy Chief of Staff for     Communications and Information 

 
MITRE  MITRE Corporation 

 
MSG   Materiel Systems Group 

 
SAF/AQ  Secretary of the Air Force, Acquisitions 
 SSG   Standard Systems Group 

 
USFJ   United States Forces Japan 

 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 125 APPENDIX B: ABBREVIA
TIONS AND ACRONYMS  ACC   Air Combat Command 
 
AEF   Aerospace Expeditionary Force 

 
AFASI   Air Force All Systems Inventory 

 
AFB   Air Force Base 

 
AFCA   Air Force Communications Agency 

 
AFCERT  Air Force Computer Emergency Response Team 

 
AFCERTS  Air Force Certified Software Changes 

 
AFCIC   Air Force Communications and Information Center 

 
AFED   Air Force Evaluation Database 

 
AFMC   Air Force Materiel Command 

 
AFY2KO  Air Force Y2K Office 

 
AMC   Air Materiel Command 
 AWACS  Airborne Warning and Control System   

 
BIOS   Basic Integrated Operating System 

 
CCRP   Continuously Computed Release Point 

 
C2IPS   Command and Control 
Information Processing System 
 
CDA   Central Design Activity 

 
CETL   Communications E
nvironment Test Laboratory 
 
CINC   Commander in Chief 

 
CIO   Chief Information Officer 

 
CIP   Critical infrastructure protection 

 
CKO   Chief Knowledge Officer 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 126 CMOS   Cargo Movement Operation System 

 
COMS   Communications squadron 

 
CONUS  Continental United States 

 
COOP   Continuity of operations plan 

 
COTS   Commercial off-the-shelf 

 
DISA   Defense Information Systems Agency 

 
DMS Defense Messaging System (a DOD-led initiative to establish 
secure e-mail throughout the department) 
 
DTS   Defense Travel System 

 
ESC   Electronic Systems Center 

 
FAR   Federal Acquisition Requirements 

 
FIPS   Federal Information Processing Standards 

 
Fusion Center  Operated by SSG, it monitors
 information relevant to information  
   warfare attacks and other systems crises 
 GAO   General Accounting Office (
now the Government Accountability 
Office) 
 
GATES  Global Air Transportation Execution System 

 
ICT   Information and communications technology 

 
IEEE   Institute of Electrica
l and Electronics Engineers  
IMPAC   International Merchant Purchase Authorization Card 

 
IT   Information technology 

 
IWD   Information Warfare Defense 

 
JACAL  An interactive, symbolic mathematics program 

 
MAJCOMs  Major commands 

 Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 127MSG   Material Systems Group 
 
NCC   Network Control Center 

 
NRC   National Research Council 

 
OCONUS  Outside the continental United States 

 
OPTN   Operationalizing and 
Professionalizing the Network  
ORM   Operational risk management 

 
PACAF  Pacific Command 

 
PDD   Presidential Decision Directive 

 
PMO   Program Management Office 

 
POC   Point of contact 

 
SA   System administrator 

 
SBSS   Standard Base Supply System 

 
SC community Systems and computing units 

 SPO   System Program Office 
 
SSG   Standard Systems Group 

 
TDY   Temporary Duty 

 
USFJ   U.S. joint services in Japan 

 
USTRANSCOM U.S. Transportation Command 
Strategic Management of Information and Communication Technology: The United States Air Force Experience with Y2KCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 128 APPENDIX C: BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION ON THE PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATOR
  Mark P. Haselkorn is Professor and Founding Chair (1985Œ97) of the Department of 
Technical Communication in the College of
 Engineering at the University of 
Washington. He has more than two decades of
 leadership in interdisciplinary technology 
areas such as assessment of information tec
hnology in organizations, design of electronic communities and online services, and manage
ment of knowledge and communication in 
large organizations. Dr. Haselkorn is also the Co-Director of the University of 
Washington's Interdisciplinary Program in Hu
manitarian Relief and a Research Scientist for the Veterans Health Administration. He 
currently leads an NSF-supported initiative on the emerging research frontier of ﬁHuman
itarian Service Science & Engineering,ﬂ conducts research on the integration of DOD and VA electronic medical records, and, 
before Y2K, conducted foundational research 
in the area of intelligent transportation systems, including development of the first Web-based real-time traveler information 

system (
Traffic Reporter
, 1990). He received his Ph.D. in English Language, M.A. in 
Computational Linguistics, and M.A. in E
nglish from the Univer
sity of Michigan.  