DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12021Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?92 pages | 7 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-11223-9 | DOI 10.17226/12021Norman R. Augustine, Chair, Rising Above the Gathering Storm Committee; NationalAcademy of Sciences; National Academy of Engineering; Institute of MedicineIs America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D.C.
www.nap.edu
The views expressed are those of the author and do not represent an official policy statement 
of the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine, 
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, or the committee that developed 
 Rising Above the Gathering Storm
. IS
 AMERICA FALLING OFF
 THE FL
AT
 ERATH?
NORMAN R. AUGUSTINEChair,Rising 
Above 
the 
Gathering 
Storm 
Committee
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiTHE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 Ł 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Ł Washington, DC 20001
Support for this project was provided by the National Academies. Any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided 
support for the project. 
Available from:
Laura Ahlberg
6801 Rockledge Drive
Bethesda, MD 20817
Phone: 301-897-6186
Copyright 2007 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the 
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The 
National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meet
-ing national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of 
Engineering.The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examina
-tion of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of 
medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute 
of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become 
the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National 
Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the 
scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vur institutionsŠthe National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy 
of Engineering, and the Institute of MedicineŠare deeply concerned about 
the nation™s ability to compete during the 21st century. Prompted by a 
bipartisan request from Congress, we undertook a study that culminated 
in the report 
Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing 
America for a Brighter Economic Future
, released in late 2005.
We were subsequently encouraged as President George W. Bush introduced his 
American Competitiveness Initiative and as both the Senate and House passed bills based 
on ideas from the report and from others. At least one newspaper in every state of the 
Union had an editorial page item indicating the need for action on this issue. We held a 
major meeting with more than 1,000 participants from all 50 statesŠboth in person and 
virtuallyŠto discuss ideas for actions that could be initiated at the regional, state, and 
local levels. Yet, we still have a long way to go for our nation to be competitive in future 
decades, when our children and grandchildren will need jobs and desire a standard of 
living at least as good as today™s. 
This essay, by Norman Augustine, the chair of the committee that developed the 
Rising Above the Gathering Storm
 report, provides a timely update on the proposals raised 
in the report. As he has in speeches throughout the country, Norman Augustine continues 
to make the case that action is needed so that the United States remains competitive in the 
21st century. Although the responsibility for the content of this essay rests with the author, 
we fully support the goals that he expresses in it. 
In 2006, the National Academy of Sciences presented Mr. Augustine with its most 
prestigious award, the Public Welfare Medal, to honor his contributions to the vitality of 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
science in the United States by bringing to industry and government a better understand
-ing of the crucial role that fundamental scientific research must play in our long-term 
security and economic prosperity. Our entire nationŠand its scientific and engineering 
enterprises in particularŠowes an enormous debt to Norman Augustine. Acting on his 
strong personal conviction that sound national policy must embrace the very best in sci
-ence and engineering, he has made a great difference in our nation™s life and welfare.
Ralph J. Cicerone
  
Charles M. Vest
   
Harvey V. Fineberg
President      
President    
President National Academy of Sciences 
 National Academy of Engineering
 Institute of Medicine
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii

The author is indebted to his colleagues on the National Academies Gathering 
Storm committee, its staff, and the many other individuals and groups whose 
work to strengthen America™s present and future competitiveness has been 
drawn on to produce this essay. He is also indebted to those who assisted in 
preparation of the manuscript, fact-checking, and editing.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 1IS AMERICA FALLING OFF THE FLAT EARTH?
 2CAN AMERICA COMPETE?
 4DISTANCE IS DEAD
 8THE GATHERING STORM
 14AMERICA, WE HAVE A PROBLEM
 17THE DINOSAURS NEVER SAW IT COMING
 22WELCOME TO THE 21ST CENTURY BOARD ROOM
 26THE COMPETITIVENESS EQUATIONŠTHE COST OF LABOR
 28THE COMPETITIVENESS EQUATIONŠTHE QUALITY OF THE WORKFORCE
 30THE COMPETITIVENESS EQUATIONŠTHE SUPPLY OF SCIENTISTS 
  AND ENGINEERS 
 41THE COMPETITIVENESS EQUATIONŠTHE RESEARCH ENTERPRISE
 54THE COMPETITIVENESS EQUATIONŠTHE INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM 
 61GONDWANALAND LIVES!
 65A NEW BEGINNING . . . OR A NEW END?
 75AUTHOR™S BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
 78BIBLIOGRAPHY 80Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1
The aviation and telecommunication revolutions have conspired to make 
distance increasingly irrelevant. An important consequence of this is that US 
citizens, accustomed to competing with their neighbors for jobs, now must 
compete with candidates from all around the world. These candidates are 
numerous, highly motivated, increasingly well educated, and willing to work 
for a fraction of the compensation traditionally expected by US workers. 
 If the United States is to offset the latter disadvantage and provide its citizens with the 
opportunity for high-quality jobs, it will require the nation to excel at innovationŠthat is, 
to be first to market new products and services based on new knowledge and the ability 
to apply that knowledge. This capacity to discover, create and market will continue to be 
heavily dependent on the nation™s prowess in science and technology. 
 Indicators of trends in these fields are, at best, highly disconcerting. While many 
factors warrant urgent attention, the two most critical are these: (1) America must repair 
its failing K-12 educational system, particularly in mathematics and science, in part by 
providing more teachers qualified to teach those subjects, and (2) the federal government 
must markedly increase its investment in basic research, that is, in the creation of new 
knowledge. 
Only by providing leading-edge human capital and knowledge capital can America 
continue to maintain a high standard of livingŠincluding providing national securityŠfor 
its citizens.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2

In October 2005, the National Academies, in response to a bipartisan request by 
members of the US Senate and House of Representatives, issued a report titled 
Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future
 stating that America is in substantial danger of losing its economic 
leadership position and suffering a concomitant decline in the standard of living of 
its citizens because of a looming inability to compete in the global marketplace. Since 
that time, well over 100 editorials and op-eds have appeared in the nation™s newspapers, 
at least one in every state, addressing this issue. Virtually all supported the Academies™ 
conclusions. The president of the United States incorporated a number of the Academies™ recom
-mendations in his 2006 State of the Union Address, and various bills were introduced in 
the Senate and House, almost all on a bipartisan basis, to implement many of the rec
-ommendations. The continuing resolution that established the federal budget in several 
relevant fields for FY 2007 provided an important step forward in preparing America for 
the intensifying global competition for jobs. Similarly, the House of Representatives (by 
votes of 389-22 and 397-20 on key bills) and the Senate (by a vote of 88-8) took steps 
to authorize many of the Academies™ recommendations in the FY 2008 budget. 
Final 
approval in the House of the America COMPETES Authorization Act was passed by a 
unanimous consent vote following a 367-57 approval of the conference report. President 
Bush signed the legislation on August 9, 2007. 
Private firms are also stepping forward: the 
ExxonMobil Foundation recently committed $125 million to help implement one element 
of the Academies™ proposals: improving America™s K-12 education system in science and 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3






mathematics. But competitiveness is a long-term challenge and much remains to be done 
in the months ahead.
 Meanwhile, our competitors have not been standing still. The World Economic 
Forum dropped America from first to seventh place in its ranking of nations™ preparedness 
to benefit from advances in information technology; the number of US citizens entering 
engineering school declined still further; the remnants of the legendary Bell Labs, the 
birthplace of the laser and the transistor and the home of many Nobel laureates, were sold 
to a French firm; a new generation of semiconductor integrated circuitsŠthe mortar of the 
modern electronics revolutionŠwas introduced; the largest initial public offering in his
-tory was conducted by a Chinese bank; another $650 billion has been spent on US public 
schools while the performance of its students on standardized science tests of those about 
to graduate declined further; American companies once again spent three times more on 
litigation than on research; 
and in July, for the first time in history, foreign automakers sold 
more cars in the United States than American manufacturers.
 The competitiveness issue as seen some 18 months after the National Academies™ 
study was completed is the topic of this essay. Its content is based on congressional tes
-timony and a series of lectures by the author and thus offers a less formal but updated 
version of the findings in the Academies™ report. Although this essay draws heavily on that 
report and other sources, the views expressed herein are those of the author.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4
The answer to that fundamental question seems, at least on the surface, less 
than straightforward. On one hand, America™s overall competitiveness as 
assessed by the World Economic Forum in Geneva recently plummeted from 
first place to sixth place in a single year. Perhaps even more perplexing, the 
news media have reported that a city in Pennsylvania not long ago consid
-ered adopting the slogan ﬁPittsburgh can become the Bangalore of America.ﬂ And few 
passengers on the main railroad line connecting New York City and the nation™s capital, 
can observe the large sign that for nearly 100 years has adorned the bridge crossing the 
Delaware River near Trenton, New Jersey, and reads ﬁTrenton Makes, the World Takesﬂ 
without having to suppress a mixture of nostalgia and bemusement. On the other hand, 
America this past year accomplished an extraordinary sweep of science-related Nobel 
prizes; the overall economy continues to be reasonably sound
; and an extraordinary Team 
USA took first place at the 2007 International Biology Olympiad, squeezing past Team 
China. The US team™s Gold Medal winners were Meng Xiao He, Barry Liu, Mark Shteyn, 
and Helen Yang
.The answer to the competitiveness question is much clearer when one considers, as 
Wall Street insiders like to say, ﬁbroad forward-looking indicators.ﬂ Most of the indica
-tors convey a troubling message, one that strongly suggests that America is rapidly losing 
its competitive position to steadily progressing economies, primarily in the developing 
worldŠa world populated by substantial numbers of highly motivated, increasingly well-
educated, low-paid workers.
 Over the years, global leadership has come to be accepted by many US citizens as 
an American provinceŠwhich it often seemingly has been, particularly in the closely 
related fields of science, engineering, and innovation. But leadership is 
not an American 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5
birthright. In this regard, it is useful to recall that Spain was a leading power in the 16th 
century; France dominated the 17th century; and England the 19th. It is also useful to 
remind ourselves, as economics historian Angus Maddison points out, that as late as 1870 
China™s economy was nearly twice the size of the US economy. Seemingly, the only thing 
that stays the same in the worlds of politics and economics is the persistence of change.
The book on the 21st century is, of course, yet to be written, but if history teaches any 
lesson it is that 
no nation has an inherent right to greatness. Greatness has to be earned and 
continually re-earned. In fact, few nations, great or ordinary, have survived to enjoy the 
third century of their existence. Nations that take their technologic leadership for granted 
will be particularly vulnerable in this fast-moving global community in which there are 
said to be more scientists at work than existed throughout all prior eras combined.
Typifying our misconception of an assured position at the forefront of science and 
engineering is a revealing story told by Dan Goldin when he was administrator of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). It seems that he was being exco
-riated by a critic of NASA who objected particularly to the government™s spending on 
weather satellites. The skeptic asked, ﬁWhy do we need meteorologic satellites when we 
have the Weather Channel?ﬂ
In the same vein, former Air Force Chief Scientist and Princeton engineering professor 
Cort Perkins tells of sailing into Woods Hole Harbor, where he was greeted by a friend 
whose boat was moored in the adjacent slip. The neighbor™s fiberglass vessel was adorned 
with nylon lines, Dacron sails, a high-strength aluminum alloy mast capped with a radar 
antenna, and a bridge replete with the latest versions of GPS, depth finders, and radio 
equipment. Its owner, an attorney, was carrying a 10-megapixel digital camera with a 
stabilized lens and wearing photosensitive sunglasses. His clothing was made of synthetic 
fibers, and his shoes sported nonslip neoprene soles. In his pocket was a Blackberry. He 
cheerily greeted Professor Perkins, asking, ﬁSo have you technologists done anything for 
us lately?ﬂ
There have, of course, been ample indicators that the canary in the US competitive
-ness mine is not well. They include the National Commission on Excellence in Education™s 
1983 report 
A Nation at Risk
, which urged more demanding high-school graduation 
requirements, measurable standards throughout K-12, and higher qualifications for teach
-ers. The 1985 report of the President™s Commission on Industrial Competitiveness (also 
known as The Young Commission, after its chairman, Hewlett-Packard CEO John Young), 
Global Competition: The New Reality
 urged greater emphasis on science and technology 
and broad K-12 education reform. The Council on Competitiveness™s 2004 report 
Innovate 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6
America: Thriving in a World of Challenge and Change
 proposed an urgent legislative 
agenda to make America more competitive. The Task Force on the Future of American 
Innovation™s 2006 report 
Measuring the Moment
 warned that ﬁthose who stand still will 
fall behind. . . . If the United States continues to stand still [specifically in basic research in 
the physical sciences], it faces inevitable decline.ﬂ The Council of Graduate Schools 2007 
report Graduate Education: The Backbone of American Competitiveness and Innovation
 asserted that ﬁwe can no longer take for granted America™s continued leadership in inno
-vation and competitiveness.ﬂ 
Indeed, during the past 3 years alone, at least 16 significant reports on America™s 
growing competitiveness 
disadvantage have been issued by such reputable organizations 
as the Council on Competitiveness, the Business Roundtable, the Brookings Institution, the 
Association of American Universities, the Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
the National Association of Manufacturers, the President™s Council of Advisors on Science 
and Technology, the Task Force on the Future of American Innovation, the Technology 
CEO Council, the US Chamber of Commerce, The Council of Graduate Schools, and the 
National Academies.
Today, it is possible that our nation™s adult generation will, for the first time in his
-tory, leave their children and grandchildren a lower sustained standard of living than they 
themselves enjoyed. Should that occur, it will be the consequence of a collective failure 
to respond to the increasingly clear signals that are emerging, and indicate that we have 
entered a new era, a global era, an era in which Americans must compete in the mar
-ketplace not merely with each other but with highly qualified people around the planet. 
It will represent a change of seismic proportions with commensurate implications for 
America™s economic well-being, national and homeland security, health care, and overall 
standard of living. 
At the same time, it must be recognized that the nations currently leading the global 
competitiveness surge are not without their own challenges. China, for example, is still 
basically an agrarian society with almost half its workers engaged in farming. Its gross 
domestic product per capita is only 17% of that of the United States. The corresponding 
value for India is but 9% of America™s. Thirty-five percent of India™s citizens survive on a 
daily household income of about $1 per person; but remarkably, this portion has been 
reduced from 50% in 1984. As developing nations prosper their governments may seek a 
disproportionate share of corporate earnings in the form of taxes and thereby undermine 
the progress that has been made. Other developed nations probably face even greater 
challenges than the United States, for example, Western Europe with its high labor costs, 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7
short workweek, and resistance to changeŠparticularly when established social benefits 
are at risk. But it is of little consolation that others may be even closer to the edge, at least 
at this moment, than we. The words of London consultant Mark Foster ring true: ﬁThe 
change is from globalization going one way to globalization going every way.ﬂ 
The impact of this tidal wave will be felt for many years by the citizens of all nationsŠ
and not all equally. As the Council on Competitiveness warns, ﬁSimply being an American 
does not guarantee a high-wage job anymore.ﬂ 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8
An all-important trend, driven largely by advancements in science and 
engineering, has been gradually engulfing the globe. It has been referred 
to by Frances Cairncross, of 
The Economist
, as ﬁthe death of distanceﬂŠa 
phenomenon whereby in many circumstances parties to transactions no 
longer need to be physically close to one another. When first considered, 
that may seem rather mundane, but its consequences are already permeating the lives of 
almost all the citizens of this planet and are profound indeed.
For example, in the past, a consumer who sought to purchase a household item 
would visit perhaps two or three retail establishments within convenient walking or driv
-ing distance and acquire the desired item from the provider who offered the best overall 
promise of satisfaction. Increasingly, however, that consumer, rather than going to the 
garage and starting the engine of an automobile, goes to his or her desk and starts a 
search
 engine on a 
computer to see what supplier 
somewhere in the world
 offers the best over
-all deal. Similarly, an employer seeking workers welcomes applications on the Internet 
from around the planet. Corporations deciding where to locate new factories, offices, and 
research laboratories search the entire globe for promising venues. And most investors 
exploring financial opportunities do not limit their search to local concerns. 
It is indicative of this pace of change that barely 100 years earlier the above consumer 
would have gone neither to a desk to start a computer nor to a garage to start an automo
-bile, but to the barn to start a horse. My mother, who was born in Colorado in 1893 and 
lived to be 105 years old, knew people who had crossed the prairie in a covered wagon, 
and she had met astronauts who had walked on the moon. Project that change forward a 
century, substantially accelerate it, and one can only begin to imagine the magnitude of 
change that will have to be absorbed in the years ahead. Former Secretary of Education 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9
Richard Riley estimates that the top 10 jobs of a handful of years from now don™t even 
exist todayŠa possibility that makes preparation particularly challenging and places a 
premium on the contributions of creative people with broad experience motivated to 
exploit opportunities.
Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates observed that ﬁthe Internet will be to the 21st century 
what aviation was to the 20th century.ﬂ Indeed, the airline terminal does have a new 
companion: the computer terminal. In the most recent century, it became practicable to 
move objects, including people, around the world at near the speed of sound and at mod
-erate cost with previously unimagined safety. It is now feasible to move 
information in a 
similar fashion, but literally at the speed of light and almost without cost. Reflecting that, 
Americans now average 14 hours a week on line. The processing, storage, and transmis
-sion of information will soon become ﬁvirtuallyﬂ free, thereby changing the entire para
-digm for the handling of knowledge. In short, there is indeed no longer a ﬁthereﬂ there. 
There is 
here. And it is here 
now
.The extent of the telecommunication revolution is suggested by the 35 
trillion e-mails 
that are currently sent each year; or the growth of Wikipedia, in its 249 languages, from 
100 million words at the beginning of 2004 to about 2 billion words less than 3 years 
later; or the increase in cell-phone users from 2 per 1,000 people in 1990 to over 400 
today; or the increase in Internet users from about 2 million to over 1 billion in a little 
over 15 years.
Many examples of the death of distance are already to be found in our daily lives:
Ł If a consumer places a telephone call to a service department to resolve a prob
-lem with a computer, bank account, golf reservation, or lost airline bag, there is 
a nontrivial likelihood that the consumer will speak with a person in Bangalore, 
Jamaica, or some other such place. One international call center is now being 
operated by the prisoners in Rome™s Rebibbia Prison. In India, courses are offered 
to teach students to speak with a midwestern accent to prepare them better for 
jobs in call centers. 
Ł In Washington, DC, visitors to an office building not far from the White House 
are greeted by a pleasant woman whose image appears on a flat-screen display 
in the lobby where she handles appointments, access, and other administrative 
matters. But she is not in Washington, DCŠshe is in Pakistan. At some time in 
the foreseeable future, when the impact of ever-advancing 3-D television research 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10
becomes ﬁreality,ﬂ there will be little apparent difference between being greeted 
by a virtual receptionist on another continent and by a real receptionist a few 
feet away. 
Ł Much of the commercial software now prevalent in the United States is construct
-ed in India, where at the end of each day teams of workers transmit the results of 
their efforts to American integrators and testers who are just beginning 
their day, 
and the product of their efforts is transmitted back to India in time for the start of 
the next day™s work, thereby doubling the pace and cutting the cost with which 
software can be produced.
Ł Many Americans™ income tax returns prepared by major accounting firms are 
processed in India. 
Ł US architectural firms are having drawings produced in Argentina.
Ł J.P. Morgan conducts a significant part of its derivatives operations in Mumbai.
Ł Nearly one in 20 Americans now works for a foreign-owned company.
Ł The CAT scans of patients in a number of US hospitals are routinely read by radi
-ologists in Australia or Bangalore.
Ł When I spoke via teleconference with groups from Harvey Mudd College and 
Harvard University about the impact of an emerging China on global competi
-tiveness, the first question asked of me came fromŠwhere else?ŠChina, from a 
student listening in the middle of the night via webcast.
Ł Recently suffering a GPS failure while seeking to locate a package-delivery firm™s 
warehouse in the Washington, DC, area, I called the firm™s ﬁ800ﬂ number on 
a cell phone and was given real-time driving instructions by the help service: 
ﬁTurn right at the traffic light by the Exxon station,ﬂ and so on. The speaker was in 
India.Ł Americans are increasingly obtaining their health care overseas, where (accord
-ing to 
The Washington Post
) dentists, for example, ﬁcharge one-fifth to one-fourth 
of US prices.ﬂ 
Ł In 2001, a patient in Strasbourg, France, had his gallbladder removed by a sur
-geon in New York who was using a remotely controlled robot. (As an engineer, I 
hope there was a backup surgeon in the room!)
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
Indeed, candidates for many jobs traditionally in the United States are now just a 
mouse click away. 
During my youth in Colorado, the locals used to take considerable pleasure in point
-ing out to visiting Texans that Colorado was actually bigger than Texas if you just flattened 
it out! Tom Friedman, writing in his extraordinarily insightful book 
The World is Flat
, takes this notion to an entirely new level: not only 
is the world flat, but many heretofore 
relatively unknown parts are very significant indeed. He observes that globalization has 
ﬁaccidentally made Beijing, Bangalore, and Bethesda next door neighbors.ﬂ 
Foremost among the consequences of the death of distance is that a large number 
of jobs, with the exception of those demanding proximity between the parties involved, 
will be opened to the global job market. And far fewer jobs are ﬁsafeﬂ than many might 
imagine. Indeed, most Americans paid little attention to the job losses that initially were 
confined largely to assembly workers, but the phenomenon of ﬁoffshoringﬂ soon migrated 
to writing software, back-office administrative work, and, more recently, professional pur
-suits. It has been said that a recession is when your neighbor is out of work, but a depres
-sion is when 
you
 are out of work. To many Americans who thought their jobs were safe, 
the competitiveness trend looks more and more like a depression.
Alan Blinder, the former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, succinctly 
observed that janitors, taxi drivers, and crane operators are ﬁ
probablyﬂ immune to foreign 
competition. It seems in retrospect that even that view was a bit optimistic, at least as far as 
taxi drivers and janitors are concerned. Early models of autonomous vehicles are already 
being tested on closed roadways, and a small robot vacuums the floor of my homeŠand 
does a remarkably good job, too. It figures out how large the room is and therefore how 
long to work, locates any concentration of dirt for extra attention, cleans under beds, and 
even knows not to fall down the stairs. When it needs energy, it plugs itself into its charging 
station. It always shows up for work and does not require the filling out of reams of Social 
Security, tax, immigration, liability, unemployment-compensation, and medical-coverage 
forms. It was, of course, made in ChinaŠno doubt by other robots, probably also made in 
China. In this spirit of internationalism, a portable DVD player that I recently purchased in 
suburban Washington, DC
, was emblazoned with the words, ﬁHecho en China.ﬂ 
Dr. Blinder estimates that about 50 million of our jobs (almost one-third of the total) 
are potentially capable of being exported. Others consider that estimate to be low. Indeed, 
as Clyde Prestowitz has pointed out, 3 billion new capitalists entered the global job mar
-ket since the fall of traditional Communism and the events that followed. That alone is, at 
least in theoretical terms, about 20 candidates for every existing job in America. A number 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
of those candidates are not now qualified for the positions held by many Americans, but 
that too is changing. The magnitude of the revolution is suggested by the fact that 150 
nations seek to participate in the global economy, compared with 87 just 25 years ago.
The question arises, ﬁWill we all end up working at McDonald™s?ﬂ The answer is 
no, because those jobs aren™t safe either. McDonald™s, it seems, has been experimenting 
with a centralized order-taking system wherein drive-through customers speak their meal 
requests into a voice recorder that transmits them via a synchronous equatorial satellite 
orbiting some 23,000 miles above Earth to a central facility staffed by people who are 
expert in taking orders. The requests are then re-entered digitally and transmitted via satel
-lite to the person who prepares hamburgers and friesŠa communication trip equivalent 
to four transits around the earth. Using this process, McDonald™s has cut its error rate in 
half and increased its throughput by 30%. As it happens, the central ordering facility is, at 
present, in Colorado Springs, but it could just as easily be in Alice Springs, in the Outback 
of Australia.
Initially, many of the jobs threatened by the global employment revolution moved to 
Mexico, but those jobs are now moving out of Mexico, which by the new global standard 
is becoming high-priced albeit not nearly as high priced as the United States. Vietnam, 
India, Malaysia, Brazil, Indonesia, and China were among the immediate beneficiaries of 
the new wage disparity. However, as reported by Tom Friedman, firms in 
India are now 
beginning to outsource work to Uruguay. 
Few Americans have been to Guandong, Zuzhou, Mumbai, or Bangalore, but if they 
went they would probably receive a rude awakening in the form of large numbers of 
highly motivated, well-trained workers, often surrounded by state-of-the art equipment. 
One who harbors any doubts about the latter need only visit Biopolis in Singapore, CERN 
in Switzerland, or the nuclear-fusion research facilities in China. In fact, five of the top 
10 exporters of high-technology products are emerging economies, compared with just 2 
two decades ago. 
Fareed Zakaria, the editor of Newsweek, has noted that ﬁof Wal-Mart™s 6,000 suppli
-ers, 5,000Š80%Šare in one country . . . and it isn™t the United States.ﬂ The economic 
impact on both nations is evident: the city of Beijing alone is adding 30,000 cars each 
month. China already has more than twice as many mobile-phone users as the United 
States. A few years ago, the mayor of Shanghai told me that over one-third of the construc
-tion cranes in the world were in his city. Between now and 2015, half the construction on 
Earth is planned to take place in China. About 22 billion square feet of buildings, mostly 
commercial, are being added each year; the total existing US commercial infrastructure 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
amounts to about 60 billion square feet. Research centers are being built in China that 
rival entire US cities in size. China™s national bird is now said to be the construction 
crane. 
What does all that mean to an American hoping to hang on to his or her job? What 
is clear is that attempting to build ﬁwalls,ﬂ in the form of economic barriers, around the 
United States will simply ensure that we are left in isolation and become increasingly 
irrelevant as the rest of the world moves rapidly forward. Ironically, China itself tried this 
in the 15th century and again in the 20th . . . with the predictable result both times. The 
Red Queen, speaking to Alice in Lewis Carroll™s 
Through the Looking Glass
, offers better 
advice: ﬁ
Here, you see, it takes all the running 
you
 can do, to keep in the same place. If 
you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!ﬂ 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
A study was conducted by the National Academies in 2005 that has impor
-tant implications for all Americans. Titled 
Rising Above the Gathering 
Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic 
Future, the study was requested, on a bipartisan basis, by Senators Lamar 
Alexander and Jeff Bingaman, of the Senate Committee on Energy and 
Natural Resources, later joined by Representatives Sherwood Boehlert and Bart Gordon, 
of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Its purpose was to examine an issue 
that was becoming an increasing concern to many Americans: the outlook for our nation™s 
prosperity. The effort turned out to be particularly timelyŠor perhaps a bit late. For exam
-ple, in a recent PriceWaterhouseCoopers poll, 48% of the executives surveyed said they 
believed that the United States has lost competitive ground in recent years, whereas only 
9% believed that the country had moved ahead in this regard. 
By way of background, the National Academies is an independent, nonpartisan, not-
for-profit, invitational professional organization consisting of three components. The first, 
the National Academy of Sciences, was created by President Lincoln and chartered by 
Congress in 1863 with the express purpose of providing advice on public-policy issues 
involving science. It was later joined by the National Academy of Engineering and the 
Institute of Medicine, each with a corresponding mission in its own fields of expertise. The 
Academies currently count 195 Nobel laureates among their membership. Participants in 
its studies serve pro bono. 
The National Academies™ 2005 study of competitiveness involved 20 people and was 
allotted 90 days for its conduct. The book containing the investigation™s results was 564 
pages long and provided a series of findings with supporting data, four overarching recom
-mendations, and 20 highly specific implementing actions. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15


Members of the Academies™ competitiveness study group included the CEOs or 
former CEOs of several corporations, including ExxonMobil, DuPont, Intel, Merck, and 
Lockheed Martin; the presidents or former presidents of several universities, including 
Yale, Rensselaer, the University of Maryland, Texas A&M, and the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT); three Nobel laureates; a state superintendent of schools; and several 
former presidential appointees, one of whom has since become secretary of defense. 
The committee™s first action was to gather almost 70 subject-matter experts in 
Washington, DC, for a weekend of discussions. Apropos of the topic, much of the group™s 
work was conducted via cyberspace. The committee™s final report was anonymously cri
-tiqued by 37 reviewers selected by the Academies before its release and ultimately came 
to be known as the 
Gathering Storm
 reportŠafter the first line in its title, 
Rising Above the 
Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future
.The thrust of the Academies™ findings is straightforward. First, the report concludes 
that individual prosperity depends predominantly on individuals having high-quality jobs. 
It also observes that the same is true of a nation™s collective prosperity, in that if there are 
few high-quality jobs, there are not likely to be sufficient tax revenues to ensure homeland 
security, provide health care, pay Social Security, or educate the nation™s children. Second, 
the report concludes that the creation of new, high-quality jobs is today disproportionately 
dependent on advances in science and engineering. 
Eight studies conducted in recent decades indicate that public investments in science 
and technology have produced annualized societal returns that range from 20% to 67%. 
Some economists estimate that about half the nation™s growth in gross domestic product 
per capita during the last half-century can be attributed to scientific and engineering 
achievements. An assessment conducted by the Bank of Boston a decade ago concluded 
that research performed at MIT alone had resulted in the creation of 1.1 million jobs in 
4,000 new companies. Alan Greenspan, then Federal Reserve chairman, cited innovation 
as the reason for significant gains in productivity growth since 1995 and told Congress: 
ﬁHad the innovations of recent decades, especially in information technologies, not come 
to fruition, productivity growth would have continued to languish at the rate of the preced
-ing twenty years.ﬂ In recent decades, 60-80% of all newly created jobs have been in small 
to medium-sized companies (with fewer than 500 employees). 
Given the increasing pace of advancement in science and technologyŠand their 
close companion, innovationŠit seems highly likely that these disciplines will have equal 
or greater impact in the decades ahead. Some 5 million researchers around the world are 
now at work in the pursuit of new knowledge. According to the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
Dallas, each year enough new information (of all types) goes into storage somewhere in 
the world to equal 37,000 Libraries of Congress. Former President Bill Clinton observed 
that ﬁwhere once nations measured their strength by the size of their armies and arsenals, 
in the world of the future knowledge will matter most.ﬂ
The leaders of other nations are unlikely to overlook the ubiquitous impact of invest
-ment in science and technology. For example, of China™s top nine leaders, eight are engi
-neers, the other a geologist. In contrast, in the United States, the number of members of 
the most recent 435-member House of Representatives who listed their field as ﬁengineer
-ingﬂ was three, the same number who categorized themselves as ﬁactors or artists.ﬂ As for 
scientists, none was to be found in the Senate, but representation in the House recently 
ballooned to five. 
At last year™s multiday meeting of China™s National Academies of Science and 
Engineering, China™s President Hu, the prime minister, and all the members of the Politburo 
were present for most of the meeting. It has been observed that President Hu, who in his 
address to the gathering referred to China as ﬁan innovation-driven nation,ﬂcould have 
taken most of the actions he proposed directly from the US National Academies™ report. 
Some years earlier, Deng Xiaoping abruptly dismissed any ideologic debate that might 
be prompted by China™s commitment to scientific and engineering competition in a free 
market, noting that ﬁit doesn™t matter if it™s a black cat or a white cat. As long as it can 
catch mice, it™s a 
good cat!ﬂ 
Indeed, in 2006, China announced a 
15-year
 planŠthat it termed ﬁ
medium- to long-
termﬂŠfor the further development of science and technology. The plan calls for increas
-ing the contribution of science and technology to equal 60% of the country™s overall 
economic growth by the end of the period. Contrast that approach with that of America™s 
government, which generally considers ﬁlong-termﬂ to mean 5 years, or America™s indus
-try, which too often considers ﬁlong-termﬂ to mean anything beyond the next quarter. 
But it is not simply America™s economy that depends on the nation™s prowess in sci
-ence and engineering. In fact, many of the demanding challenges facing the country 
today will require advances in science and engineering, including challenges in providing 
health care, supplying energy, protecting the environment, ensuring homeland security, 
finding and providing water, and maintaining a vibrant economy. Paul Peercy, chair of the 
Engineering Deans Council of the American Society for Engineering Education, observed, 
ﬁI used to say ‚Look around, everything except the plants is engineered.™ Now I say, ‚Look 
around, everything 
and some of the plants are engineered.™ﬂ
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17

How are we doing in the global competition for jobs? The unani
-mous answer of the members of the Academies™ Gathering Storm 
committee is, not well. 
For example
Ł The US share of the world™s 
leading-edge semiconductor manufacturing capacity 
dropped from 36% to 11% in the past 7 years.
Ł Chemical companies closed 70 facilities in the United States in 2004 and were in 
the process of closing 40 more the following year. Of the 120 new plants costing 
over $1 billion each that were under construction at that time, 50 were in China 
and one was in the United States.
Ł The US Big Three automakers announced the closing of 26 plants in the United 
States over the next several years, while Japan-based companies are opening four 
new plants in the United States between 2006 and 2008.
Ł There are now 12 energy companies in the world whose reserves exceed those of 
the largest US energy firm, ExxonMobil.
Ł IBM recently sold its once-promising PC business to a Chinese company.
Ł In Business Week™s
 ranking of the world™s information-technology companies, 
only one of the top 10 is based in the United States.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
Ł In spite of America™s growing demand for energy, no new petroleum refineries 
have been built and no new nuclear power plants have been ordered in the past 
30 years. (France now derives 78% of its electric power from nuclear sources; 
Lithuania, 72%; Belgium, 54%; Armenia, 42%; Japan, 30%; and the United 
States, 19%.)
Ł Nearly 60% of the patents filed with the US Patent and Trademark Office in the 
field of information technology now originate in Asia.
Ł Once-mighty Ford and General Motors both have junk-bond ratings, and each 
has laid off over one-third of its dwindling North American workforce in the past 
5 years alone. 
Ł Last year Toyota brought to an end the notion of the US Big Three automakers 
when it sold more vehicles 
in the United States
 than Chrysler.
Ł This year, rapidly expanding Toyota ended General Motors™s 75-year reign as the 
world™s largest auto manufacturer. 
Ł Only one of the 25 largest initial public offerings last year took place on American 
exchanges.
Ł China is on track to build 108 new airports between 2005 and 2010, including 
the world™s largest. The United States, in spite of stifling congestion, has built only 
one major airport in the last third of a century.
Ł Low-wage firms, such as Wal-Mart and McDonald™s, created 44% of the new jobs 
in America during one recent periodŠa period during which high-wage firms 
produced only 29% of the new jobs. 
Ł Americans are now ﬁsavingﬂ a net 
negative
 0.4% of their disposable income.
Ł In 2000, the number of foreign students studying physical sciences and engi
-neering in 
US graduate schools surpassed, for the first time, the number of US 
students.Ł The 
Los Angeles Times
 reports that in the past 16 years two high-rise buildings 
were constructed in Los Angeles as the city executed its accelerated urban-renew
-al plan. In the past 10 years, 5,000 were built in Shanghai.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
Ł Some foreign universities are now conducting their engineering and business 
classes in English to promote recruitment of faculty and students and simplify 
access to technical information. In contrast, the working language in the back 
halls of many US engineering schools is Chinese.
Ł The United States is falling relative to its economic competitors in broadband 
Internet access. As recently as 2000 it was in first place; now it ranks 16th in the 
fraction of citizens having broadband connections and 61st in the use of mobile 
telephony per capita. South Korea has nearly 
twice the broadband penetration 
(subscribers per capita) of the United States.
Ł Toyota now has over 5 times the market capitalization of General Motors and 
Ford 
combined.Ł The United States ranks 17th among nations in high-school graduation rate and 
14th in college graduation rate. 
Ł Foreigners finance about two-thirds of US domestic investment, compared with 
about one-fifteenth a decade ago.
Ł China has supplanted the United States as the world™s number 1 
high-technology
 exporter.
Ł During the past 30 years, 40% of new petroleum production came from industri
-alized nations. It is estimated that during the next 40 years, 90% will come from 
developing nations. 
Ł Well over half the world™s foreign-exchange resources are held by emerging mar
-ket countries: the poorer nations are now financing the richer nations.
Ł The German firm that a decade ago purchased one of America™s Big Three auto
-mobile makers, Chrysler, for $36 billion decided after 9 years that it didn™t want 
the company after all and in effect paid nearly $700 million to get someone else 
to take it away (
along with its pension liability
).Ł Of the new R&D sites planned for construction in the next 3 years by the 177 
companies queried in one recent survey, 77% are to be built in China or India, 
often using US corporate financing. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
An analysis conducted by Marie and Jerry Thursby for the National Academies 
Government-University-Industry Research Roundtable titled 
Here or There: A Survey 
of Factors in Multinational R&D Location
 records the findings of a survey of US and 
European firms that recently established, or plan to establish, R&D sites in an emerging 
economy. The top 10 reasons for choosing a selected location were the country™s growth 
potential, followed by the availability of highly qualified personnel, the existence of local 
customers, the strength of intellectual-property protection, the ease of negotiating intel
-lectual-property rights, the inherent cost of conducting R&D, the ease of collaborating 
with local universities, the availability of university faculty with scientific or engineering 
expertise, the absence of regulatory and other restrictions, and the suitability of the coun
-try as an export platform. 
The bottom line is that the United States is today a net importer of 
high-technology 
products. It took slightly less than a decade for the US trade balance in high-technology 
manufactured goods to shift from a positive $40 billion in 1990 to a negative $50 bil
-lion in 2001. In fact, Americans now pay almost as much to foreign firms for imports as 
they pay to their own government in taxes. In a recent article, 
Business Week
 asks, ﬁWhy 
is that important?ﬂ and then answers its own question: ﬁBecause for the past 70 years 
Washington has been the 800-pound gorilla, more powerful by far than any other force in 
the US economy. That™s not true any more.ﬂ As 
USA Today
 (speaking of foreign financial 
reserves) puts it, ﬁDeveloping nations have gone from beggar to banker.ﬂ Indeed, in just 7 
years the United States has tripled its foreign debt. And although a great deal of attention 
has been focused on China and India because of their size and potential, 
The Economist 
reminds us that ﬁthese two together made up less than one-quarter of the total increase 
in emerging economies™ gross domestic product last year [2005].ﬂ Such is the magnitude 
of the competitiveness challenge that is sweeping the globe in this chaotic new-world 
disorder.
But is it not good that other nations prosper? In the view of the National Academies™ 
competitiveness committee, the answer is a resounding ﬁAbsolutely.ﬂ In a world in which 
half the population lives on less than $2 per day, a prosperous world will almost certainly 
be a safer world, not to mention a more humane world. Similarly, a prosperous world will 
provide more potential customers for US products and cheaper and more diverse products 
for US consumers. Prosperity is not necessarily a zero-sum game, but there will inevitably 
be winners and losers. The National Academies™ Gathering Storm committee, in its work 
on competitiveness, sought to ensure that America would remain among the 
winners. Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
Early projections as to the outcome of this global contest, which bears such enormous 
stakes, are already beginning to arrive. For example, I recently traveled some 7,000 miles 
on the Trans-Siberian Railroad and had the opportunity to visitŠwith the help of interpret
-ersŠwith a broad spectrum of citizens of those remote regions. Russians, perhaps under
-standably pragmatic, are projecting the outcome of the world competitiveness race in the 
form of a joke that one repeatedly hears on the streets: ﬁThe 
optimists are studying English, 
the realists are studying Chinese, and the 
pessimists are buying Kalashnikovs.ﬂ 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22

The enigma, of course, is that America, by most measures, is prospering today. 
The nation produces 28% of the world™s economic product with less than 
5% of the world™s population. America™s economy has been creating nearly 
2 million 
net new jobs a year. 
Business Week
 ranks 8 US firms in the top 10 
ﬁmost innovativeﬂ companies in the world. America has a gross domestic 
product close to $13 
trillion and has contributed one-third of the growth in global output 
over the most recent 15-year period. Its household net worth is now over $55 
trillion. U.S. 
universities employ 70% of the world™s Nobel Laureates. 
According to the 
Times
 of London, seven of the top 10 universities in the world are in 
the United States. Jiao Tong University in China says the number is 8 of 10. It is interesting 
that a dissenting opinion comes from the US National Conference of State Legislatures in 
its recent report 
Transforming Higher Education
, which concludes that although America 
has many fine colleges and universities, excellence is by no means uniform. It goes on to 
state flatly that ﬁthe American higher education system is no longer the best in the world. 
Other countries outrank and outperform us.ﬂ America™s academic institutions nonetheless 
have a culture that encourages innovative thinking and the free exchange of ideas, and 
our society, even with its shortcomings, is virtually unparalleled in its ability to absorb 
motivated, contributing people from around the world. Perhaps most important, we enjoy 
the benefits of a stable government and an economic system that encourages risk-taking 
and, left to itself, vigorously filters out noncompetitive firms and industries in favor of the 
growth firms and industries of tomorrow. Protectionism in the United States, although 
clearly not dead, seems to be 
in extremis
. Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23
All that comes at a price. To produce such great accomplishments, our economic sys
-tem, evidencing its version of what has been called creative destructionism, 
destroys
 29 
million jobs each year while generating 31 million 
new jobs. In fact, about one-sixth of all 
jobs in the United States are destroyed in any given year. Mathematicians would describe 
the process as encompassing the most hazardous of calculations in that it concerns rela
-tively small differences between relatively large numbers, and economists would say that 
the job market is highly volatile. But if one assumed a 10% adverse change in both job 
creation and job destruction, it would result in the 
disappearance
 of twice as many net 
jobs as are now being 
added. Such is the tenuousness of life in a modern economy.
If the overall economy is doing so well, what is the concern? 
In a word, 
trends. Not only are others getting better, but also to a disconcerting degree America has in 
many respects been losing its own edge. Truly, America has enjoyed what for many have 
been the best of timesŠseldom if ever has the world seen a single nation with such broad 
predominanceŠbut these are also the worst of times, inasmuch as we are slipping peril
-ously and silently closer to the flat earth™s edge. Ironically, the nations that are emerging as 
our most serious competitors are doing so in large part by adopting the best of our institu
-tional practices and often executing them better than we. In America, we are to a consid
-erable degree living off past investments, the comparatively strong position the nation held 
at the end of World War II, and the prevalence of English as the predominant language 
of business, government, and technical education. But the impact of those discriminators 
appears to be diminishing. Simply stated, we have been eating our seed corn. 
Worse yet, this is a crisis that provides no sudden, dramatic warning as did, say, 
9/11, Sputnik, and Pearl Harbor. In the present instance, the analogy much more closely 
matches the proverbial frog being slowly boiled. We are witnessing a gradual, albeit accel
-erating, erosion rather than a single cataclysmic wakeup call. 
Charles Darwin observed that ﬁit is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor 
the most intelligent, but the one most responsive to change.ﬂ That conclusion seems to 
apply to human organizations as well as to biological organisms. There can be no more 
dangerous place to be than in first place: the one holding that exalted position becomes 
everyone else™s target and, perhaps worse, is the recognized beneficiary of the status 
quoŠand therefore reluctant to promote, or even accept, change.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
We, of course, did not get into our intensifying plight overnight. Correspondingly, if 
we should fall decisively behind the leaders of the rest of the world, particularly in the 
prosperity drivers of science and engineering, it will take decades to catch up, if it is pos
-sible to do so at all. Consider the matter of producing one additional research scientist 
who can help to generate the knowledge from which future innovation and jobs will 
spring. Rather convincing empirical evidence suggests that most children who are ﬁturned 
offﬂ by mathematics and science have already arrived at that conclusion by the time they 
are in fourth grade. The die is usually cast by a teacher who finds teaching science and 
mathematics an unwelcome and intimidating burden or by a parent with a disinterest in 
or disdain for these fields. 
One of the unusual characteristics of a technical education is that by eighth grade a 
student must most often decide whether to 
preserve the option
 to pursue such a career, 
for example, in science or engineering, by deciding whether or not to take algebra to be 
prepared for higher-level science and mathematics courses in high school. That is in dis
-tinct contrast with the decisions faced by those who might wish to 
preserve the option
 to 
become lawyers, bankers, accountants, or medical doctors. The reason for the disparity 
is the hierarchic nature of an education in mathematics that serves as the foundation of 
science and engineering. One cannot usefully study trigonometry until one has mastered 
algebra (only 13 states currently require algebra II for a high-school diploma . . . up from 
2 states in 2005); one cannot study calculus until one has learned something of trigonom
-etry; and one cannot study differential equations until one has studied calculus. So funda
-mental is mathematics that it is in essence the language of science and engineering. 
Assuming that a person has completed the requisite courses during 4 years in high 
school and has successfully completed 4 years of undergraduate work (the average for 
engineers is now closer to 6 years), the person is prepared to begin a 6- or 7-year pursuit 
of a PhD, after which a creative research career can presumably begin. A few more years 
may in many cases be devoted to postdoctoral endeavors. 
As one might suspect, there is a great deal of leakage along that extended educational 
highway. To begin with, about one-third of US eighth-graders do not receive a high-school 
diploma. And of those who do, about 40% do not go on to college. About half who do 
begin college do not receive a bachelor™s degree. Of those who do receive such a degree, 
two-thirds will not be in science or engineering. And of those who are US citizens and 
do receive degrees in either science or engineering, only about 1 in 10 will become candi
-dates for a doctoral degree in those fields. And over half the doctoral candidates drop out 
before being awarded a PhD. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25
Furthermore, even after they receive their degree, a growing proportion of US gradu
-atesŠin the case of baccalaureate engineers, slightly over halfŠdecide to become invest
-ment bankers on Wall Street, lawyers, corporate executives, or some other form of worker. 
More S&P 500 CEOs receive their undergraduate training in engineering than in any other 
field, in spite of the minority of undergraduates who receive degrees in that field. About 
23% of the nation™s CEOs majored in engineering, 13% in economics, and 12% in busi
-ness; the remainder are trained in a broad variety of other disciplines. It can justifiably be 
argued that those who migrate from science or engineering into other fields still use their 
education for the betterment of society, but they generally do not then directly contribute 
to the nation™s research enterprise. The point is that it takes a lot of third-graders to produce 
one contributing research scientist or engineer and a very long time to do it.
But that is only the beginning. The newly minted scientist or engineer must continue 
to pursue his or her education and the search for knowledge, at least informally, at an ever-
increasing pace throughout his or her career or become professionally ﬁmiddle-agedﬂ by 
the time they are 30 years old. That is a consequence of the exploding supply of technical 
information in the world, which is said to double about every 2 years. Studies of the fre
-quency of citations of scientific and technical articles suggest a half-life of such informa
-tion, depending on the field, of about 3 to 6 years. Similarly, studies of the course content 
in university catalogs and qualitative surveys of science and engineering professionals 
indicate that, absent continued learning, the professional value of the specific knowledge 
imparted through their formal studies becomes negligible in about 5 years. This perhaps 
explains why there are seemingly always engineers seeking employment at the same time 
that employers are decrying an ﬁengineering shortage.ﬂ Employers are seeking integrated-
circuit and jet-engine designers, not vacuum-tube and propeller designers. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26

Imagine, for a moment, that one is sitting in a board meeting of a Fortune 100 
company with several billion dollars to devote to the establishment of a major new 
facility somewhere in the world. The board is reviewing management™s proposal as 
to where the facilityŠand the jobs it generatesŠshould be located. In the past 2 
decades, I have participated in over 500 board meetings of Fortune 100 firms and 
not infrequently wrestled with that very question.
Several books and numerous articles have decried the lack of ﬁloyaltyﬂ of America™s 
CEOs and boards of directors to the American worker when making such decisions. Before 
attempting to address that accusation, it is instructive to ask, What 
is an American firm? 
For example, one respected company with which I have been associated as a director 
for 18 years was founded in the United States well over 170 years ago and maintains its 
headquarters in the United States, but some 10% of its owners (shareholders) are foreign; 
over half its customers are foreign; over half its employees are foreign; and not long ago 
its CEO was foreign. Is that an 
American firm, or is that a 
global enterprise? And even 
if it were judged ﬁan American firm,ﬂ the most disastrous thing a CEO could do for any 
firm™s employees and shareholders alike would be to make business decisions designed 
to protect the interests of a few if those decisions are harmful to the competitiveness of 
the organization as a whole and thus endanger the prosperity, even survivability, of the 
enterprise itselfŠand the jobs and profits it sustains. 
Turning from the topic of corporate nationality to the related subject of the heritage 
of specific products, 
Boeing™s new 787 has major assemblies manufactured in Europe, 
Asia, and North America and components from countries virtually thoughout the world.
 Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27
A recent 
USA Today
 article pointed out that 59% of the parts content of the ﬁ
USﬂ General 
Motors Chevrolet HHR is 
not made in the United States or Canada (revealingly, the US 
government™s reporting system does not distinguish between the two countries) and, fur
-thermore, is assembled in Mexico. In contrast, 85% of the parts content of the ﬁ
Japanese
ﬂ Toyota Sienna is made 
in the United States or Canada, and it is assembled in Indiana. The 
question is, Which is the 
American car? General Motors spokesperson Greg Martin helps 
to answer that question: ﬁWe™re a global car company,ﬂ he explains, ﬁthat happens to be 
based in the United States.ﬂ 
The world™s borders are becoming increasingly indistinct. 
Several years ago when traveling in Peru and visiting with the owner of a small kiosk, I 
asked whether the gentleman had ever been to the United States. ﬁNo,ﬂ he replied, ﬁonly 
to Miami!ﬂ
In the case of most large US employers, it is quite probable that a substantial majority 
of their shares are owned by institutional investors, and the primary, if not sole, interest of 
that set of shareholders is financial returnŠpreferably 
near-term
 financial returnŠand cer
-tainly not the matter of preserving jobs. In fact, announcements of job layoffs in times of 
prosperity are almost always greeted favorably on Wall Street. Ironically, the institutional 
investors who own those companies often are fiduciaries for the pension funds of American 
workers
Šworkers who, for their own part, have seldom displayed any great reluctance 
to purchase foreign-made cars, television sets, and DVD players if they thought doing so 
was in their immediate interest as consumers. Perhaps one should not be surprised by this 
proclivity, at least when it comes to cars: US-based 
Consumer Reports
 identifies only one 
traditional US brand in its top dozen automobiles as ranked by reliability. 
Few would disagree with the observation that most large US firms are becoming 
global enterprises. A more recent and less noticed trend is that many US universities are 
following suit. It is well known that universities often have one or two foreign affiliations, 
but this practice is now expanding to the point where some institutions have numerous 
locations abroad. Thus, universities are also gradually losing their national identity. 
Not atypically, the University of Chicago states, ﬁWe educate the next generation of the world™s 
leaders, not just United States leadership,ﬂ and a 
few years ago, 260-year-old Princeton 
University changed its motto from ﬁIn the Nation™s Serviceﬂ to ﬁIn the Nation™s Service and 
in the Service of All Nations.ﬂ 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28


Among the first factors considered by a corporate board in determining 
where to locate a new facility often is the cost of labor. If that is not the 
case, the implication is that the firm has found a way to operate its busi
-ness with little labor content, that is, without creating many jobs. If the 
company is concerned with hiring factory workers, it will undoubtedly be 
noted that nine such workers can be hired in Mexico for the cost of one in the United 
States. I recently visited a plant in Vietnam where 20 assembly workers could be hired for 
the cost of 1 in the United States. As far as labor wrap-rates are concerned, the US worker 
would have to take a 95% cut in pay and benefits simply to be on an even footing with 
a counterpart in Vietnam from the standpoint of cost. Needless to say, few US workers 
would do so willingly.
In recognition of these trends, a new ﬁinternational standardﬂ of comparative wages 
has emerged in recent years: the ﬁMcWage.ﬂ The McWage is what McDonald™s pays its 
beginning employees in various countries, and it reveals an average pay differential of a 
factor of 12 between the US worker and workers in low-wage countries. Not 12%. Not 
even 120%. A factor of 12Š1,100%.
But perhaps it is not factory workers who are needed for the new facility being con
-sidered; perhaps it is engineers and scientists. In this case, eight engineers can be hired 
in India for the cost of one in the United States. Five chemists can be employed in China 
for the cost of one in the United States. And they may well be graduates of the renowned 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29
Indian Institute of Technology, Tsinghua University of China, or one of America™s foremost 
universities. Some studies indicate still greater exchange ratios for engineers and scientists 
in Russia; however, the data on Russia are notoriously imprecise, as well as volatile. 
Such disparities will presumably narrow when other economies and their citizens 
prosper, as indeed is already beginning to happen. But global wage equivalence appears 
to be a long time awayŠmuch longer than America can afford to wait before address
-ing its competitiveness shortcomings. There is also, as critics point out, the possibility of 
major political upheavals in developing countries that could have significant effects on the 
competitiveness of those nationsŠbut it seems unwise to predicate America™s future on 
such destabilizing events. It thus appears highly likely that the United States will suffer a 
substantial wage disadvantage for many years to come and that some means will have to 
be found to offset that fundamental tilt of the flat earth away from America.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30



Economist Lester Thurow wrote nearly 2 decades ago that ﬁin the 21st cen
-tury, the educational skills of the workforce will end up being the dominant 
competitive weapon.ﬂ If so, it appears that America is becoming a formidable 
threatŠto itself.
A workforce that costs more than its competitors can, within reason, over
-come this disadvantage through productivity, although the increase in productivity in 
some instances can itself destroy jobs. Indeed, major steps have been taken in improving 
efficiency in the United States, with, for example, real factory output per worker having 
increased from $52,000 to $108,000 since 1990 alone. That is important, but it falls far 
short of the wage gap that must somehow be offsetŠparticularly as others have improved 
their productivity, too. 
The most obvious place to begin when assessing workforce quality in a knowledge 
age is with educational qualifications. In China, virtually all high school students study 
calculus; the corresponding share in the United States is 13%. In 1970, US students made 
up 30% of all university enrollments in the world; by 2000, the fraction had dropped 
to 12%. Similarly, the share of PhDs (in all fields) granted by US universities will have 
declined from 50% in the early 1970s to a projected 15% in 2010. Fewer than 18% of 
US high-school graduates go on to receive a college degree within 6 years of receiving 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31
their high-school diplomas. The United States still leads in the fraction of the population™s 
35- to 64-year-olds who hold college degrees (in any field), but it ranks seventh among 25- 
to 34-year-olds. For every American elementary and secondary school student studying 
Chinese, there are 10,000 students in China studying English. China already is the largest 
ﬁEnglish-speakingﬂ nation on the globe, although English is a 
second language. When I 
visited China in the late 1970s, English lessons were being given over the loudspeakers 
in the street cars. How long do you suppose US commuters would tolerate mandatory 
Chinese lessons on their way home from the office?
The situation in science and technology is particularly perilous. In the Program for 
International Student Assessment tests of students™ ability to apply mathematical under
-standing to real-world problems, US 15-year-olds finished in 24th place among the par
-ticipating nations. US 15-year-olds finished in 18th place in science. In a test of basic 
knowledge of both mathematics and science, US 12th-graders finished below the students 
of 18 other countries in math, and 15 in science. In yet another test, American 8th-graders 
ranked 9th in science and 15th in mathematics, behind Estonia and Malaysia. The earlier 
(1999) Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study found 
no country with 
12th-graders scoring significantly below those in the United States in mathematics and 
only one in physics. Of US students who take the ACT college-entrance examination, a 
self-selecting and presumably more highly achieving group, 78% are deemed 
unqualified for college-level work in reading, mathematics, or science. 
In a 2005 test of science understanding administered by the National Assessment 
of Educational Progress, 32% of US fourth-grade students performed below the ﬁbasicﬂ 
achievement cutoff level (the lowest of three levels defined for the test). Among 8th-
graders, the share increased to 41%. By the 12th grade, the fraction of underachievers 
had grown to 46%. In mathematics, the same test revealed that fewer than one-fourth of 
high-school seniors perform at or above their grade level. 
An examination of the trend over time is no more encouraging. In the abovemen
-tioned test of mathematics understanding, the proportion of American high-school seniors 
scoring below the ﬁbasicﬂ cutoff level in 1996 was 31%; in 2000, it was 35%; and by 
2005, it had grown to 39%. Recent changes in the test™s methods reduce the confidence 
one can attach to the trend analysis, but it seems clear that the average level of mathemati
-cal understanding attributable to high-school seniors is low and not improving, and these 
results exclude the 1 million students who are generally not among the top performers and 
drop out of high school each year.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
Ironically, US 4th-graders rank near the 80th percentile among nations participating 
in 2003 science testing, but by the 12th grade, US students plummet to the 5th percentile. 
Similarly, by the 12th grade, US students descend to the 10th percentile in mathematics 
(in 1995, the most recent year for which data are available). A benchmark test given to 
US students in 2005 indicates that over the most recent decade, 4th-graders modestly 
improved in mathematics and science, 8th-graders remained basically unchanged in per
-formance, and 12th-graders lost additional ground. In fact, other tests displayed that 17-
year-olds have not improved in scores in mathematics for a quarter-century. It seems that 
the longer our children are exposed to our K-12 education system, the worse they do.
If we wish to be 
average
 by global standards, we will need to 
improve
 a great deal. 
Can anyone imagine a football coach at any American high school greeting his players on 
the first day of fall practice by saying, ﬁThis year let™s get out there and try to be average 
for the Gipper!ﬂ?
It can, of course, be argued that comparing averages and medians tells only part of the 
story, as indeed is often the case. But in this instance, further parsing of the data generally 
reveals that the United States has a disproportionately small share of the highest perform
-ers and a disproportionately large share of the lowest performers. Although this is widely 
overlooked, it is not simply the poorer-performing students who are falling through the 
gaping cracks of our educational system but also the highest performers whoŠmuch to 
the nation™s detrimentŠare frequently being forced to learn in an environment approach
-ing the lowest common denominator.
As former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan explains, ﬁIf you don™t solve 
[the K-12 education problem], nothing else is going to matter all that much.ﬂ In choos
-ing words to characterize the present health of the US public K-12 education system, he 
selected ﬁpretty awful.ﬂ Speaking from the perspective of business, the president of the 
US Chamber of Commerce, Thomas Donohue, says, ﬁIf companies were run like many 
education systems, they wouldn™t last a week.ﬂ 
As one digs deeper, additional societal concerns emerge as consequences of the 
nation™s education shortcomings. For example, according to the Federal Reserve™s data, 
during the 15 years ending in 2004, the net worth of families led by college graduates 
increased by 61% while that of families led by high-school dropouts rose by only 12%; 
the disparity generated 
during the above period
 eventually exceeded a factor of 6. In 
1980, college graduates, on the average, earned 75% more than high-school graduates 
(and 150% more than those without a high-school diploma). In today™s knowledge age, 
a quarter-century later, the wage gap between high-school and college graduates is over 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33
130%. Households led by a college graduate have, on the average, more than 4 times the 
net worth of households led by high-school graduates with no college education. Over 
the past 2 decades, median 
real income has declined (by about 10%) for all households 
except those including a recipient of a bachelor™s or higher degreeŠthe latter having seen 
an increase. Greenspan notes that ﬁit™s pulling our society apart.ﬂ His successor as chair
-man of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, adds that ﬁwe™re probably not doing what we 
should be doing in terms of ensuring that all children have opportunities to learn math
-ematics and science.ﬂ 
Finding a solution to America™s failing K-12 performance is complicated by the char
-acter of the nation™s education delivery system that comprises some 15,000 school districts 
that are locally managed, generally apply local budgetary policies with local hiring and 
retention practices, and often use local standards of achievement. Certainly not all schools 
are failing, but the 
average
 of all schools is certainly failing, and failing resoundingly. Bill 
Gates has remarked, ﬁWhen I compare our high schools to what I see when I™m travel
-ing abroad, I™m terrified for our workforce of tomorrow.ﬂ I had a similar reaction when, 
as but one example, I visited a school in Sri Lanka in an area that not long before had 
been ravaged by the tsunami of 2004. There, amidst the wreckage of homes and in the 
heat and humidity of a tropical jungle, attentive children were attending school in open-
air classrooms. Encouragement was taken by some observers in 2005, when 65,000 US 
students participated in Intel™s global science and engineering fairs. But it should not go 
unnoticedŠeven with recognition that quality is far from uniformŠthat 6 
million students 
took part in the corresponding events in China. Yet the Asia Society reports that China 
educates 20% of the world™s students with only 2% of the world™s educational resources. 
Jay Greene points out that inflation-adjusted spending per public school student in 
the United States increased by a factor of 7 from the end of World War II to the present, 
but 12th-grade test scores have remained substantially unchanged over that extended 
period, as has the high-school graduation rate. The United States spends more per student 
on secondary education than any other nations except Switzerland and Luxemburg 
and more on primary education than any nation except Luxemburg
. The problem appears to 
be not 
what
 we are spending but rather 
how
 we are spending it. States, on the average, 
spend only 61% of their education budget on classroom instruction. The nation™s capital, 
which ranks third in spending per pupil, finds itself in last place in the fraction of its bud
-get dedicated to instructionŠ53%. As the nation awaits fundamental structural changes, 
most of which must be introduced at the local level, more funds will need to be devoted, 
at least in the near term, at the national levelŠhopefully to jump-start a turnaround. In 
the judgment of many, America™s K-12 educational process simply needs to embrace the 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
free-enterprise systemŠwith its competition, measurable standards, and consequences for 
allŠand make performance-related compensation the coin of the realm, as is the case in 
virtually every other pursuit in the nation and, increasingly, in the world. 
A few years ago, it was reported that California was taking action in that regard: 
In 1999, it passed a law mandating that students pass an exit examination to receive 
a high-school diploma. A passing grade in mathematics was set at 55%. The examina
-tion was multiple-choice, with four possible answers to each question; seemingly, this 
at least assured the not-unlucky, totally uninformed student of a 25% score, for openers. 
Furthermore, students were permitted as many as six tries to pass the examination in the 
normal course of affairs and even more in ﬁspecialﬂ circumstances. Yet there emerged a 
cacophony of objections by vocal citizens who believed even this set of undernourished 
standards to be too demanding, and a series of lawsuits and political maneuverings arose 
to eliminate the requirement. Similarly, attempts by a few school boards around the coun
-try to lengthen the school year by a week or two have not infrequently resulted in decisive 
action: the members of the school board were summarily thrown out of office by enraged 
parents. The problem of low expectations has not been confined to California. Alabama, for 
example, reported that in 2005, 83% of its fourth-graders ranked as ﬁproficientﬂ on its 
state test of academic achievement. But in the most widely accepted 
national test, the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress, only 22% of Alabama™s fourth-graders scored at or 
above the proficient level. In truth, 
neither of the measures matters much. What counts 
today is how the children of Alabama rank with the children of Singapore, Moscow, Hong 
Kong, Delhi, Beijing, and Berlin. There is little consolation in being first among losers. 
A Gallup poll offering 20 options reported that the American public ranks lack of 
student motivation, lack of parental involvement, and home-life issues as the three fac
-tors adversely affecting the nation™s public schools. In sharp contrast, participants in the 
Teach for America program, which seeks highly qualified new college graduates to teach 
in challenged public schools, rank teacher shortcomings, principal shortcomings, and 
inadequate expectations of students as predominant. 
The foremost conclusion of the National Academies™ Gathering Storm committee was 
that along with increasing parental interest and involvement in our public schools and 
their children™s education, the greatest leverage for improving K-12 performance resides 
in providing qualified, motivated teachers, particularly in mathematics and science. In 
generations past, America™s classrooms were the beneficiary of an abundance of extraor
-dinarily capable women who, because of the failings of those eras, had only the most 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35
limited set of career opportunities other than teaching. Today, many of these would-be 
teachers are not in the classroom at all but instead are in the executive suite, operating 
room, or law office. The impact on the nation™s schools is palpable. 
According to the most recently available data, 69% of US fifth- through eighth-grade 
students are being taught mathematics by teachers who 
do not possess a degree or cer
-tificate in mathematics. Fully 93% of students in those grades are being taught physical 
sciences by teachers with no degree or certificate in the physical sciences. Even in high 
school, the corresponding likelihoods are 31% for mathematics, 61% for chemistry, and 
67% for physics. (In contrast, 81% of the physical-education teachers in grades 5-8 and 
9-12 have degrees in physical education.) Many entire school districts do not have a single 
teacher with an academic degree in mathematics or science. 
If it offers any consolation, help is on the way: English-speaking tutors, many with 
master™s degrees in mathematics or science, are now available over the Internet from South 
Africa, India, and Israel; they generally charge $3-20 per hour. One wonders whether this 
might be a precursor of outsourcing the teaching of our children.
Often, physical-education teachers are simply assigned to teach physics; anointed 
might be a more descriptive term. Many of them have a distinct lack of interest in the 
subject they must teach and a lack of comfort with it that is both evident and contagious 
to their students. The dearth of background and excitement on the part of these teachers 
translates into a lack of intriguing experiments that can be conducted in a science class, 
a lack of real-world applications that can be presented in a mathematics class, and a lack 
of interesting and provocative insights that can be offered in both. Thus, when a Raytheon 
survey asked 11- to 13-year-olds whether they would rather clean their room, eat their 
vegetables, go to the dentist, take out the garbage, or learn mathematics and science, fully 
84% simply went with the garbage. Tom Friedman asks, ﬁIf Einstein were alive today and 
learned science the boring way it is taught in many US schools, wouldn™t he have ended 
up at a Wall Street hedge fund rather than developing theories of relativity for a Nobel 
prize?ﬂThe inadequacies of the nation™s public school systems spill into our colleges and 
universities in a domino-like effect: three-fourths of all 2- and 4-year institutions feel com
-pelled to offer remedial courses. Twenty-two percent of all freshmen enroll in mathematics 
remediation.In most school districts, physical-education teachers are paid on the same wage scale 
as physics teachers, and excellent physics teachers are paid the same wages as mediocre 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
physics teachers, on the grounds that this is ﬁfair.ﬂ But when we encounter a pursuit that 
really matters
 in our secondary-education system, we somehow manage to find a solution 
to the pay conundrum: for example, we put a priority on paying our high-school football 
coaches very well for the extra duties they perform. Not surprisingly, a 
Sports Illustrated 
online survey reveals that the nation™s university students believe overwhelmingly that the 
athletic departments in their institutions have more power than the academic faculties. 
The public K-12 school system in the United States continues to be largely impervious to 
the forces of the free-enterprise system. 
About 46% of new teachers abandon the profession within 5 years. The attrition rate 
is even higher among science and mathematics teachers. In 2004, in Maryland, my home 
state, 523 mathematics teachers resigned. In spite of a monumental effort, only 91 quali
-fied replacements could be hired. The situation is even worse in the case of physics teach
-ers. Geoffrey Summers, of the University of Maryland Baltimore Campus, noted that ﬁif we 
add four physics teachers per year in Maryland public schools we will double the rate of 
physics teachers that Maryland currently produces.ﬂ That is in a state with nearly 6 million 
inhabitants. Maryland is not alone in this respect. Before the University of Texas initiated 
its UTeach program, of which more will be said, only 16 of 12,000 graduates in 1996 
were certified to teach secondary science and 5 to teach mathematics. At the University 
of North Carolina, Erskine Bowles, in his inaugural address as president, remarked, ﬁThink 
about this: in the past 4 years, our 15 schools of education at the University of North 
Carolina turned out a grand total of three physics teachers. Three. And we™re going to 
compete with those guys in Asia? Come onŠnot that way.ﬂ And a recent article in 
Science points out that ﬁlast year, BYU, a private institution run by the Mormon Church, graduated 
roughly five percent of all the new physics teachers produced by all U.S. colleges and 
universities in 2006. Its class of 16 dwarfs the production of any other university.ﬂ
Why do classroom teachers abandon the profession? There are, of course, a plethora 
of reasons: lack of prestige, lack of inherent discipline in the classroom, lack of parental 
support, demanding work, inadequate pay, and so on. The number 1 source of dissatisfac
-tion among teachers in low-poverty suburban public schools is, according to one survey, 
poor salary (51% of respondents), but among high-poverty public schools, the lack of 
administrative support (50%) ranks number 1. 
U.S. News & World Report
 states that 
whereas a high-school teacher must work 43 hours to make $1,000, the average corpo
-rate CEO can do so in 2 hours and 55 minutes. Kobe Bryant takes only 5 minutes and 30 
seconds on the basketball courtŠand Howard Stern need labor only 24 seconds in 
his chosen profession. 
Simply stated, if a teacher is to inspire today™s young people, that teacher had better be 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37
excited about the subject at hand, be knowledgeable enough to answer penetrating ques
-tions, and be informed enough to provide interesting, challenging coursework. The evi
-dence along those lines is not encouraging. For example, the 
Los Angeles Times
 reported 
that last year 35% of the future elementary-school instructors who studied at California 
State University, Northridge, said to be the largest supplier of new teachers to the Los 
Angeles Unified School District, received Ds or Fs in their first college-level mathematics 
class. And with today™s inflated grading standards at most colleges and universities, it is 
not easy to get a D or an F.
Some have suggested opening the K-12 teaching ranks to practicing engineers and sci
-entists who wish to change careers or take early retirement to meet new challenges or who 
are simply committed to the cause. Ironically, examples are rife wherein such people are 
denied the opportunity to teach 9th-grade algebra but are permitted to teach in a research 
university. In my own case, I would be deemed unqualified to teach in virtually any grade 
school in America, but was welcomed, on taking early retirement from a position in the 
aerospace industry, to teach both undergraduate and graduate students in the School of 
Engineering and Applied Science of Princeton University.
The US Department of Education estimates that 60% of the new jobs that will open 
in the 21st century will require skills possessed by only 20% of the current workforce. 
Similarly, industry surveys indicate that 90% of the fastest growing jobs will require at 
least some post-secondary education. Jobs that demand technical training are growing at 5 
times the rate of those requiring non-technical skills. And, as has been widely publicized, 
a person with a bachelor™s degree will have median lifetime earnings that exceed earnings 
of those with only a high-school diploma by about $1 million. 
Most parents don™t seem to be losing much sleep over all this. One survey found that 
70% of the parents of America™s high-school students believe that their children get about 
the right amount of science and mathematics. A Harris poll reports that 58% of Americans 
believe that the United States is performing ﬁvery wellﬂ or ﬁsomewhat wellﬂ in mathemat
-ics and science education compared with other nations. And in another poll, only 15% of 
the parents surveyed indicated that the most pressing problem facing high schools in their 
communities was ﬁlow academic standards.ﬂ In contrast, 73% cited ﬁsocial problems and 
kids that misbehave.ﬂ
Nor do students themselves seem to be losing much sleep over an issue that will 
have such a profound impact on their lives. About 83% of students eligible for 
free tutor
-ing elect to forgo it. The average American youth now spends 66% more time watching 
television than in school (a number that is beginning to diminish as students devote more 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
time to increasingly realistic but generally educationally hollow video games). Over 40% 
of America™s 4- to 6-year-olds have their own television sets in their bedrooms. In the case 
of their older brothers and sisters, the fraction approaches 70%. 
When MIT made the materials it uses in its courses available free of charge on the 
Internet, well over half the users were outside the United States. Roy Singham, CEO of 
ThoughtWorks, which has operations around the world, observes, ﬁWhen you™re in col
-lege drinking beer and watching the Super Bowl, your counterpart in China is on his fourth 
book.ﬂ
Could it be that most of America™s parents and students ﬁjust don™t get itﬂ? That 
question, as far as students are concerned, was actually addressed in the Trends in 
International Mathematics and Science Study 1998/99. When it comes to self-perception, 
American youth truly excel. In fact, it was no contest. US high-school seniors ranked 
number 1 among the 20 participating nations in agreeing that they were doing well in 
mathematics and number 3 in agreeing that they were doing well in science. The problem 
is that the same group of students finished 18th in the mathematics examination and 17th 
in the science examination. As my young son once announced on the opening day of 
yet another soccer season, ﬁThis year we™re really gonna™ get ‚em; last year we were too 
overconfident!ﬂ Indeed, it seems that at least when it comes to science and mathematics, 
America™s youth rank considerably higher in confidence than in competence.
Tom Friedman, writing in 
The Earth Is Flat
, takes a somewhat more critical perspec
-tive. ﬁMathematics and science,ﬂ he says, ﬁare the keys to innovation and power in today™s 
world.ﬂ He goes on to say that ﬁAmerican parents had better understand that the people 
who are eating their kids™ lunch in mathematics are not resting on their laurels.ﬂ He 
describes a conversation with his own daughters that began, ﬁGirls, when I was growing 
up, my parents used to say to me, ‚Tom, finish your dinner. People in China and India are 
starving!™ My advice to you is: ‚Girls, finish your homework. People in China and India 
are starving . . . for your jobs.™ﬂ 
There is yet another critical ingredient of workforce quality: motivationŠthe drive to 
apply one™s talents. This is seldom mentioned in most competitiveness debates; general
-izations tend to be unfair to that not insignificant segment of the workforce that 
is highly 
motivated and possessed of a strong work ethic. But, as IBM™s Nicholas Donofrio, puts 
it, ﬁThe attitude I see in Estonia, Mexico, Brazil, China, LatviaŠthey™re hungrier than we 
are.ﬂ Employers in many of those countries take the ﬁdefaultﬂ position vividly expressed 
by former Green Bay Packers coach Vince Lombardi: ﬁIf you are not fired with enthusiasm, 
you will be fired with enthusiasm.ﬂ My own experiences in visiting over 100 countries 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39
suggest that it is difficult to name five in which, on average, customers receive worse ser
-vice than in the United States. 
Gilman Louie, the Silicon Valley entrepreneur and former CEO of the high-technology 
firm In-Q-Tel, tells of attending a lecture by an industrial leader in Japan at which the stu
-dent audience spontaneously began chanting in unison the Japanese word for innovation. 
Some businesses in India outfit work cubicles with cots for employees who elect to work 
late and remain overnight. On a visit to Bangalore, I was told that the young engineers and 
computer scientists writing software were so committed to their tasks that if an employer 
simply provides them pizza (yes, in India!) for dinner, ﬁthe kids will work all night.ﬂ In 
contrast, in a recent survey of 431 US business leaders, nearly three-fourths cited a lack of 
work ethic and professionalism as a characteristic of US high-school graduates. (As a case 
in point, I recently had difficulty gaining the attention of a clerk atŠwhere else?Šthe cus
-tomer-service desk of a local computer store because of her ongoing telephone conversa
-tion with a boyfriend. When the clerk finally appeared in front of me, I, rather amused by 
the ridiculousness of the situation, smilingly remarked, ﬁYou know, if you worked for me, 
I™d fire you!ﬂ The clerk returned my smile and replied, ﬁThat™s why I don™t work for you!ﬂ 
USA Today
 reports one US business executive as saying that ﬁ[organizations] are 
realizing it™s less risky to [employ] internationals because they™re more coachable, more 
socialized, have no posses, and have not been Americanized.ﬂ That executive predicts 
that in his field, by about 2010, foreigners will fill 50% of all the jobs available, compared 
with the roughly 25% they fill today. The article goes on to assert that US youth are ﬁlack
-ing the fundamentals.ﬂ 
The executive being quoted was not whom one might expect. It was not the CEO of 
some high-technology company, such as IBM, Microsoft, or Dell. Rather, it was George 
Raveling of 
NikeŠspeaking of basketball players in the National Basketball Association!
Raveling™s remarks are echoed by Red Auerbach, legendary coach of the Boston 
Celtics: ﬁAll those years I traveled overseas and held clinics, I said to people, ‚You know 
what? There™s going to come a day when these countries are dangerous for us because 
these guys are 
listening. You look at the foreign kids who come over and everyone of them 
is solid fundamentally. Not our guys. No one can teach them because they all think they 
are stars when they™re 15.ﬂ As if to punctuate his observation, the United States had just 
finished in sixth place in the world basketball championships.
Former NBA executive Jerry Colangelo could easily have been referring to America™s 
free-enterprise system and our system of higher education rather than basketball (or base
-Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40
ball, for that matter) when he lamented, ﬁWe invented the game, we taught people how 
to play the game, and they came back and knocked us off the perch.ﬂ The two teams in 
the 2007 NBA finals, San Antonio and Cleveland, had half and one-fourth of their players 
from abroad (including the tournament™s Most Valuable Player), respectively. Their players 
came from Argentina, France, Slovenia, Netherlands, Lithuania, Serbia and Montenegro, 
Brazil, and the Virgin Islands. No fewer than 28 countries were represented on the rosters 
of playoff teams. NBA Commissioner David Stern is reported in the abovementioned 
USA Today
 article as being ﬁstartled at how fast the rest of the world has come along.ﬂ To take 
an example from another sport invented in the United States, fully 44% of the starting line
-ups in last year™s major league baseball all-star game were foreign-born. This trend is being 
replicated in many fields other than basketball and baseball in which, ironically, other 
nations are successfully adopting our own proven but oft-ignored practices. In the case of 
economic competitiveness, the nations posting the most remarkable gains in recent years 
have to a large extent been doing so simply by copying the attributes of our systems of 
higher education, business management (pre-Enron era), and free enterprise and in many 
instances implementing them more effectively than we. 
David Gergen describes a presentation by Harvard economist Richard Freeman that 
provides a good summary of the above considerations: Freeman ﬁargued that we have 
been sugar-coating the impact that China, India, and the former Soviet Union may have 
on jobs and incomes in America in coming years. Unless we find some answers, our chil
-drenŠand certainly our grandchildrenŠwill be in for a very rough ride.ﬂ
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41



It should be emphasized that the goal of the National Academies™ Gathering Storm 
committee was not to produce more scientists and engineers merely for the sake 
of filling employment slots. Scientists and engineers today make up only 4% of US 
employment; even doubling their number would in itself have a modest overall 
impact on the economy. Rather, the point is that scientists and engineers contribute 
disproportionately to the creation of jobs for the other 96% of the nation™s workforce by 
generating knowledge, by innovating, and by establishing new companies based on that 
knowledge and innovation. 
It should also be noted that the Gathering Storm committee™s intense focus on sci
-ence, mathematics, and engineering was in no way intended to diminish the importance 
of other academic skills that are critical for survival in a knowledge world, with reading 
being foremost among these ﬁotherﬂ skills. (In the most recent international test, US 15-
year-olds ranked in 17th place in reading literacy.) The committee™s emphasis on science, 
mathematics, and technology is merely a reflection of the growing pervasiveness of these 
fields in creating jobs and solving other societal problems, of the precarious state of 
today™s K-12 education in the United States in these fields and, of course, of the National 
Academies™ own principal expertise.
Although the nation will need a cadre of extraordinary people well versed in such 
fields as microbiology, information sciences, and nanotechnologyŠﬁbio, info, nanoﬂŠ
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
such people will represent a relatively small part of the nation™s employment base. The 
remainder of our citizenry will need to be sufficiently science-literate to survive and 
contribute in the high-technology world we are all entering. British novelist C.P. Snow 
used to delight in asking acquaintances whether they could describe the Second Law 
of Thermodynamics. When they failed, as they almost invariably did, he would point 
out that his question was the technologic equivalent of asking, Have you ever read any 
Shakespeare? In the same vein, Walter Isaacson, president of the Aspen Institute, has 
observed that ﬁscientific illiteracy is sometimes worn as a badge of pride. Most educated 
people would be ashamed to admit they didn™t know the difference between Hamlet and 
King Lear, but they might jovially brag that they don™t know a gene from a chromosome 
or relativity theory from the uncertainty principle.ﬂ Admittedly, not everyone 
needs to be 
a rocket scientist (most of them, incidentally, are engineers, not scientists!), but everyone 
will need at least to be functional in using basic mathematics and science and as familiar 
with a computer as their parents were with an automobile. 
Engineers and scientists are, admittedly, not always particularly helpful in making that 
necessity a reality. Software programmers are notorious in this regard, having developed 
an entire ﬁlanguage spaceﬂ of their own, speaking whole sentences without using anything 
but acronyms. In fact, most engineers don™t even know what words many of the common 
engineering acronyms they use, such as ﬁlaserﬂ and ﬁradar,ﬂ represent. Engineers design 
computers so that often we must click on ﬁ
startﬂ to turn them 
off. We must press the ﬁ
All Onﬂ button to 
turn off our television set remotely. I adhere to the principle that normal 
people believe ﬁif it ain™t broke, don™t fix it,ﬂ whereas engineers believe ﬁif it ain™t broke, 
it doesn™t have enough functions yet.ﬂ Whatever the case, this is life in the fast lane, the 
only lane in the world in which we live, and those who cannot keep up seem destined to 
become road-kill on the information highway.
Despite the unprecedented explosion of scientific knowledge that has occurred in 
recent decades and its pervasive impact on our lives, a 2004 National Science Board sur
-vey revealed that almost 30% of America™s adults do not know that Earth revolves around 
the sun, 22% do not know that the center of Earth is very hot, and over half do not know 
that electrons are smaller than atoms. Only half the population is aware that dinosaurs 
and humans never coexisted. Another poll indicated that at least 25% of American adults 
believe in astrologyŠno doubt more than believe in the principles of astronomy. And, 
according to a NASA survey, fully 15% of America™s adults do not believe that humans 
have gone to the moon. 
The not-too-astounding conclusion of the National Academies competitiveness study 
is that in a knowledge age we will need people with knowledge. And we will need a few 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43
people with extraordinary knowledge, particularly in science and engineering. Nobel lau
-reate Julius Axelrod was probably guilty of understatement when he observed that ﬁ99% 
of the discoveries are made by 1% of the scientists.ﬂ It would seem that one cannot make 
up for the lack of an Einstein with legions of less-capable scientists. 
But the trends in America™s scientific and engineering workforce are not 
encouraging:
Ł During the past 2 decades, part of an era that has been described as science 
and engineering™s greatest period of accomplishment, the numbers of engineers, 
mathematicians, physical scientists, and geoscientists graduating with bachelor™s 
degrees in the United States have declined by 18%. The proportion of university 
students achieving bachelor™s degrees in these fields has declined by almost 40% 
during that time.
Ł Almost twice as many bachelor™s degrees were awarded in physics the year 
before Sputnik, deemed a time of dangerous educational neglect, as last year. 
Ł The number of engineering doctorates awarded by US universities to US citizens 
dropped by 23% in the past decade.
Ł In 2002, Asian countries as a whole awarded 636,000 first engineering degrees, 
European countries awarded 370,000, and North America awarded 122,000.
Ł The US share of the global output of doctorates in science and engineering 
declined from 52% in 1986 to 22% in 2003.
Ł The United States ranks 17th among developed nations in the proportion of 
college students receiving degrees in science or engineering, a fall from third 
place three decades ago. It ranks 26th in the proportion receiving undergraduate 
degrees in mathematics. 
Ł The share of doctoral degrees awarded by US universities in science, engineering, 
technology, and mathematics to US citizens dropped from 65% in 1987 to 53% 
in 2005 (although the composition of this group was not uniformŠfor example, 
84% of the degrees in psychology go to US citizens).
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
Ł In a recent contest of college software programmers, only two US universities™ 
teams were in the top dozen finishers. Until the past few years, US universities 
dominated the demanding test.
Ł Fewer than 15% of US high-school graduates have sufficient mathematics and 
science credentials to even begin pursuing an engineering degree.
Ł There are more temporary residents than US citizens enrolled in graduate-level 
information-technology pursuits in US universities.
Ł Since 1982, a period during which the cost of living increased by 95%, the net 
cost of higher education (base cost minus grant aid) increased by 375%Ševen 
outstripping the increase in the cost of medical care (223%).
Ł According to Department of Education statistics, the United States is graduating 
more visual-arts and performing-arts majors than engineers.
Ł The US ranks eighth in the fraction of its citizens obtaining college degrees (in 
all fields).Ł According to the National Bureau of Statistics of China, the number of students 
enrolled in higher education in China at the graduate and undergraduate levels 
each increased by a 
factor of 5 over the most recent decade.
Ł Although the United States ranks fifth among 27 developed nations in the propor
-tion of college-age youth who enter college, it ranks 16th in the fraction of those 
who complete college (with a bachelor™s degree or equivalent).
Ł According to Nobel laureate Richard Smalley, by 2010, 90% of all scientists and 
engineers with PhDs will be living in Asia.
Ł China graduates more English-speaking engineers than the United States.
Estimates of the numbers of various types of engineers being produced in China vary 
widely. One apparently conservative estimate states that in 2003 China graduated about 
350,000 engineers, including computer scientists and information technologists, with 
4-year degrees, and the United States about 140,000. If one considers only traditional 
engineering degrees, the comparison becomes about 250,000 vs 60,000. Similarly, China 
graduated 290,000 students with 3-year degrees (including computer scientists and infor
-Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45
mation technologists), and the United States about 85,000 with 
either 2- or 3-year degrees. 
According to Adnan Akay using data from the National Science Foundation, ﬁThe number 
of new PhD graduates in engineering in the US between 1983 and 2003 increased by 
89%ﬂ (with most of the increase being foreign students) ﬁwhile in Japan the increase was 
204%, in South Korea 1858% and in Taiwan 4586%. The number of engineering PhD 
graduates in China increased 306% in only eight years.ﬂ
Such comparisons are difficult to derive because of fundamental differences in edu
-cational systems in various countries around the world. For example, is an engineer who 
studied 3 years for 11 months each year less of an engineer than one who studied 4 years 
for 8 months each year? Most US universities™ academic year for classes comprises only 
about half the weeks in a calendar year. Debating the nuances of the issue seems to offer 
about as much enlightenment as arguing how many engineers can dance on the head of 
a pin. But the forest seems abundantly clear, if not each individual tree.
Comparative data on the combination of science 
and engineering degrees are even 
more uncertain. 
The Economist
 reports that India graduated 690,000 scientists and engi
-neers of all types while China produced 520,000 and the United States 420,000. By any 
measure, America™s position is eroding rapidly. The operative question is, What will be 
the end state? Speaking to a group of political leaders in our nation™s capital, Jeff Immelt, 
CEO of General Electric, shared his opinion on the topic: ﬁWe had more sports-exercise 
majors graduate than electrical engineering graduates last year. If you want to become the 
massage capital of the world, you™re well on your way.ﬂ 
Punctuating that perspective, China™s President Hu, speaking of the role of technology, 
recently stated that ﬁthe worldwide competition of overall national strength is actually a 
competition for talents, especially for innovative talents.ﬂ 
The supply of scientists and engineers does not affect only the competitiveness of 
acknowledged high-technology companies, such as Intel, Merck, and AOL. Consider the 
words attributed in the Forbes CEO Forum to Fred Smith, CEO of FedEx: ﬁAs FedEx grew, 
it had to become a technology company as much as a transport company.ﬂ Also consider 
Procter & Gamble, perhaps best known for its diapers, soap, and toothpaste. Two of the 
most recent CEOs of that company have each described the firm as an R&D company, and 
its head of R&D has publicly stated that over the next 5 years, three-fourths of the firm™s 
projected growth depends on advances in science and engineering. It has been amply 
demonstrated that if a firm loses its lead in innovation, it can lose market share in diapers 
just as fast as in jet engines.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
Given the immense population disparities among nations, America cannot reasonably 
hope to produce the same number of engineers as, say, China or India. Nor does it need 
to do so. What is needed is not more engineers capable of performing relatively routine 
engineering functionsŠthose jobs have already been commoditized and will continue 
to move abroadŠbut more engineers capable of creative, innovative thinking, engineers 
who can challenge the status quo and ﬁsee around corners,ﬂ engineers who are entre
-preneurs, and engineers whose ideas are bounded only by a solid understanding of the 
fundamental physical laws of nature. 
The balance of power in science and engineering can tip rapidly. Craig Barrett, 
chairman of Intel Corp., has pointed out that 90% of the products that his firm ships on 
December 31 generally did not even exist on January 1 of the same year, and the pace 
of innovation continues to increase. It took 38 years to install indoor toilets in half of 
America™s homes, 30 years to electrify half the homes, 25 years to place radios in a cor
-responding share, 7 years for television, and so on.
It is not difficult to convince me, as but one person, of the speed at which technol
-ogy advances. I began my career using a slide ruleŠthree sticks of wood and two pieces 
of glassŠto perform engineering calculations, the middle of my career was punctuated 
by the landing of 12 of my friends on the moon, and the final phase of my career was 
shaped by something called the Internet. Yet nowhere in my experience have I observed 
anything approaching the revolutionary change that has taken place in much of China 
since the first of my visits to that country in the late 1970s. At that time, just 30 years ago, 
all adultsŠmale and female alikeŠwore the obligatory ﬁMao suits.ﬂ Hotels were few, 
cars and motorbikes were rare, bicycles seemingly everywhere, and the appearance of 
a Caucasian was cause for the gathering of large and curious crowds, particularly if the 
visitor happened to be carrying a Polaroid camera. Research laboratories were populated 
with primitive Soviet-style hand-me-down equipment; ﬁcleanﬂ rooms had exposed con
-crete floors. To say that all that has changed would be an extreme understatement. 
There are, of course, the ﬁsoftﬂŠyet importantŠaspects of the science and engineer
-ing workforce issue: the social aspects. In one recent survey, when young Americans 
were asked whether they associated scientists with several pejorative terms provided by 
the pollsters, 70% of the respondents advised that they did. Geoffrey Orsak, of Southern 
Methodist University has written that ﬁit is a sad reality that other young students from 
across the globe are clamoring to be admitted into engineering schools, yet US students 
who spend much of their day talking on cell phones created by engineers, driving cars 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47
designed by engineers, and surfing the Internet made faster and more engaging by engi
-neers, are passing [the profession] for other opportunities.ﬂ
The attractivenessŠor, more precisely, the unattractivenessŠof a career in science 
or engineering, at least as seen through the eyes of much of America™s youth, becomes 
evident when one examines trends in graduation statistics. The number of traditional 
bachelor of engineering degrees (excluding computer science) awarded by US universities 
each year has, as already noted, declined by 18% over the past 20 years. And the number 
of doctorates in engineering awarded to US citizens by US universities has declined by 
23% in the past decade alone. In contrast, over the most recent 2 decades, the number 
of law degrees granted each year by US law schools has 
increased by over 20% and the 
number of master™s degrees in business administration has increased by 108%. In absolute 
terms, the most recent data available from America™s universities show nearly 44,000 stu
-dents receiving law degrees, nearly 140,000 receiving MBA™s, and over 64,000 receiving 
bachelor™s
 of science in engineering and 6,400 receiving PhDs in engineering (of whom 
33% are US citizens). In other terms, counting only US citizens, for every new (PhD) engi
-neering researcher, the nation produces about one (PhD) physical scientist, 18 lawyers, 
and 50 MBAs. The implicit strategy seems to be to sue ourselves to prosperity, or perhaps 
to do so through 
financial ﬁengineering.ﬂ
In many countries, particularly developing countries, young people are eager to 
advance their lives through careers in science or engineering. These professions are 
viewed as ultraprestigious and, as has been the case in the United States, as entry profes
-sions for students who are in the first generation in their family to attend college (as was 
the case for me). In South Korea, 38% of undergraduates receive their undergraduate 
degrees in the natural sciences or engineering. In France, the corresponding figure is 47%; 
in China, 50% (the National Intelligence Council reports the figure for China to be 64%.); 
in Russia, 31%; in Singapore, 67%; and in the United States, 
15%. Correspondingly, of 
international graduate students attending US universities, about 
70% are majoring in engi
-neering, physical science, life science, social science, or business.
In recent years, the number of US high-school students who expressed an interest in 
becoming scientists or engineers dropped from 36% to 6%. Today, fewer than 2% of US 
high-school graduates eventually receive engineering degrees from US universities (and 
very few study these fields abroad). In the case of women and minorities, the correspond
-ing proportions are each less than 1%.
Craig Mundie, Microsoft™s chief research and strategy officer, states that ﬁif you ask 
most [US] kids when they™re really young, what do you want to be, they™re more likely to 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
tell you they want to be Tiger Woods or Britney Spears . . . than a scientist or engineer. 
When you go to China and ask that question, they actually answer Bill Gates.ﬂ And Bill 
Gates himself warns, ﬁWe simply cannot sustain an economy based on innovation unless 
our citizens are educated in mathematics, science, and engineering.ﬂ It might be noted 
that his cause was not aided by a recent full-page article in 
The Washington Post
 on how 
to get good grades in college. Number 2 on the list was ﬁDon™t major in engineering.ﬂ 
According to 
The Post
, college success ﬁdoes not correlateﬂ with ﬁpicking unusually 
demanding and precision-loving majors, particularly engineering, with exams that require 
the exact answer and not some lively written analysis of why exactitude is no longer appli
-cable in a post-modern age.ﬂ 
In the United States, many engineers, including me, refer to 
themselves
, actually 
rather proudly, as ﬁgeeksﬂ or ﬁnerds.ﬂ (Although most of us probably privately envy astro
-physicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, a giant of both mind and body, who declares that in high 
school ﬁI was a nerd who could kick your butt!ﬂ) As was once said, ﬁBe nice to nerds. 
Chances are one day you™ll end up working for one!ﬂ In a brief moment of imagined gran
-deur, I once proposed creating a television series called ﬁL.A. Engineer.ﬂ Astronaut Neil 
Armstrong describes himself as ﬁa white-socks, pocket protector, nerdy engineer.ﬂ Most US 
youths can™t name a single Nobel laureate (in 
any
 field), but they know who Snoop Dogg 
and Allen Iverson are. Similarly, most Americans have no idea who Bob Noyce or Jack 
Kilby or Bob Kahn is, even though these people arguably changed the lives of Americans 
as much as virtually anyone who lived during the past century. When a Harris poll asked 
Americans to name a living scientist, virtually no one was able to do so. 
Part of this unfamiliarity probably stems from the fact that as they pursue their primary 
and secondary education, few American youths ever come into contact with a practicing 
engineer or scientist. It is indicative of that local nonprominence that a few years ago at 
a meeting of American university presidents and the presidents of seven Chinese universi
-ties, the US representatives were a Renaissance scholar, an economist, a political scientist, 
a linguist, a lawyer, and a mechanical engineer, and the Chinese delegation constituted of 
six physicists and an engineer.
George Heilmeier, a former director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), recently wrote that when he visits Russia he especially likes to go to the 
movies. ﬁIn Russia,ﬂ he explains, ﬁthe engineer always gets the girl!ﬂ 
Therein lies yet another aspect of the problem: women receive only 20% of the 
engineering bachelor™s degrees and 17% of the engineering doctorates awarded by US 
universities. Nearly half the nation™s high-school physics students are female, yet women 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49
make up only 18% of doctorate recipients in physics. Women constitute 46% of the US 
workforce, but only 23% of the science and engineering workforce. Members of under
-represented minority groups receive disproportionately smaller shares of science and engi
-neering degrees. For example, blacks and Hispanics, each making up about 12% of the 
total US population, each receive fewer than 5% of the bachelor™s degrees and doctorates 
awarded in those fields (recently there were encouraging signs of an up-turn). 
The overall record reflects a serious loss of potential talent in a nation that is strug
-gling to compete with much more populous nations in an intense global marketplace. 
Furthermore, the tendency of the above groups to avoid science and engineering pursuits 
will become an even greater handicap in the future in that blacks and Hispanics consti
-tute an increasing fraction of America™s population and women an increasing fraction of 
America™s (overall) college graduates. In 1970, 24% fewer women than men received 
bachelor™s degrees; today, 35% 
more women than men receive such degrees. 
In fact, the 
number of white male US citizens receiving PhDs in engineering has declined by about 
40% in three decades.
To a great extent, America has been living off foreign-born talent in science and engi
-neering for many years. For example, during the most recent 15-year period, over one-third 
of US scientists who received Nobel prizes were foreign-born. One-fourth of the degreed 
professionals in the entire US science and engineering workforce are foreign-born. Of the 
PhDs in the US science and engineering workforce, 38% are foreign-born. Significantly, 
of those under 45 years old, 52% are foreign-born. Of engineering doctorates from US 
universities, 67% are granted to non-US citizens, and 40% of US engineering faculties are 
foreign-born. Of America™s science and technology ﬁpostdocs,ﬂ 58% are not US citizens. 
Sixty percent of the finalists at a recent Intel Science Talent Search were immigrants or the 
children of immigrantsŠand 46% of the members of the US physics team and 65% of the 
top US scorers in the mathematics Olympiad were the children of immigrants.
The following list of surnames of speakers r
epresenting US universities
 at a recent 
(2003) communications conference is suggestive of the contribution of immigrants and the 
families of immigrants to America™s science community: Farhaug-Boroujeny, Zhou, Blum, 
Deng, Hu, Seyedi, Poor, Kuo, Cioffi, Ding, Wang, Zaman, Zhang, Song, Alouini, Li, Liang, 
Han, Wiegandt, Hwang, Negi, Goldsmith, Larsson, Giannakis, Huang, Haimovich, Reed, 
Saulnier, Wu, Toumkakaris, Gardan, Wang, Lin, Papandreou-Suppappola, Zhang, Xia, 
Arora, Ambati, Zhu, Liu, Li, Nassar, Zekavat, Kang, Gamal, Qin, Zhang, Garcia-Frias, Yu, 
Li, Mitra, Yu, Ouzzif, Li, Mumtaz, Yan, Digham, Zhang, Tureli, Roy, Kang, Wu, Toumkis, 
and Poovendran.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50
The year 2005 (the most recent year for which data are available) saw a moderate 
overall increase in doctorates awarded in science and engineering by US universities; 
however, the 1-year gain was almost entirely attributable to non-US citizens. A Nobel 
laureate at one major university told me that of 50 applications by students to conduct 
graduate research in his laboratory, 49 came from China. Only one came from the United 
States. Not only are we dependent on the rest of the world for energy (two-thirds of our 
petroleum comes from abroad) and for financial capital (70% of the world™s surplus sav
-ings now comes to the United States), we are also becoming dependent on others for our 
brains. Reflecting that fact, Sudha Ramachandran, writing in 
Asia Times
, warns that ﬁthe 
US will have to accept that with Americans lagging behind in tech skills, its economy 
doesn™t just need immigrant brain power, it is dependent on it.ﬂ
Tom Friedman writes about his attendance at Rensselaer™s 2007 graduation: ﬁThe for
-eign names kept comingŠ‚Hong Lu, Xu Xie, Tao Yuan, Fu Tang™ŠI thought that the entire 
class of doctoral students in physics were going to be Chinese, until ‚Paul Shane Morrow™ 
saved the day. . . .My complaint . . . was that there wasn™t someone from the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service standing [there] stapling green cards to the diplomas of each 
of these foreign-born PhDs.ﬂ In fact, it can be responsibly argued that America™s scientific 
enterprise would virtually cease to function without the foreign-born talent that makes up 
such a crucial part of it. 
Translating the new scientific knowledge that this enterprise generates into products 
and jobs is the province of innovation and entrepreneurship, and in this realm immigrants 
have made equally great contributions. Examples over the years range from steel magnate 
Andrew Carnegie (Scotland) and publisher Joseph Pulitzer (Hungary) to Yahoo! cofounder 
Jerry Yang (Taiwan), Sun Microsystems cofounders Andreas Bechtolsheim (Germany) and 
Vinod Khosla (India), eBay founder Pierre Omidyar (France), Intel founder Andy Grove 
(Hungary), and Sergey Brin (Russia), who cofounded Google. Immigrants have created 
25% of all venture-backed public firms in the United States and 40% of those in the high-
technology manufacturing industry, although legal immigrants make up only 9% of the 
total US population. A recent survey conducted at Duke University shows that immigrants 
from India and China (mainland and Taiwan) alone were key founders of almost 30% of 
all Silicon Valley startups. This research, which covers the 1995-2005 period, shows that 
52% of Silicon Valley startups were formed by immigrants. The predominant group in 
the earlier period was Chinese; during the latter period, Indians were most prominent. A 
further study conducted at the University of Colorado indicates that for every 100 foreign 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51
students who receive science or engineering doctorates at US universities, 62 future patent 
applications result. 
ﬁYahoo! would not be an American company today if the United States had not wel
-comed my family and me almost 30 years ago,ﬂ says Jerry Yang.
Foreign applications to US graduate schools plummeted after 9/11, in part because of 
the implementation of more stringent visa controls, in part because of growing prosperity 
elsewhere in the world, and in part because of a perceived ﬁless welcomingﬂ America. 
With regard to the former, 
Newsweek™s
 Fareed Zakaria writes that ﬁevery visa officer today 
lives in fear that he will let in the next Mohammad Atta. As a result, he is probably keeping 
out the next Bill Gates.ﬂ Zakaria might have added Wernher von Braun, Edward Teller, and 
Albert Einstein, to name but a few others. 
Last year saw a 13% rebound in student and exchange visas granted as visa processes 
were modified, but applications by foreign students to US universities are still below the 
level of 3 years ago and enrollments from critical countries, such as India and Japan, 
continue to decline. David Heenan, the author of 
Flight Capital
, calculates that several 
hundred foreign-born professionals 
leave
 the United States every day. In the case of China, 
returnees to their native country are referred to as ﬁsea turtlesﬂ and make up a remark
-able 81% of the membership of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. In some fields, such as 
particle physics, international meetings are now rarely held in the United States, because 
of uncertainties and delays in obtaining visas. Verne Harnish, the founder of Gazelles, 
an executive advisory firm for high-growth companies, is reported in 
Fortune
 as saying, 
ﬁWe™re just not friendly any more.ﬂ
Viewed from the perspective of the bright young foreign student, growing prosper
-ity elsewhere in the world has opened a whole realm of possibility: ﬁinnovation without 
emigration.ﬂ Opportunities for meaningful employment, as well as a high quality educa
-tion, are markedly increasing in many parts of the world. At a recent National Academy 
of Engineering workshop, Theodore Rappaport, of the University of Texas, reported that 
of the 57 major research initiatives recently affecting the telecommunication field, all but 
five originated outside the United States. He believes that as a result US students have lost 
interest in entering graduate school to pursue research in the field. As though to punctuate 
his observation, CISCO recently announced that in the next 3 years it would be moving 
20% of the positions held by its senior managers in Silicon Valley to Bangalore. Perhaps 
most astonishing, when asked in spring 2005 ﬁWhat is the most attractive place in the 
world in which to lead a good life?,ﬂ respondents in only one of the 16 countries polled 
answered ﬁthe United States.ﬂ That represents a truly profound shift from views held dur
-ing most of the prior century. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
Many foreign countries are, in fact, intensifying their efforts to attract bright young 
international students. The Chinese Vice Minister of Education announced China™s plan to 
provide scholarships for 11,000 foreign students in 2007 to augment the 140,000 inter
-national students said already to be studying in China. Singapore has indicated its goal to 
increase its foreign student enrollment from 70,000 in 2006 to 150,000 by 2012. Malaysia 
intends to boost the foreign student population in its universities from 70,000 in 2006 to 
100,000 by 2010.
 Further complicating America™s increasingly tenuous competitiveness position, 
Congress a few years ago cut the annual allotment of visas for people with critical skills 
by two-thirds, from 195,000 down to 65,000, that is, to 0.02% of the US population. 
Meanwhile, an estimated 7-12 million people reside in the US illegally, and 50,000 immi
-grants arrive each year by virtue of a purely random drawing. In 2007, the fiscal year visa 
quota for immigrants with critical skills was filled 5 months before the fiscal year even 
began.Perhaps the greatest irony of all is that to obtain a student visa to enter the United 
States, a foreign national must 
promise to return home after receiving his or her degree
Šnot infrequently to help some foreign employer compete against US firms. For candidates 
seeking a US student visa to state that they wish to study in the United States so that they 
can remain in America and start a firm that employs US citizens is a sure ticket to some
-where else. That is a consequence of Section 214(b) of the Immigration Act of 1952Š
(un)popularly known as the ﬁgo-away clauseﬂŠwhich specifies that visitors must prove to 
the satisfaction of a US consular official that they will 
not remain in the United States after 
they obtain their degrees from US universitiesŠusually on scholarships originally funded 
by US corporations or private citizens.
Chad Holliday, the CEO of DuPont, offers a perspective that is not atypical of American 
business as a whole: ﬁIf the US doesn™t get its act together,ﬂ he warns, ﬁDuPont is going 
to go to the countries that do.ﬂ Jim Jarrett, vice president of Intel, echoes that sentiment: 
ﬁWe go to where the smart people are and there are smart people all around the world.ﬂ 
And it is not only the business community that is taking such a stance. US investors are 
buying foreign stocks at an unprecedented rate, and US consumers are purchasing 40% of 
their cars from Asian-based companies. In one recent quarter, Toyota sold more cars than 
Ford in the United States. Even the new CEO of Ford drove a Japanese car . . . until he 
became CEO of Ford! Unions decry management™s decisions to move plants abroad, but 
their members generally make purchases and investments on the basis of their personal 
judgment of best value, not country of origin.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53
Political observer Norm Ornstein writes in 
Roll Call
, ﬁA few years back I helped super
-vise a project to create a comprehensive software package for presidential [appointee] 
nominees to use to fill out all the disclosure and conflict-of-interest forms. The American 
software company doing the work could not complete it, and the only place we could 
go to get it done well and on time was Mumbai. The software engineers there did a great 
jobŠand ended up knowing more about the intricacies of the American executive branch 
nomination and confirmation process than most scholars who teach about it.ﬂ
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54


It will be necessary to have more and better scientists and engineers, but that alone 
will not be sufficient to ensure America™s ability to compete in the 21st century. 
Funds must be available to underwrite the efforts of scientists and engineers who 
decide to pursue careers seeking the new knowledge that in turn creates new jobs. 
The funds must provide for modern laboratories and instrumentation and must sup
-port the conduct of research itself. As President Bush observed, ﬁIt™s research that will keep 
the United States on the cutting edge.ﬂ 
Although the research establishment in America remains extremely productive, ample 
warning signs are to be found in considering the future. For example, 
Ł In 2004, federal funding of research in the physical sciences as a fraction of GDP 
was 54% less than in 1970. In engineering, it was 51% less.
Ł By the end of 2007, China and India will account for 31% of the global R&D staff, 
up from 19% as recently as 2004.
Ł The share of US post-doctoral scientists and engineers who are temporary resi
-dents has grown from 37% to 59% in two decades.
Ł In 2005, only four American companies were among the top 10 in receiving US 
patents.Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55
Ł The National Intelligence Council reports that in 2003 ﬁforeigners contributed 37 
percent of the research papers in 
Science, 55 percent in the 
Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, and 71 percent in the journals of the American Physical Society.ﬂ
Ł For the first time, the world™s most powerful particle accelerator does not reside 
in the United States; this virtually ensures that the next round of breakthroughs in this fundamental discipline will originate abroad.
Ł In the recent ranking by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), the United States is in 22nd place in the fraction of GDP 
devoted to nondefense research.
Ł Federal annual investment in research in the physical sciences, mathematics, and 
engineering combined is equal to the 
increase in US health care costs experi
-enced every 6 weeks.
The National Science Foundation (NSF) has indicated that it can now fund only one 
in five research proposals that it receives, the vast majority of which are deemed meritori
-ous by peer reviewers. As funds have become more scarce, peer reviewers have been less 
inclined to allocate grants to younger researchers as opposed to more senior researchers 
with ﬁsafeﬂ track records, even though history shows convincingly that the most signifi
-cant scientific advances have been attributable disproportionately to younger researchers 
pursuing cutting-edge, high-risk science. The median age for first grants to individual 
researchers by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has recently reached 42 years, and it 
should not go unnoticed that even greater risk aversion has evolved among many of those 
who fund research on behalf of US industry. 
In contrast with the deteriorating situation in the physical sciences and engineer
-ing, America has in recent years made a substantial investment in the biologic sciences, 
doubling the federal budget for health-related research at NIH over a 5-year period. The 
impact of the increase in investment in understanding the causes and cures of diseases 
has been remarkable. However, this gain was eroded as inflation ate away at flat or even 
declining budgets in the years that followed the buildupŠa trend that was reversed once 
again in the current year™s federal budget. It is, of course, of the utmost importance that 
increases in the funding of the physical sciences are not accomplished at the expense of 
investment in the biologic sciences. It is noteworthy in this regard that advances in the bio
-logic sciences, the physical sciences, and engineering have often been highly interdepen
-dent, and they are increasingly so. For example, it is said that the human genome could 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
not have been sequenced without the benefit of progress in computers and robotics, and 
modern medical imaging would not have been possible without advances in computers 
and mathematics. Correspondingly, promising new fuels could not have become serious 
candidate energy sources without accomplishments in biology and agriculture.
One might argue that investment in research should be the province of industry 
because industry is often a principal beneficiary of research and its direct descendant, 
innovation. In fact, during the past 40 years, as the fraction of the nation™s R&D spending 
provided by the government steadily declined from two-thirds to one-third, industry made 
up the difference, increasing its share of the total investment from one-third to two-thirds. 
Significantly, however, the composition of industry™s effort changed markedly during this 
period: development, not research, became industry™s priority. Although overall federal 
investment in research in constant dollars has been increasing, the growth has almost 
entirely been focused on the life sciences. 
There are several reasons for industry™s perhaps counterintuitive behavior. First, there 
is the inherent possibility that an investment in research may produce no new knowledge 
at all; research is a risky business. One study in information technology concluded that 
only one new research ﬁideaﬂ in 500,000 results in a commercially profitable product. 
Furthermore, even when an effort is successful, there may be uncertainty as to the appli
-cability of a particular research project to a firm™s own competence and business interests. 
For example, while working in the composites laboratory of an aerospace companyŠthe 
same firm at which I was later employedŠHoward Head conceived the idea for the skis 
and tennis racquets produced by the firm that now bears his name. The return to society 
as a whole from investment in research often far exceeds the rewards to the corporate 
underwriter or performer of an individual piece of research. 
In addition to the implicit riskiness and uncertain applicability of investment in basic 
research, there is always the matter of its long-term nature, not uncommonly involving 
a decade or more of effort before results can be introduced into the marketplace. That 
constitutes a significant deterrent to investment by industry, which tends to have a ﬁnext-
quarterﬂ focus. 
One might ask, Isn™t that short-sighted? The answer, of course, is yes; it is very short-
sighted. But before condemning industry, consider the following incident that occurred 
a few years ago at the company where I was employed. Motivated by an unusually large 
stable of highly promising research opportunities, the company™s management conducted 
a briefing for Wall Street analysts to inform them of a planned increase in investment in 
research and the promise this would offer for the company™s future growth and profitabil
-Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57
ity. At the end of the briefing by the company™s president, most members of the audience 
ran from the room and sold the firm™s stock. The company™s share price dropped by 11% 
during the next few days, then gradually declined for nearly 2 years before the tide could 
be stemmed. When, shortly after the debacle on Wall Street, as the event became known 
in the company™s research laboratories and executive suite, I asked one of the attendees 
at the briefing what had been said that was wrong, the analyst impatiently responded, 
ﬁYou should know that it takes 10 or 15 years for research to pay off . . . if it does at all. 
Your average shareholder owns your stock for about 18 months, doesn™t care what hap
-pens to you 10 or 15 years from now, and certainly doesn™t want to pay for it. In fact, by 
that time the investor will probably own one of your competitors™ shares and would be 
just as happy if your firm were 
not competitive.ﬂ The analyst then administered the coup 
de grâce, explaining, ﬁOur firm does not invest in companies with such short-sighted 
management.ﬂ
Is that one example of excessive focus on short-term profits at the expense of long-
term substantive gains in the provision of goods and services perhaps simply an anomaly? 
To obtain insight into the answer to that question, consider a result of a survey by the 
National Bureau of Economic Research: 80% of the senior financial executives questioned 
said they would be willing to forgo funding R&D to meet their public projections of near-
term profitability. Then consider that the outstanding value of derivative contracts world
-wide recently reached 8 times the value of all the homes and land in the United States 
and over 5 times the combined yearly output of all the world™s nations. Patience does not 
seem to rank highly on the list of attributes of today™s investors, nor does making money 
ﬁthe old-fashioned way.ﬂ 
Margaret Thatcher eloquently summarized the significance, as well as complexities, 
of basic research in her remarks on the overall topic of innovation: 
Although basic science can have colossal economic rewards, they are totally unpredict
-able. And therefore the rewards cannot be judged by immediate results. Nevertheless, 
the value of Faraday™s work today must be higher than the capitalization of all shares on 
the stock exchange. . . . The greatest economic benefits of scientific research have always 
resulted from advances in fundamental knowledge rather than the search for specific 
applications. . . . Transistors were not discovered by the entertainment industry . . . but 
by people working on wave mechanics and solid state physics. [Nuclear energy] was not 
discovered by oil companies with large budgets seeking alternative forms of energy, but by 
scientists like Einstein and Rutherford.
It has long been recognized that pursuits that are important to the public interest, 
but have disproportionately large societal returns as opposed to individual returns, often 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
of necessity become the province of government. But in the case addressed herein, US 
federal support of research in the physical sciences, mathematics, and engineeringŠwhen 
adjusted for inflationŠhas been stagnant for 2 decades. As already noted, as a percent
-age of GDP, federal investment in research in the physical sciences and engineering has 
been reduced by more than half since 1970. The federal government not only will need 
to increase its investment in research but also will need to find a way to forge closer ties 
among industry, academe, and government. That will require working arrangements to 
overcome such inherent barriers to cooperation as industry™s 3-month rhythm (until the 
next quarterly report) vs academe™s 6- or 8-year operating time constant (the period typi
-cally required to qualify for a PhD); academe™s culture of ﬁpublish or perishﬂ vs industry™s 
ﬁpublish and perishﬂ mentality; and government™s periodic attacks on both academe and 
industry generally concerning overhead ceilings, visa policy, and antitrust matters, the lat
-ter including such assaults as the one courageously and successfully challenged in court 
by MIT several years ago.
Even when undertaking all reasonable steps to remain competitive in science and tech
-nology, it is unlikely that on the flat earth any nation, even one as wealthy as the United 
States, can maintain a position of such broad prowess as the United States has enjoyed 
in recent decades. A few areas can undoubtedly be singled out in which to seek promi
-nence, more areas can be pursued wherein a nation can be a ﬁfast followerﬂ in applying 
new knowledge, and still more will simply have to be monitored or even forgone. That 
is, choices must be madeŠand these will be difficult choices bearing significant conse
-quences. Those making such decisions will no doubt seem to face the sort of dilemma that 
comedian Woody Allen once described in the following terms: ﬁMore than any other time 
in history, [we] face a crossroads. One path leads to despair and utter hopelessness. The 
other, to total extinction. Let us pray we have the wisdom to choose correctly!ﬂ 
The decline in support of basic research in America has been particularly pronounced 
in the case of the Department of Defense (DOD), an organization that for the latter half 
of the 20th century was arguably the pivotal underwriter of basic research and innovation 
in the nation. Examples of commercial products stemming from research investment by 
DOD are as varied as the Internet, freeze-dried foods, weather satellites, GPS, communi
-cation satellites, and nuclear power. But during the past 30 years, the fraction of overall 
defense research, development, test, and evaluation funds devoted to science and tech
-nology has dropped, from 20% to 13%. Real funding of basic research by DOD has been 
essentially flat for 30 years in spite of the growing overall defense budget and the grow
-ing importance of technology to national security. Its science and engineering workforce 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59
declined from 45,000 to 28,000 during the 1990s alone, according to testimony before 
Congress by DOD officials.
Competitiveness problems are exacerbated when national security is addressedŠa 
realm wherein scientific and engineering leadershipŠor lack of leadershipŠcan have 
profound consequences. President Bush, echoing the sentiments of several presidents 
speaking of their own eras, noted that ﬁscience and technology have never been more 
important to the defense of the nation and the health of the economy.ﬂ In the aerospace 
industry, most engineers and scientists require security clearances, the granting of which 
generally demands US citizenship. During my service as CEO of the Lockheed Martin 
Corporation, that firm employed over 80,000 scientists and engineers. The defense estab
-lishment cannot simply outsource its software to a shop somewhere in Bangalore, as many 
commercial firms can and do. Executives at several US government organizations have 
told me that whereas they used to go to US universities and companies for information 
about leading-edge technologies, they now find that they increasingly must go abroad. 
The recent century™s most decisive new military capabilitiesŠsuch as the atomic 
bomb, night vision, stealth, digital computers, precision-guided missiles, nuclear propul
-sion, precision geolocation, space surveillance, and the airplaneŠall had their roots in 
new discoveries and innovation.
America™s national security challenge has been complicated by the ongoing transition 
of the nation from a manufacturing economy to a service economy. Today, fully 77% of 
America™s jobs reside in the service sector, which is in general not the arsenal of military 
might. It may be possible to base a prosperous society on a service economy, but a nation 
cannot successfully fight a major conflict purely with a service economy. Armored vehi
-cles, missiles, airplanes, sensors, and communication satellites are still among the instru
-ments of survival and success in modern combat, not the production of reality television 
programs, sports extravaganzas, mass-media exposes, audits, and legal depositions. And 
finally there is the all-important underlying issue that a weakened economy may simply be 
unable to 
afford the resources needed to defend itself and its interests. The Soviet Union 
imploded in trying to provide an immense defense capability with an undernourished 
economy. 
Several years ago, 
before the events of 9/11
, Congress established what became 
known as the Hart-Rudman Commission, of which I was a member, and assigned it the 
task of examining America™s national security needs in the decades ahead and making any 
recommendations deemed appropriate. It was assumed by the mass media and many oth
-ers interested in the effort that the group™s findings would concern the number of air wings, 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60
infantry divisions, and carrier battle groups that the nation should maintain to prevail in 
possible future conflicts. Instead, in its two (sadly prescient) major findings, the bipartisan 
group warned that a major terrorist attack would probably take place on US soil and pro
-duce thousands of casualties, and stated that ﬁthe inadequacies of our system of research 
and educationﬂ pose a threat to national security ﬁgreater than any potential conventional 
war that we might imagine.ﬂ It noted that, ﬁsecond only to a weapon of mass destruction 
detonating in an American city, we can think of nothing more dangerous than a failure to 
manage properly science, technology, and education for the common good.ﬂ
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61


In our hypothetical board room, with the need to decide where to locate a new 
facility, the focus thus far has been on labor costs, the availability and quality of 
human capital, and the creation of knowledge. But other ingredients will affect 
where new plants, offices, and laboratoriesŠand the jobs they provideŠare to be. 
This so-called innovation ecosystem, a combination of factors defining the ﬁinnova
-tion-friendlinessﬂ of a country, plays a large role as managers and boards decide where to 
locate new facilities. 
One such factorŠarguably of declining importanceŠis the proximity of potential 
customers. Between 2012 and 2020, China will pass the United States to become the 
largest consumer market in the world. By 2030 China alone is expected to have more 
middle-income consumers than the entire population of the United States at that time. 
India™s middle class is projected to grow from today™s 50 million citizens to just under 600 
million by 2025.
Another factor affecting the selection of a location for a new business venture has 
traditionally been the availability of investment capital. America has long enjoyed an 
immense advantage. California alone has far more venture capital than any 
nation on 
earth (other than the United States). This is rapidly being neutralized because financial 
capital now crosses porous geopolitical borders literally at the speed of light as it chases 
opportunity. In 2005, for the first time in 20 years, US investors put more new money into 
international stock funds than into US stock funds and did so by a substantial margin. As 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
recently as 6 years ago, only 8% of the money newly invested in US stock funds went 
overseas; now the fraction has reached 77%.
There remain a number of other factors in the US innovation ecosystem that might 
lead firms to locate new facilities elsewhere. For example, 
Ł The US effective corporate tax rate of about 40%, including state taxes, is, accord
-ing to the Tax Foundation, higher than that of all but one other developed nation. 
Exacerbating the problem, most US corporate taxes, unlike those of many other 
nations, apply to 
global earnings. For example, a US firm competing in Ireland 
has imposed on it a 35% net US federal tax rate, whereas an Irish firm pays 
12.5%Šwhich was reduced from 50% as Ireland successfully girded itself for the 
global economic race. Many nations offer ﬁtax holidaysﬂ for a specified period 
when new entities establish themselves within the nations™ borders. In the early 
1990s, the United States ranked first among OECD nations in offering tax incen
-tives for R&D; but by 2004, it had fallen to 17th place. Perhaps the most signifi
-cant factor in this regard is the federal R&D tax credit that requires renewal by 
Congress and the president each year and is therefore unreliable and diminished 
in value to companies addressing the long-term decisions implicit in the conduct 
of R&D.
Ł The US patent system is in many respects antiquated. In the words of Michael 
Splinter, CEO of Applied Materials, Inc., ﬁThose of us who are patenting inven
-tions are becoming hostages to those who are inventing patents. The current sys
-tem is an invitation to litigation.ﬂ It seems that the jobs that our patent system is 
creating are largely for lawyers, not scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs and 
those they serve.
Ł US firms are among the few that directly bear the responsibility for funding major 
portions of the health care received by their employees, their employees™ families, 
and their retirees and their families. That is an admirable social practice, but the 
cost of providing such benefits must be recovered in the prices that the firms charge 
for their products or services. It is not an immaterial cost: General Motors now 
spends more on health care than on steel; Starbucks spends more on health care 
than on coffee. Many executives responding to a recent PriceWaterhouseCoopers 
survey indicated that health-care costs, now 16% of the entire GDP, have had a 
ﬁmajor impactﬂ on the competitiveness of their businesses. The secretary of health 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63
and human services, Mike Leavitt, observes that ﬁthere is simply no place on the 
economic leader-board for a nation that spends a fifth of its domestic product on 
health care.ﬂ
 Ł
 Similar considerations are related to employer-provided pensions. Bethlehem 
Steel in 2001 celebrated its impending 100th birthday by declaring bankruptcy. 
The number of workers that the firm employed during World War II had dropped 
by a 
factor of 27 by the time the company was liquidated in 2004, down to 
11,000. But, the company had over 5 times that many pensioners on the roles still 
drawing benefits from the firm. Similarly, General Motors supports three pension
-ers for every worker now on the payroll. 
Time
 magazine offers the following sum
-mary: ﬁDig through the financial statements of the Detroit Three . . . and you can 
easily conclude that they are money-losing retirement and healthcare organiza
-tions just masquerading as money-losing carmakers.ﬂ But perhaps most troubling 
of all, the lack of portability of most pensions will make them almost irrelevant to 
the needs of the average worker in an increasingly turbulent job market.
Ł Finally, as previously noted, and perhaps most astounding of all, US industry 
consistently spends three times more on litigation than on research. This is in 
part attributable to the malfeasance of some business leaders who abuse their 
fiduciary responsibilities and in part to the actions of some members of the legal 
profession who exploit the vagaries of the judicial system for their personal gain. 
Whatever the cause, the result is clear, and it is not a formula for survival in the 
emerging, intensely competitive world.
It is presumably because of such considerations that only 41% of the global corpora
-tions responding to a recent survey ranked the United States as an ﬁattractiveﬂ location for 
new R&D facilities, compared with 62% for China. This, of course, represents a remark
-able shift. 
Perhaps the most incisive summary to be found, as far as the nation™s competitiveness 
ecosystem is concerned, comes from the 2,500-year-old writings of Aeschylus: 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
So in the Libyan fable it is told
That once an eagle, stricken with a dart,
Said, when he saw the fashion of the shaft,
ﬁWith our own feathers, not by others™ hands,
Are we now smitten.ﬂ 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65
Geologists tell us that some 200 million years ago many of the earth™s 
major continents were joined together in a single ﬁsupercontinentﬂ 
known as Gondwanaland. It included, in part, what is now South 
America, Africa, Australia, Antarctica, Arabia, and the Indian Peninsula. 
Over time, the continents slowly drifted apart, with their influence on 
each other diminishing correspondingly. The last few decades have seemingly brought all 
the continents crashing back together again. A problem encountered with the economy in 
Southeast Asia causes a stock market crash in Europe. 
A precipitous drop in the Chinese 
stock marketŠﬁThe Shanghai SurpriseﬂŠproduces a significant decline in the US Dow 
Jones. 
The devaluation of the Russian ruble brings down the best known hedge fund in 
America. And so it goes in this modern version of Gondwanaland. Tom Friedman™s previ
-ously noted remark that globalization has made Beijing, Bangalore, and Bethesda next 
door neighbors seems to have geologic as well as economic connotations!
It is tempting, especially for people who are disciples of Adam Smith (a group that 
includes myself), simply to dismiss the untidy competitiveness matter that results from 
this drift by saying, ﬁLet market forces solve the problem.ﬂ But, unfortunately, that 
is the problemŠat least from America™s perspective. Indeed, market forces 
are solving the 
problem. They are solving it by moving jobs outside the United States and by reducing 
or limiting compensation and benefits for employees who remain in the US workforce. 
Intel spokesperson Howard High explains: ﬁWe go where the smart people are. Now our 
business operations are two-thirds in the United States and one-third overseas. But that 
ratio will flip over in the next 10 years.ﬂ Following the pattern of many other companies, 
Dell announced in 2006 that it plans to increase its workforce in India by a factor of 2; 
that is, to 20,000, within 3 years. Already, 125 of the US Fortune 500 companies have 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
established research facilities in India, and the R&D boom in China and elsewhere is also 
gathering momentum. 
The irony is that ﬁAmericanﬂ 
companies may well survive, and their owners even 
prosper, but market forces will cause this to be at the expense of America™s 
workers
. In 
such a scenario, America could evolve into a nation comprising a number of extremely 
wealthy shareholders (fully 55% of Finland-based Nokia™s shares are owned by Americans) 
and a few corporate headquarters (at least for a time) mired in an enormous sea of unem
-ployment. That is not a formula for stability, national security, or quality of life for most of 
America™s future citizens. 
Is it already too late? Is the contest, as some critics have suggested, already over? 
Is America™s future now behind it? One observer, 
Electrical Engineering Times
, recently 
provided the following assessment in the introduction to its annual State of the Engineer 
Survey: ﬁThe single, young, energetic, upwardly mobile engineer constantly angling for 
better pay and greener pastures was for decades a Silicon Valley stereotype. But that image 
no longer holds true. The go-getters are now in India.ﬂ
In contrast, the National Academies and others believe that it is not too late, but they 
warn that it is 
getting lateŠvery late. The good news is that we can do something about 
the competitiveness challenge, but only if we act with urgency and perseverance. 
Less than 12 years after being surprised by Sputnik, America mobilized itself and 
placed the first of a dozen humans on the moonŠand brought them all home safely. A 
similarly intense effort will be required if we are to give Americans the opportunity to 
hold high-quality jobs in the future. Other nations have faced serious competitive chal
-lenges and are doing something about them. Finland, Singapore, Portugal, and Ireland 
are prime examples. This past year, Portugal, in its overall environment of severe fiscal 
austerity, increased its investment in science and technology by 60%. In 1987, Ireland™s 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita was 31% below the average of the European 
Union (EU). It was, by almost any measure, among the poorest countries in Europe. In 
fact, 1% of its populationŠincluding some of the youngest and best educated members 
of its citizenryŠwas leaving the country each year in search of opportunity. But by 2003, 
Ireland™s GDP per capita had grown to 36% above the EU average; unemployment had 
fallen from 17% to 4% and young people were immigrating into Ireland from the rest of 
Europe to fill the new jobs being added at a net rate of 4% per year. Economist Dermot 
O™Brien describes this growth as ﬁoff the scale in European terms.ﬂ 
But except for those who 
fail to adapt, this is a race without a finish line, a race that 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67
never ends. A few companies are now beginning to leave Ireland for greener pastures, 
such as Poland and Hungary, and Ireland is already taking steps to strengthen its competi
-tiveness and attract them back. 
How did Ireland do it? The answer is straightforward. They did it the old-fashioned 
way, the way America must do it and used to do it: ﬁGet out and compete.ﬂ The choice is 
straightforward: in the 21st century, a developed nation can either innovate or evaporate. 
It can invest in the future, or it can enjoy the present until the present becomes the past. 
In fact, it is already widely agreed that the key to survival for countries suffering severe 
labor-cost burdens is innovation: being first to acquire new knowledge, being first to cre
-ate new products and services derived from that knowledge, and being first to market new 
products and services. (As used here, 
innovation
 includes entrepreneurship.) With regard 
to the latter activity, even a few weeks can make an immense difference between success 
and failure, so it is all the more important that we not handicap ourselves further with 
unneeded bureaucracy, regulation, and oversight. In some respects, America is doing well 
in that regard, being one of the fastest and least expensive places in the world to start a 
new business. In othersŠsuch as visa processing, product licensing, resolution of judicial 
matters, and export approvalŠit lags behind much of the world.
How does a nation achieve success in innovation in science and technology? There 
are at least four prominent ingredients in the process. The first is to generate a supply 
of brilliant scientists capable of producing new knowledge. The second is to invest suf
-ficient funds to support the research of those scientists. The third is to provide a cadre 
of engineers who have a solid understanding of the fundamental laws of the universe 
yet are capable of the unconstrained, imaginative, creative thought that translates newly 
discovered scientific knowledge into products and services. And the fourth is to create an 
environment that is highly conducive to innovation. The latter, as already noted, includes 
the availability of risk capital, a sound patent policy, a constructive tax policy, and reason
-able liability laws. It also includes a number of less tangible factors. Seven of the latter are 
briefly described below: 
The 
first is an environment that provides researchers and inventors the 
freedom to 
exploreŠan environment that offers creative, inquisitive people the opportunity to pursue 
promising new avenues that may appear unexpectedly in their research and to be reward
-ed for their successes. The classic example at least of the former would be Alexander 
Fleming™s discovery of penicillin. It is said that this enormous contribution to humankind 
was brought about when Fleming, studying bacteria with his microscope, found that one 
of his slides had accidentally become contaminated with mold. He also noticed that 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
bacteria were not growing in the vicinity of the mold. That simple observation led him to 
pursue a new avenue in his investigation, which ultimately resulted in the production of 
penicillin. Had Fleming been working in an environment wherein each moment™s activi
-ties were prescribed and freelance exploration was proscribed, it is quite likely that the 
invention of penicillin would have been left to others at a later time, to the detriment of 
those who were then in need. 
In a similar vein, according to 
Smithsonian magazine, Percy Lebaron Spencer one 
day was standing near an operating magnetron in his radar laboratory at the Raytheon 
Company when he recognized that a candy bar in his pocket was melting. That observa
-tion led to the discovery of the microwave oven. (Apparently, Spencer didn™t stand there 
very long!)
It is important at this point to note the observation of Louis Pasteur that ﬁchance favors 
only the prepared mind.ﬂ
The 
second element is an atmosphere wherein 
disruptive ideas are welcomed
, not 
discouraged or dismissed. When Alexander Graham Bell offered his world-changing 
invention, the telephone, for a fee of $100,000 to the Western Union Company, at that 
time one of the giants on the American corporate scene, the company flatly rejected the 
offer. A memo dated in 1876 was later found in the files of Western Union dismissing the 
proposal on the following grounds: ﬁThis ‚telephone™ has too many shortcomings to be 
seriously considered as a means of communication.ﬂ After all, what could a person with 
a telephone say that couldn™t be said with Morse code? 
It was Darryl F. Zanuck, of the motion picture company 20th Century Fox, who, on 
being exposed to a new device called television, remarked that it ﬁwon™t be able to hold 
any market after six months. People will soon get tired of staring at a plywood box every 
night.ﬂ
In contrast with those examples from the past is the modern semiconductor industry, 
which about every 2 years introduces a whole new generation of integrated circuits that 
largely destroys the market for the existing products. 
Third
 is an environment that is
 tolerant of risk
Šnot irrational, injudicious, intemper
-ate, or ﬁoverly exuberantﬂ risk but rather prudent risk based on considered judgments that 
offer commensurate payoffs. A classic example of the willingness to accept understood 
risks was an advertisement placed in a London newspaper in the early 1900s by Antarctic 
explorer Ernest Shackleton. It read, ﬁMen wanted for hazardous journey. Small wages, bit
-Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69
ter cold, long months of complete darkness. Constant danger. Safe return doubtful. Honor 
and recognition in case of success.ﬂ Inspired by this advertisement, thousands of would-be 
explorers sent applications to join the expedition. 
Fourth
 is an understanding that 
failures must not be unreasonably punished
. Researchers and entrepreneurs must have the freedom to fail. Of course, if failures are 
due to negligence, dishonesty, or any other form of malfeasance, that is an altogether 
different matter. Princeton University™s former President Harold Shapiro put this notion in 
these words: ﬁI do not recommend failure. Nor am I attracted to the idea that failure builds 
character. But the willingness to accept the risk of failure is one of the costs of leadership 
and therefore, the price of all success.ﬂ Indeed, if failure is routinely punished, it is human 
nature to simply adopt a policy wherein no risks are takenŠa policy under which it is 
likely that neither failure nor success will be achieved. But as Dean Kamen, the inventor 
of the Segway vehicle and numerous other items, reminds us, the lack of failure does not 
constitute success.
Fifth
 is an environment that produces and facilitates the search for discontinuities. 
DiscontinuitiesŠwhether political, social, economic, technical, or otherŠare fertile 
grounds for innovators. In dealing with profoundly disruptive technology, it is not
eworthy 
that history suggests that we generally overestimate the impact of a new technology in the 
short term and underestimate its impact in the longer term. Examples of the latter include 
the laser and the Internet, both of which were around for several decades before their 
broad impact was fully appreciated. A prime example of the former is represented in a 
quotation from Alex Lewyt, the founder and president of the home-appliance company 
that once bore his name, who informed us in 1955 that ﬁnuclear-powered vacuum clean
-ers will be a reality within 10 years.ﬂ Fortunately, he was wrong.
Sixth is an interactive environment wherein creative people can identify and pursue 
synergistic cross-cutting technologies
Šwhat University of Maryland Dean of Engineering 
Nariman Farvardin has described as ﬁhyphenated engineering.ﬂ Innovations are increas
-inglyŠbut certainly not exclusivelyŠbeing derived from the process of combining 
diverse technologies and disciplines, as opposed to mining of a single field in ever greater 
depth. Seventh
 is the acceptance of the notion that those responsible for managing the 
innovation process must not run around pulling up the flowers, as the saying goes, to see 
whether their roots are healthy. 
Patience, continuity
, and their close relative 
perseverance
 are all fundamental catalysts of successful innovation. Indeed, there is little that is easy 
about introducing change, that is, about innovating. Many difficult decisions are required, 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70
many failures suffered, and a great deal of scar tissue almost invariably accumulated. As 
Thomas Edison once observed with regard to his efforts to find a suitable filament for the 
electric light bulb, ﬁI have not failed. I have just found 10,000 ways that won™t work.ﬂ
The National Academies™ 
Gathering Storm
 report on competitiveness provides an 
explicit plan to confront the competitiveness challenge facing America and its innovation 
enterprise. The plan consists of four overarching recommendations and 20 highly specific 
implementing actions. All are at the federal level because that was the charter of the 
Gathering Storm committee, but even more remains to be accomplished at the state and 
local levels. During the past year, several states have conducted Gathering Storm assess
-ments of their own, and major convocations have been held at the state and national lev
-els to address additional actions that could strengthen America™s future competitiveness. 
In the 
Gathering Storm
 report, the Academies™ overall recommendations were cou
-pled to the critical challenge of eliminating America™s energy vulnerability (as opposed to 
ﬁbecoming energy-
independentﬂŠa virtually unreachable goal). There were several rea
-sons for making that connection. First, the availability of a sustainable supply of reliable, 
clean, affordable energy is critical to the nation™s economy and physical security and to 
the natural environment. Second, an attack on the energy-security problem happens to 
draw heavily on the same science and engineering fields that are currently in the greatest 
need of increased attention from a competitiveness standpoint: physics, chemistry, math
-ematics, and engineering. Third, an assault on energy vulnerability provides a focus and a 
framework for many of the recommendations in the report, much as the Apollo program 
to put humans on the moon provided cohesiveness to the national research and education 
reforms that followed the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957. The magnitude of the energy 
challenge to the nation is suggested by the fact that the United States, with only 5% of the 
world™s population, consumes 25% of the energy commercially produced on the entire 
planet. The Gathering Storm committee™s four overarching, highly interdependent recommen
-dations, in order of assigned importance, are:
I.  
Move the US K-12 education system to a leading position by
 global standards
.II.  
Double the real federal investment in basic research in mathematics, the physical 
sciences, and engineering over the next 7 years (while, 
at a minimum
, maintain
-ing the recently doubled real spending levels in the biosciences). 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71
III.  
Encourage more US citizens to pursue careers in mathematics, science, and 
engineering.IV.
  
Rebuild the competitive ecosystem by introducing reforms in the nation™s tax, 
patent, immigration, and litigation policies. 
 In support of those general recommendations, the National Academies offered 20 
specific implementing actions:
  
ﬁ10,000 Teachers Educating 10 Million Mindsﬂ
 (focuses on K-12 education, the 
committee™s unanimous highest priority). 
Ł Provide 10,000 
new mathematics and science teachers each year by funding 
competitively awarded 4-year scholarships for US citizens at US institutions 
that offer special programs leading to core degrees in mathematics, science, or 
engineering accompanied by a teaching certificate
. On graduation, participants 
would be required to teach in a public school for 5 years and, one hopes, beyond 
that time by choice. 
Ł Strengthen the skills of 250,000 
current teachers by such actions as subsidizing 
the achievement of master™s degrees and participation in workshops, and create a 
world-class mathematics and science curriculum available for voluntary adoption 
by local school districts throughout the nation.
Ł Increase the number of teachers qualified to teach Advanced Placement courses 
and the number of students enrolled in those courses by offering financial bonus
-es both to high-performing teachers and to students who excel.
   ﬁSowing the Seedsﬂ
 (focuses on funding for research). 
 Ł
 Increase federal basic-research funding in the physical sciences, mathematics, 
and engineering by a real 10% each year over the next 7 years.
Ł Provide research grants each year to 200 early-career researchers, payable over 5 
years.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
Ł Provide an incremental $500 million per year for at least 5 years to modernize 
the nation™s aging research facilities, with the expenditures overseen by a National 
Coordination Office for Research Infrastructure to be in the White House Office 
of Science and Technology Policy.
Ł Allocate 8% of government research funds to pursuits specifically chosen at the 
discretion of local researchers and their managers, with emphasis on projects 
potentially offering a high payoff even though accompanied by substantial risk.
Ł Establish an ARPA-E in the Department of Energy patterned after the highly suc
-cessful DARPA in the Department of Defense but focused on major breakthroughs 
in energy security.
Ł Institute a Presidential Innovation Award to stimulate advances serving the nation
-al interest.
  ﬁBest and Brightestﬂ
 (focuses on higher education). 
Ł Provide 25,000 competitively awarded undergraduate scholarships each year of 
up to $20,000 per year for 4 years in the physical and life sciences, mathematics, 
and engineering for US citizens attending US institutions.
Ł Provide 5,000 competitively awarded portable graduate fellowships each year of 
up to $20,000 per year in fields of national need.
Ł Grant tax credits to employers that support continuing education for practicing 
scientists and engineers.
Ł Continue to improve visa processing for international students.
Ł Offer a 1-year visa extension to PhD recipients in science, technology, engineer
-ing, mathematics or other fields of national need, grant automatic work permits to 
those meeting security requirements and obtaining employment, provide a prefer
-ential system for acquiring citizenship for those who complete their degrees, and 
repeal the mandatory ﬁgo-awayﬂ provision now in US immigration law. 
Ł Offer preferential visas to applicants who have special skills in mathematics, sci
-ence, engineering, and selected languages. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73
Ł Modify the ﬁdeemed exportﬂ law whereby faculty currently may be required to 
obtain export licenses to teach a technology class that includes a foreign student 
even if the material covered is unclassified.
  ﬁIncentives for Inno
vationﬂ (focuses on innovation environment).
Ł Adopt a ﬁfirst-to-fileﬂ patent system and increase employment of the US Patent 
and Trademark Office to permit accelerated handling of patent matters.
Ł Expand and make permanent the R&D tax credit that has been extended 11 times 
since it was first enacted in 1981 but never made permanent. 
Ł Restructure the corporate income-tax laws to help make firms that create jobs in 
the United States more competitive.
Ł Increase broadband Internet access throughout the nation. 
Many of these recommendations have been tested on smaller scales and demonstrat
-ed to work effectively. For example, the highest-priority recommendationŠproduce math
-ematics and science teachers holding primary degrees in these fieldsŠhas been addressed 
by at least two privately sponsored, highly successful endeavors: UTeach and Teach for 
America. UTeach reports that 22% of its participants, on completing their undergraduate 
degrees, voluntarily go on to teach in high school. Even more significant, 82% of those 
who do so are still teaching 5 years later. Teach for America seeks volunteers to teach in 
the most challenging urban and rural schools (20% teach mathematics and science). The 
program has become one of the 10 largest employers on college campuses nationally. Last 
year 10% of the seniors at Duke, Amherst, and the University of Chicago competed for 
positions in the program, along with 7% at Princeton and Yale. An independent study by 
Mathematics Policy Research reports that Teach for America members ﬁproduced higher 
[student] test scores than other teachers in their schoolsŠnot just other novice teachers 
or uncertified teachers, but also veteran and certified teachers.ﬂ When members staffed a 
school opened for children displaced by hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, initial testing 
showed the students were 1.7 grade levels behind in reading and 1.5 levels behind in 
mathematics, but after just 7 months of instruction by Teach for America participants the 
students gained 1.3 grade levels in reading and 2.0 in mathematics.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
What will all the National Academies™ recommendations cost? Can we afford it? The 
answer to the first question is $9 billion the first year, growing to $19 billion per year 
steady-state. The answer to the second question is that we cannot afford 
not to do these 
things or the equivalent. Last year, as a nation we spent $7 billion gambling on the Super 
Bowl. We devoted $13 billion to pornography. We spent $32 billion on movies and DVDs. 
We have a federal budget of $2.8 
trillion, and a GDP of $13 
trillion. The affordability of 
funding for education, research, and innovation is simply a matter of whatever priority 
we wish to assign to meeting the competitiveness challenge and offering our children and 
grandchildren the opportunity to enjoy a high-quality standard of living. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75

As action is sought in the political sphere to meet the nation™s competitiveness 
challenge, it needs to be emphasized that competitiveness is not a
 partisan 
issue. It is an 
American
 issue. In fact, the initial bill introduced in the Senate 
to implement the National Academies™ findings promptly acquired 70 
cosponsorsŠ35 Democrats and 35 RepublicansŠall in an election year. 
The fiscal year 2007 federal budget that was enacted in part through a continuing resolution, 
made special provisions for many of the recommendations offered in the 
Gathering Storm
 report. Similar steps have been taken with regard to the 2008 budget; for example, the bill 
that rectifies differences among the various competitiveness measures previously proposed 
in the Senate was cosponsored by the majority leader and the minority leader.
Votes on competitiveness measures have received overwhelming support in the House 
of Representatives. The final America COMPETES Act was passed by both houses and signed 
by the President in August 2007. Speaking in support of the initial competitiveness
 legislation 
introduced in the Senate after the National Academies™ effort, Bill Frist, then Senate majority 
leader, noted that ﬁauthorizations for these programs would total $73 billion over the next 
5 years; when we consider that over the next 5 years our economy will exceed $76
 trillionŠ
a [0.1%] investment for the future seems a small price to pay for our continued economic 
security and leadership in the world.ﬂ Senator Lamar Alexander noted on the occasion when 
he introduced legislation to implement the 
Gathering Storm
 report™s recommendations, ﬁIf we 
only spend money on war, welfare, Social Security, debt, hurricanes, disasters, and flu, we™re 
not going to have an economy strong enough to pay the bill for those urgent needs.ﬂ
There is, of course, little political gain in taking the lead in addressing challenging 
problemsŠeven serious problemsŠthat most of the public has not yet recognized to 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
be problems. Columnist David Broder, writing in 
The Washington Pos
t under the title 
ﬁThankless Bipartisanship,ﬂ put it this way: ﬁOn Monday, with few of his colleagues pres
-ent and the Senate press galleries largely unoccupied, Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee 
took the floor. ‚Last week,™ he said, ‚while the media covered Iraq and [recently fired] US 
attorneys, the Senate spent three days debating and passing perhaps the most important 
piece of legislation of this two-year session.™ﬂ Broder went on to assert that ﬁAlexander™s 
larger point is that this is the model Congress and the president need to followŠif any of 
the major challenges facing the country are to be met.ﬂ 
Indeed, the constructive bipartisanship reflected, at least to date, in addressing the 
nation™s competitiveness-jobs-quality of life issue poses an excellent example for the 
resolution of many challenges. Ironically, when the overwhelmingly supportive vote on 
competitiveness was occurring in the House of Representatives, the media made virtually 
no mention of the event. Instead, it focused almost exclusively on a partisan battle that 
was concurrently being waged on another piece of legislation.
Some rightfully question whether the actions proposed by the National Academies, 
even if fully implemented, will be sufficient or even significant. One can know the answer 
to that question only as time progresses, but the proposals are at least a beginning. What 
is clear is that to do nothing is an almost certain formula for a greatly diminished America. 
There remain a few observers who insist that there is in fact no competitiveness issue; 
that concerns such as those expressed here are overstated. One can only hope that these 
observers are correct. But it seems imprudent to gamble the future of the nation and its 
children on that possibility. As Churchill said of those who argued against defense spend
-ing in Britain after World War I claiming that future wars were impossible in the ﬁmore 
civilized societyﬂ then existing: ﬁIt would be a pity if they were wrong.ﬂ
In my travels abroad, I have been astonished by the degree to which foreign officials 
are familiar with the National Academies™ 
Gathering Storm
 report. Some are conducting 
similar reviews of their own competitiveness standing. The ultimate ironyŠit might be 
termed the Doomsday ScenarioŠwould be if our efforts succeeded in motivating others 
to do more and then we ourselves did or sustained little.
This nation did not arrive in its increasingly tenuous competitiveness situation overnight, 
certainly not under any one political party™s oversight or through any single ill-considered 
action. For example, it has now been fully 24 years since a prestigious national commis
-sion on education cited what it called ﬁa rising tide of mediocrityﬂ in the nation™s public 
schools. The true measure of our commitment in this contest will be staying-power.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77
As has been noted, it is unreasonable to expect that in a broadly prospering world any 
single nation can maintain indefinitely the broad dominance that America has enjoyed 
in recent decades. But America can, if it wishes, maintain a position of considerable 
strength, overall prosperity, and constructive leadership. Furthermore, if America decides 
no longer to play a major leadership role, the perplexing question then arises, Who might 
do so? This should be of concern to all. 
Although only the passage of time can offer certainty, the available evidence strongly 
suggests that America and the world are on the precipice of a change of seismic propor
-tionsŠa tipping pointŠsimilar to the one that saw the fraction of American workers 
engaged in agriculture plummet from 84% in the early 1800s to eventually settle at about 
1%. The primary differences between that shift and today™s is that the current transition 
will take place on a global scale and will occur much more rapidly. And 
no one
 will be 
immune to its impact. 
 A Broadway show some years ago bore the provocative title, 
Stop the WorldŠI 
Want To Get Off
. Unfortunately, or fortunately as the case may be, this new world is not 
likely to stop, or even pause, for 
anyone
. Perhaps, then, the best advice for 
everyone
 is 
offered in a poem by Richard Hodgetts:
Every morning in Africa a gazelle wakes up.
It knows it must outrun the fastest lion or it
will be killed.
Every morning in Africa a lion wakes up.
It knows it must outrun the slowest gazelle
or it will starve.
It doesn™t matter whether you™re a lion or a
gazelleŠwhen the sun comes up, you™d
better be running. 
Churchill once said that you can always count on the Americans to do the right 
thingŠafter they have tried everything else. Reversing America™s competitiveness decline 
is one thing we had better get right the first time. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78

NORMAN R. AUGUSTINE
 was raised in Colorado and attended Princeton University, 
where he graduated with a BSE in aeronautical engineering, magna cum laude, and 
an MSE. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, Tau Beta Pi, and Sigma Xi. Mr. Augustine 
chaired the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute 
of Medicine committee that developed the report 
Rising Above the Gathering Storm: 
Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future
.In 1958, he joined the Douglas Aircraft Company in California, where he worked as 
a research engineer, program manager, and chief engineer. Beginning in 1965, he served 
in the Office of the Secretary of Defense as assistant director of defense research and engi
-neering. He joined LTV Missiles and Space Company in 1970, serving as vice president, 
advanced programs and marketing. In 1973, he returned to the government as assistant 
secretary of the Army and in 1975 became under secretary of the Army and later acting 
secretary of the Army. Joining Martin Marietta Corporation in 1977 as vice president of 
technical operations, he was elected as CEO in 1987 and chairman in 1988, having previ
-ously been President and COO. He served as president of Lockheed Martin Corporation 
on the formation of that firm in 1995 and became its CEO in January 1996 and later 
chairman. On retiring from Lockheed Martin in August 1997, he joined the faculty of 
the Princeton University School of Engineering and Applied Science, where he served as 
lecturer with the rank of professor until July 1999.
Mr. Augustine was chairman and principal officer of the American Red Cross for 9 
years, chairman of the National Academy of Engineering, president and chairman of the 
Association of the United States Army, chairman of the Aerospace Industries Association, 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79


and chairman of the Defense Science Board. He is a former president of the American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and of the Boy Scouts of America. He is a cur
-rent or former member of the boards of directors of ConocoPhillips; Black & Decker; 
Procter & Gamble, of which he was presiding director; and Lockheed Martin and was 
a member of the Board of Trustees of Colonial Williamsburg. He is a trustee emeritus of 
Johns Hopkins and a former member of the boards of trustees of Princeton and MIT. He is 
a member of the Advisory Board to the Department of Homeland Security, was a member 
of the Hart-Rudman Commission on National Security, and has served for 15 years on 
the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. He is a member of the 
American Philosophical Society and the Council on Foreign Affairs and is a Fellow of the 
National Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Explorers Club.
Mr. Augustine has received the National Medal of Technology and the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Distinguished Public Service Award. He has received the Department of Defense™s 
highest civilian decoration, the Distinguished Service Medal, five times. He is coauthor of 
The Defense Revolution
 and 
Shakespeare In Charge
 and author of 
Augustine™s Law
s and 
Augustine™s Travels
. He holds 22 honorary degrees and was selected by 
Who™s Who in 
America and the Library of Congress as one of ﬁFifty Great Americansﬂ on the occasion 
of Who™s Who
™s 50th anniversary. He has traveled in over 100 countries and stood at both 
the North and South Poles. 
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80
American Electronics Association. 2004. Losing the Competitive Advantage? The Challenge 
for Science and Technology in the United States. Washington, DC: American Electronics 
Association. 
Association of American Universities. A National Defense Education and Innovation Initiative. 2006. 
Meeting America™s Economic and Security Challenges in the 21st Century. Washington, DC: 
AAU. Available at: 
http://www.aau.edu/reports/NDEII.pdf.
Building Engineering & Science Talent, The Talent Imperative, San Diego, CA: BEST. 2004.
Bush, George W. 2006. State of the Union to Congress. Washington, DC. January 28.
Business Roundtable. 2005. Tapping America™s Potential. Washington, DC: Business Roundtable. 
Center for Strategic and International Studies. 2001. Technology and Security in the 21st Century: 
US Military Export Control Reform. Washington, DC. CSIS. 
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy. 1993. Science, Technology, and the Federal 
Government: National Goals for a New Era. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Congressional Budget Of˜ce. 2007. Federal Support for Research and Development. The Congress 
of the United States. Washington, DC.
Council on Competitiveness. 2004. Innovate America: National Innovation Initiative Summit and 
Report: Thriving in a World of Challenge and Change. Washington, DC: Council on Competi
-tiveness. 
Council on Competitiveness. 2006. Competitiveness Index: Where America Stands. Washington, 
DC: Council on Competitiveness. 
Dertouzos, M., R. Lester, and R. Solow. 1989. Made in America: Regaining the Productive Edge. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Freeman, Richard B. 2005. Does Globalization of the Scienti˜c/Engineering Workforce Threaten US 
Economic Leadership? (Working Paper 11457). Cambridge, MA.: National Bureau of Economic 
Research.
Friedman, Thomas L. 2005. The World is Flat: A Brief History of the 21st Century. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. Pp. 414-419.
Glenn Commission. 2000. Before It™s Too Late: A Report to the Nation from the National Com
-mission on Mathematics and Science Teaching for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Education. 
Greenspan, Alan. 2001. Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board™s semian
-nual monetary policy report to the Congress. Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of 
Representatives, Washington, DC. July 18. Available at: 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARD
-DOCS/HH/2001/july/testimony.ht
m.Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81
Heenan, David. 2005. Flight Capital: The Alarming Exodus of America™s Best and Brightest. Moun
-tain View, CA: Davies-Black Publishing.  
Henry L. Stimson Center and Center for Strategic and International Studies. 2001. Enhancing 
Multilateral Export Controls for US National Security. Washington, DC: The Henry L. Stimson 
Center and CSIS.
Jackson, Shirley Ann. 2001. The Quiet Crisis: Falling Short in Producing American Scienti˜c and 
Technical Talent. BEST. Washington, DC. Available at: 
http://www.bestworkforce.org/PDFdocs/
Quiet_Crisis.pd
f.King, D. A. 2004. The scienti˜c impact of nations. 
Nature
 430:311-316.
The National Academies. 2005. Policy Implications of International Graduate Students and Postdoc
-toral Scholars in the United States. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering and Institute of Medicine. 1995. 
Reshaping the Graduate Education of Scientists and Engineers, Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering and Institute of Medicine. 1999. 
Capitalizing on Investments in S&T. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Science Board. 2006. Science and Engineering Indicators 2006, Arlington, VA: National 
Science Foundation. Available at: 
www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind04/c4/c4h.ht
m.National Science Foundation. 1999. Preparing Our Children: Math and Science Education in the 
National Interest. Arlington, VA: NSF.
National Science Foundation. 2003. The Science and Engineering Workforce: Realizing America™s 
Potential. Arlington, VA: NSF.
Of˜ce of Scienti˜c Research and Development. 1945. ScienceŠThe Endless Frontier. Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Of˜ce.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2005. Main Science & Technology In
-dicators. Paris: OECD Publications. Available at: 
http://www.oecd.org/document/26/0,2340,en_
2649_34451_1901082_1_1_1_1,00.htm
l.Pelosi, Nancy. 2007. The Innovation Agenda. Available at:
 http://speaker.gov/issues?id=001
6. Popkin, Joel, and Kathryn Kobe. 2006. U.S. Manufacturing Innovation at Risk. Council of Manufac
-turing Associations and The Manufacturing Institute. Washington, DC. Available at: 
http://www.
nam.org/s_nam/bin.asp?CID=202515&DID=236300&DOC=FILE.PD
F.Prestowitz, C. 2005. Three Billion New Capitalists: The Great Shift of Wealth and Power to the East. 
New York: Basic Books. 
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. 2004. Sustaining the Nation™s Innovation 
Ecosystems, Information Technology Manufacturing and Competitiveness. Washington, DC: 
White House Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy.
Romer, Paul M. 2000. Should the Government Subsidize Supply or Demand in the Market for Sci
-entists and Engineers? (Working Paper 7723). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau for Economic 
Research. Available at: 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7723
.Saxenian, Anna Lee. 2002. Brian Circulation: How High-Skill Immigration Makes Everyone Better 
Off. The Brookings Review 20(1)(Winter 2002) Washington, DC: The Brookings Institute.
Semiconductor Industry Association. 2005. Choosing to Compete. December 12.
Task Force on the Future of American Innovation. 2007. The Knowledge Economy: Is the United 
States Losing Its Competitive Edge, Benchmarks for Our Innovation Future. Washington, DC: 
The Task Force on the Future of US Innovation. November.
United States House of Representatives Committee on Science. 1998. Unlocking our future: toward 
a new national science policy. September 24. Available at: 
http://www.house.gov/science/sci
-ence_policy_report.htm.
U.S. Commission on National Security. 2001. Road Map for National Security: Imperative for 
Change. Washington, DC: The Commission on National Security.
Is America Falling Off the Flat Earth?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2004. Manufacturing in America: A Comprehensive Strategy to Ad
-dress the Challenges to US. Manufacturers. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce 
Available at: 
http://www.ita.doc.gov/media/Publications/pdf/manuam0104˜nal.pd
f.Zumeta, Williams, and Joyce S. Raveling. 2006. Attracting the Best and the Brightest. 
Issues in 
Science and Technology
. The National Academies Press. Washington, DC. Available at: 
http://
www.issues.org/19.2/p_zumeta.ht
m.