DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12036Identification of Research Needs Relating to PotentialBiological or Adverse Health Effects of WirelessCommunication Devices78 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-11294-9 | DOI 10.17226/12036Committee on Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biologicalor Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices; Nuclear andRadiation Studies Board; Division on Earth and Life Studies; National ResearchCouncilIdentification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential 
 Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices
Nuclear and Radiation Studies Board
Division on Earth and Life Studies
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern
-ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer
-ing, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for 
the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropri
-ate balance.
This study was supported by Award No. HHSF223200710005C between the Na
-tional Academy of Sciences and the Department of Health and Human Services. Any 
opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organiza
-tions or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-11294-9
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-11294-X
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or 
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2008 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to 
the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Acad
-emy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c 
and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the 
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
-ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is presi
-dent of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in 
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti
-tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its 
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sci
-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. 
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to 
the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The 
 
Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. 
Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, 
of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
COMMITTEE
 ON IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS 
RELATING TO POTENTIAL BIOLOGICAL OR ADVERSE HEALTH 
EFFECTS OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES
FRANK S. BARNES
 (Chair
), University of Colorado, Boulder
OM P. GANDHI, University of Utah, Salt Lake City
MAILA HIETANEN,
 Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, 
Finland
LEEKA KHEIFETS,
 University of California, Los Angeles
RÜDIGER MATTHES,
 Federal Of˜ce of Radiation Protection, 
Oberschleißheim, Germany
DAVID L. MCCORMICK,
 IIT Research Institute, Chicago
BERNARD VEYRET, University of Bordeaux, France
Nuclear And Radiation Studies Board Liaison
DANIEL KREWSKI, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Staff
RICK JOSTES, Study Director
NAOKO ISHIBE, Program Of˜cer
TONI
 G
REENLEAF
, F
inancial and Administrative Associate
SHAUNTE
É W
HETSTONE
, Program Assistant
JAMES YATES, JR., Of˜ce Assistant
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vNUCLEAR AND RADIATION STUDIES BOARD
RICHARD A. MESERVE
 (Chair
), Carnegie Institution, Washington, D.C.
S. JAMES ADELSTEIN (
Vice
 Chair
), Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts
JOEL S. BEDFORD, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins
SUE
 B. C
LARK
, Washington State University, Pullman
ALLEN
 G. C
ROFF
, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (retired), 
St.
 Augustine, Florida
DAVID
 E. D
ANIEL
, University of Texas at Dallas
SARAH C. DARBY, 
Clinical Trial Service Unit, Oxford, United Kingdom
JAY
 D
AVIS
, 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (retired), 
Livermore, California
ROGER
 L. H
AGENGRUBER
, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque
DANIEL KREWSKI, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
KLAUS
 KÜ
HN
, Technische Universität Clausthal, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, 
Germany
MILTON
 L
EVENSON
, Bechtel International (retired), Menlo Park, 
California
C. C
LIFTON
 L
ING
, Memorial Hospital, New York City, New York
PAUL
 A. L
OCK
E, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland
WARREN
 F. M
ILLER
, Texas A&M University, Albuquerque, New Mexico
BORIS 
F. M
YASOEDO
V, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
ANDREW M. SESSLER, E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley,
 California
JOHN C. VILLFORTH,
 Food and Drug Law Institute (retired), 
Gaithersburg, Maryland
PAUL L. ZIEMER, Purdue University (retired), West Lafayette, Indiana
Staff
KEVIN D. CROWLEY
, Director
EVAN B. DOUPLE,
 Scholar
RICK JOSTES
, Senior Program Of˜cer
MICAH D. LOWENTHAL
, Senior Program Of˜cer
 JOHN R. WILEY, 
Senior Program Of˜cer
NAOKO ISHIBE, 
Program Of˜cer
TONI GREENLEAF,
 Administrative and Financial Associate
 LAURA D. LLANOS,
 Administrative and Financial Associate
 COURTNEY
 GIBBS
, Senior Program Assistant
MANDI M. BOYKIN, Senior Program Assistant
SHAUNTE
É WHETSTONE, Senior Program Assistant
JAMES YATES, JR., Of˜ce Assistant
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Acknowledgements
The report bene˜ted from the contribution of the speakers and partici
-pants in the workshop. The agenda, speakers, and participants are included 
as appendices to the report. The committee would like to thank Rick
 Jostes, Shaunteé Whetstone, Toni Greenleaf, and Naoko Ishibe for helping to make 
the workshop a success. A special thanks to the sponsor, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), as well.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by persons chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures 
approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review Committee.
  The purposes of this review are to provide candid and critical comments 
that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound 
as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards of 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.
  The review 
comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity 
of the deliberative process.
  We wish to thank the following for their par
-ticipation in the review of this report:
Joel S. Bedford,
 Colorado State University
Maria Feychting, 
Karolinska Institutet
Lennart Hardell
, University Hospital
Niels Kuster, 
Foundation for Research on Information 
  Technologies in Society (IT™IS)
Harri Lindholm,
 Finnish Institute of Occupational Health
Gabor Mezei,
 Electric Power Research Institute
Frank S. Prato,
 University of Western Ontario
Jerome S. Puskin,
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
E. Van Rongen,
 Health Council of the Netherlands
Teri L. Vierima,
 Resource Strategies Inc.
Peter M. Wiedemann, 
Federal Research Center
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x REVIEWERS
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse, nor did 
they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. The review of this 
report was overseen by May R. Berenbaum, University of Illinois
 and 
Daniel E
. Wartenberg, University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey. 
Appointed by the National Research Council, they were responsible for 
making certain that an independent examination of this report was car
-ried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered.
  Responsibility for the ˜nal content 
of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the National 
Research Council.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Contents
Executive Summary 
  1
Summary 
 3Introduction
 10
Dosimetry and Exposure
 13
Epidemiology
 19
Human Laboratory Studies
 27
Mechanisms
 33
In Vivo and In Vitro Studies in Experimental Model Systems
 37
References
 45 
Appendixes 
A Statement of Task
 51
B Committee Biographical Sketches
 52
C Workshop Agenda
 57
D Workshop Participants
 64
E  
List of Individuals Who Submitted Statements Identifying 
 Needs and Gaps in Research Prior to Workshop
 66
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive Summary
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Department of 
Health and Human Services asked the National Academies to organize a 
workshop of national and international experts to identify research needs 
and gaps in knowledge of biological effects and adverse health outcomes 
of exposure to radiofrequency (RF) energy from wireless communications 
devices. To accomplish this task, the National Academies appointed a seven 
member committee to plan the workshop.
1 Following the workshop, the 
committee was asked to issue a report based on the presentations and dis
-cussions at the workshop that identi˜ed research needs and current gaps in 
knowledge. The committee™s task did not include the evaluation of health 
effects or the generation of recommendations relating to how the identi˜ed 
research needs should be met. 
For the purposes of this report, the committee de˜nes research needs as 
research that will increase our understanding of the potential adverse effects 
of RF energy on humans. Research gaps are de˜ned as areas of research 
where the committee judges that scienti˜c data that have potential value are 
presently lacking, but that 
closingofthesegapsiseitherongoingandresults
closing of these gaps is either ongoing and results 
should be awaited before judgments are made on further research needs, or 
the gaps are not judged by the committee to be of as high a priority with 
respect to 
directlyaddressinghealthconcernsatthistime.
directly addressing health concern
satthistime.
 at this time
. The research needs and gaps identi˜ed by the committee are presented 
in abbreviated form in the report Summary and in more detail in the text. 
1 
Committee
 on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse 
Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
These needs and gaps are committee judgments derived from the workshop 
presentations and discussions, and the report does not necessarily re˚ect 
the views of the FDA, individual workshop speakers, or other workshop 
participants.
The committee judged that important research needs included, in order 
of appearance in the text, the following:
 Ł Characterization of exposure to juveniles, children, pregnant 
women, and fetuses from personal wireless devices and RF ˜elds from base 
station antennas.
Ł Characterization of radiated electromagnetic ˜elds for
 typical
 multiple-
element base station antennas and exposures to affected individuals.
Ł Characterization of the dosimetry of evolving antenna con˜gura
-tions for cell phones and text messaging devices.
Ł Prospective epidemiologic cohort studies of children and pregnant 
women.
Ł Epidemiologic case-control studies and childhood cancers, includ
-ing brain cancer.
Ł Prospective epidemiologic cohort studies of adults in a general 
population and retrospective cohorts with medium to high occupational 
exposures.
Ł Human laboratory studies that focus on possible adverse effects 
on electroencephalography
2 activity and that include a suf˜cient number 
of subjects.
Ł Investigation of the effect of RF electromagnetic ˜elds on neural 
networks.
Ł Evaluation of doses occurring on the microscopic level. 
Ł Additional experimental research focused on the identi˜cation 
of potential biophysical and biochemical/molecular mechanisms of RF 
action.
2 
Electroencephalography
 is a neurological diagnostic procedure that records the changes in 
electrical potentials (brain waves) in various parts of the brain.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Summary
In recent years there has been a rapid increase in the use of wireless 
communications devices, and a great deal of research has been carried out 
to investigate possible biological or human health effects resulting from the 
use of these devices. In a more focused initiative, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) of the Department of Health and Human Services 
asked the National Academies to organize a workshop of national and inter
-national experts to identify research needs and gaps in knowledge of bio
-logical effects and adverse health outcomes of exposure to radiofrequency 
(RF) energy from wireless communications devices (for full statement of 
task see Appendix A). To accomplish this task, the National Academies 
appointed a seven member committee to plan the workshop (Appendix B).
1 Following the workshop, the committee was asked to issue a report based 
on the presentations and discussions at the workshop that identi˜es, in 
the committee™s judgment, research needs and current gaps in knowledge. 
The committee™s task did not include the evaluation of health effects or the 
generation of recommendations relating to how identi˜ed research needs 
should be met. 
The requested workshop was held on August 7-9, 2007 (Appendix C). 
It was organized into ˜ve sessions to identify research needs and gaps in 
the following areas: 
Ł  dosimetry and exposure,
Ł  epidemiology,
1 
Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse 
Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Ł  human laboratory studies,
Ł  mechanisms, and
Ł  animal and cell biology. 
A sixth session, which was held on the morning of the third day of the 
workshop, introduced overarching issues and solicited research needs and 
gaps from workshop speakers and other interested parties.
The organizing committee invited experts from 9 countries (Appen
-dix
 D) to speak on research needs and gaps relating to potential biologi
-cal or adverse health effects of wireless communications devices. Written 
contributions relating to research needs and gaps were also solicited for 
consideration prior to and at the workshop (individuals who submitted 
written contributions are listed in Appendix E).
The report contains the committee™s evaluation of the workshop pre
-sentation and discussion sessions followed by the committee™s identi˜cation 
of research needs and gaps. 
RESEARCH NEEDS AND GAPS
For the purposes of this report, the committee de˜nes ﬁresearch needsﬂ 
as research that will increase our understanding of the potential adverse 
effects of RF energy on humans. ﬁResearch gapsﬂ are de˜ned as areas of 
research where the committee judges that scienti˜c data that have potential 
value are presently lacking, but that 
closingofthesegapsisongoing,and
closing of these gaps is ongoing, and 
results should be awaited before judgments are made on further research 
needs, or the gaps ar
enotjudgedbythecommitteetobeofashighaprior-
 notjudgedbythecommitteetobeofashighaprior-
not judged by the committee to be of as high a prior
-ity at this time.
To the extent possible, near-, mid-, and long-term research opportuni
-ties have been characterized as follows: the committee judged that ﬁresearch 
needsﬂ are near-term research opportunities. ﬁResearch gapsﬂ that are cur
-rently being ˜lled may result in mid-term research opportunities, depending 
on the outcome of the current research. ﬁResearch gapsﬂ de˜ned as being of 
lower priority 
withrespecttodirectlyaddressinghealthconcernscomprise
with respect to 
directlyaddressinghealthconcernscomprise
directly addressing health concern
scomprise
 comprise
comprise 
possible long-term research opportunities.
Abbreviated versions of committee judgments on research needs and 
gaps are organized below in the Summary in order of the ˜ve sessions that 
comprised the ˜rst two days of the workshop. The reader is referred to the 
text of the report for details on research needs and gaps.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5DOSIMETR
Y 
AND
 EX
POSURE
 Research Needs
1.
 There is a need to characterize exposure of juveniles, children, 
pre
gnant women, and fetuses, both for personal wireless devices (e.g., 
cell phones, wireless personal computers [PCs]) and for RF ˜elds from 
base station antennas including gradients and variability of exposures, the 
env
ironment in which devices are used, and exposures from other sources, 
multilateral exposures, and multiple frequencies. 
2.
 Wireless networks are being built very rapidly, and many more base 
station antennas are being installed. A crucial research need is to character
-ize radiated electromagnetic ˜elds for typical multiple-element base station 
antennas and for the highest radiated power conditions with measurements 
conducted during peak hours of the day at locations close to the antennas 
as well as at ground level. 
3.
 The use of evolving types of antennas for hand-held cell phones 
and text messaging devices need to be characterized for the Speci˜c Absorp
-tion Rates (SARs) that they deliver to different parts of the body so that 
this data is available for use in future epidemiologic studies. 
4.
 RF exposure of the operational personnel close to multi-element 
newer base station antennas is unknown and could be high. These expo
-sures need to be characterized. Also needed are dosimetric absorbed power 
calculations using realistic anatomic models for both men and women of 
different heights.
Research Gaps
Research Ongoing
1.
 Although several dosimetric models are currently available for 
children and individuals of reduced stature, a research gap remains in the 
further development of models of several heights for men, women, and chil
-dren of various ages for use in the characterization of SAR distributions for 
exposures characteristic of cell phones, wireless PCs, and base stations.
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
2.
 Presently, there is negligible or relatively little knowledge of local 
SAR concentration (and likely heating) in close proximity to metallic adorn
-ments and implanted medical devices for the human body. 
3.
 There is a need for improved exposure systems for human labo
-ratory studies including reliable and accurate exposure assessment for 
designs of next generation exposure systems for human laboratory studies. 
Furthermore, location-dependent ˜eld strength needs to be accounted for 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
in the characterization of exposures. A very important consideration is the 
validation of results by several independent investigators so that reliable 
and accurate exposure assessments are available for both comparisons 
between systems and between laboratories.
4.
 There is a need for an updated survey in a properly selected sample 
of the U.S. population to characterize and document rapidly changing expo
-sures to electromagnetic ˜eld strengths that would improve our knowledge 
of the exposure levels for the population at large, taking into account the 
large number of new cell phones and base stations, radio and TV stations, 
and a wide array of other communications devices, including a survey of 
measured personal exposure with information on location and activity at 
the time of measurement including the difference between indoor and out
-door environments. 
EPIDEMIOLOG
YThe committee identi˜ed signi˜cant research needs for a number of 
epidemiologic studies, particularly of children.
Adults
Research Needs
1.
 Prospective Cohort Studies. A prospective cohort study will allow 
for the evaluation of diverse outcomes, but a very large sample size and 
extended follow-up is required for rare outcomes or those that occur only 
with very long latencies.
2.
 Occupational Cohorts with Medium to High Exposure. None of 
the occupational studies to date have been based on an adequate exposure 
assessment. Much work is needed to identify occupations with potentially 
high RF exposures and to characterize them. 
Research Gaps
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
1.
 Nested case-control studies of rare diseases. 
2.
 Observational studies on subjective outcomes.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7Children
Research Needs
1.
 Prospective Cohort Studies of Pregnancy and Childhood. Children 
are potentially exposed from conception through maternal wireless device 
use and then postnatally when they themselves become users of mobile 
phones. 
2.
 Case-control Study of Children Mobile Phone Users and Brain 
Cancer. Owing to widespread use of mobile phones among children and 
adolescents and the possibility of relatively high exposures to the brain, 
investigation of the potential effects of RF ˜elds in the development of 
childhood brain tumors is warranted. 
Research Gaps
Research Ongoing
1.
 Case-control studies of childhood cancer with improved exposure 
assessment taking into account all major ˜xed point sources of RF exposure 
(base stations, AM, FM, TV antennas, and other sources).
HUMAN LABORATOR
Y STUDIES
Research Needs
There are some signi˜cant research needs for human laboratory studies. 
Due to the paucity of data from identically replicated experiments,
1.
 There is a need for experiments focusing on possible adverse RF 
effects identi˜ed by changes in electroencephalogram activity as well as a 
need to include an increased number of subjects.
Research Gaps
Research Ongoing
1.
 Little or no information is available on possible neurophysiological 
effects developing during long-term exposure to RF ˜elds.
2.
 Risks of exposure to RF ˜elds in elderly volunteers are not 
well
 explored. 
3.
 There is a continuing need for experiments focusing on possible ad
-verse RF effects identi˜ed by changes in cognitive performance functions.
 Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
4.
 There is a need to conduct human volunteer studies to investigate 
potential 
healthimplicationsarisingfrominteractionofcellphoneswith
health implications arising from 
interactionofcellphoneswith
interaction of cell phones with 
hearing aids and cochlear implants.
MECHANISMS
Research Needs
1.
 The effect of RF electromagnetic ˜elds on neural networks is a 
topic needing further investigation. There are indications that neural net
-works are a sensitive biological target
. 2.
 Evaluation of doses occurring on the microscopic level is a topic 
needing further investigation.
Research Gaps
Research Ongoing
1.
 Mechanisms that can be modeled theoretically with the use of 
software-based nonlinear cell models that describe ˜eld-induced molecular 
changes
.Itiscurrentlyunclearifanonlinearbiologicalmechanismexists
 It is currently unclear if a nonlinear biological mechanism exists 
that could lead to demodulation effects. There is some research with respect 
to this question underway. 
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
2.
 It is unclear whether low-level RF exposure can trigger effects 
through stimulation of cellular thermo-receptors. 
3.
 Knowledge is lacking concerning the effects of electromagnetic 
˜elds on ion
 and molecular transport through the cell membrane.
IN V
IVO
 AND
 I
N V
ITRO
 S
TUDIES
 IN
 EX
PERIMENTAL
 M
ODEL
 SY
STEMS
Research Needs
1.
 Additional experimental research focused on the identi˜cation of 
potential biophysical and biochemical/molecular mechanisms of RF action 
is considered to be of the highest priority. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9Research Gaps
 Research Ongoing
1.
 Following completion of several large ongoing studies, a ﬁweight-
of-the-evidenceﬂ analysis can be conducted to synthesize and evaluate the 
entire data set. At that time, rational, informed decisions can be made 
concerning the value of conducting additional oncogenicity
2 studies in 
standard-bred laboratory animals.
2.
 The use of genetically engineered animals may increase the sensi
-tivity of laboratory studies to detect weak effects, and may be particularly 
suitable to evaluate the possible interactions between RF ˜elds and other 
agents in disease causation.
3.
 The overall database for RF ˜elds and cancer would be strength
-ened by additional studies using multi-stage model systems for cancer in 
tissues (such as the brain) that have been hypothesized to be targets of RF 
action.
4.
 Although genetic toxicology studies have failed to identify potential 
RF health effects, additional genetic toxicology studies may be warranted 
should evidence of oncogenicity be identi˜ed in any of the ongoing chronic 
toxicity/oncogenicity bioassays of RF ˜elds in laboratory animals, or in 
any future studies to be performed using genetically engineered animal 
models.
5.
 A number of potentially critical cancer-related endpoints have re
-ceived only very limited study and are identi˜ed in the report text.
6.
 In addition to cancer-related endpoints, data gaps exist in a num
-ber of other areas of toxicology in which knowledge is needed to support 
a complete evaluation of the possible health effects of RF exposure; these 
gaps are identi˜ed in the body of the report.
2 
Oncogenicity
 is the capacity to cause tumors.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10Introduction
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the Department of 
Health and Human Services asked the National Academies to organize a 
workshop of national and international experts to discuss research needs 
and gaps in our knowledge of the biological effects and adverse health 
outcomes of exposure to radiofrequency (RF) energy from wireless com
-munications devices. Although the sponsor™s main interest centers on hand-
held devices such as cell phones or portable home phones, base stations and 
antennas were also considered by the committee based on discussions with 
the sponsors indicating that consideration of these components would not 
be discouraged.
The workshop was announced on the National Academies™ Current 
Projects site, and attendance was available to anyone interested in attending 
the workshop. This workshop announcement included instructions for sub
-mitting written comments for consideration at the workshop. A workshop 
announcement was also provided to the FDA and the
 Bioelectromagnetics 
Society for distribution as deemed appropriate, as well as to
 individuals 
who expressed an interest in the workshop.
It was clear from the presentations and discussions at the workshop 
that a great deal of research has been accomplished to date, but sometimes 
with inconsistent results. This workshop, however, was not intended to 
evaluate health effects, and the report based on a workshop does not 
assess health effects or make recommendations as to how the identi˜ed 
research needs should be met. The National Academies was asked to issue 
a report following the workshop that exclusively draws on the workshop 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 11
presentations and discussions to identify current research needs and gaps 
in knowledge. The committee was also asked to provide its consensus ˜nd
-ings on near-, mid-, and long-term research opportunities. The report is a 
committee product and does not necessarily re˚ect the views of the FDA, 
individual workshop speakers, or other workshop participants.
To organize the workshop and to identify experts to address research 
needs and gaps relating to potential biological or adverse health effects 
of wireless communications devices, the committee (Appendix B) held a 
workshop planning meeting on July 9-10, 2007. As a result of this plan
-ning meeting, international experts from 9 countries were invited to speak 
at the workshop. Written contributions on research needs and gaps for 
the committee™s consideration were also solicited for submission prior to 
the workshop, which was held on August 7-9, 2007. A total of 16 writ
-ten contributions were received from individuals listed in Appendix E. 
The
 speakers™ presentations, panel discussions, comments from interested 
workshop attendees, and written contributions were considered by the com
-mittee as it developed this report.
The workshop itself was organized into six sessions (Appendix C). The 
˜rst ˜ve sessions consisted of invited participants and panel discussions that 
identi˜ed research needs and gaps in the following areas: 
Ł  exposure and dosimetry,
Ł  epidemiology,
Ł  human laboratory studies,
Ł  mechanisms, and
Ł  animal and cell biology. 
A sixth session, which was held on the morning of the third day, intro
-duced overarching issues and solicited research needs from speakers and 
other interested participants. Overarching issues were determined by the 
committee at the workshop planning meeting held in July 2007. The pur
-pose of the sixth session was to make sure that research needs that might 
reach across the disciplines were discussed and identi˜ed. The issues were 
thus designed to address current topics in RF research. A short introduc
-tion of each subject was made by a committee member and unrestricted 
input was then invited from interested parties attending the workshop. The 
overarching issues were as follows:
Ł Are there differences in health effects of short-term vs. long-term 
exposure?
Ł Are there differences between local vs. whole-body exposures?
Ł Can the knowledge of biological effects from current signal types 
and exposure patterns be extrapolated to emerging exposure scenarios?
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Ł Are there any biological effects that are not caused by an increase 
in tissue temperature (nonthermal effects)?
Ł Does RF exposure alter (synergize, antagonize, or potentiate)
1 the 
biological effects of other chemical or physical agents?
Ł Are there differences in risk to children?
Ł Are there differences in risk to other subpopulations such as the 
elderly and individuals with underlying disease states?
These overarching issues and the general discussions that followed 
were factored into the committee™s deliberations in developing the report. 
From the presentations and discussions that took place at the workshop 
sessions, the committee identi˜ed research needs and gaps; the selection of 
these research needs and gaps are committee judgments. 
For the purposes of this report, the committee de˜nes research needs as 
research that will increase our understanding of the potential adverse effects 
of RF energy on humans.
  Research gaps are de˜ned as areas of research 
where the committee judges that scienti˜c data that have potential value 
are presently lacking, but that 
closingofthesegapsisongoing,andresults
closing of these gaps is ongoing, and results 
should be awaited before judgments are made on further research needs, 
or the gaps ar
enotjudgedbythecommitteetobeofashighapriorityat
 notjudgedbythecommitteetobeofashighapriorityat
not judged by the committee to be of as high a priority at 
this time.
To the extent possible, near-, mid-, and long-term research opportuni
-ties have been characterized as follows: the committee judged that research 
needs are near-term research opportunities. Gaps that are currently being 
˜lled may result in mid-term research opportunities, depending on the out
-come of the current research. Gaps de˜ned as being of lower priority 
with
with 
respect to 
directlyaddressinghealthconcernscomprisepossiblelong-term
directly addressing health concern
scomprisepossiblelong-term
 comprisepossiblelong-term
comprise possible long-term 
research opportunities.
1 
Synergize:
 two or more agents or forces interacting so that their combined effect is greater 
than the sum of their individual effects. 
Antagonize: 
two or more agents or forces interacting 
so that one agent counteracts the effect of another agent.
 Potentiate:
 one agent promotes or 
strengthens a biochemical or physiological action or effect of another agent.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
Dosimetry and Exposure
This section reports on the workshop session on radiofrequency (RF) 
energy,
1 dosimetry,
2 and exposure.
3 As discussed by Dr. van Deventer at the workshop (van Deventer 2007) 
there is a need to characterize exposure of juveniles, children, pregnant 
women, and fetuses both for personal wireless devices (e.g., cell phones, 
wireless personal computers [PCs]) and for RF ˜elds from base station 
antennas. This characterization includes taking into account gradients and 
variability of exposures due to the actual use of the device, the environ
-ment in which it is used, and exposures from other sources, multilateral 
exposures, and multiple frequencies. The data thus generated would help to 
de˜ne exposure ranges for various groups of exposed populations.
There is a need for reliable and accurate exposure assessment for de
-signs of the next generation of epidemiologic studies, such as development 
of an index that integrates service technology and location of use (both 
1 
RF energy
 includes waves with frequencies ranging from about 3000 waves per second 
(3
 kHz) to 300 billion waves per second (300 GHz). Microwaves are a subset of radio waves 
that have frequencies ranging from around 300 million waves per second (300 MHz) to 300 
billion waves per second (300 GHz).
2 
RF dosimetry
 is the science pertaining to coupling of RF waves, e.g., from cell phones to 
the human body. Because of the human anatomy, RF dosimetry must take into account the 
shape as well as the heterogeneity of the tissues. The unit for absorbed dose (i.e., rate of energy 
absorption per unit mass) is Watts/kg.
3 
RF exposure
 is the quanti˜cation of the absorbed RF energy and its distribution for the 
various parts of the body. The absorbed energy and its distribution within the exposed body 
is a function of the incident electromagnetic ˜elds described in units of Watts/meter-squared 
and the spatial variation of these ˜elds
. Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
geographic location and whether a phone is primarily used indoors or 
outdoors). Towards this end, we need tissue-characterized models of chil
-dren of different ages and of pregnant women for dosimetric calculations. 
Speci˜c Absorbtion Rates (SARs)
4 for children are likely to be higher than 
for adults, both for cell phones and for base station exposures, due to the 
fact that the exposure frequency is closer to the whole-body resonance fre
-quency for shorter individuals such as children (ANSI 1982; Gandhi 1979; 
Wang et al. 2006; Hirata et al. 2007). Better characterization of SARs for 
children of various age groups is, therefore, needed. Furthermore, models 
are not presently adequate for men and women of various heights and for 
children of various ages.
BASE
 STATIONS
Wireless networks are being built very rapidly, and many more base sta
-tion antennas are being installed
. 
Maintenance personnel may be exposed 
to fairly high electromagnetic ˜elds emanating from base station antennas
5 unless all of the typically four to six antennas mounted on the base station 
are turned off. For all of the base station antennas, the radiated power is 
on the order of several tens of watts, with higher powers being radiated at 
peak hours of the day. Though not as well characterized, particularly for 
multiple co-located base station antennas, the radiated RF ˜elds for roof
-tops near base stations may also be fairly high. The quanti˜cation of SAR 
distributions from base stations is fairly minimal and those distributions 
are of concern for professionals involved in maintenance of base stations, 
building/roof maintenance personnel, and members of the public that live 
in close proximity to the antennas. There are also subpopulations among 
the employees, which might be exposed to greater amounts of RF energy 
than the average population. The characterization of these subpopulations 
is important.
Thus, the interest in base station exposures close to the antennas is 
driven by the potential health effects on antenna repair professionals and 
building/roof maintenance workers from relatively high, acute exposures, 
but the interest in exposures for members of the public that live in close 
proximity to the antennas or for the public at the ground level at larger 
distances is motivated by the need to address public concern about very low 
4 
Speci˜c Absorption Rate
 (SAR) is a measure of the rate at which radiofrequency (RF) en
-ergy is absorbed by the body when exposed to an RF electromagnetic ˜eld. The most common 
use is in relation to cellular telephones.
5 
Base station antennas mounted on rooftops, on poles, or other elevated positions are the 
important intermediaries for cell phone communications.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DOSIMETRY AND EXPOSURE
 15
level, chronic exposures that are in fact similar to those from existing TV 
and radio antennas albeit at different frequencies.
Most of the reported studies to date have involved one base station 
antenna and have used mostly homogeneous models, often of simpli˜ed 
circular or rectangular cross sections of the exposed human. One study 
involving a heterogeneous, anatomically based model consisting of di
-verse constituents, but still assuming a single antenna rather than typical 
arrang
ements of four to six antennas, is given in Gandhi and Lam (2003). 
In other words, the studies to date do not pertain to the commonly used 
multiple-element base station radiators. Also, unlike highly localized cell 
phone RF energy deposition, the base station exposures involve much, 
if not all, of the body and would have slightly different radiator origins 
(for multi
-element base stations) and may be multi-frequency as well, par
-ticularly if several different-frequency base station antennas are co-located. 
Furthermore,
 because of the whole-body resonance
6 phenomenon, the SAR 
is likely to be higher for shorter individuals due to the closeness of the 
frequency
/frequencies of exposure to the whole-body resonance frequency. 
In addition to the rapid growth in the number of base stations since 1990, 
there has also been growth in other sources of RF radiation from cordless 
phones, wireless computer communications, and other communications 
systems. The last general survey of RF levels in U.S. cities was during the 
1970s, and an updated survey of RF intensities would be useful background 
for future epidemiologic studies. There are many indoor wireless systems 
as well as cell phones, which are used both indoors and outdoors. Mea
-surements of the differences in the exposures generated by the use of these 
devices in these environments will be of value in determining if there are 
any health effects resulting from exposures to low levels and intermittent 
sources of RF radiation.
MOBILE
 PHONES
The use of evolving types of antennas for cell phones and text mes
-saging devices needs to be characterized for the SARs that they deliver to 
different parts of the body so that this data is available for use in future 
epidemiologic studies.
 A great deal of research has been done by many 
laboratories worldwide to understand coupling of RF energy irradiation 
from cell phone antennas to the human head. For most of these studies, the 
6 
Whole-body resonance
: It has been shown that each individual absorbs maximum energy 
from incident RF ˜elds at frequencies that are higher for shorter individuals. Furthermore the 
SAR at this resonance frequency is increasingly higher for shorter individuals (Gandhi 1979). 
As the absorbed energy diminishes inversely with frequency in the post-resonance region, it 
is still quite high for the shorter individuals at base station frequencies because of the relative 
proximity of these frequencies to the resonance frequencies.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
researchers have assumed that cell phones are held against one of the ears, 
and studies have used a variety of anatomically based models. Cell phones 
were assumed to have
 pull-out linear rod antennas with dimensions on the 
order of several centimeters. However, most of the recent telephones use 
built-in antennas of various shapes for which additional published informa
-tion is needed.
The published results on pull-out linear rod antennas are generally in 
agreement in that the RF energy coupled to the human head is the highest 
for the ear and for a limited volume (approximately 3 × 3 × 3 cm) of the 
brain proximal to the cell phone (IEEE 1996). As expected, the penetration 
of the coupled electromagnetic ˜elds
7 into the brain is shallow (approxi
-mately 2 cm) at higher frequencies (i.e., 1800-1900 MHz). For cell phones 
held against the ear, the SAR drops off rapidly for the regions of the brain 
away from the antenna and is negligible for the rest of the human body 
except for the hand.
Wireless technology is leading to devices such as wireless PCs, handheld 
devices used for video calls, and other handheld devices for text messaging. 
In their typical usage, the antennas are closer to the hand or other parts 
of the body. SAR distributions for these newer devices have been obtained 
using homogeneous liquid-˜lled ˚at phantom models. Though these models 
are reasonably accurate to get the 1 or 10 Watts/kg average SAR needed 
for safety compliance testing, they are incapable of providing detailed SAR 
distributions because of lack of detailed anatomical features, e.g., for the 
hand or the human lap or parts of the body close to the devices. Addition
-ally, such models cannot resolve the detailed RF ˜eld distribution at the 
cellular and subcellular levels. Given a set of anatomical data, the RF ˜eld 
distributions can be modeled and estimates can be made of the effects of 
various wave forms and carrier frequencies. An important research gap is 
the lack of models of several heights for men, women, and children of vari
-ous ages for use in the characterization of SAR distributions for exposures 
characteristic of cell phones, wireless PCs, and base stations.
Presently, there is negligible or relatively little knowledge of local SAR 
concentration (and likely heating) in close proximity to metallic adorn
-ments and implanted medical devices for the human body. Examples in
-clude metal rim glasses, earrings, and various prostheses (e.g., hearing aids, 
cochlear implants, cardiac pacemakers). Research is therefore lacking to 
quantify the enhanced SARs close to metallic implants and external metal
-lic adornments.
7 
If either the electric or magnetic ˜eld has a time dependence, then both ˜elds must be con
-sidered together as a coupled electromagnetic ˜eld using Maxwell™s equations.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DOSIMETRY AND EXPOSURE
 17
LABORATOR
Y 
EXPOSURE
 SYSTEMS
There is a need for improved exposure systems for human laboratory 
studies. Furthermore, location-dependent ˜eld strength needs to be ac
-counted for in the characterization of exposures. Most of the present-day 
exposure systems used in laboratory studies focus on the exposure of the 
head. Though exposures to the head are relevant for most cell phone ex
-posures, whole-body exposures due to base stations are a research need. 
The laboratory exposure systems also need to include ELF
8 and pertinent 
modulation protocols.
9There is a need for reliable and accurate exposure assessment for de
-signing the next generation of epidemiologic studies, such as development 
of an index that integrates service technology and location of use (both 
geographic location and whether a phone is primarily used indoors or 
outdoors). For human laboratory studies there has been considerable effort 
to quantify the uncertainties of the different methods used in dosimetry. 
However, there is little information about the overall accuracy of the dosi
-metric approaches with respect to reality and variability. The accuracy of
 dosimetric approaches is particularly important as well as the validation of 
results by several independent investigators to establish SAR variability. 
The committee™s evaluation of presentations and discussions at the 
workshop has resulted in the identi˜cation of the following research needs 
and gaps.
Research Needs
1.
 There is a need to characterize exposure of juveniles, children, 
pregnant women, and fetuses both for personal wireless devices (e.g., cell 
phones, wireless PCs) and for RF ˜elds from base station antennas includ
-ing gradients and variability of exposures, the environment in which devices 
are used, and exposures from other sources, multilateral exposures, and 
multiple frequencies.
 The data thus generated would help to de˜ne expo
-sure ranges for various groups of exposed populations. 
2.
 Wireless networks are being built very rapidly, and many more base 
station antennas are being installed. A crucial research need is to character
-ize radiated electromagnetic ˜elds for typical multiple-element (four to six 
elements) base station antennas for the highest radiated power conditions 
and with measurements conducted during peak hours of the day at loca
-tions close to the antennas as well as at ground level. A study of the wire
-8 
ELF: 
Extremely low frequency ˜elds, such as the 50 and 60 Hz power frequency ˜elds used 
in Europe and the United States, respectively.
9 
Some commonly used modulation protocols are TDMA (time division multiple access) and 
CDMA (code division multiple access).
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
less RF ˜elds in a properly selected sample of the population is needed to 
characterize and document rapidly changing exposures. 
3.
 The use of evolving types of antennas for hand-held cell phones 
and text messaging devices need to be characterized for the SARs that they 
deliver to different parts of the body so that this data is available for use in 
future epidemiologic studies. 
4.
 RF exposure of the operational personnel close to newer multi-
 
element base station antennas is unknown and could be high. These expo
-sures need to be characterized. Also needed are dosimetric absorbed power 
calculations using realistic anatomic models for individuals, including both 
men and women of different heights.
Research Gaps 
Research Ongoing
1.
 Although several models are available for children and individuals 
of reduced stature, a research gap remains in the further development of 
models of several heights for men, women, and children of various ages for 
use in the characterization of SAR distributions for exposures characteristic 
of cell phones, wireless PCs, and base stations.
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
2.
 Presently, there is negligible or relatively little knowledge of local 
SAR concentration (and likely heating) in close proximity to metallic adorn
-ments and implanted medical devices for the human body.
3.
 There is a need for improved exposure systems for human labo
-ratory studies including reliable and accurate exposure assessment for 
designs of next generation exposure systems for human laboratory studies. 
Furthermore, location-dependent ˜eld strength needs to be accounted for 
in the characterization of exposures. A very important consideration is the 
validation of results by several independent investigators so that reliable 
and accurate exposure assessments are available for both comparisons 
between systems and between laboratories.
4.
 An updated survey of the electromagnetic ˜eld strengths in the U.S. 
would improve our knowledge of the exposure levels for the population 
at large. This survey should take into account the large number of new 
cell phone stations, radio stations, and TV stations and a wide array of 
other communications devices. It would include a survey of the difference 
between indoor and outdoor environments.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
Epidemiology
The second session of the workshop focused on epidemiologic studies. 
The following sections are organized into cancer and noncancer effects, and 
effects in children.
Epidemiologic studies are of primary importance in health risk assess
-ment, because they are able to provide direct information on the health of 
people exposed to an agent. While epidemiologic investigations are dif˜cult 
to conduct and easy to criticize, they offer unique advantages over experi
-mental models. In particular, epidemiologic studies permit for associations 
between an environmental exposure, under actual rather
 than arti˜cial 
conditions, and a health outcome to be evaluated in human populations. 
Moreover, because epidemiologic research is conducted in natural settings, 
the joint in˚uence of multiple factors on disease occurrence can be studied, 
while taking into account an individual™s susceptibility. Equally important, 
extrapolation from high doses to low doses is not necessary because epi
-demiologic studies examine a wide range of exposures at relevant doses. 
However, epidemiologic studies may be affected by bias,
1 confounding,
2 and exposure misclassi˜cation.
3 A large amount of exposure misclassi˜ca
-tion is likely to be present for radiofrequency (RF) exposure. Furthermore, 
1 
Bias
 is any trend in the collection, analysis, interpretation, publication, or review of data 
that can lead to conclusions that are systematically different from the truth. Types of bias 
include recall and selection. 
2 
Confounding
 occurs when an observed association between an exposure and disease is 
distorted by other risk factors for the disease that are also associated with exposure. 
3 
Misclassi˜cation
 is inaccuracies in how subjects are categorized by exposure or disease 
status. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
large studies are needed to have enough statistical power to detect effects 
when exposures and outcomes are rare. Thus, while the observational 
nature of the epidemiologic studies makes them dif˜cult to conduct and 
interpret, they remain indispensable by providing direct information on the 
health of people exposed to an agent.
 C
ANCER
 E
FFECTS
Recent concerns about possible health effects of exposure to RF radia
-tion from cellular phones have centered on brain cancer (Krewski 2007), 
and a series of epidemiologic studies looking at the association between 
cellular phone use and malignant and benign brain tumors, as well as 
salivary gland tumors, have been published since 1999 (Johansen et al. 
2001; Lonn 2004; Shoemaker et al. 2005; Schuz et al. 2006; Hardell et al. 
2006; Lahkola 2007). The majority of these have been case-control stud
-ies.
4 Limitations of these studies have included inclusion of only a small 
number of heavy users, inability to account for a suf˜ciently long latency
5 period, differential participation by cases and controls according to his
-tory of cellular phone use, inclusion of both prevalent and incident cases,
6 and relatively crude exposure assessment. All of these
 case-control studies 
relied on self-reported histories of cellular phone use, which can be prone 
to both random and systematic errors.
7 The latter could occur if cases or 
their proxies tended to over-report cellular phone use relative to controls 
or if tumor laterality
8 in˚uenced reported laterality of phone use. It also is 
possible that cognitive impairment would cause brain cancer cases to incor
-rectly report phone use. 
Analyses conducted as part of the INTERPHONE study, a multi-center 
international case-control study of brain and parotid gland tumors, point 
to selection bias
9 due to likely under-enrollment of nonexposed controls, 
4 
A 
case-control study
 is a type of observational study in which subjects are selected on the 
basis of whether they have or do not have a disease under investigation. Characteristics such 
as previous exposure are then compared between cases and controls.
5 
Latency
 is the period of subclinical disease following exposure that ends with the onset 
of disease.
6 
Prevalence
 is the number or proportion of cases or events or conditions present in a given 
population. Incident cases are those who are newly diagnosed with the disease of interest.
7 
Random errors
 vary in a nonreproducible way around a limiting mean. These errors can be 
treated statistically by use of the laws of probability. 
Systematic errors
 are reproducible and 
tend to bias a result in one direction. Their causes can be assigned, at least in principle, and 
they can have constant and variable components.
8 
Tumor laterality
 is the preference in location of tumor in one portion of the body over 
other locations in the body.
9 
Selection bias 
occurs when the association that is observed among those who participate in 
a study is different from what would have been observed because individuals who were eligible 
to participate refused or were not selected.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EPIDEMIOLOGY
 21
which would tend to bias estimates of the odds ratio downward (Vrijheid 
et al. 2006). Random errors in reported use of cellular phones also could 
obscure a small increase in risk. In the simulation study based on different 
assumptions about random and systematic errors using preliminary data 
of a study on short-term recall of mobile phone use among healthy volun
-teers, sensitivity analyses indicated that random errors in recall were likely 
to outweigh plausible systematic errors in recall that can lead to a large 
under-estimation, if there is a true risk, in the risk of brain cancer associ
-ated with use of wireless communication devices (Vrijheid et al. 2006).
 The 
pending results of the INTERPHONE study, by far the largest case-control 
study of head and neck tumors to date, are likely to have a major in˚uence 
on the direction and scope of future research concerning the use of cellular 
phones and cancer. 
An international collaborative study with prospective follow-up of 
mobile phone use is being launched in Europe. A key advantage of cohort 
studies
10
 is the ability to evaluate multiple outcomes, providing the op
-portunity for a more comprehensive assessment of possible health risks. 
In addition, more accurate exposure data may be
 obtained because recall 
of exposure information would be independent of the outcome of interest 
and the self-reported mobile phone use could be complemented more read
-ily with information from mobile service providers. Furthermore, selection 
bias should not be an issue as it can be in a case-control study. Suf˜ciently 
long exposure and follow-up would allow for the detection of effects that 
occur with a latency of several years. Additionally, it might be possible to 
collect data to evaluate dose-response relationships in a prospective cohort 
study. Mortality is probably inadequate as the sole measure of effect and 
incidence
11
 could also be included.
 Occupational studies
12
 have been performed over a longer time period, 
but the exposure frequencies may not always be relevant for an assessment 
of effects at frequencies of interest from wireless communication devices, 
and we are only beginning to measure and learn about RF exposures in 
various occupations. The most extensive literature addresses brain tumors 
and leukemia, but also of note are cancers of the breast (Tynes et al. 1996; 
Morgan et al. 2000), testis (Hayes et al. 1990), lung (
Armstrongetal.1994;
Armstrong et al. 1994; 
Groves et al. 2002
),anduvealmelanoma
), and uveal melanoma
13
 (Stang et al. 2001). These stud
-ies have several methodological weaknesses related to the fact that none 
10
 A 
cohort study
 is a type of epidemiologic study where a group of individuals are followed 
over time to assess the occurrence of a given disease or condition. Enrollment into the study 
is based on exposure characteristics or membership in a group. 
11
 Incidence
 is a measure of disease occurrence that quanti˜es the number of new cases of a 
disease that develop in a population of individuals at risk during a speci˜ed time period.
12
 Occupational studies
 are studies of workers.
13
 Uveal melanoma
 is cancer of the eye.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
of the studies measured RF exposures. 
Theincludedoccupationsdidnot
The included occupations did not 
necessarily represent truly highly exposed occupations. 
Anotherweakness
Another weakness 
is that exposure classi˜cation has often been based on a single job title. In 
addition, limited control of confounding, if any, has been made.
Evaluation of effects and adjustment for exposure measurement error 
and selection bias in case-control studies is needed. By better characterizing 
exposure measurement error and evaluating the magnitude of selection bias, 
such information may be used to adjust for exposure misclassi˜cation in 
existing and future studies. 
Several ecologic studies
14
 (Hocking et al. 1996; McKenzie et al. 1998) 
have examined cancer risk, including risk of childhood leukemia, among 
populations living in
 proximity to radio and television broadcast towers. 
Often driven by a previously identi˜ed cluster, thes
eanalysesarebased
 analyse
sarebased
 are based 
simply on distance from the source and often include an extremely small 
number of cases. 
 Such studies have been mostly uninformative. More 
rigorous investigations might be feasible with a development of new instru
-ments capable of capturing personal RF exposures. 
Furthermore, in addition to the rapid growth in the number of base 
stations, there has been a growth of other sources of RF radiation from 
cordless phones and wireless systems. The last general survey of RF levels 
in U.S. cities was conducted in the 1970s (Tell and 
Mantiply1980),and
Mantiply 1980
),and
), and 
an updated survey of RF intensities would be useful background for future 
epidemiologic studies. Measurements of the differences in the exposures 
generated by the use of cell phones and other wireless systems will be of 
value in determining if there are any health effects resulting from exposures 
to low levels and/or intermittent sources of RF radiation.
NON
CANCER
 H
EALTH
 E
FFECTS
Few studies have been conducted on health effects other than cancer 
risk of RF electromagnetic ˜elds from wireless communication devices 
(Auvinen 2007). The existing studies have been small and have meth
-odological limitations such as lack of rigorous exposure assessment, in
-adequate control of confounding, and cross-sectional design. Exposure 
settings have included mobile phone use, residence close to base stations, 
and occupational exposures (broadcasting). The health endpoints evaluated 
include reproductive effects, cardiovascular health (Morgan et al. 2000; 
Groves et al. 2002), and nonspeci˜c symptoms such as headache, sleep 
disturbances, fatigue, and depressed mood (Chia et al.
 2000; Sandstrom 
et al. 2001). Several reports of increased prevalence of symptoms among 
14
 Ecologic studies
 contain only information on population averages and lack joint distribu
-tions of individual-level variables
.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EPIDEMIOLOGY
 23
subjects exposed to communication devices have been published, but the 
quality of the research is generally low. At present, the knowledge base of 
health effects other than cancer is grossly inadequate. 
Due to lack of knowledge on possible mechanisms and the wide range 
of potential effects, assessment of research needs cannot be very speci˜c. 
Little indication to guide future efforts is available from other ˜elds of re
-search related to wireless communications devices (in vivo studies, animal 
studies, or laboratory studies of volunteers). Thus, multi-endpoint
 studies 
are needed, and in this case a cohort approach of both children and adults is 
most suitable. In addition, there is the possibility of obtaining more accurate 
exposure data, which is important considering how rapidly wireless tech
-nology is changing in both exposure characteristics (e.g., frequencies and 
modulation) and usage pattern (e.g., phone use vs. text messaging or web 
sur˜ng). The following outcomes are of particular interest: cancer, cardio
-vascular, neurological, neurodegenerative, and cerebrovascular diseases; 
and reproductive, behavioural, cognitive, neurophysiologic, and neuro
-psychological effects, including headaches, sleep disturbances,
 tinnitus,
15
 psychiatric disorders, and well-being (health-related quality of life).
 Children
With the rapid advances in technologies and communications utilizing 
RF ˜elds, children are increasingly exposed to RF energy at earlier ages 
(starting at age 6 or before). Environmental exposures could be particularly 
harmful to children because of their vulnerability during periods of develop
-ment before and after birth. Although it is unknown whether children are 
more susceptible to RF exposures, they may be at increased risk because 
of developing organ and tissue systems, particularly of the nervous system 
(Kheifets et al. 2005). In addition, they may have a greater speci˜c absorp
-tion rate (SAR) and higher absorption of RF energy at frequencies utilized 
in wireless communications devices and greater RF penetration relative 
to head size. Finally, the current generation of children will experience a 
longer period of exposure to RF ˜elds from mobile phone use than adults 
since they started using mobile phones at an early age and are likely to 
continue to use them. Data from the INTERPHONE study show that both 
the prevalence of regular mobile phone users and daily use were highest 
in the younger age groups (Cardis et al. 2007). Moreover, several recent 
trends (such as increased popularity, reduced price, and advertising to 
children) have led to increased mobile phone use among children. A steep 
increase in mobile phone ownership among children has been reported in 
15
 Tinnitus
 is ringing of the ears.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
several
 surveys. In spite of this, there is virtually no relevant epidemiology 
at
 present that examines health effects in children.
Children are potentially exposed from conception through maternal 
wireless device use and then postnatally when they themselves become users 
of mobile phones. Both short-term and long-term health consequences of 
mobile phone use can be ef˜ciently studied by adding information on the 
mobile phone use to the existing birth cohorts using a life course approach. 
Cognitive and behavioral effects are of particular importance and can be 
evaluated in the near term.
Owing to widespread use of mobile phones among children and adoles
-cents and the possibility of relatively high exposures to the brain, investiga
-tion of the potential effects of RF ˜elds in the development of childhood 
brain tumors is warranted. Brain cancer is an important endpoint to study 
but is rare in children and so a cohort study is unlikely to be feasible.
There is at present a lack of information concerning the health effects 
associated with living in close proximity to base stations. Epidemiologic 
studies of mobile phone base stations present unique challenges that need 
to be addressed to make such studies rigorous. One particular dif˜culty in a 
study of populations near transmitters such as TV, radio, and base stations, 
with both residential exposure and cell phone use, is the development of 
accurate indexes of exposure that are closely correlated to the exposures 
that a person receives. Assuming a nonspeci˜c effect from RF exposure 
implies that in an epidemiologic study all major RF sources should be evalu
-ated (i.e., from both base stations and TV and radio towers as exposure 
from these sources are whole body and of similar magnitude; additionally, 
exposure from one™s own cell phone use should be considered). Further 
investigation into improved measurements is a critical step in better captur
-ing exposure data from these sources and in determining the feasibility of 
epidemiologic studies of children living in the vicinity of these sources.
The committee™s evaluation of presentations and discussions at the 
workshop has resulted in the identi˜cation of the following research needs 
and gaps.
Adults
Research Needs
1.
 Prospective Cohort Studies. A prospective cohort study will allow 
for the evaluation of diverse outcomes, but a very large sample size and 
extended follow-up is required for rare outcomes or those that occur only 
with very long latencies.
2.
 Occupational Cohorts with Medium to High Exposure. None of 
the occupational studies to date have been based on an adequate exposure 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EPIDEMIOLOGY
 25
assessment.
 Much work is needed to identify occupations with potentially 
high RF exposures and to characterize them.
 Among the particular ˜nd
-ings in need of follow-up are uveal cancer, leukemia, lung, breast, testicular 
cancers, and sperm quality. If feasible, epidemiologic studies could focus on 
the health effects of potential RF exposures at high levels that might occur 
in a few workplace tasks (e.g., antenna construction and maintenance). In 
addition, several groups of ˜re˜ghters have expressed concerns about their 
exposure from base stations located in ˜rehouses and possible exposure to 
antennas on the ˜re trucks. A feasibility study might be useful in determin
-ing whether these groups have a suf˜cient exposure range and if an infor
-mative study is feasible. 
Research Gaps
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
1.
 Case-control Studies of Rare Diseases. 
For rare diseases, such as 
adult leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma
 and neurodegenerative diseases, 
additional case-control studies may be justi˜ed as a cohort study will likely 
not have suf˜cient statistical power. Such case-control studies would better 
characterize exposure and try to adjust for exposure measurement error and 
selection bias as needed.
2.
 Observational Studies on Subjective Outcomes.
16
 Subjective out
-comes from long-term exposures can be addressed in appropriately de
-signed, observational studies (e.g., prospective cohort study) that include 
provisions for avoiding or minimizing reporting and selection and misclas
-si˜cation biases.
Children
Research Needs
1.
 Prospective Cohort Studies of Pregnancy and Childhood.
 Children 
are potentially exposed from conception through maternal wireless device 
use and then postnatally when they themselves become users of mobile 
phones.
 Both short-term and long-term health consequences of mobile 
phone use can be ef˜ciently studied by adding information on the mobile 
phone use to the existing birth cohorts using a life course approach. Cogni
-tive and behavioral effects are of particular importance and can be evalu
-ated in the near term.
16
 Subjective outcomes
 are outcomes or symptoms that are dif˜cult to quantify objectively 
(e.g., pain, headaches, sleep disturbances). 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
2. Case-control Study of Children Mobile Phone Users and Brain 
Cancer.
 Owing to widespread use of mobile phones among children and 
adolescents and the possibility of relatively high exposures to the brain, 
investigation of the potential effects of RF ˜elds in the development of 
childhood brain tumors is warranted.
 Brain cancer is an important end
-point to study but is rare in children and so a cohort study is unlikely to 
be feasible.
Research Gaps
Research Ongoing
1.
 Case-control studies on childhood cancer with improved exposure 
assessment taking into account all major ˜xed point sources of RF expo
-sure (base stations, AM, FM, TV antennas, and other sources)
.Thereisat
 There is at 
present a lack of information concerning the health effects associated with 
living in close proximity to base stations
.Epidemiologicstudiesofmobile
. Epidemiologic studies of mobile 
phone base stations present unique challenges that need to be addressed to 
make such studies rigorous
. Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27
Human Laboratory Studies
The third session of the workshop focused on human laboratory stud
-ies. Human laboratory studies of radiofrequency (RF) exposure investigate 
the effects of RF exposure to humans in a controlled laboratory environ
-ment to determine potential RF effects on relevant biological endpoints 
including changes in electroencephalogram (EEG) amplitudes, increase in 
blood pressure, sleep disturbances, cardiac arrhythmia, changes in cognitive 
performance, and headaches. This report section is organized into neuro
-physiological and cognitive effects, effects on the ear and hearing, effects 
on heart rate and blood pressure, 
andsubjectivesymptomsandelectro-
and subjective symptoms and electro
-magnetic hypersensitivity (EHS).
NEUROPH
YSIOLOGICAL
 AND
 COGNITIVE
 EFFECTS
 In spite of the large number of investigations, RF-induced neurophysi
-ological effects need further study. While several studies have focused on 
spectral power of EEG, regional cerebral blood ˚ow (rCBF),
1 and event-
related (evoked) potentials (ERP),
2 most of the present data are collected 
by investigations evaluating acute effects on healthy adults during short 
1 
Cerebral blood ˚ow
 (CBF) is the blood supply to the brain in a given time, being about 
15
 percent of the cardiac output. An increase or decrease in normal CBF will cause an increase 
or decrease in cerebral arterial blood volume because of arterial dilatation or constriction.
2 
An 
event-related potential
 (ERP) is any stereotyped electrophysiological response to an 
internal or external stimulus. More simply, it is any measured brain response that is directly 
the result of a thought or perception.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
exposures to RF ˜elds.
 Dosimetric measurements for different cortical func
-tional subregions can be conducted inside a head phantom ˜lled with liquid 
having tissue-equivalent dielectric properties. A calibrated RF ˜eld scanning 
probe, moved by a robotic arm, records the spatial values of electric ˜eld 
strengths and Speci˜c Absorption Rates (SARs) within cubic volumes in 
the head phantom.
It is generally recognized that the interpretation of EEG ˜ndings is dif˜
-cult because of the high intra-individual variability in attention and waking 
state of volunteers. Some of the waking EEG studies reveal an enhancement 
of cortical activity, as measured by the increase of spectral power in the 
alpha band
3 during RF exposure. Also, the most convincing effects of RF 
exposure on the sleep EEG indicate an increase of the power of the alpha 
waves, while studies on ERPs have given mixed and inconclusive results 
(Hamblin and Wood, 2002; Cook et al. 2006).
For other spectral ranges,
4 reduction of beta band, attenuation in the 
theta activity, and increase of gamma response have been reported, as well 
as reduced amplitude and latency of N100 waves
5 and an increased P300 
latency.
6 However, these ˜ndings could not be replicated with an experi
-ment that had more statistical power (Hamblin et al. 2006). The inconsis
-tency with the previous studies was attributed to the small sample size or 
the lack of a double blind protocol of the previous study. 
Cognitive performance was assessed using several cognitive tasks, but 
no statistically signi˜cant effects were found on task performances in a 
recent study on effects on cognitive performance of exposure to 888 MHz 
signals using 168 volunteers (Russo et al. 2006). Another comprehensive 
study focused on cognitive performance of 120 subjects 
exposedto900
exposed to 900 
MHz mobile phones (Keetley et al. 2006). 
Cognitiveperformancewas
Cognitive performance was 
assessed using eight cognitive tests. 
Afteradjustingforgender,ageand
After adjusting for gender, age and 
education, simple and choice reaction times showed signi˜cant impairment, 
whereas performance on the trail-making task,
7 which involves working 
memory, signi˜cantly improved.
3 
The 
alpha band
 is the spectral component in the EEG signal, which falls between 8-13 Hz.
4 
EEG has usually been described in terms of frequency bands: GAMMA (greater than 30
 Hz), 
BETA (13-30 Hz), ALPHA (8-13 Hz), THETA (4-8 Hz), and DELTA (less than 4 Hz).
5 
N100
 is an ERP component, characterized as a negative de˚ection in voltage, peaking ap
-proximately 100 ms after the stimulus. Anomalies in N100 may give rise to cognitive de˜cits 
(i.e., impairments of memory and learning abilities).
6 
P300
 is an ERP potential component, characterized as a positive de˚ection in voltage, 
peaking approximately 300 ms after the stimulus.
7 
This test consists of two parts, A and B. Part A consists of encircled numbers from 1 to 
25 spread across a sheet of paper. The object of the test is for the subject to connect the 
numbers in order, beginning with 1 and ending with 25, whereas Part B requires the subject 
to connect numbers and letters in an alternating pattern (1-A-2-B-3-C, etc.), both in as little 
time as possible.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN LABORATORY STUDIES
 29
 E
FFECTS
 ON
 THE
 EAR
 AND
 HEARING
 Because of the close proximity of mobile phones to human ears, the 
area around the ear receives the highest RF exposure, and a lot of inter
-est has focused on possible effects on auditory perception or on acoustic 
evoked potentials.
8 However, in the majority of experiments on hearing 
threshold levels or transient evoked otoacoustic emissions,
9 no signi˜cant 
effects have been reported. Accordingly, no effects of RF exposure on 
auditory functions of the cochlea or auditory brainstem responses have 
been found by several research groups (Pau et al. 2005; 
Sievert et al. 2005
; Parazzini et al. 2005
).
While there is no evidence on adverse effects on hearing, there are 
anecdotal reports on interaction of cell phones with hearing aids and co
-chlear implants. At present, however, there are very few experimental data 
from human volunteer studies concerning health problems with auditory 
prostheses.
EFFECTS
 ON
 HEART
 RATE
 AND
 BLOOD
 PRESSURE
 Acute changes in the blood pressure and in other cardi
ophysiological 
parameters during RF exposure have been studied using healthy adult 
volunteers. In a study of 32 volunteers, an extensive set of test condi
-tions including controlled and spontaneous breathing, head-up tilt table 
test, and deep breathing tests was applied during real and sham exposure 
 
(Tahvanainen et al. 2004
). The results indicated no statistically signi˜cant 
effects on heart rate or blood pressure. Also a later comprehensive study 
with 125 volunteers concluded that RF exposure from cellular phones 
does not cause noticeable effects on heart rate regulation in healthy adults 
(Barker et al. 2007). 
Although there is no clear evidence concerning the negative cardio
-vascular, in˚ammatory, or respiratory health effects of the electromagnetic 
˜eld (EMF) produced by wireless communications tools at the macro
-physiological level, further studies focusing on the early phase of potentially 
harmful changes are needed. The new techniques focusing on endothelial 
dysfunction or prolonged oxidative stress have not been extensively used 
8 
Evoked potentials
 are brain reactions on stimulus with amplitude much lower than EEG 
voltage measured during regular brain activity. While different evoked potentials occur as a 
result of different stimuli, acoustic evoked potentials (AEP) are a result of acoustic stimuli.
9 
An 
otoacoustic emission
 (OAE) is a sound that is generated from within the inner ear.
 Broadly speaking, there are two types of otoacoustic emissions: Spontaneous Otoacoustic 
Emissions (SOAEs) and Evoked Otoacoustic Emissions (EOAEs). As their names suggest, 
SOAEs arise spontaneously and EOAEs require an evoking stimulus.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
in the human studies. Also, the rapidly developing salivary biochemical 
analysis techniques offer new possibilities.
SUBJECTIVE
 SYMPTOMS
 AND
 ELECTROMAGNETIC
 HYPERSENSITIVIT
YDuring recent years, numerous individuals have reported a variety 
of health problems that they relate to exposure to RF ˜elds from mobile 
phones. While some perceive only mild symptoms and react by avoiding 
phones, others are so severely affected that they change their entire lifestyle. 
This reported sensitivity has been generally termed ﬁelectromagnetic hyper
-sensitivityﬂ or EHS (WHO 2005).
A number of studies have been conducted where EHS individuals were 
exposed to RF ˜elds similar to those emitted by cellular phones. In one 
provocation study,
10
 20 EHS volunteers were exposed to cellular phone 
signals, which they attributed to the cause of their symptoms (
Hietanen et 
al. 2002)
. The aim was to elicit symptoms under controlled conditions with 
low-background ˜elds. The number of reported symptoms was higher dur
-ing sham exposure than during RF exposure, which could have been due to 
higher postural and mental tension at the beginning of the experiment when 
subjects were not yet adapted to the experimental conditions. In another 
study, persons with self-reported sensitivity to mobile phone signals did not 
react to RF exposure with any increased severity of perceived symptoms 
(Rubin et al. 2006)
. Hence there is little support in the research commu
-nity for the perception that RF ˜elds can be related to EHS or symptoms 
(Roosli 2007). 
The conclusion of the Fact Sheet on EHS published by the World Health 
Organization™s (WHO™s) EMF project is that ﬁEHS is characterized by a 
 
variety of non-speci˜c symptoms that differ from individual to individual. 
The symptoms are certainly real and can vary widely in their severity. What
-ever its cause, EHS can be a disabling problem for the affected individual. 
EHS has no clear diagnostic criteria and there is no scienti˜c basis to link 
EHS symptoms to EMF exposure. Further, EHS is not a medical diagnosis, 
nor is it clear that it represents a single medical problemﬂ (WHO 2005).
The committee™s evaluation of presentations and discussions at the 
workshop has resulted in the identi˜cation of research needs and gaps. 
Because of the paucity of data from identically replicated experiments, any 
future studies would bene˜t from experiments focusing on possible adverse 
effects on EEG activity, as well as on cognitive performance functions, and 
should include an increased number of subjects (Croft 2007). 
10
 An investigation into the basis of symptoms attributed to RF emissions.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUMAN LABORATORY STUDIES
 31
For further research, the workshop attendees noted the following im
-portant considerations:
Ł appropriate exposure regimes,
Ł multi-center collaborations using identical research protocols,
Ł large sample sizes, and
Ł reliable EEG analysis techniques.
In addition, most human studies have examined healthy young adults, 
a group not necessarily representing the most susceptible part of the popu
-lation. Therefore, future research needs to include children, the elderly, 
and people with underlying diseases. While the basic thermoregulatory 
physiology of healthy people in relation to external heat stress and internal 
heat load generated by RF radiation is well known, elderly people may be 
particularly vulnerable to the effects of heat stress (coronary and cerebral 
thrombosis); therefore, a gap exists in the study of this population.
Current research gaps include little existing information about
 neuro
-physiological changes during
 heavy (occupational) use of cellular phones for 
several years. A second gap is that no studies using elderly volunteers
 are 
available
, 
but could be performed.
 Finally, there is a continuing need for 
experiments focusing on possible adverse RF effects identi˜ed by changes 
in cognitive performance functions.
Research Needs
There are some considerable research needs for human laboratory stud
-ies. Due to the paucity of data from identically replicated experiments,
 1.
 There is a need for experiments focusing on possible adverse RF 
effects identi˜ed by changes in EEG activity, as well as a need to include a 
larger number of subjects.
Research Gaps 
Research Ongoing
1.
 Little or no information is available on possible neurophysiologic 
effects developing during long-term exposure to RF ˜elds.
2.
 Risks of exposure to RF ˜elds in elderly volunteers are
 not well 
explored.
3.
 There is a continuing need for experiments focusing on possible ad
-verse RF effects identi˜ed by changes in cognitive performance functions
.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
4.
 Because the use of cell phones by individuals with auditory pros
-theses is increasing, there is a need to conduct human volunteer studies 
to investigate potential 
healthimplicationsarisingfrominteractionofcell
health implications arising fro
minteractionofcell
 interaction of cell 
phones with hearing aids and cochlear implants.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33
Mechanisms
Knowledge of the basic interaction mechanisms of radiofrequency (RF) 
electromagnetic ˜elds (EMFs) with cellular and subcellular (molecular) 
structures provides a basis for extrapolation of existing knowledge to fu
-ture technologies and exposure conditions. Thus, research on interaction 
mechanisms is an important topic and a relevant part of most research 
programs worldwide. In Europe and the United States, such research has 
been ongoing for decades. 
Some of the interaction mechanisms that have been identi˜ed so far 
are well understood and widely accepted. Those include mechanisms that 
lead to thermal effects in biological tissues and forces exerted at high 
˜eld strengths that result in dielectrophoresis,
1 electroporation,
2 and pearl 
chain formation
3 of cells (Schwan 1982, 1985; Holzapfel et al. 1982). The 
responses of cells to elevated temperature are well documented and seem 
to be independent from the heating source. The electroporation effects 
are technically used, for example in pharmacology and for basic scienti˜c 
research in the integration of external DNA into cells. For wireless
 com
-munication devices electroporation is not relevant as it becomes signi˜cant 
1 
Dielectrophoresis
 is de˜ned as the lateral motion imparted on uncharged particles as a 
result of polarization induced by nonuniform electric ˜elds.
2 
Electroporation
 is a mechanical method used to introduce polar molecules into a host cell 
through the cell membrane. In this procedure, a large electric pulse temporarily disturbs the 
phospholipid bilayer, allowing molecules like DNA to pass into the cell.
3 Chains of living or nonliving particles (pearl chains) form along the lines of force of electro
-magnetic ˜elds (including RF ˜elds).
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
only at very high ˜eld strengths. The minimum RF signal that can modify 
the transport of ions and molecules is an open question. 
The basic question still under debate is whether there are other inter
-action mechanisms of low-intensity RF electromagnetic ˜elds that could 
have health consequences. Of particular interest is the possible existence of 
health effects that occur due to the accumulation of multiple, long-term, 
low-intensity RF exposures.
Currently, the most appropriate ways to answer these basic questions 
include the use of biophysical
4 (theoretical), biochemical, and biological ap
-proaches. At the physical and chemical levels, the prime goal is to identify 
a candidate mechanism that could overcome the various sources of ﬁnoiseﬂ 
in the biological system. 
From the biochemical and biological perspective, two approaches were 
suggested at the workshop to identify mechanisms that may be operating 
at low exposures:
Ł Successive- or multiple-hypothesis testing based on hazard mecha
-nisms or stress responses that are relevant for cancer (Roti Roti 2007).
 The 
pitfall of this approach seems to be that the number of parameters to be 
tested is high and not all parameters are known.
Ł The use of high-throughput screening methods (Leszczynski 2007) 
such as genomics,
5 proteomics,
6 metabolomics,
7 and others not yet devel
-oped (the so called ﬁ-omicsﬂ). Such methods have already been used in 
EMF research programs. The pitfall of these methods is the very high num
-ber of reactions that might be detected. Many of those reactions might be 
of no relevance or be false positives. Thus all ˜ndings need to be validated 
using complementary methods. 
From the biophysical perspective a series of mechanisms has been 
suggested by various investigators. Those mechanisms include but are not 
limited to:
4 
A 
biophysical approach
 is one that applies physical principles and methods to biological 
problems.
5 
Genomics
 is a branch of biotechnology concerned with applying the techniques of genetics 
and molecular biology to the genetic mapping and DNA sequencing of sets of genes or the 
complete genomes of selected organisms using high-speed methods.
6 
Proteomics
 is a branch of biotechnology concerned with applying the techniques of molecu
-lar biology, biochemistry, and genetics to analyzing the structure, function, and interactions 
of the proteins produced by the genes of a particular cell, tissue, or organism, including the 
organization of the information in databases.
7 
Metabolomics 
is the systematic study of the unique chemical ˜ngerprints that speci˜c 
 
cellular processes leave behindŠspeci˜cally, the study of their small-molecule metabolite 
pro˜les.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MECHANISMS
 35
Ł Temperature rise (ﬁheatingﬂ),
Ł voltage-gated ion channels (includes action potential-related 
channels),
Ł ion channel electro-denaturation,
Ł membrane enzyme electro-conformational coupling,
Ł magnetically sensitive radical pair reactions,
Ł magnetite-based mechanical coupling, and
Ł temporary membrane pore creation.
None of these possible mechanisms has so far been positively identi˜ed as 
a candidate for causation of health effect.
Testing for the sensitivity of the central nervous system (CNS) to detect 
modulated RF signals using the pattern recognition capability of the brain 
and neural networks would improve our understanding of the minimum 
signal level that biological systems can sense and distinguish from back
-ground noise.
It was noted at the workshop that mechanisms can be modeled theo
-retically with the use of software-based nonlinear cell models that describe 
˜eld-induced molecular changes (Weaver 2007; Gowrishankar et al. 2006). 
It was also noted (D™Inzeo 2007) that investigation of doses occurring on 
the microscopic level may lead to a better understanding of possible interac
-tions of RF electromagnetic ˜elds on the cellular and subcellular level. The 
utility of this observation is supported by recent ˜ndings (Barnes and Kwan 
2005) that suggest a higher energy absorption at the microscopic scale, e.g., 
at the boundary between cellular structures with different dielectric proper
-ties. Several national and international expert groups, including the World 
Health Organization, have requested more research into micro-dosimetry 
and appropriate dielectric models as a medium- to long-term research need. 
Some research programs in Europe already include such investigations.
It is unclear whether low-level RF exposure can trigger effects through 
stimulation of cellular thermo-receptors. 
Itisalsocurrentlyunclearifanon-
It is also currently unclear if a non
-linear biological mechanism exists that could lead to demodulation effects. 
As a result, different modulations and wave characteristics would affect 
biological systems differently. There is some research with respect to this 
question underway, such as 
anexperimentbeingconductedintheUK.
an experiment being conducted in the
 UK.
8 Knowledge is lacking concerning the effects of electromagnetic ˜elds on 
ion and molecular transport through the cell membrane. Work is ongoing at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the outcome should be eval
-uated before further work is initiated (Weaver and
 Chizmadzhev
 2006).
8 
http://www.mthr.org.uk/research_projects/HO_funded_projects_excell.htm Accessed Sep
-tember 2
0, 2007.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
The committee™s evaluation of presentations and discussions at the 
workshop has resulted in the identi˜cation of the following research needs 
and gaps.
Research Needs
1.
 Effects of RF electromagnetic ˜elds on neural networks are re
-search needs.
 There are indications that neural networks are a sensitive 
biological target
. 2.
 Investigations of doses occurring on the microscopic level are 
needed to better understand possible interactions of RF electromagnetic 
˜elds on the cellular and subcellular level.
 Several national and inter
-national expert groups, including the World Health Organization, have 
requested more research into micro-dosimetry and appropriate dielectric 
models as a medium- to long-term research need
.Research Gaps 
Research Ongoing
1.
 Mechanisms that can be modeled theoretically with the use of 
software-based nonlinear cell models that describe ˜eld-induced molecular 
changes
.Itiscurrentlyunclearifanonlinearbiologicalmechanismexists
 It is currently unclear if a nonlinear biological mechanism exists 
that could lead to demodulation effects. There is some research with respect 
to this question underway. 
Judged to Be of Lower Priority
2.
 It is unclear whether low-level RF exposure can trigger effects 
through stimulation of cellular thermo-receptors. 
3.
 Knowledge is lacking concerning the effects of electromagnetic 
˜elds on ion
 and molecular transport through the cell membrane.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37
In Vivo and In Vitro Studies in 
Experimental Model Systems
Studies performed using in vivo and in vitro (animal and cellular) 
experimental model systems are critical components of the effort to iden
-tify adverse health effects of exposure to radiofrequency (RF) ˜elds gen
-erated by wireless communications devices. Experimental studies permit 
the evaluation of possible risks of RF exposure using well-studied model 
systems under closely controlled conditions. Well-designed studies in ex
-perimental biological models permit the precise quanti˜cation of exposure 
levels, generate essential dose-response data, provide the opportunity to 
eliminate many external variables that could confound or otherwise alter 
responses to RF ˜elds, and support comparisons of RF responses to those 
of chemical and other physical agents using large historical databases in 
which the effects of those agents have been evaluated in biological models 
with known ability to predict human responses. Experimental studies can 
also be designed to include speci˜c endpoint evaluations that can generate 
important data concerning possible biological mechanisms of RF action. 
Conversely, however, an unavoidable limitation to data from experimental 
studies is the requirement to extrapolate data (a) between animal species 
and (b) from high exposure levels used in the laboratory to lower exposure 
levels to which humans are commonly exposed. Interspecies differences 
and high-dose to low-dose extrapolations remain important challenges to 
the interpretation and application of experimental data to assessments of 
human risk. 
The body of experimental data from studies designed to investigate the 
possible health effects of exposure to RF ˜elds continues to expand. Well-
designed bioassays will include consideration of dose-response
 relationships.
 Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
The state-of-the-science does currently, or will soon, support reasonable 
conclusions related to the effects of RF exposure on a number of health-
related endpoints in laboratory animals (Sienkiewicz 2007; Lai 2007; Roti 
Roti 2007) and cell-based model systems (Vijayalaxmi 2007). However, 
data gaps do exist, and a number of possibly critical health effects of RF 
˜elds remain to be investigated. In this regard, it should be noted that 
essentially all experimental studies of RF health effects have been descrip
-tive (e.g., Chou et al. 1992; Vijayalaxmi and Obe 2004) in that they have 
not been designed to investigate speci˜c hypotheses of disease causation. 
Indeed, lacking compelling biophysical and biochemical/molecular mecha
-nisms through which RF exposure could play a role in disease causation, 
investigations of possible links between RF exposure and disease are neces
-sarily empirical. Additional experimental research focused on the identi˜ca
-tion of potential biophysical, biochemical, and molecular mechanisms of RF 
action is therefore considered to be an important research need, because it 
serves as an essential element of a comprehensive hazard assessment.
 The following sub-sections are organized into Cancer, Cancer-related 
Endpoints: Genetic Toxicology, Cancer-related Endpoints: Other, and Non
-cancer Health Effects.
CANCER
Perhaps the single most important question concerning the health 
 
effects of exposure to RF ˜elds is the possible link between such exposures 
and cancer risk. Several well-designed, large-scale studies to evaluate the 
possible oncogenicity of chronic exposure to RF ˜elds in laboratory animals 
have been conducted (Zook and Simmens 2001; La Regina et al. 2003; 
Anderson et al. 2004; Tillmann et al. 2007) or are currently in progress. 
In consideration of the size and strength of the emerging database for 
studies of the potential carcinogenicity and general toxicity of RF ˜elds, 
and the quality of the studies that have been and are being conducted, 
there appears to be only limited value to be gained by initiating addi
-tional
 oncogenicity studies using standard-bred animal models until ongo
-ing studies have been completed. Following completion of these studies, a 
ﬁweight-of-the
-evidenceﬂ analysis can be conducted (for example, using 
criteria established by the International Agency for Research on Cancer) to 
synthesize and evaluate the entire data set. At that time, rational, informed 
decisions can be made concerning (a) the value of conducting additional 
oncogenicity studies in standard-bred
 laboratory animals and (b) speci˜c 
design elements that can be incorporated into any such studies in order to 
address identi˜ed data gaps. 
Although a large database will soon be available to support evalua
-tions of the possible oncogenicity of RF ˜elds in standard-bred animals, 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IN VIVO AND IN VITRO STUDIES IN EXPERIMENTAL MODEL SYSTEMS
 39
few
 studies have been conducted in which potential cancer risks have been 
evaluated using genetically engineered models in which animals demon
-strate increased sensitivity to carcinogenesis. The results of such studies 
could be essential to assessing possible risks of RF exposure in susceptible 
subpopulations, including individuals with underlying disease, those with 
genetic alterations that predispose them to oncogenesis, and prior or simul
-taneous exposure to other carcinogenic or potentially carcinogenic agents. 
The use of genetically engineered animals may also increase the sensitivity 
of laboratory studies to detect weak effects, and may be particularly suit
-able to evaluate the possible interactions between RF ˜elds and other agents 
in disease causation. 
The possible risks of neoplasia (the process of tumor formation) associ
-ated with RF exposure in individuals that have been (or are currently) exposed 
to other environmental or occupational carcinogens may also be investigated 
experimentally through the use of multi-stage (ﬁinitiation
-promotionﬂ or co-
carcinogenesis) cancer models (Adey et al. 1999, 2000; Zook and Simmens 
2001; Bartsch et al. 2002; Anane et al. 2003; Yu et al. 2006). Several such 
studies have been performed in animal models for cancer in several different 
organ sites, with uniformly negative results. However, the overall database 
for RF ˜elds and cancer would be strengthened considerably by additional 
studies using multi-stage model systems for cancer in tissues (such as the 
brain) that have been hypothesized to be targets of RF action. Currently the 
value of such studies is often limited by the lack of suitable animal models 
that demonstrate the (a) organ speci˜city and (b) background tumor re
-sponses to make them suitable for use in hazard identi˜cation. 
CANCER
-R
ELATED
 E
NDPOINTS
: G
ENETIC
 T
OXICOLOG
YAs noted at the workshop (Lai 2007, Vijayalaxmi 2007), substantial 
effort has been put forth to evaluate the possible genetic toxicity of RF 
˜elds, both in vivo and in vitro. Although a number of positive outcomes 
have been reported, efforts to replicate
 the results of positive studies have 
generally failed. Furthermore, the majority of experimental studies designed 
to identify genotoxic effects of exposure to RF ˜elds have not found sig
-ni˜cant mutagenic or clastogenic activity in any model system that is in 
broad general use for genetic toxicology evaluations. On this basis, most 
investigators in the ˜eld agree that no compelling body of evidence exists 
to support the hypothesis that RF ˜elds are genotoxic. The committee con
-cludes that additional studies using standard genetic toxicology test systems 
are unlikely to increase our understanding of the possible risks associated 
with RF exposure at this time.
That said, additional genetic toxicology studies may be warranted 
should evidence of oncogenicity be identi˜ed in any of the ongoing chronic 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
toxicity/oncogenicity bioassays of RF ˜elds in laboratory animals, or in 
any future studies to be performed using genetically engineered animal 
models. In the event that RF ˜elds are identi˜ed as being oncogenic in one 
or more of these studies, further genetic toxicology studies of RF ˜elds may 
be warranted as a means to identify possible mechanisms underlying such 
oncogenicity. Should evidence of oncogenicity be identi˜ed in a genetically 
engineered animal model, additional genetic toxicology studies could be 
particularly valuable if conducted using cells demonstrating the same mo
-lecular defect. Additional genetic toxicology studies could also be of value 
if performed in cells that demonstrate a predisposition to DNA damage, 
such as defects in the ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) gene (associated with AT)
1 or de˜ciencies in DNA repair (e.g., 
xeroderma pigmentosum
 cells).
2  C
ANCER
-R
ELATED
 E
NDPOINTS
: O
THER
Although substantial experimental data are emerging that can be used 
to evaluate the possible oncogenicity of RF ˜elds, a number of potentially 
critical cancer-related endpoints have received only very limited study. 
These include:
Ł Possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function of 
the immune system. Modulation of immune surveillance provides a known 
mechanism through which exogenous agents may stimulate oncogenesis. 
The effects of RF on speci˜c arms of host immune function have received 
very little study in validated immunotoxicology model systems.
Ł Possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the endocrine system. In 
consideration of the high incidence of hormone-dependent cancers in the 
population at large, modulation of hormone synthesis and/or action could 
also provide an indirect mechanism through which agents may stimulate or 
inhibit carcinogenesis in hormone-dependent tissues. 
Ł In vitro
 studies of the effects of RF exposure on cell proliferation, 
apoptosis,3 and biochemical and molecular pathways of known signi˜cance 
to carcinogenesis. Although labor-intensive and relatively narrow in scope, 
1 
Ataxia-telangiectasia
 is an inherited disorder with symptoms that may include 
telangiectasi
s (dilation of capillaries), ataxic (uncoordinated) gait, proneness to infection, defective humoral 
and cellular immunity, and increased risk of malignancies.
2 
Xeroderma pigmentosum
 is a genetic condition inherited as a recessive autosomal trait that 
is caused by a defect in mechanisms that repair DNA mutations (as those caused by ultraviolet 
light) and is characterized by the development of pigment abnormalities and multiple skin 
cancers in body areas exposed to the sun.
3 
Apoptosis
 is a genetically directed process of cell self-destruction that is activated either 
by a stimulus or removal of a suppressing agent or stimulus, and is a normal physiological 
process eliminating unwanted cells.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IN VIVO AND IN VITRO STUDIES IN EXPERIMENTAL MODEL SYSTEMS
 41
such studies may identify mechanisms through which RF may induce or 
stimulate neoplastic development. 
Ł Broadly based (whole genome) investigations of alterations in gene 
and protein expression in cells exposed to RF ˜elds. Because no repro
-ducible effects of RF exposure on cancer-related endpoints have yet been 
identi˜ed, genome-wide and proteome-wide screening studies can provide 
an unbiased (although untargeted) approach through which RF-induced 
changes in biological activities may be identi˜ed. Following the initial 
genome-wide/proteome-wide screening, targeted data analyses and further 
investigations of pathways that are modulated by RF will be required to 
identify alterations in gene or protein expression that may underlie neoplas
-tic activity or other toxic effects of RF exposure. 
OTHER
 H
EALTH
 E
FFECTS
 (N
ON
CANCER
) In addition to cancer-related endpoints, data gaps exist in a number 
of other areas of toxicology in which knowledge is essential to support a 
complete evaluation of the possible health effects of RF exposure. These 
include:
Ł Possible in˚uences of RF exposure on fetal and neonatal develop
-ment. Developmental and reproductive toxicity evaluations could include 
possible teratogenic
4 effects at nonthermal exposure levels, effects on ma
-ternal behavior, effects on male and female fertility, and effects on matu
-ration patterns in neonatal and juvenile animals. Although clear evidence 
of teratogenicity has been demonstrated at RF exposure levels that induce 
temperature changes, the possible teratogenicity of RF ˜elds at lower (non
-thermal) exposure levels has been studied much less extensively. Similarly, 
the possible effects of RF exposure on neonatal and juvenile growth and 
development (for example, using endpoints included in perinatal and post
-natal development, including maternal function, and toxicology evalua
-tions) have received little study.
Ł Possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function of 
the immune system, including prenatal, neonatal, and juvenile exposures. In 
addition to possible effects on cancer risk (as discussed above), modulation 
of immune function could alter host resistance to infectious agents. This 
could be particularly important in juvenile animals (and children), since 
their immune system is less developed than in adults.
Ł Possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function 
of the central nervous system, including prenatal, neonatal, and juvenile 
 
exposures. Effects on the structure of the nervous system (including the 
4 
Teratogenic
 means to be of, relating to, or causing developmental malformations.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
blood-brain barrier) could impact a variety of behavioral, emotional, learn
-ing, and other higher cognitive functions. It is important to note, however, 
that changes in central nervous system (CNS) function may also occur with
-out histopathologic evidence of underlying structural damage. Such changes 
could be assessed through comprehensive neurobehavioral evaluations, 
such as functional observational batteries that are commonly included in 
nonclinical toxicology studies; through specialized evaluations of CNS 
function (e.g., motor activity, acoustic startle, and other more speci˜c neuro
-toxicology evaluations); and through electrophysiological assessments of 
CNS function (e.g., electroencephalograms). Neurobehavioral evaluations 
in juvenile animals exposed to RF may be particularly important, as the 
juvenile blood-brain barrier is less well developed than in adults; alterations 
in the blood-brain barrier could have both direct effects on CNS function, 
and could underlie neurotoxicity by allowing the entry into the brain of 
substances that are ordinarily excluded.
 The data gaps identi˜ed above can be addressed, at least initially, 
through the conduct of descriptive (empirical) toxicology, carcinogenesis, 
and molecular studies whose goal is general assessment of the impact of 
exposure to RF ˜elds on toxicological or disease endpoints. Following com
-pletion of this set of empirical studies, further progress in the evaluation of 
the possible health effects of RF exposure will depend on the conduct of 
hypothesis-driven investigations of putative mechanisms of RF action. At 
the present time, no generally accepted biological or molecular mechanism 
has been identi˜ed through which RF exposure may impact disease pro
-cesses. Should exposure to RF ˜elds be found to induce toxicity or increase 
the risk of any speci˜c disease, the importance of fundamental mechanistic 
research in our understanding of these effects cannot be overstated, as it 
will provide the only realistic pathway to a complete assessment of any 
hazards posed to exposure to RF ˜elds. 
The committee™s evaluation of presentations and discussions at the 
workshop has resulted in the identi˜cation of the following research needs 
and gaps.
Research Needs
1.
 Additional experimental research focused on the identi˜cation of 
potential biophysical and biochemical/molecular mechanisms of RF action 
are considered to be of the highest priority. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IN VIVO AND IN VITRO STUDIES IN EXPERIMENTAL MODEL SYSTEMS
 43
Research Gaps
Cancer
Research Ongoing
1.
 In consideration of the size and strength of the emerging database 
for studies of the potential carcinogenicity and general toxicity of RF ˜elds, 
there appears to be only limited value to be gained by initiating additional 
oncogenicity studies using standard-bred animal models until ongoing stud
-ies have been completed. Following completion of these ongoing studies, 
a ﬁweight-of-the-evidenceﬂ analysis can be conducted to synthesize and 
evaluate the entire data set. At that time, rational, informed decisions can 
be made concerning:
 a.
 the value of conducting additional oncogenicity studies in 
 
standard-bred laboratory animals, and
 b.
 design elements that should be incorporated into any such 
 
studies in order to address identi˜ed data gaps. 
2.
 The use of genetically engineered animals may increase the sensi
-tivity of laboratory studies to detect weak effects, and may be particularly 
suitable to evaluate the possible interactions between RF ˜elds and other 
agents in disease causation. 
3.
 The overall database for RF ˜elds and cancer would be strength
-ened by additional studies using multi-stage model systems for cancer in 
tissues (such as the brain) that have been hypothesized to be targets of RF 
action. At the present time, however, the value of such studies is often lim
-ited by the lack of suitable animal models that demonstrate:
 a.
 appropriate organ speci˜city, and 
 b.
 background tumor responses (incidence and latency) to make 
them suitable for use in hazard identi˜cation. 
Cancer-related Endpoints: Genetic Toxicology
4.
 Although genetic toxicology studies have failed to identify potential 
RF health effects (in part due to lack of replication of ˜ndings from key 
positive studies), additional genetic toxicology studies may be warranted 
should evidence of oncogenicity be identi˜ed in any of the ongoing chronic 
toxicity/oncogenicity bioassays of RF ˜elds in laboratory animals, or in 
any future studies to be performed using genetically engineered animal 
models. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Cancer-related Endpoints: Other
5.
 A number of potentially critical cancer-related endpoints have re
-ceived only very limited study. These include:
 a.
 possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function 
of the immune system,
 b.
 possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the endocrine system,
 c.
 in vitro
 studies of the effects of RF exposure on cell prolifera
-tion, apoptosis, and biochemical and molecular pathways of known signi˜
-cance to carcinogenesis, and
 d.
 broadly based (whole genome) investigations of alterations in 
gene and protein expression in cells exposed to RF ˜elds. 
Other Health Effects (Noncancer) 
6.
 In addition to cancer-related endpoints, data gaps exist in a number 
of other areas of toxicology in which knowledge is essential to support a 
complete evaluation of the possible health effects of RF exposure. These 
include:
 a.
 possible in˚uences of RF exposure on fetal and neonatal 
development,
 b.
 possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function 
of the immune system, including prenatal, neonatal, and juvenile exposures, 
and
 c.
 possible in˚uences of RF exposure on the structure and function 
of the central nervous system, including prenatal, neonatal, and juvenile 
exposures.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45
References
Adey, W. R., C. V. Byus, C. D. Cain, R. J. Higgins, R. A. Jones, C. J. Kean, N. Kuster, A. 
MacMurray, R. B. Stagg, and W. Haggren. 1999. Spontaneous and nitrosourea-induced 
primary tumors of the central nervous system in Fischer 344 rats chronically exposed to 
836 MHz modulated microwaves. Radiat. Res. 152:293-302.
Adey, W. R., C. V. Byus, C. D. Cain, R. J. Higgins, R. A. Jones, C. J. Kean, N. Kuster, A. 
MacMurray, R. B. Stagg, and G. Zimmerman. 2000. Spontaneous and nitrosourea-
induced primary tumors of the central nervous system in Fischer 344 rats chronically 
exposed to frequency-modulated microwave ˜elds. Cancer. Res. 60:1857-1863.
Anane, R., P. E. Dulou, M. Taxile, M. Geffard, F. Crespeau, and B. Veyret. 2003. Effects of 
GSM-900 microwaves on female rats bearing DMBA-induced tumours. Radiat. Res. 
160:492-497.
Anderson, L. E., D. M. Sheen, B. W. Wilson, S. L. Grumbein, J. A. Creim, and L. B. Sasser. 
2004. Two-year chronic bioassay study of rats exposed to a 1.6 GHz radiofrequency 
signal. Radiat. Res. 162:201-210.
ANSI (American National Standards Institute). 1982. American National Standard Safety 
Levels with respect to Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 300 
kHz to 100 GHz. ANSI C95.1-1982.
Armstrong, B., G. Theriaul, P. Guenel, J. Deadman, M. Goldberg, and P. Heroux. 1994. As
-sociation between exposure to pulsed electromagnetic ˜elds and cancer in electric utility 
workers in Quebec, Canada, and France. Am. J. Epidemiol. 140:805-820.
Auvinen, A. 2007. Non-cancer Epidemiology. Presented at the workshop organized by the 
Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007. 
Barker, A. T., P. R. Jackson, H. Parry, L. A. Coulton, G. G. Cook, and S. M. Wood. 2007. The 
effect of GSM and TETRA mobile handset signals on blood pressure, catechol levels and 
heart rate variability. Bioelectromagnetics 28(6):433-438.
Barnes, F., and Y. Kwon. 2005. A theoretical study of the effects of rf ˜elds in the vicinity of 
membranes. Bioelectromagnetics 26(2):118-124.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Bartsch, H., C. Bartsch, E. Seebald, F. Deerberg, K. Dietz, L.Vollrath, and D. Meeke. 2002. 
Chronic exposure to a GSM-like signal (mobile phone) does not stimulate the develop
-ment of DMBA-induced mammary tumors in rats: Results of three consecutive studies. 
Radiat. Res. 157:183-190.
Cardis, E., L. Richardson, I. Deltour, B. Armstrong, M. Feychting, C. Johansen, et al. 2007. 
The INTERPHONE study: Design, epidemiological methods, and description of the 
study population. Eur. J. Epidemiol. DOI 10.1007/s10654-007-9152-z.
Chia, S. E., H. P. Chia, and J. S. Tan. 2000. Prevalence of headache among handheld cel
-lular telephone users in Singapore: A community study. Environ. Health Perspect. 108: 
1059-1062.
Chou, C. K., A. W. Guy, L. L. Kunz, R. B. Johnson, J. J. Crowley, and J. H. Krupp. 1992. 
Long-term low-level microwave irradiation of rats. Bioelectromagnetics 13:469-496.
Cook, C. M., D. M. Saucier, A. W. Thomas, and F. S. Prato. 2006. Exposure to ELF magnetic 
and ELF-modulated radiofrequency ˜elds: The time course of physiological and cognitive 
effects observed in recent studies (2001-2005). Bioelectromagnetics 27:613-627. 
Croft, R. 2007. Human Laboratory SessionŠSleep, Cognition. Presented at the workshop 
organized by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential 
Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, 
DC, August 7-9, 2007.
D™Inzeo, G. 2007. Mechanisms (Biophysics). Presented at the workshop organized by the 
Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007.
Gandhi, O. P. 1979. DosimetryŠThe absorption properties of man and experimental animals. 
Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine 55:(11)999-1020.
Gandhi, O. P., and M. S. Lam. 2003. An on-site dosimetry system for safety assessment of 
wireless base stations using spatial harmonic components. IEEE Transactions on Anten
-nas & Propagation 51(4):840-847.
Gowrishankar, T. R., A. T. Esser, Z. Vasilkoski, K. C. Smith, and J. C. Weaver. 2006. Microdo
-simetry for conventional and supra-electroporation in cells with organelles. Biochemical 
and Biophysical Research Communications 341:1266-1276.
Groves, F. D., W. F. Page, G. Gridley, L. Lisimaque, P. A. Stewart, R. E. Tarone, et al. 2002. 
Cancer in Korean War navy technicians: Mortality survey after 40 years. Am. J. Epide
-miol. 155:810-818.
Hamblin, D. L., R. J. Croft, A. W. Wood, C. Stough, and J. Spong. 2006. The sensitivity of hu
-man event-related potentials and reaction time to mobile phone emitted electromagnetic 
˜elds. Bioelectromagnetics 27:265-273.
Hamblin, D. L., and A.W. Wood. 2002. Effects of mobile phone emissions on human brain 
activity and sleep variables. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 78(8):659-669.
Hardell, L., M. Carlberg, and K. Mild. 2006. Pooled analysis of two case-control studies on 
the use of cellular and cordless telephones and the risk for malignant brain tumours 
diagnosed in 1997-2003. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 79:630-639.
Hayes, R. B., L. M. Brown, L. M. Pottern, M. Gomez, J. W. Kardaun, R. N. Hoover, K. J. 
O™Connell, R. E. Sutzman, and N. Javadpour. 1990. Occupation and risk for testicular 
cancer: A case-control study. Int. J. Epidemiology 19:825-831.
Hietanen, M., A.-M. Hämäläinen, and T. Husman. 2002. Hypersensitivity symptoms as
-sociated with exposure to cellular telephones: No causal link. Bioelectromagnetics 23: 
264-270. 
Hirata, A., S. Kodera, J. Wang, and O. Fujiwara. 2007. Dominant factors in˚uencing whole-
body average SAR due to far-˜eld exposure in whole-body resonance frequency and GHz 
regions. Bioelectromagnetics 28:484-487.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
 47
Hocking, B., I. Gordon, H. Grain, and G. Hat˜eld. 1996. Cancer incidence and mortality and 
proximity to TV towers. 
Med.J.Aust.165:601-605.
Med. J. Aust. 165:601-605.
Holzapfel, C., J. Vienken., and U. Zimmermann. 
1982.Rotationofcellsinanalternating
1982. Rotation of cells in an alternating 
electric ˜eld: Theory and experimental proof. J. Membr. Biol. 67:13-26.
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers). 1996. Microwave Theory & Tech
-niques, Special Issue on Medical Application and Biological Effects of Microwaves Part 
II.
Keetley, V., A. W. Wood, J. Spong, and C. Stough. 2006. Neuropsychological sequelae of 
digital mobile phone exposure in humans. 
Neuropsychologia44(10):1843-1848.
Neuropsychologia 44(10):1843-1848.
Kheifets, L., M. Repacholi, R. Saunders, and E. van Deventer. 2005. Sensitivity of children to 
EMF. Pediatrics 116(2):e303-e313.
Krewski, D. 2007. Cancer Epidemiology. Presented at the workshop organized by the Commit
-tee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health 
Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 7-9, 2007. 
Lahkola, A., A. Auvinen, J. Raitanen, M. Schoemaker, H. C. Christensen, M. Feychting, 
C. Johansen, L. Klaboe, S. Lonn, A. J. Swerdlow, T. Tynes, and T. Salminen. 2007. 
Mobile phone use and risk of glioma in 5 North European countries. Int. J. Cancer 
120:1769-1775.
Lai, H. 2007. In VivoŠAnimal and Cell Biology. Presented at the workshop organized by 
the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007. 
La Regina, M., E. G. Moros, W. F. Pickard, W. L. Straube, J. Baty, and J. L. Roti Roti. 
2003. The effect of chronic exposure to 835.62 MHz FDMA or 847.74 MHz CDMA 
radiofrequency radiation on the incidence of spontaneous tumors in rats. Radiat. Res. 
160:143-151.
Leszczynski, D. 2007. In VitroŠAnimal and Cell Biology. Presented at the workshop or
-ganized by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential 
Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, 
DC, August 7-9, 2007. 
Lonn, S., A. Ahlbom, P. Hall, and M. Feychting. 2004. Mobile phone use and the risk of 
acoustic neuroma. Epidemiology 15(6):653-659.
McKenzie, D., Y. Yin, and S. Morrell. 1998. Childhood incidence of acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia and exposure to broadcast radiation in SydneyŠa second look. Aust. N. Z. J. 
Public Health 22:360-367.
Mezei, G., M. Benyi, and A. Muller. 2007. Mobile phone ownership and use among school 
children in three Hungarian cities. Bioelectromagnetics 28(4):309-315. 
Morgan, R. W., M. A. Kelsh, K. Zhao, K. A. Exuzides, S. Heringer, and W. Negrete. 2000. 
Radiofrequency exposure and mortality from cancer of the brain and lymphatic/hema
-topoietic systems. Epidemiology 11:118-127. 
Parazzini, M., S. Bell, G. Thuroczy, F. Molnar, G. Tognola, M. E. Lutman, and P. Ravazzani. 
2005. In˚uence on the mechanisms of generation of distortion product otoacoustic emis
-sions of mobile phone exposure. Hear. Res
. 208:68-78.
Pau, H. W., U. Sievert, S. Eggert, and W. Wild. 2005. Can electromagnetic ˜elds emitted 
by mobile phones stimulate the vestibular organ? Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 132: 
43-49.
Roti Roti, J. 2007. In VivoŠAnimal and Cell Biology. Presented at the workshop organized 
by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 IDENTIFICATION OF RESEARCH NEEDS
Rubin, G. J., G. Hahn, B. S. Everitt, A. J. Cleare, and S. Wessely. 2006. Are some people sensi
-tive to mobile phone signals? Within participants double blind randomised provocation 
study. BMJ 332:886-891. 
Russo, R., E. Fox, C. Cinel, A. Boldini, M. A. Defeyter, D. Mirshekar-Syahkal, and A. Mehta. 
2006. 
Doesacuteexposuretomobilephonesaffecthumanattention?Bioelectromagnet-
Does acute exposure to mobile phones affect human attention? Bioelectromagnet
-ics 27(3):215-220.
Sandstrom M., J. Wilen, G. Oftedal, and K. Mild. 2001. Mobile phone use and subjective 
symptoms. Comparison of symptoms experienced by users of analogue and digital mobile 
phones. Occup. Med. (Lond) 51:25-35.
Schuz, J., R. Jacobsen, J. Olsen, J. Boice, J. McLaughlin, and C. Johansen. 2006. Cellular 
telephone use and cancer risk: Update of a nationwide Danish cohort. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 98:1707-1713.
Schwan, H. P. 1982. Nonthermal cellular effects of electromagnetic ˜elds: AC-˜eld induced 
ponderomotoric forces. Br. J. Cancer. 45 (Suppl. V):220-224.
Schwan, H. P. 1985. EM-˜eld induced effects. 
InA.Chiabrera,C.Nicolini,andH.P.Schwan,
In A. Chiabrera, C. Nicolini, and H. P. Schwan, 
editors. 
Interactionsbetweenelectromagnetic˜eldsandcells.NewYork:PlenumPress.
Interactions between electromagnetic ˜elds and cells. New York: Plenum Press. 
Pp 371-390.
Sienkiewicz, Z. 2007. In VitroŠAnimal and Cell Biology. Presented at the workshop organized 
by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007. 
Sievert, U., S. Eggert, and H. W. Pau. 2005. Can mobile phone emissions affect auditory func
-tions of cochlea or brain stem? Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 132:451-455. 
Stang, A., G. Anastassiou, W. Ahrens, K. Bromen, N. Bornfeld, and K. H. Jockel. 2001. The 
possible role of radiofrequency radiation in the development of uveal melanoma. Epi
-demiology 12:7-12.
Tell, R., and E. D. Mantiply. 1980. Population exposure to VHF and UHF broadcast radiation 
in the U.S. Proceedings of the IEEE 68:6-12. 
Tillmann, T., H. Ernst, S. Ebert, N. Kuster, W. Behnke, S. Rittinghausen, and C.
 Dasenbrock. 
2007. Carcinogenicity study of GSM and DCS wireless communication signals in B6C3F1 
mice. Bioelectromagnetics 28:173-187.
Tynes, T., M. Hannevik, A. Andersen, A. I. Vistnes, and T. Haldorsen. 1996. Incidence of 
breast cancer in Norwegian female radio and telegraph operators. Cancer Causes Control 
7:197-204.
van Deventer, E. 2007. Research Needs for RF Fields: A WHO Perspective. Presented at the 
workshop organized by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to 
Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communication Devices, Wash
-ington, DC, August 7-9, 2007 (see also 
www.who.int/em
f for RF Research Agenda).
Vijayalaxmi, and G. Obe. 2004. Controversial cytogenetic observations in mammalian somatic 
cells exposed to radiofrequency radiation. Radiat. Res. 162:481-496.
Vijayalaxmi. 2007. In VitroŠAnimal and Cell Biology. Presented at the workshop organized 
by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, Washington, DC, August 
7-9, 2007. 
Vrijheid, M., I. Deltour, D. Krewski, M. Sanchez, and E. Cardis. 2006. The effects of recall 
errors and of selection bias in epidemiologic studies of mobile phone use and cancer risk. 
J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 16(4):371-384.
Wang, J., O. Fujiwara, S. Koder, and S. Watanabe. 2006. FDTD calculation of whole-body 
average SAR in adult and child models for frequencies from 30 MHz to 3 GHz. Phys. 
Med. Biol. 51:4119-4127.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
 49
Weaver, J., and Y. Chizmadzhev. 2006. Handbook of Biological Effects of Electromagnetic 
Fields (3rd Edition), F. Barnes and B. Greenbaum,
 editors. Biological and Medical Aspects 
of Electromagnetic Fields. Chapter 9:293-333. New York: CRC Press.
 Weaver, J. 2007. In Silico Bioelectromagnetics and In Vivo Biochemical Noise. Presented at 
the workshop organized by the Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating 
to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices, 
Washington, DC, August 7-9, 2007. 
WHO (World Health Organization). 2005. Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity. Fact Sheet No 
296, Geneva, Switzerland.
Yu, D., Y. Shen, N. Kuster, Y. Fu, and H. Chiang. 
2006.Effectsof900MHzGSMwire-
2006. Effects of 900 MHz GSM wire
-less communication signals on DMBA-induced mammary tumors in rats. Radiat. Res. 
165:174-180.
Zook, B. C., and S. J. Simmens. 2001. The effects of 860 MHz radiofrequency radiation on 
the induction or promotion of brain tumors and other neoplasms in rats. Radiat. Res. 
155:572-583.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51
Appendix A
Statement of Task
The National Academies will organize a workshop of national and in
-ternational experts to discuss research needs and gaps in knowledge of bio
-logical effects and adverse health outcomes of exposure to radiofrequency 
energy from wireless communications devices. Following the workshop, 
the National Academies will issue a report that draws on the presentations 
and discussions at the workshop to identify current gaps in knowledge and 
future research needed to address those gaps. The report will also provide 
the committee™s consensus ˜ndings on near-, mid-, and long-term research 
opportunities.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
Appendix B
Committee Biographical Sketches
Frank S. Barnes, Ph.D., NAE, 
is distinguished professor in the Department 
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Colorado at 
Boulder. He received a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford Uni
-versity. His career has included research in a wide variety of applications 
in physics and electrical engineering, focusing on fundamental research on 
the biological effects of electromagnetic ˜elds, surgical procedures, and 
telecommunications education. His research has included the effects of 
radio waves, ˜elds from power lines, and ultrasonic ˜elds on biological 
systemsŠtrying to understand the mechanisms of interaction that might 
lead to identi˜cation of hazards, the setting of safety standards, and the 
establishment of minimum detectable ˜elds. He has been an author of more 
than 150 papers. Dr. Barnes is an AAAS fellow, an Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) fellow, and was elected to the National Acad
-emy of Engineering in 2001. He received the Gordon Prize for Innovations 
in Engineering Education and is a past-president of the Bioelectromagnetics 
Society (BEMS). Dr. Barnes chaired a National Academies™ committee that 
assessed in four reports potential health effects from exposures to low-level 
radiofrequency energy produced by a phased-array radar
.Om P. Gandhi, Ph.D.,
 has been a faculty member in the Department of 
Electrical Engineering at the University of Utah since 1967, where he has 
been a professor since 1973. He also served as the department chairman 
from 1992 to 2000. Having worked in the ˜eld of bioeletromagnetics 
(safety assessment and medical applications of electromagnetic ˜elds) since 
1973, Dr. Gandhi has expertise regarding electromagnetic (EM) absorption 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 53
in humans for various public and personnel radio frequency EM exposure 
environments using anatomically based models of the human body and 
numerical electromagnetic techniques that are used to understand coupling 
of EM ˜elds for far- and near-˜eld exposures from power line to microwave 
frequencies. This expertise includes the use of numerical and experimental 
techniques for compliance testing of wireless communication devices and 
development of instrumentation for assessing personnel safety. From 1995 
to 2003, Dr. Gandhi served as chairman of the National Council of Ra
-diation Protection™s Scienti˜c Committee 89-4 on ﬁBiological Effects and 
Exposure Recommendations for Pulse-Modulated RF Fields.ﬂ Dr. Gandhi 
was elected a fellow of the IEEE in 1979 and received the distinguished 
research award from the University of Utah for 1979-1980. He received 
the Utah Governor™s Medal for Science and Technology in 2002 and the 
Microwave Pioneer Award of the IEEE-Microwave Theory and Techniques 
Society in 2001. He has been president of the Bioelectromagnetics Society 
(1992-1993), co-chairman of IEEE SCC 28.IV Subcommittee on the RF 
Safety Standards (1988-1997), and chairman of the IEEE Committee on 
Man and Radiation (1980-1982). Dr. Gandhi is author or co-author of 
several book chapters and over 250 peer-reviewed journal articles on elec
-tromagnetic dosimetry, microwave tubes, and solid-state devices. When 
the Speci˜c Absorption Rate (SAR) testing of the cell phone industry was 
mandated by the FCC in 1993, his laboratory at the University of Utah 
provided a service to test cell phones during the years 1993-1999 from a 
number of manufacturers.
Maila Hietanen, Ph.D.,
 is head of the Non-Ionizing Radiation (NIR) Sec
-tion at the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH) in Helsinki, 
Finland. She has a background in applied physics, and her research inter
-ests focus on assessment and prevention of health risks related to human 
exposure to non-ionizing radiation. In recent years Dr. Hietanen with her 
research team has been doing research on the neurophysiological and cardio
-physiological effects associated with the use of mobile phones. In addition, 
her research work includes a study on subjective symptoms of persons with 
perceived electrical hypersensitivity. Dr. Hietanen has been a board member 
(2001Œ2007) of the European Bioelectromagnetic Association (EBEA). She 
has also served on the board of the BEMS, and was an associate editor 
for the 
Bioelectromagnetics Journal
 during the years 2003-2005. She has 
been involved in research cooperation within the European Coordination 
Action (EMF-NET). She is also the vice-chair of the European COST 281 
Action (ﬁPotential Health Implications from Mobile Communicationﬂ), 
and a member of several European and international standards commit
-tees (CENELEC, IEC). She was also nominated as the Finnish representa
-tive at the International Advisory Committee of the WHO EMF Project. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 APPENDIX B
Dr.
 Hietanen was invited as a member of the International Commission on 
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) in 1996, and elected as the 
ICNIRP vice-chair for 2004-2008. Currently she is involved in a national 
research program, which receives funding from the Finnish Technological 
Agency, which in turn receives some funding from industry in addition to 
the governmental budget.
Leeka Kheifets, Ph.D.,
 is a professor of epidemiology in UCLA™s School 
of Public Health. Most recently she was head of the Radiation Studies 
Program at the World Health Organization. Previously she was a techni
-cal executive at the Electric Power Research Institute, where she directed 
a multidisciplinary electric and magnetic ˜elds (EMFs) research program. 
She taught at the Stanford University School of Medicine in the Depart
-ment of Health Research and Policy and is widely known for her work 
in environmental and occupational epidemiology. Dr. Kheifets serves on 
international and national committees that provide advice to governments 
on environmental policy. She is a member of the International Committee of 
the Swedish Radiation Protection Authority (SSI). She has served on com
-mittees for the National Research Council, IEEE, and National Council on 
Radiation Protection and Measurements. Dr. Kheifets was also a member of 
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer Working Groups, and WHO EHC Task 
Groups charged with evaluating potential health effects from EMF expo
-sure. Her research interests include epidemiology of cardiovascular and 
neurodegenerative diseases and cancer, as well as a methodologic research 
in risk assessment and policy development. Dr. Kheifets has been a member 
of the standing committee on epidemiology of the ICNIRP since March 
2002. A portion of Dr. Kheifets™s funding comes from the nonpro˜t Electric 
Power Research Institute (EPRI) to study effects of power-frequency ˜elds 
(60 Hz). EPRI in turn receives funding from the electrical power industry. 
She has also consulted for electric utilities.
Rüdiger Matthes
 received his M.E. degree in electronic engineering from 
the Technical University in Munich. Since 1989 he has served as head of 
the group ﬁNon-Ionizing Radiation (Dosimetry)ﬂ at the German Federal 
Of˜ce for Radiation Protection. The interests of this group cover all aspects 
of nonionizing radiation protection with the main focus on dosimetry. He 
has been the scienti˜c secretary of the ICNIRP since 1993. Mr. Matthes 
is currently coordinating a 
17 million German research program on pos
-sible health effects from mobile communication technologies. Mr. Matthes 
himself is a civil servant and thus completely independent from external 
funding. In addition, the Federal Of˜ce for Radiation Protection has a close 
liaison to the International EMF Project of the World Health Organization. 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 55
Mr. Matthes is the German expert in this program that currently reviews 
scienti˜c evidence in the radio frequency area. ICNIRP is also reviewing 
the scienti˜c literature in that ˜eld. At that organization, Mr. Matthes is 
chairing the standing committee on physics and technology.
David L. McCormick, Ph.D., D.A.B.T.,
 is senior vice-president and
 director of IIT Research Institute (IITRI). At IITRI, Dr. McCormick leads the
 research 
activities of approximately 150 scientists, technicians, and support staff 
working in the ˜elds of toxicology, carcinogenesis and cancer prevention, 
microbiology, molecular biology, and biodefense. He also serves as chair
-man of Technology Research, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of IITRI. 
Dr. McCormick is the IITRI professor of biology at the Illinois
 Institute of 
Technology (IIT), where he teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in 
physiology and toxicology. He joined the IITRI staff in 1979 and the IIT 
faculty in 1982. Dr. McCormick received his A.B. degree from Middlebury 
College (Middlebury, VT) with a joint major in chemistry and biology. He 
received his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in environmental
 medicine
/biology 
from New York University (New York, NY). He is a diplomate of the 
American Board of Toxicology. Dr. McCormick™s primary research activi
-ties are in the areas of carcinogenesis and cancer prevention, preclinical 
and environmental toxicology, and the biological effects of magnetic ˜elds. 
He has published more than 225 research papers, abstracts, and reviews 
in these
 areas. He currently serves as principal investigator on four multi-
year research programs supported by the National Cancer Institute, and is 
principal investigator on the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences/National Toxicology Program project entitled ﬁStudies to Evalu
-ate the Toxic and Carcinogenic Potential of Cell Phone Radiofrequency 
Radiation.ﬂ Dr.
 McCormick serves on the editorial boards of three scienti˜c 
journals (
Toxicology, Nutrition and Cancer,
 and 
The International Journal 
of Cancer Prevention
) and regularly reviews manuscripts submitted for 
publication in 
Cancer Research; Clinical Cancer Research;
 Carcinogenesis; 
Molecular Cancer Therapeutics; Cancer Epidemiology,
 Biomarkers, and 
Prevention; Radiation Research;
 and 
Bioelectromagnetics
; among other 
journals. He has served on several dozen grant and contract review com
-mittees for the National Cancer Institute and other funding agencies. 
Dr.
 McCormic
k is a member of the American Association for Cancer Re
-search, the Society of Toxicology, and the Society for Experimental Biology 
and Medicine.
Bernard Veyret, Ph.D.,
 belongs to the Centre National de la Recherche 
Scienti˜que (CNRS) as ﬁDirecteur de Rechercheﬂ (senior scientist) at the 
ﬁLaboratoire de l™Intégration du Matériau au Sytème,ﬂ within the College 
of Chemistry and Physics at the University of Bordeaux 1, France. Trained 
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 APPENDIX B
as an engineer in physics and chemistry at the Industrial Physics and Chem
-istry Higher Educational Institution (ESPCI) in Paris, he joined the CNRS in 
1979 and did research on the physical chemistry of the troposphere. Since 
1984, Dr. Veyret has turned towards the new ˜eld of research on biologi
-cal effects of electromagnetic ˜elds (bioelectromagnetics). He is now head 
of the Bioelectromagnetics Laboratory of the 
École Pratique des Hautes 
Études. His research team in Bordeaux is composed of about 15 scientists, 
biologists, and physicists. He was one of the founders of the European 
Bioelectromagnetics Association (EBEA) in 1989. He belongs to the main 
commission of ICNIRP and is a member of the International Committee of 
the Swedish Radiation Protection Authority (SSI). Dr. Veyret has authored 
more than 75 papers in peer-reviewed journals and co-authored several na
-tional and international expert-group reports on EMF and health. He was 
the chairman of the French expert group on ﬁExtremely Low Frequency 
Fields and Healthﬂ and is a consultant for the French Agency for Envi
-ronmental and Occupational Health Safety (AFSSET) on the same topic. 
He is currently a consultant with the World Health Organization (WHO), 
developing a Web-based EMF course for young scientists working in bio
-electromagnetics, and has served as the chairman of the RF research recom
-mendation committee of WHO. He was the coordinator of the European 
program Perform-B and was an external reviewer for the RAMP 2001 and 
TeraHertz-Bridge European programs. Dr. Veyret was awarded the 2007 
Medal of the French International Union of Radio Science. Dr. Veyret is a 
member of the scienti˜c council (consulting board) of Bouygues Telecom, 
which is one of the three French mobile phone providers. His laboratory 
has contracts with Alcatel and some of the mobile telephone providers to 
write scienti˜c reports and conduct research.
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57
Appendix C
Workshop Agenda
Committee on Identi˜cation of Research Needs Relating to Potential 
Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communications Devices
Workshop
August 7-9, 2007
The National Academies
Keck Center, Room 100
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Tuesday, August 
7, 
200
7Open Session
 Room 100
9:00 am
 Call to order
  
Description of Meeting, Introduction of Committee Members 
and Participants
 Frank Barnes, University of Colorado at Boulder
 Committee Chair
9:20
 Perspective on Gaps in Research Needs
  Emilie van Deventer, World Health Organization
 9:40
 Questions and comments
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 APPENDIX C
Session 1: Exposure and Dosimetry
9:50
 Introduction by Moderator, Rüdiger Matthes
 Om Gandhi, Rapporteur
9:55
 Exposure Systems Presentation
 Gernot 
Schmid,AustrianResearchCenters
Schmid, 
AustrianResearchCenters
Austrian Research Centers 
 GmbH Œ ARC
,Seibersdorf,Austria
 Seibersdorf, Austria
10:15
 Questions and comments
10:20
 Dosimetry Presentation
  
Soichi Watanabe, National Institute of Information and Com
-munications Technology, Tokyo, Japan
10:40
 Questions and comments
10:45
 Comments on Exposure Issues
 Ray Neutra, California State Department of Health
11:05
 Questions and comments
11:10
 Exposure Assessment
  
Joe Bowman, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health
11:30
 Questions and comments
11:35
 Panel DiscussionŠSession 1 Presenters and Moderator 
12:00 pm
 LUNCH in Refectory
Session 2: Epidemiology
1:15 
 Introduction by Moderator, Leeka Kheifets 
 Naoko Ishibe, Rapporteur
1:20
 Cancer Epidemiology
  
Dan Krewski, University of Ottawa, Institute of Population 
Health, Ottawa, Canada
1:40
 Questions and comments
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 59
1:45
 Noncancer Epidemiology
  
Anssi Auvinen
, 
Tampere School of Public Health, Tampere, 
Finland
2:05
 Questions and comments
2:10
 Epidemiology Methods
  
Peter Inskip, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, 
National Cancer Institute
2:30
 Questions and comments
2:35
 Panel DiscussionŠSession 2 Presenters and Moderator 
3:05
  
Opportunity for Public Comment on Gaps in Research Needs 
(see sign-up sheet)
4:00 
 Adjourn Open Session for the Day
Wednesday, August 
8, 
200
7Open Session
 Room 100
8:30 am
 Call to order
  
Description of Meeting, Introduction of Committee Members 
and Participants
 Frank Barnes, Committee Chair
Session 3: Human Laboratory Session
8:45
 Introduction by Moderator, Leeka Kheifets 
 Maila Hietanen, Rapporteur 
8:50
 Sleep, Cognition 
  
Rodney Croft, Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, 
 
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia 
9:10
 Questions and comments
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 APPENDIX C
9:15
 EHS and Well-being
 Martin Roosli, University of Bern, Switzerland
9:30
 Questions and comments
9:35
  
Human Peripheral and Central Auditory and Cardiovascular 
Systems
  Paolo Ravazzani
,ConsiglioNazionaledelleRicerche,Milan,
 Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Milan, 
Italy
9:50
 Questions and comments
9:55
 Panel DiscussionŠSession 3 Presenters and Moderator
Session 4: Mechanisms
10:25
 Introduction by Moderator, Frank Barnes
  Rüdiger Matthes, Rapporteur
10:35
 Biology
  
Joe Roti Roti, Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, 
 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO
10:55
 Questions and comments
11:00
 Biophysics
 Guglielmo D™Inzeo
, 
Department of Electronic Engineering, 
  University ﬁLa Sapienzaﬂ of Rome, Italy
11:20
 Questions and comments 
11:25
  
Need for Models to Improve Our Understanding of Electro
-magnetic Effects on Biological Systems. 
  James Weaver (via telephone), Harvard/Massachusetts Insti
-tute of Technology Division of Health Sciences and Technol
-ogy, Cambridge
11:40
 Questions and comments
11:45
 Panel DiscussionŠSession 4 Presenters and Moderator
12:15 pm
 LUNCH in Refectory
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 61
Session 5: Animal and Cell Biology
1:15
 Introduction by Moderator, Bernard Veyret 
 David McCormick, Rapporteur
1:20
  
In VivoŠAnimal and Cell Biology
  Zenon Sienkiewicz, Health Protection Agency, Radiation Pro
-tection Division, Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire, UK
1:40
 Questions and comments
1:45
  
In VivoŠAnimal and Cell Biology
  Henry Lai, Department of Bioengineering, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA
1:55
 Questions and comments
2:00 
  
In VivoŠAnimal Studies
  Chiyoji Ohkubo, Department of Environmental Biology, 
Meiji Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan
2:10
 Questions and comments
2:15
  
In VitroŠAnimal and Cell Biology
  Vijayalaxmi, Department of Radiation Oncology, University 
of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas (retired)
2:35
 Questions and comments
2:40
  
In VitroŠAnimal and Cell Biology
  Dariusz Leszczynski, STUK-Radiation and Nuclear Safety 
Authority, Helsinki, Finland 
2:50
 Questions and comments
2:55
 Panel DiscussionŠSession 5 Presenters and Moderator
3:30
  
Opportunity for Public Comment on Gaps in Research 
Needs
4:00 
 Adjourn Open Session for the Day
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 APPENDIX C
Thursday, August 
9, 
200
7Open Session
 Room 100
9:00 am
 Call to order
  
Description of Meeting, Introduction of Committee Members 
and Participants
 Frank Barnes, Committee Chair
Overarching Issues and Identi˜cation of Research Needs
Introduction of topic: 5 minutes
 Open discussion: 15 minutes 
9:15 
  
Effects of Short-term vs. Long-term Exposure 
  Frank Barnes, University of Colorado at Boulder
 9:35
  
Local vs. Whole-Body Exposure
 Om Gandhi, University of Utah, Salt Lake City
9:55
  
How Can the Knowledge of Biological Effects from Cur
-rent Signal Types and Exposure Patterns Be Extrapolated to 
Emerging Exposure Scenarios?
  
Rüdiger Matthes, Federal Of˜ce for Radiation Protection, 
Oberschleißheim, Germany
10:15
   
Are There Any Biological Effects That Are Not Caused by an 
Increase in Tissue Temperature (Nonthermal Effects)? 
  Bernard Veyret, Université de Bordeaux, Pessac cedex, 
France
10:35
  
Does RF Exposure Alter (synergize, antagonize, or potentiate) 
the Biological Effects of Other Chemical or Physical Agents? 
David McCormick, IIT Research Institute, Chicago, Illinois
10:55
  
Differences in Risk to Children
  Leeka Kheifets, UCLA School of Public Health, Los Angeles, 
California
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 63
11:15
  
Differences in Risk to Other Subpopulations Such as Elderly 
and Individuals with Underlying Disease States
 Maila Hietanen, FIOH, Helsinki, Finland
11:35
  
Opportunity for Public Comment on Gaps in Research 
Needs
12:05 pm 
 Adjourn Open Session
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
Appendix D
Workshop Participants
Anssi Auvinen, Tampere School of Public Health, Tampere, Finland
Joe Bowman, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States
Rodney Croft, Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, Swinburne 
University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia
Guglielmo D™Inzeo, Department of Electronic Engineering, University ﬁLa 
Sapienzaﬂ of Rome, Italy
Peter Inskip, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
Dan Krewski, University of Ottawa, Institute of Population Health, 
Ottawa, Canada
Henry Lai, Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, 
Seattle, United States
Dariusz Leszczynski, STUK-Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority, 
Helsinki, Finland
Ray Neutra, California State Department of Health
Chiyoji Ohkubo, Department of Environmental Biology, Meiji 
Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan
Paolo Ravazzani, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Milan, Italy
Martin Roosli, University of Bern, Switzerland
Joe Roti Roti, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States
Gernot Schmid, Austrian Research Centers, Seibersdorf, Austria
Zenon Sienkiewicz, Health Protection Agency, Radiation Protection 
Division, UK
Emilie van Deventer, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
 65
Vijayalaxmi, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas 
Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas (retired), United States
Soichi Watanabe, National Institute of Information and Communications 
Technology, Tokyo, Japan
James Weaver, Harvard/Massachusetts Institute of Technology Division of 
Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States
Identification of Research Needs Relating to Potential Biological or Adverse Health Effects of Wireless ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
Appendix E
List of Individuals Who Submitted 
Statements Identifying Needs and 
Gaps in Research Prior to Workshop
Richard Albanese, M.D., As private citizen 
Igor Y. Belyaev, Ph.D., D.Sc., The Arrhenius Laboratories for Natural 
Sciences
Carl Blackman, Ph.D., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Martin Blank, Ph.D., Columbia University
Ben Greenbaum, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Parkside
Magda Havas, B.Sc., Ph.D, Trent University
Catherine Kleiber, As private citizen
Dariusz Leszczyski, STUK-Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority
B. Blake Levitt, As private citizen
James Lin, Ph.D., University of Illinois, Chicago
Michael Milligan, Secretary General, Mobile Manufacturers Forum
Lloyd Morgan, Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States
Janet Newton, EMR Policy Institute
Cindy Sage, M.A., Sage Associates
Asher Sheppard, Ph.D., Asher Sheppard Consulting
Martin Wolf, Ph.D., Biomedical Optics Research Laboratory
