DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12112Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in aNew World (Collected Studies)386 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38600-5 | DOI 10.17226/12112Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, Editors; Committee on the Competitivenessand Workforce Needs of U.S. Industry; Board on Science, Technology, andEconomic Policy; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilInnovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, 
Editors
Committee on the Competitiveness and Workforce Needs of U.S. Industry
Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy
Policy and Global Affairs
INNOVATION
 IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
U.S. FIRMS COMPETING IN A NEW WORLD
COLLECTED STUDIES
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of 

the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute 
of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for 
their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. SB 1341-06-Z-0011, TO #2 between the 
National Academy of Sciences and the Technology Administration of the U.S. Department 
of Commerce; Contract/Grant No. SLON 2005-10-18 between the National Academy 

of Sciences and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; and Contract/Grant No. P116Z05283 

between the National Academy of Sciences and the U. S. Department of Education. Any 

opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are 
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or 
agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-11631-2
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-11631-7
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2008926521
Limited copies are available from:
Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Keck Center 574, Washington, D.C. 20001

Phone: (202) 334-2200

Fax: (202) 334-1505
E-mail: 
step@nas.ed
uCover:
 The cover design depicts a possible far distant future con˜guration bringing nearly 
all of the earth™s land mass into a single supercontinent, including merging the Americas 

into Asia.
Copyright 2008 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. 

Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of 
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. 
It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with 

the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. 

The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of 

Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examina
-tion of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 

be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of 
medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute 
of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in 

accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become 

the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the Na
-tional Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and 
the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest 

are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE
 ON
 C
OMPETITI
VENESS
 AND
 WOR
KFORCE
 N
EEDS
 OF
 U.S. I
NDUSTR
YDavid T. Morgenthaler
, 
Chair
Founding Partner, Morgenthaler Ventures
David C. Mowery
, 
Vice-Chair
William A. & Betty H. Hasler Professor of New Enterprise Development
University of California at Berkeley
Ashish Arora
Professor of Economics and Public 
 Policy
Heinz School, Carnegie Mellon 
University
Nicholas M. Donofrio

Executive Vice President, Innovation 
 and Technology
IBM Corporation
Kenneth S. Flamm
Dean Rusk Chair in International Affairs

Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public 
Affairs
University of Texas at Austin
Richard B. Freeman
Herbert Ascherman Professor of 
Economics
Harvard University
Mary L. Good
Donaghey University Professor and 
 Dean, Donaghey College of 
 Information Science and Systems 

Engineering
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Kent H. Hughes
Director, Program on Science, 
Technology, America and the Global 

Economy
Woodrow Wilson International Center for 
Scholars
Devesh 
Kapur
Director

Center for the Advanced Study of 
India
University of Pennsylvania
Thomas R. Pickering
Vice-Chairman, Hills and Company

U.S. Career Ambassador (retired)
AnnaLee Saxenian
Dean and Professor, School of 
Information and Professor, 

Department of City and Regional 

Planning
University of California at Berkeley
Denis F. Simon
Provost and Vice-President 
for Academic Affairs, 

Levin Graduate Institute of 

International Relations and 

Commerce
State University of New York
Richard P. Suttmeier
Professor of Political Science and 
Director, Asian Studies Program
University of Oregon
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
Project Staff
Stephen A. Merrill
Study Director
Mahendra Shunmoogam
Program Associate
Cynthia Getner
Financial Associate
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
BOARD
 ON
 S
CIENCE
, T
ECHNOLOG
Y, 
AND
 E
CONOMIC
 P
OLIC
YEdward E. Penhoet
Interim Chairman
Director, Alta Partners
Timothy F. Bresnahan
Landau Professor in Technology and 
the Economy
Stanford University
Lewis W. Coleman
President

DreamWorks Animation
Kenneth S. Flamm
Professor and Dean Rusk Chair in 
International Affairs
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public 
Affairs
University of Texas at Austin
Ralph E. Gomory
President Emeritus

Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Mary L. Good
Donaghey University Professor 
and Dean, Donaghey College of 

Information Science and Systems 

Engineering
University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Amory Houghton, Jr.

Former Member of Congress
David T. Morgenthaler
Founding Partner

Morgenthaler Ventures
Joseph P. Newhouse
John D. MacArthur Professor of 
Health Policy and Management 

Director, Division of Health Policy 

Research and Education
Harvard University
Arati Prabhakar
General Partner

U.S. Venture Partners
William J. Raduchel
Independent Director and Investor
Jack W. Schuler
Chairman

Ventana Medical Systems, Inc.
Alan Wm. Wolff
Partner

Dewey & LeBoeuf LLP
Ex-Of˜cio Members
Ralph J. Cicerone

President

National Academy of Sciences
Charles M. 
Vest
President

National Academy of Engineering
Harvey 
V. Fineberg
President

Institute of Medicine
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
STEP Staff
Stephen A. Merrill
Executive Director
Charles W. Wessner
Program Director
Sujai J. Shivakumar
Senior Program Of˜cer
David E. Dierksheide
Program Of˜cer
Mahendra Shunmoogam

Program Associate
Jeffrey C. McCullough
Program Associate
Cynthia A. Getner
Financial Associate
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
   Preface and Acknowledgments
In 1999 the National Academies™ Board on Science, Technology, and Eco
-nomic Policy (STEP) released a series of industry studies analyzing the sources of 
competitive resurgence from the 1980s to the 1990s of many U.S.-based ˜rms in 

a variety of manufacturing and service sectors. These studies, published under the 

title 
U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competitive Performance
, included steel, 
chemicals, metal working, trucking, grocery retailing, retail banking, computing, 

semiconductors, hard disk drives, apparel, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology.
The general picture of stronger performance in the mid-to-late 1990s than in 
the early 1990s was attributed to a variety of factors including heavy investment 

in applications of information technology, supportive public policies, openness to 

innovation, and changes in supplier and customer relationships. Vigorous foreign 

competition forced cost-cutting changes in manufacturing processes, organiza
-tion, and strategy but then receded, making the performance of U.S. industries 

look even better. As none of these favorable conditions could be assumed to be 

permanent, the collected studies persuasively made the point that U.S. industries™ 

superior performance is not guaranteed to continue.
In late 2005 the STEP Board decided to reprise the study, focusing on the ac
-celeration in global sourcing of innovation and emergence of new locations of re
-search capacity, new sources of skilled technical workers, and the implications of 

these developments for U.S. businesses and workforce. Although the current study 

involves several of the same industriesŠin particular, semiconductors, personal 

computing, ˜nancial services, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnologyŠthe overall 

selection shifted markedly toward technology-intensive producing, supporting, or 

using sectors to include software, ˚at panel displays, solid state lighting, logistics, 

and venture capital ˜nance. The group of industries examined does not represent 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
a carefully selected sample representative of the economy as a whole. Rather, it 
re˚ects a decision to again capitalize on the work of university-based multidisci
-plinary research teams studying economic performance and technological change 
at the industry level. Most of these groups were formed and supported under the 

Industry Centers Program of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
To help integrate this work, the Board again asked 
David C. Mowery
, Pro
-fessor at the Haas School of Business at the University of California at Berkeley, 

to develop a general framework for analyzing changes in the structure of innova
-tion over the past 10 to 15 years. Mowery in turn recruited 
Jeffrey T. Macher
, Associate Professor, McDonough School of Business, Georgetown University, to 

assist in this effort and co-edit the resulting volum
e. The chapters in this volume 
were drafted independently by individual authors, and their ˜ndings and any 

policy recommendations do not represent a consensus among all of the contribu
-tors to the volume. They also do not necessarily represent the opinions and views 

of the Committee on Competitiveness and Workforce Needs of U.S. Industry, the 

STEP Board, the National Academies, or the sponsoring organizations.
In the course of their work, the editors and chapter authors participated in 
two public workshops in Washington, D.C. The ˜rst, on April 19, 2006, reviewed 

their preliminary ˜ndings with industry representatives and other analysts includ
-ing 
Irving Wladawsky-Berger
, IBM Corporation; 
Jack Gill
, Vanguard Ventures 
and Harvard Medical School; 
Richard S. Golaszewski
, GRA, Inc.; 
Jeffrey D. 
Tew
, General Motors; 
Jerome H. Grossman
, LionGate Corporation and Harvard 
University; 
Gordon W. Day
, Optoelectronic Industry Development Association; 
Timothy J. Sturgeon
, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 
Charles W. Wade
, Technology Forecasters, Inc.; 
Richard B. Freeman
, Harvard University; 
Nancy 
Hauge
, K12; 
Harold Salzman
, the Urban Institute; and 
Navi Radjou
, Forrester 
Research, Inc.
A year later a second workshop was held, on April 20, 2007, to try to an
-ticipate trends over the next several years in three broad sectors encompassing 

most of the industries being studiedŠinformation and computing technology, 

biopharmaceuticals, and ˜nance. Speakers in addition to committee members 

and authors included 
Undersecretary Robert C. Cresanti
, Commerce Depart
-ment™s Technology Administration; 
Barry Jaruzelski
, Booz Allen Hamilton; 
Robert D. Atkinson
, Information Technology and Innovation Foundation; 
Alex 
Soojung-
Kim Pang
, Institute for the Future; 
Bhaskar Chakravorti
, McKinsey 
and Company; 
David Moschella
, Leading Edge Forum; 
Michael E. Fawkes
, Hewlett-Packard Company; 
Anna D. Barker
, National Cancer Institute; 
Thomas 
R. Cech
, Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 
Joseph Jasinski
, Health Care Life 
Science, IBM; 
Andy Lee
, P˜zer Inc.; 
T. L. Stebbins
, Canaccord Adams, Inc.; 
Karen G. Mills
, Solera Capital; and 
Alex J. Pollock
, American Enterprise 
Institute.
As the editors state in their summary introduction to this collection, despite 
the emergence of robust R&D and innovative capabilities in East, Southeast, and 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 xi
South Asia, and concerted efforts to develop them in other parts of the world, 
patterns of innovation are highly variable across industries and across ˜rms 
within industries. Many industries and some ˜rms within nearly all industries 

retain leading-edge capacity in the United States. The ˚at panel display sector, 

in which innovative activity for the most part has followed production abroad, 

is not as yet the norm. This is no reason for complacency about the outlook for 
the future, however. Empirically-based analyses such as those in this volume are 
inevitably backward-looking. Even recently issued patents generally represent 

˜lings two to ˜ve years back and R&D investments considerably earlier. Al
-though not pessimistic overall, our authors compellingly document the rapidity 

of contemporary industrial change and shifts in competitive advantage. For that 

reason alone, innovation deserves more sustained public policy attention than it 

has been receiving.
The STEP Board is grateful to the authors, the editors, and the workshop par
-ticipants as well as to the sponsors of this activityŠ
the Alfred P. Sloan Founda
-tion
, the 
U.S. Department of Education
, and the 
Technology Administration 
of the U.S. Department of Commerce
.This collection has been reviewed in draft from by individuals chosen for 
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures 

approved by the National Academies™ Report Review Committee. The purpose 

of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 

assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to 

ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 

responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 

remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: 
Suma Athreye
, Brunel University; 
MaryAnn Feldman
, University of Toronto; 
Jeffrey Furman
, Boston University; 
Bronwyn Hall
, University of California at 
Berkeley; 
Megan MacGarvie
, Boston University; 
Deepak Somaya
, University 
of Maryland; 
Jerry Thursby
, Emory University; and 
Philip Webre
, Congres
-sional Budget Of˜ce.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com
-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report, 

nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. Responsibility for 

the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the individual authors.
David T. Morgenthaler
, 
Chair
Stephen A. Merrill
, 
Study Director
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
  
 Contents
INTRODUCTION
 1 Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery
 1 PERSONAL COMPUTING
 19
 Jason Dedrick and Kenneth L. Kraemer
 2 SOFTWARE
 53
 Ashish Arora, Chris Forman, and JiWoong Yoon
 3 SEMICONDUCTORS
 101
 Jeffrey T. Macher, David C. Mowery, and Alberto Di Minin
 4 FLAT PANEL DISPLA
YS 141
 Jeffrey A. Hart
 5 LIGHTING
 163
  
Susan W. Sanderson, Kenneth L. Simons, Judith L. Walls, and 
 Yin-Yi Lai, 
 6 PHARMACEUTICALS
 207
 Iain M. Cockburn
 7 BIOTECHNOLOG
Y 
231
 Raine Hermans, Alicia Löf˜er, and Scott Stern
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 CONTENTS
 8 LOGISTICS
 273
 Anuradha Nagarajan and Chelsea C. White III
 9 V
ENTURE CAPITAL
 313
 Martin Kenney, Martin Haemmig, and W. Richard Goe
10
 FINANCIAL SER
VICES
 341
 Ravi Aron
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1  
 Introduction
JEFFREY
 T. MACHER
Georgetown University
DAVID
 C. M
OWERY
University of California at Berkeley
The causes and consequences for U.S. competitiveness and living standards 
of innovation by foreign nations and ˜rms have been long-standing topics of 
scholarly and policy debate within the United States. During the 1960s and 1970s, 

much of this debate focused on U.S. multinational ˜rms™ investment in offshore 

research and development (R&D) and production facilities, most of which were 

located in other industrial economies. Concern was expressed that the transfer of 

technology by U.S. corporations through their offshore R&D and manufacturing 

investments would contribute to the growth of foreign competitors in these and 

other industries and reduce domestic employment opportunities. The debates 

of the 1980s and early 1990s adopted a slightly different tone, emphasizing the 

growth of foreign competitors in industries such as automobiles and semicon
-ductors whose innovative performance and high-quality products threatened the 

viability of U.S. ˜rms (including multinational U.S. ˜rms) and entire industrial 

sectors. These debates were concerned less with the offshore transfer of U.S. 

technological capabilities than with the threat posed by foreign ˜rms™ competi
-tive strengths.
A previous volume (
U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competitive Perfor
-mance
) released by the National Academies™ Board on Science, Technology, and 
Economic Policy in 1999 argued that much of the pessimism of the 1980s and 

1990s over U.S. industrial competitiveness proved to be exaggerated or mis
-placed. U.S. ˜rms in a number of industries developed new business models and 

new products, which enabled them to address competitive threats with consider
-able success. In some cases, the responses of U.S. ˜rms relied on their position 

within a large domestic market of innovative users who proved to be important 

sources for new ideas and products. In other cases, improvements in U.S. com
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
petitive and innovative performance relied on the robust domestic ﬁR&D infra
-structureﬂ comprising industrial, governmental, and university research facilities, 
much of which had bene˜ted from large federal investments spanning the post-

1945 period. U.S. ˜rms and consumers alike also bene˜ted from low-cost imports 

of some products, such as personal computers and components that were critical 

inputs for the innovation and restructuring processes described in this volume.
A more recent wave of concern over U.S. competitive prospects in the 
21st century combines elements of all of these previous debates. The actions 

of many U.S. ˜rms (not all of which can be considered multinational by any 

conventional de˜nition) to ﬁoutsourceﬂ activities formerly undertaken by U.S.-

based professional, scienti˜c, and engineering employees have raised widespread 

popular concerns over the erosion of employment opportunities in occupations 

and industries (including many service industries) that formerly were minimally 

exposed to foreign competition. At the same time, the growth of innovative and 

manufacturing capabilities in countries such as China, India, South Korea, and 

Taiwan has raised concerns over new sources of competition for U.S. ˜rms. A 

2006 study of U.S. competitiveness and innovative performance phrased these 

concerns as follows:
. . . the committee is deeply concerned that the scienti˜c and technological 
building blocks critical to our economic leadership are eroding at a time when 
many other nations are gathering strength. We strongly believe that a worldwide 

strengthening will bene˜t the world™s economyŠparticularly in the creation 
of jobs in countries that are far less well-off than the United States. But we 
are worried about the future prosperity of the United States. Although many 

people assume that the United States will always be a world leader in science 

and technology, this may not continue to be the case inasmuch as great minds 
and ideas exist throughout the world. We fear the abruptness with which a lead 
in science and technology can be lostŠand the dif˜culty of recovering a lead 

once lost, if indeed it can be regained at all. (National Research Council, 2006, 

Executive Summary, p. 2)
1A central issue in the long debate over U.S. competitiveness that is brie˚y 
summarized above is the processes through which industrial ˜rms in the United 
States and other economies create innovative new products and processes. What 

has changed in the global and U.S. domestic economies to transform the near 

euphoria in popular evaluations of U.S. economic and innovative performance 

during the ﬁNew Economyﬂ of the late 1990s to the concerns expressed by 
1 
A similar sentiment may be found in Freeman (2005): ﬁBut the US will also face economic dif
-˜culties as its technological superiority erodes. What is good for the world is not inevitably good for 
the U.S. The group facing the biggest danger from the loss of America™s technological edge are work
-ers whose living standards depend critically on America™s technological superiority. The decline in 

monopoly rents from being the lead country will make it harder for the US to raise wages and bene˜ts 

to workers. The big winners from the spread of technology will be workers in developing countries, 

and the ˜rms that employ them, including many U.S. multinational corporationsﬂ (p. 27).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 3the blue-ribbon panel cited above? In particular, what characteristics of the 
innovation-related activities of U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms have changed since the 
late 1990s so signi˜cantly to trigger these concerns? On the other hand, rec
-ognizing that many elements of this debate are not new but have been widely 

shared since the 1960s, what aspects have not changed in the innovation-related 

competition in which U.S. and foreign ˜rms ˜nd themselves engaged? How well 

are scholars or policy makers able to measure any such change at a suf˜ciently 

˜ne-grained level of analysis to inform such debates? Finally, what are the impli
-cations for public policy of change in the structure (especially globalization) of 

U.S. ˜rms™ innovation-related activities? This volume examines these questions 

by providing detailed studies of structural change in the innovation process in 10 

manufacturing and service industries.
Any study of issues related to innovation and competitiveness must address 
the widely held view that ﬁ˜rms compete, nations don™t.ﬂ In other words, the 

innovation-related and employment consequences of global competition are the 

result of private-sector investment and management decisionsŠpublic policy is 

of little importance. Just as it distorts reality to claim that international economic 

competition is solely a matter of competition among governments, the claim that 

private managers™ decisions are all that matter is also an oversimpli˜cation, par
-ticularly in light of the evidence presented in many of the chapters in this volume. 

The international performance of ˜rms, including multinationals, is affected by 

policy and other economic conditions in their home countries. And this link is 

especially strong for ˜rms™ innovation-related activities, which rely on a complex 

infrastructure of public and private institutions devoted to knowledge creation 

and transmission, personnel training, and other activities. Indeed, one of the most 

striking ˜ndings in many of the chapters in this volume is the extent to which the 

inventive activities of ˜rms in many knowledge-intensive industries remain con
-centrated in their home countries. Simply put, both ˜rms and nations matter.
THE
 STEP B
OARD
 S
TUD
YRecognizing that the debate over the international transfer of technological 
and innovative capabilities and potential loss of U.S. competitiveness is a long-

running one, the Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) Board of 

the National Academies undertook a study in 2006-2007 of the changes in the 

structure of the innovation process that are associated with shifting perceptions 

of the competitive outlook for U.S. ˜rms and domestic employment, especially 

in professional and engineering occupations.
The STEP Board study examined 10 industries: personal computers, soft
-ware, semiconductors, ˚at panel displays, lighting, pharmaceuticals, biotechnol
-ogy, logistics, venture capital, and ˜nancial services. The choice of industries 

re˚ected several factors: (1) coverage of knowledge-intensive industries that have 

been the focus of many expressions of concern over waning U.S. technological 

strength; (2) inclusion of service industries, which historically have received little 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
attention in debates over foreign competition and innovation; and (3) the willing
-ness of scholars who have conducted extensive research on these industries to ex
-amine the issues of change in the structure and globalization of innovation-related 
activities. Re˚ecting the study organizers™ interest in highlighting similarities 

and differences across industry-level studies, we drew on scholars af˜liated with 

the Industry Centers established with initial ˜nancial support from the Alfred P. 

Sloan Foundation.
The following is a summary of the ˜ndings of each industry study.
Personal Computing
The personal computer (PC) industry now operates as a global network of 
independent suppliers of systems, components, peripherals, and software. Al
-though the pace of innovation in the industry is rapid, its character now is largely 

incremental because of the dominance of the ﬁWintelﬂ PC architectural standard. 

One important future challenge is the integration of the PC with the proliferating 

array of consumer devices that ﬁorbit the userﬂ and provide computing and com
-munication capability (e.g., PDAs, phones, music players).
The global division of innovation-related activities within the industry is 
characterized as follows: component-level R&D (concept design and product 

planning) is performed in the United States and Japan; applied R&D and develop
-ment of new platforms (particularly notebook computers) take place in Taiwan; 

and product development for mature products (mainly desktop computers) and a 

majority of production and sustaining engineering are performed in China.
U.S. PC ˜rms have bene˜ted from the international division of labor in 
innovation that has supported rapid innovation and quicker integration of new 

technologies into new products. The growing demand for smaller, more mobile 

products plays to U.S. ˜rms™ strengths in product architecture and early stage 

development. The shift in production activities away from the United States has 

pulled new product development activities to Asia, but design jobs, which are 

relatively few in number, are expected to remain largely in the United States.
Software
U.S. ˜rms dominate global trade in both packaged software products and 
software services, although their leadership position is weakening in software 

services. Important non-U.S. providers of software services are located in India 

(software services), Ireland (software logistics, localization, and development), 

and Israel (product development and R&D). Despite some change in the location 

of leading providers of software services, there has been relatively little change 

in the location of new software product development. Inventive software devel
-opment activity (at least as measured by patents) is concentrated in the United 

States and is controlled by U.S. ˜rms. Some inventive activity by U.S. ˜rms has 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5shifted abroad but represents a relatively small share of the overall inventive 
activity of U.S. ˜rms.
The importance of repeated interaction between software developers and 
users is especially important in the early stages of complex projects, and the 
enormous size and sophistication of the U.S. market for software and services 

means that the United States is likely to retain its dominant role in this industry 

for some time to come. Nonetheless, some software development activities will 

continue to move to offshore sites characterized by lower labor costs and high-

quality manpower. The chapter highlights the importance for the future U.S. 

software industry of federal support for computer science R&D in industry and 

academia in the face of continued upgrading of the capabilities of offshore sites 

for R&D and product development.
Semiconductors
Signi˜cant structural change occurred in the U.S. semiconductor industry 
during the 1990s. Among the most important changes were shifts in markets 

for semiconductor component applications, changes in the location of produc
-tion and geographic structure of markets for semiconductor components, and 

increased vertical specialization in industry structure. Despite these changes, the 

contributions of ﬁoffshoreﬂ sites to U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ innovation-related 

activities remain surprisingly modest. For example, process R&D remains pre
-dominantly ﬁhomeboundﬂŠconcentrated in global semiconductor ˜rms™ home 

countries. The patenting activity of U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms alike 

is similarly dominated by domestic inventive activity. The innovation-related ac
-tivities of global ˜rms in this industry remain remarkably ﬁnonglobalized,ﬂ even 

in the face of greater international ˚ows of capital and technology, far-reaching 

change in the structure of semiconductor manufacturing, and signi˜cant shifts in 

the structure of demand.
The vertically specialized industry structure that now characterizes the semi
-conductor industry has enabled U.S. ˜rms specializing in design and marketing 

of semiconductor components to access global production networks and grow 

rapidly. Nevertheless, continued growth in production capacity and design capa
-bilities in Southeast Asia is likely to result in expanded offshore product design 

and development activity by U.S. ˜rms and the entry of new ˜rms based in this 

region.
Flat Panel Displays
The ˚at panel display industry originated in the United States, but production-
related activities quickly migrated to Japan, followed by Korea and Taiwan, and 

now are expanding in China. Innovation in the ˚at panel display industry has 

been driven by periodic shifts to larger ﬁform factorsﬂ (i.e., larger screens), which 

affect the design of new products and new manufacturing processes. Innovative 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
activity has tended to follow production investment in the industry because of 
the high demand for process innovation. The migration of production away from 
the United States means that U.S. ˜rms play a limited but important role in the 

innovation process, primarily as suppliers of specialized components (e.g., glass 

substrates). The innovation-related activities of these U.S. ˜rms remain concen
-trated in the United States, although all of these ˜rms have invested in offshore 

R&D and related activities that are located near major customers.
Lighting
The structure, characteristics, and location of innovation in lighting contrast 
with those of predecessor lighting technologies. The traditional lighting industry, 

which relied on incandescent, gas-discharge, and ˚uorescent technologies, was 

dominated by a three-˜rm oligopoly (GE, Philips, and OSRAM) based in the 

United States and Europe. All three ˜rms still operate global production networks 

for the manufacture of traditional lighting products, but they face increased 

competition from low-cost Southeast Asian producers in traditional lighting 

products. Moreover, the growth of markets for lighting technologies based on 

light-emitting diodes (LEDs) has begun to transform the competitive balance of 

the industry. The three dominant ˜rms were slow to enter the LED market and 

have subsequently utilized joint ventures and acquisitions for technological catch-

up, but they have failed to achieve market dominance in this technology.
Lighting innovation, which historically was dominated by the U.S. and 
European R&D facilities of the leading ˜rms, has shifted to Southeast Asia. 

An analysis of patenting in lighting indicates that Japanese and U.S. ˜rms hold 

modest leadership positions in inventive activity, but their lead is shrinking as 

Taiwanese and other Southeast Asian companies improve their R&D capabili
-ties. Most global ˜rms have established Asian-based manufacturing, engineering, 

and R&D operations, principally in Japan and Taiwan. The lighting industry also 

has developed a vertically specialized structure, with ˜rms specializing in R&D, 

production, packaging, and other functions within the value chain.
Pharmaceuticals
The structure of the U.S. pharmaceutical industry has been transformed 
since 1990 by the rise of biotechnology and intensi˜ed competition from global 

generic manufacturers. Innovative activity in the industry (measured in terms of 

industry-˜nanced R&D investment and patenting) is concentrated in the United 

States, some European Union countries, and Japan. U.S. pharmaceutical ˜rms 

have been leading investors in offshore R&D, which has been concentrated in 

high-income economies, since the 1980s. Important economic factors, such as 

localized knowledge spillovers, intellectual property protection, and government 

policies related to price regulation, state procurement of drugs, and health and 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 7safety regulation, have helped to reinforce this geographic concentration of inno
-vative activity. Nonetheless, increasing vertical specialization within the industry, 
as well as improvements in the scienti˜c and engineering capabilities of nations 

such as India, has been associated with shifting some innovation-related activities 

to offshore sites. Thus far, the innovation-related activities that have experienced 

some movement include manufacturing process innovation and clinical trials 

management.
In some respects, the trends in offshore movement of pharmaceutical R&D 
resemble those in the U.S. software industry in the early 1990s. U.S. ˜rms con
-tinue to dominate the innovative efforts of the industry, a position that has been 

reinforced considerably by large public investments in biomedical R&D in aca
-demic and government research facilities. The U.S. market is also an attractive 

site for product innovations, given the minimal price controls that characterize 

it at present.
Biotechnology
Although it has attracted a great deal of attention from policy makers, in
-vestors, and entrepreneurs, the U.S. biotechnology industry employs a relatively 

small number of individuals overall, and even fewer scientists and engineers. The 

industry consists of several distinct segments that span biomedical, industrial, 

and agricultural biotechnology. Development of the industry has been dominated 

by biomedical applications, for which prices and pro˜ts tend to be greatest. The 

biomedical segment is concentrated in particular regions in the United States 

and Western Europe, re˚ecting the importance of the interaction of biomedi
-cal biotechnology ˜rms with science-based university research. Although many 

countries around the world now ﬁhostﬂ a biotechnology industry (of varying im
-portance), biotechnology activity within most of these nations is often centered 

in a single metropolitan area. Nevertheless, an increasing number of distinct loca
-tions in the United States and an increasing number of countries support modest 

to signi˜cant biotechnology activity.
Vertical specialization has played an important role in the development of 
the biomedical segment in particular, since many new ˜rms in this segment serve 

as ﬁresearch boutiques,ﬂ conducting R&D in new drugs that are subsequently 

developed for commercial purposes by larger pharmaceutical ˜rms. The biotech
-nology industry itself has experienced considerable vertical specialization, and 

(as in other industries examined in this volume) the development of a vertically 

specialized structure has tended to support the globalization of innovation-related 

activities. Based on its large academic and public biomedical R&D infrastructure, 

however, the United States remains the dominant location for advanced R&D and 

product development in the industry, and the growth of offshore R&D and related 

activities is likely to have a minor impact on U.S. employment in this industry 

for the foreseeable future.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Logistics
The logistics industry manages the planning and control of the ˚ow and stor
-age of goods, services, and related information between the point of production 
and the point of consumption. The industry has expanded rapidly since 1990, 

in parallel with the globalization of manufacturing, and now includes a large 

number of specialized ˜rms. Innovation in logistics frequently occurs in response 

to new customer requirements, and this process in many respects resembles the 

ﬁco-inventionﬂ activity that typi˜es innovation in computer software. Advances 

in supporting technologies, such as information technology and communications, 

are another important source of innovation in logistics.
Close interaction between the developers and users of logistics services is 
essential to innovation, and the global spread of logistics networks has been 

associated with growth in the offshore innovation-related activities of U.S. and 

non-U.S. logistics ˜rms. Nevertheless, analysis of logistics-related patents indi
-cates that U.S. logistics ˜rms specializing in information technology (IT)-related 

software and services remain dominant within the industry. As the logistics 

industry develops a more global structure, the role of governments in creating 

and enforcing intellectual property protection, in reducing trade barriers and stan
-dardizing import rules, and in supporting the training of managers, engineers, and 

technicians capable of furthering innovation will grow in importance.
Venture Capital
The venture capital (VC) ﬁindustryﬂ in its modern form emerged in the 
United States during the post-1945 period. Although the industry now operates 

globally, U.S. ˜rms remain dominant. Globalization of the VC industry has oc
-curred through cross-border partnerships, the establishment by U.S. VC ˜rms of 

overseas of˜ces, and expansion within the United States by foreign VC ˜rms. 

This process is likely to continue as countries develop clusters of technological 

expertise that attract the attention and investments of VC ˜rms throughout the 

global economy, as multinational corporations acquire more foreign startups, 

and as ˜nancial markets throughout the world develop suf˜ciently to support the 

liquidation by venture capitalists of their investments. Indeed, in some important 

respects, globalization of innovation in VC re˚ects the growth of innovation-

related entrepreneurship in other economies.
The primary focus of investments by U.S. and non-U.S. VC ˜rms has been 
the IT sector, including semiconductor, computer software, computer hardware, 

and related industries. Indeed, the historic strength and innovative dynamism of 

the U.S. IT sector is one factor behind U.S. VC ˜rms™ dominant position in the 

industry. Although the globalization of VC has not had negative consequences 

for the U.S. innovation system, U.S. VC ˜rms will continue to expand their off
-shore activities and support the creation of foreign startups that compete directly 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 9against U.S. ˜rms in the IT and other high-technology sectors. The effect of these 
investments will be strongly in˚uenced by most economies™ evolving regulatory 
and legal systems.
Financial Services
The rapid expansion in offshore investment in business process support by 
U.S. ˜nancial services ˜rms has led to increased innovation within these offshore 

locations by subsidiaries of U.S. ˜rms as well as independent providers of spe
-cialized services. The growth of vertical specialization within the global ˜nancial 

services industry also has affected the structure of innovation-related activities. 

There are strong complementarities between process and product innovation in 

this industry, but the offshore movement (mainly to Asian countries) of ﬁback-

of˜ceﬂ functions has supported increased offshore innovation in these processing 

functions. Firms based in high-income markets such as the United States and 

Europe remain the primary sources of product-oriented ﬁcustomer-facingﬂ inno
-vations, but market-mediated interaction between end users and providers is less 

important to the process innovation activities of many of these offshore sites.
WHAT
 H
AS
 C
HANGED
 S
INCE
 1990?
These summaries of structural change in the innovation-related activities 
of the industries examined in the volume highlight four broader trends: (1) the 

growth of innovative capabilities in a number of foreign nations that 30 years 

ago were classi˜ed as ﬁdeveloping economies,ﬂ (2) the growth of sophisticated 

manufacturing and services-production activities in these and other economies, 

(3) the growth of demand for cutting-edge technologies (particularly in IT) in 

markets outside of the United States, and (4) the growth of ﬁvertical specializa
-tionﬂ in many knowledge-intensive industries. A discussion of each of these 

trends follows.
Improved Innovative Capabilities in New Regions of the Global Economy
The ˜rst and perhaps most important of these trends is the growth of innova
-tive capabilities in countries such as China, India, Taiwan, and South Korea, none 

of which were active in R&D or product development for global markets during 

the 1960s and 1970s. In some of these countries, indigenous ˜rms or subsidiaries 

of foreign ˜rms are performing fundamental research. In most of them, improve
-ments in innovative capabilities have enhanced the ability of these countries to 

contribute to the design and development of advanced products, including those 

in service-based industries such as ˜nancial services and logistics. Particularly in 

India and China, advances in regional innovative capabilities have been associ
-ated with growth in domestic scienti˜c and engineering workforces.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
With the important exception of India, whose role in the production of soft
-ware and services has assuredly expanded, the transformation of these countries™ 
innovative capabilities has been linked to growth in the domestic manufacture 

(in some cases, in foreign-owned facilities) of products for global markets in 

industries ranging from PCs to automobiles. And just as has been true of in
-novation in the industrial economies, the growth in innovation-related activities 

within countries such as India, China, and Taiwan has been associated with 

regional concentration and agglomerationŠBangalore, Shanghai, and Hsinchu 

are examples of regional ﬁhigh-technologyﬂ agglomerations in India, China, and 

Taiwan, respectively.
Expansion of Production Activities Outside of the United States
A second factor in the transformation of the innovation processes in the 
industries discussed in this volume is the expansion of production activities out
-side of the United States in these and other regions. The extent and timing of this 

expansion of offshore production vary among industries (e.g., offshore produc
-tion is hardly a new feature of the automobile industry, but is less important in 

biotechnology). In a number of industries, however, ranging from semiconductors 

to ˚at panel displays and PCs, U.S. ˜rms rely on sites outside of the United States 

(through ownership or contracts) for a growing share of their production require
-ments. Much of this offshore expansion in manufacturing activity has occurred in 

Asia and Southeast Asia, particularly in China, Taiwan, and South Korea. In the 

˚at panel display industry, growth in Asian production by U.S. ˜rms and the entry 

into production by Asian ˜rms have ﬁpulledﬂ many innovation-related activities 

(e.g., process innovation) to Asian sites. Increased offshore manufacturing by 

U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, by contrast, has had more modest consequences for 

the location of innovation-related activities. There is little evidence of shifts to 

offshore locations in the patenting activities of U.S. (or non-U.S.) semiconduc
-tor ˜rms, and no evidence of offshore shifts in the location of process-innovation 

activities of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms.
Growth in global ﬁproduction networksﬂ in many of the industries discussed 
in this volume has provided a powerful impetus for the expansion of logistics 

that has in turn spurred and depended on signi˜cant innovation in the logistics 

industry. Expanding offshore production and product-development networks in 

industries such as semiconductors and software also has accelerated growth in 

foreign nations™ VC industries.
The Changing Pro˜le of Demand for Advanced 
Products in Foreign Markets
Yet another in˚uence on the movement of product design and development 
activities away from the United States in industries such as software, semicon
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 11
ductors, and PCs is interregional shifts in the scope and sophistication of con
-sumer demand. Consumer markets for wireless and digital devices in countries 
such as South Korea, for example, are growing more rapidly than are similar 

markets in the United States. Equally important is the fact that many consumers 

in these markets (including ˜rms producing advanced electronic-systems prod
-ucts) demand more advanced applications than is true of consumers elsewhere 

in the global economy. Users play a crucial role in demanding and in some cases 

developing or ﬁco-inventingﬂ new applications in the aforementioned industries, 

as well as in logistics. Firms seeking to exploit and develop new applications for 

these dynamic user-driven markets typically must locate a portion of their prod
-uct development and design activities within these markets. In industries such as 

semiconductors, U.S. ˜rms™ offshore design activities rely on close contacts with 

local ˜rms who design and produce the new consumer products that incorporate 

advanced semiconductor components.
The ﬁproduct cycleﬂ model that in˚uenced academic analysis of U.S. ˜rms™ 
offshore manufacturing and R&D activities during the 1960s (Vernon, 1966) 

posited that U.S. ˜rms developed and introduced their most advanced products 

within their domestic market before marketing and (eventually) manufacturing 

these products offshore. Although product demand in a number of the indus
-tries examined in this volume remains important, several of the most advanced 

markets in these industries now are located in foreign economies and, therefore, 

attract increased investment by U.S. ˜rms seeking to develop advanced products. 

In effect, the product cycle has been reversed, with important implications for the 

location by U.S. ˜rms of their product development activities.
Increased ﬁ
Vertical Specializationﬂ
Structural change in the industries examined in this volume has in˚uenced 
the shifting structure and location of innovation-related activities. Perhaps the 

most pervasive and important type of structural change, one that is observed in 

industries ranging from PCs to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, is vertical 

specializationŠthe development of an industry structure populated by ˜rms 

that specialize in one or a limited set of activities who contract with other ˜rms 

that specialize in different activities within the industry. For example, one group 

of ˜rms in the pharmaceutical industry now focuses on drug discovery and 

contracts with other ˜rms for drug development (e.g., clinical trials) and post-

approval marketing. In semiconductors, manufacturing ﬁfoundriesﬂ collaborate 

on a contractual basis with ﬁfablessﬂ semiconductor ˜rms that specialize in de
-sign and marketing of semiconductor components. This type of contract-based 

collaboration among specialized ˜rms differs considerably from the operations 

of ˜rms that are vertically integrated in all functions ranging from R&D through 

manufacturing to marketing.
In many industries, vertical specialization has developed in parallel with (and 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
in many cases has accelerated) global shifts in production activities. The manu
-facturing specialists in semiconductors are largely located in Asia, whereas fab
-less semiconductor ˜rms remain largely based in the United States. Similarly, the 
systems architecture, software operating systems, and semiconductor components 

within PCs are designed in the United States, but almost all production activity is 

located offshore and managed by ˜rms not af˜liated with the U.S. semiconduc
-tor or software enterprises. Moreover, the offshore manufacturers of PCs rely on 

specialized suppliers of components ranging from disk drives to displays.
Vertical specialization thus far has had varied effects on the location of 
innovation-related activities in the industries discussed in this volume. Although 

˚at panel display production is located almost entirely outside of the United 

States, U.S. ˜rms retain important roles in technology development (including 

investing in U.S.-based R&D) as suppliers of specialized inputs and equipment. 

In PCs, vertical specialization has been associated with the geographic separation 

of manufacturing from high-level design activities. Although some semiconductor 

design activities have migrated to the East Asian sites where the bulk of special
-ized semiconductor producers are located, U.S. sites retain an important role in 

advanced design activities. The location of U.S. pharmaceuticals and biotechnol
-ogy R&D does not appear to have shifted in response to growing offshore drug 

production and marketing activities.
In some industries, the factors determining the location of advanced R&D 
activities seem to differ signi˜cantly from those in˚uencing the location of manu
-facturing. In semiconductors and pharmaceuticals, vertical specialization has 

supported the formation of new U.S.-based ˜rms whose business models rely on 

collaboration with offshore manufacturers. Vertical specialization also has aided 

the growth of innovation and globalization in ˜nancial services and logistics by 

facilitating the complex web of transactions that underpin the structure of these 

industries. But in other industries, such as lighting, shifts in the location of pro
-duction have had signi˜cant implications for the location of innovation-related 

activities.
WHAT
 H
AS
 N
OT
 C
HANGED
?Although many aspects of the innovation process in the industries examined 
in this volume (as well as many others) have undergone signi˜cant change since 

1990, the broad economic and policy challenges associated with such structural 

change have changed little. In most of these industries, U.S.-based ˜rms continue 

to perform the majority of their (most advanced) R&D within the United States. 

Inventive activity, as measured by the location of inventors for U.S. patents ˜led 

by U.S.-based ˜rms, remains remarkably ﬁhomeboundﬂ in industries such as 

biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, and software.
22 
Indeed, patent-based indicators suggest that the inventive activity of foreign-based ˜rms in these 
industries also remains concentrated in their home countries.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 13
Nevertheless, in other industries, a growing share of the R&D and inventive 
activity at the technological frontier now appears to be located outside of the 
United States. In the lighting and ˚at panel display industries, non-U.S. ˜rms 

and nations have become more prominent innovators since 1990. Moreover, even 

within industries such as software or semiconductors, in which the inventive 

activity of U.S.-based ˜rms appears to be concentrated in the United States, a 

substantial (and poorly measured) portion of the design and development of new 

products has moved offshore, either to exploit lower labor costs or to collaborate 

more closely with innovative users. As we noted earlier, however, the ability to 

exploit offshore innovative talent has supported the entry and growth of numerous 

U.S. ˜rms pursuing new business models and technology strategies.
Thus, economic change has affected the structure of the innovation pro
-cess in all of the industries studied. The characteristics of structural change in 

virtually all of these industries resemble those emphasized in the analyses of 

U.S. competitiveness highlighted earlier: Industries and activities in which U.S. 

workers (de˜ned in this case to include scientists and engineers) add less value 

are the most vulnerable to foreign competition and the most likely ones to move 

to foreign sites. The improved capabilities of scientists and engineers in many 

of these foreign locations, the identity of these locations themselves, and the 

changing outlook of demand and growth in the U.S. and foreign markets, how
-ever, may be causing more rapid shifts in competitive advantage and affecting a 

broader range of activities, including innovation-related activities, than in earlier 

decades. Nevertheless, the fundamental conclusion remains unchanged: For U.S. 

˜rms, consumers, and workers to pro˜t from the expanding opportunities in the 

global economy, their innovative and productivity performance must continue to 

improve; the U.S. economy must remain open to in˚ows of goods, technology, 

and capital; and the infrastructure underpinning the domestic U.S. R&D ﬁsystemﬂ 

must remain highly innovative and attractive as a site for investment by U.S. and 

non-U.S. ˜rms alike.
Another important element of continuity that contemporary analyses of in
-novation and globalization share with earlier discussions of this topic is the poor 

quality of the data on which they rely. As the previous STEP Board study (
U.S. 
Industry in 2000
) noted, restructuring in the domestic and international R&D sys
-tems means that conventional R&D investment data are less reliable as a guide to 

structural change in the innovation process. The R&D investment data collected 

by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and other public statistical agencies 

in the United States and other industrial economies arguably do not include a 

number of the activities (e.g., product design, or spending by ˜rms on acquisi
-tions as a means of gaining access to new technologies or capabilities) that play 

a central role in the innovation process of the 21st century. Moreover, the NSF 

data provide limited information on the international dimensions of R&D invest
-ment by U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms. These problems with the R&D investment data 

have been the subject of a number of studies by the STEP Board, the National 

Research Council, and other expert panels, but the fact remains that much of the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
analysis of globalization in the innovation process is hampered by limited, dated, 
and imperfect data and indicators. These data limitations are especially serious 
for service-based industries, which have expanded their investment in R&D and 

offshore production signi˜cantly since 1990.
A number of the chapters in this volume rely on patent data to supplement 
the limited R&D investment data available for their industry. Patent data have a 

number of advantages, including their disaggregation into speci˜c technology 

classes, and their reporting of both the assignment and geographic location of 

the patent owner(s). Nevertheless, patents have important disadvantages as well. 

They measure inventive activity, which is an important input to the overall pro
-cess of commercial innovation, but do not measure the output of the innovation 

process. The coverage by patents of even inventive activity within different indus
-tries and technology classes also varies, as does their commercial and economic 

value among ˜elds of invention. Equally important is the fact that the grant of a 

patent follows a period of review of the patent application that typically takes at 

least 18 months and frequently requires 3 to 5 years. Therefore, patent data pro
-vide a ﬁretrospectiveﬂ measure of inventive activity occurring as many as 5 years 

ago, and this inventive activity itself results from investments in R&D and other 

activities made still earlier. Although patent data represent a valuable additional 

set of indicators of innovation-related activities in a much more complex global 

economic environment, their limitations must be kept in mind.
Yet another area in which the quality of available data makes it dif˜cult to 
draw de˜nitive conclusions is the effects on domestic scienti˜c and engineering 

employment from the globalization of innovation-related activities that is occur
-ring in many of these industries. Data on industry-wide employment trends for 

scientists and engineers in many of these industries (e.g., logistics, venture capi
-tal, PCs, software) do not exist, re˚ecting the complex structure of the industries 

and the outdated structure of publicly available data on industry employment. 

Moreover, the central topic of these chapters is not shifts in the location of these 

industries but shifts in the location of speci˜c functions within these industries. 

And many of the trends described in these chapters (e.g., greater reliance on 

advanced information and communications technologies, vertical specialization) 

facilitate the geographic separation of different activities within industries, rather 

than the relocation of entire industries.
33 
The distinction is an important one, since the gloomy predictions made by Freeman (2005) and 
others assume that the United States will lose its historic dominance in knowledge-intensive industries 
as a result of the growing technological and scienti˜c capabilities and workforce in nations such as 

India and China. What these chapters indicate is that some speci˜c functions (e.g., product manufac
-ture, software coding, product development) may shift to offshore locations. But these shifts need not 

pull other knowledge-intensive activities in their wake, and in some cases (as in semiconductors) these 

shifts in location create opportunities for the growth of new ˜rms in the United States. The Freeman 

predictions cannot be dismissed, although Branstetter and Foley (2007) present a more skeptical view 

of the current level of MNE R&D and innovation within China. Nevertheless, the trends described in 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 15
The chapters in this volume on semiconductors, software, and PCs all con
-clude that the employment consequences for scientists and engineers from the 
restructuring of innovation-related activities thus far are modest and not clearly 

negative or positive. Indeed, leading U.S. ˜rms in these IT-related industries con
-sistently complain about the lack of suf˜cient immigration visas to hire foreign-

born engineers needed to address shortages (Lohr, 2007).
4 It is also dif˜cult if not 
impossible to separate the ﬁcontributions,ﬂ negative or positive, to scienti˜c and 

engineering employment of the globalization of an industry™s innovation-related 

activities from myriad other factors.
Overall, therefore, the data underpinning the conclusions of all of the chap
-ters in this volume provide a clearer understanding of the past than they do of the 

future. Although the nature of the innovation process is such that the near-term 

future is not likely to differ radically from the recent past, the fact remains that 

the data underpinning detailed industry studies such as these provide a limited 

foundation for forecasts.
POLIC
Y I
SSUES
 AND
 C
HALLENGES
The fundamental challenges for policy created by the processes of globaliza
-tion described in this volume have changed little from those described in stud
-ies of this topic that date back to the 1960s and 1970s. To preserve and expand 

employment in the functions and professions that bene˜t from the globalization 

of innovation, the United States must sustain the high levels of innovative perfor
-mance that have supported the competitiveness of U.S. industry and have made 

the United States a major destination for R&D investment from foreign ˜rms. 

Among other things, this goal means that support for the ﬁR&D infrastructureﬂ 

that decades of public and private investment have created must be strengthened. 
this volume re˚ect a different process of economic change. Indeed, it is highly plausible that stronger 
scienti˜c and engineering capabilities in India and China will produce effects similar to those ob
-served after Japanese and European ﬁconvergenceﬂ with U.S. levels of innovation-related expertise, 

as Bhagwati et al. (2004) point out: ﬁWhen the revival of Europe and Japan brought their skill levels 

closer to those of the United States, the gains from trade induced by ‚factor endowment differences™ 

were increasingly replaced by gains from ‚intraindustry™ trade; for example, the United States now 

specializes in high-end chips such as Pentium, while leaving more standard semiconductor chips to 

foreign producers. Similarly, we can con˜dently expect ‚intraservice™ and ‚intraindustry™ trade to grow 

between the United States on the one hand and India and China on the other as the latter acquire more 

skillsﬂ (p. 108). Alternatively (and equally plausibly), one may observe growth in ﬁintrafunctionﬂ trade 

within such activities as new product development, based on the same factors. 
4 
H-1B visas are given to foreign workers with high-technology skills or in specialty occupations 
by the Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency. U.S. companies seek H-1B visas on behalf of 

foreign scientists and engineers to ˜ll hiring shortfalls, but Congress mandates that the Agency cap 

the number of visas granted to 65,000. Some claim that U.S. H-1B visa policies are counterproduc
-tive and detrimental to U.S. technological and economic competitiveness, while others see them as 

critical to protecting domestic workers. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
This infrastructure has supported investment and innovation by U.S. and foreign 
˜rms in the industries examined in this volume, as well as others, and has yielded 
great bene˜ts to U.S. consumers.
Other developing and developed countries now recognize the importance 
of such an infrastructure and, in many respects, are emulating U.S. policies by 

making similar public and private investments. A failure by the United States 

to maintain its commitment to the strength and quality of its public and private 

R&D infrastructure could limit the bene˜ts for U.S. citizens of the globalization 

of innovation-related activities described in this volume. Here, as elsewhere, the 

competitive dynamics should not be seen as a ﬁzero-sumﬂ competitionŠU.S. 

citizens bene˜t from higher levels of R&D investment by foreign governments, 

just as foreign citizens have bene˜ted from U.S. public R&D investment. But 

the mobility of innovation-related activities means that the United States must 

remain an attractive site for these activities by U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms in order 

to maintain employment opportunities for skilled personnel.
Beyond sustaining this infrastructure, however, public policies must ensure 
that government R&D investments yield the highest possible public returns. 

Achieving this goal means that university-industry research collaboration should 

be supported by public policy, without imperiling the critical role of U.S. uni
-versities as educational institutions that produce world-class scientists and engi
-neers. Any obstacles to such collaboration imposed by shortsighted university 

patenting and licensing policies also should be reviewed critically by university 

administrators, industry managers, and policy makers.
5 As Thursby and Thursby 
(2006) note, one of the most important in˚uences on the location of multinational 

corporations™ advanced scienti˜c research facilities is proximity and access to 

university researchers. U.S. universities, like U.S. ˜rms, face growing compe
-tition from foreign institutions for industry-supported collaborative R&D and 

must adjust their policies toward intellectual property management accordingly. 

Policies that limit federal support for academic research on politically sensitive 

topics such as embryonic stem cells also reduce the attractiveness of U.S. uni
-versities as research collaborators and therefore weaken the ﬁmagnetic forceﬂ 

of these important institutional assets for R&D investment in the United States 

from foreign sources.
Users of advanced technologies play an important role in innovation in many 
of the industries examined in this volume, especially those in the IT sector. Prox
-5 ﬁLargely as a result of the lack of federal funding for research, American Universities have become 
extremely aggressive in their attempts to raise funding from large corporations. . . .  Large US based 
corporations have become so disheartened and disgusted with the situation they are now working with 

foreign universities, especially the elite institutions in France, Russia and China, which are more than 

willing to offer extremely favorable intellectual property termsﬂ (testimony before the Subcommit
-tee on Science, Technology, and Space, U.S. Senate Commerce Committee of R. Stanley Williams, 

September 17, 2002; statement reproduced at 
http://www.memagazine.org/contents/
current
/webonly/
webex319.htm
l; accessed April 2, 2005).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 17
imity to sophisticated users is an important factor in the decisions of U.S. ˜rms 
to locate a portion of their innovation-related activities offshore. An important 
part of the R&D infrastructure that attracts (or retains) investment in innovation-

related activities supports user-driven applications in advanced technologies. 

One of the most celebrated recent examples of investment in such infrastructure 

was the public investment in the computer-networking infrastructure (originally 

referred to as ARPANET) that laid the foundations for the Internet. U.S. policy 

supported public and private investments in the networking technology and 

infrastructure, and U.S. trade policy encouraged widespread imports and adop
-tion by users of low-cost desktop computing hardware. These policies helped 

create a large domestic ﬁtestbedﬂ for demanding users of computing technology 

to develop new applications, which in turn helped propel the explosive growth 

during the 1990s of commercial investment in Internet-related ˜rms (Mowery 

and Simcoe, 2002).
One contemporary (and closely related) equivalent to the computer-networking 
infrastructure of the ARPANET and NSFNET is broadband communications 

technology, which remains less widely available in the United States than in 

other (notably Nordic) nations (Turner, 2006). Moreover, differences in such 

access between urban and rural users depress the size of the domestic market for 

advanced applications developed on this testbed by innovative users. Broadband 

access is an indispensable foundation for continued growth in the user-driven in
-novation that now is prominent in many of these industries. In this area, as well 

as others affecting the viability of user-led innovation, public policy and private 

investment should support the development of widely accessible testbeds for 

sophisticated users to develop new applications and business models. Such an 

infrastructure could support the development of new ˜rms and industries from 

domestic sources, investments in related ˜elds from foreign ˜rms, and continued 

innovation and growth in the U.S. economy.
The broader process of economic globalization, of which the restructuring of 
innovation-related activities is one part, is on the whole bene˜cial for the United 

States. Consumers bene˜t from higher-quality, lower-cost, and more innovative 

products; employees bene˜t from the ability to exploit their skills in a global 

rather than a domestic market; ˜rms bene˜t from lower costs and economies of 

specialization through vertical specialization and increased collaboration; and the 

processes of trade liberalization can have bene˜cial political consequences for in
-ternational relations as well. In addition, of course, literally millions of non-U.S. 

citizens bene˜t from the expanded economic opportunities in their home nations 

provided by the process of economic globalization.
Nevertheless, the distributional consequences of trade liberalization and 
globalization are signi˜cant, and, in a democracy, the political effects of worker 

displacement and ˚at or declining wages can intensify resistance to trade liberal
-ization. These concerns are affected much more by relocation of manufacturing 

and services employment, rather than by change in the structure of innovation-
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
related activities, and raise issues that go far beyond the focus of the studies 
in this volume. Nevertheless, in the absence of more effective policies within 
the United States to address the legitimate concerns and needs of the domestic 

economic ﬁlosersﬂ from globalization, political resistance to policies seeking 

to further liberalize international ˚ows of trade and investment seems likely to 

grow. And such political resistance has the potential to undercut the globaliza
-tion in innovation-related activities that has proven highly bene˜cial to U.S. and 

non-U.S. citizens alike.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
Research for this chapter was supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, 
the Ewing M. Kauffman Foundation, and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. 

A portion of David Mowery™s research was supported by the National Science 

Foundation (SES-0531184).
REFERENCES
Bhagwati, J., A. Panagariya, and T. N. Srinavasan. (2004). The muddles over outsourcing. 
Journal 
of Economic Perspectives
 18(4):93-114.
Branstetter, L., and C. F. Foley. (2007). Facts and Fallacies about U.S. FDI in China. National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper #13470.
Freeman, R. B. (2005). Does Globalization of the Scienti˜c/Engineering Workforce Threaten U.S. 
Economic Leadership. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper 11457, pp. 1-47.
Lohr, S. (2007). Parsing the truths about visas for tech workers. 
New York Times
. April 15.
Mowery, D. C., and T. S. Simcoe. (2002). Is the Internet a U.S. invention?ŠAn economic and tech
-nological history of computer networking. 
Research Policy
 31:1369-1387.
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine. Committee 
on Prospering in the Global Economy of the 21st Century. (2006). 
Rising above the Gathering 
Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future.
 Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press.
Thursby, J., and M. Thursby. (2006). Where is the new science in corporate R&D. 
Science
 314:
 1547-1548.
Turner, S. D. (2006). Broadband reality check II: The truth behind America™s digital decline. 
Con
-sumers Union
 1-44.
Vernon, R. (1966). International investment and international trade in the product cycle. 
Quarterly 
Journal of Economics
 80:190-207.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
 1  Personal Computing
JASON
 D
EDRICK
University of California at Irvine
KENNETH
 L. K
RAEMER
University of California at Irvine
INTRODUCTION
August 2006 marked the 25th anniversary of the release of the original IBM 
personal computer (PC), the product that de˜ned the standards around which a 
vast new industry formed. Unlike the vertically integrated mainframe industry, 

the PC industry consisted of a global network of independent suppliers of sys
-tems, components, peripherals, and software (Grove, 1999; Dedrick and Kraemer, 

1998). The key factor shaping the industry™s structure was the design of the IBM 

PC as a modular, open system with standard interfaces, which allowed many 

newcomers to enter the market by specializing in one industry segment and de
-veloping innovations that could be integrated into any IBM-compatible system. 

It also permitted producers of parts, components, and systems to achieve global 

economies of scale as most of the world adopted the IBM standard. In time, 

desktop PCs were joined by portable laptop/notebook PCs and PC servers as the 

industry innovated on this common standard.
Today, the core personal computing industry includes not only traditional 
desktop and laptop PCs and PC servers but also smart handheld devices such as 

personal digital assistants (PDAs) and smart phones. This core industry is sup
-ported by a large number of component suppliers, manufacturing services and 

logistics providers, distributors, retailers, service specialists, and others. These 

companies also support other segments of the electronics industry, and so are 

counted here not as part of the PC industry but as part of its overall production 

and innovation network. This network not only supports innovation in the core 

industry segments but also provides the necessary infrastructure for innovations 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
in newer product categories such as ultramobile PCs, MP3 players (e.g., the 
iPod), and smart phones.
Worldwide revenues for the core PC industry totaled $235 billion in 2005: 
$191 billion in desktop and portable PCs, $28 billion in PC servers, and $16 bil
-lion in smart handheld devices (IDC, 2006a). In addition, PC software accounts 
for about half of the packaged software industry, whose 2006 sales were $225 
billion, and PC use also drives sales of information technology (IT) services and 
of other hardware such as storage, peripherals, and networking equipment (IDC, 

2006c).
The PC has undergone considerable innovation and change since it was ˜rst 
introduced. The traditional PC is no longer expected to be the sole locus of inno
-vation in the future, but simply one of many devices ﬁorbiting the userﬂ (
Econo
-mist
, 2006). Communications devices (phones, PDAs) have acquired computing 
capabilities and people now send e-mail with a BlackBerry or download music 

on a mobile phone. Digital photos can be transferred from a camera to a PC and 

uploaded to a website, transferred directly to a printer, or shot and e-mailed with 

a mobile phone. And although the traditional desktop and laptop PC is becoming 

less central to all computing activities, over 225 million PCs were sold in 2006 

and the PC is often the ˜rst place to ˜nd innovations that may migrate later to 

other devices.
As important as product innovation has been, equally important is the steady 
price declines in recent years, which have brought PCs within the reach of more 

of the world™s population. Emerging markets such as China and India are growing 

much faster than the more mature developed markets, and PC makers have begun 

to focus on innovation that addresses the needs of those markets at low prices. 

Globalization of production has been credited for making computer hardware 10 

to 30 percent cheaper than it would be otherwise (Mann, 2003). The availability 

of ever cheaper, smaller, and more powerful hardware has continued to expand 

the market and has stimulated ongoing innovation in hardware, software, and 

services.
Although globalization has been a major factor in the growth and innovation 
of the PC industry, it raises issues for U.S. companies, government and other 

institutions, and workers. U.S. PC makers are struggling to eke out a pro˜t in an 

environment of falling prices and intense international competition. Government 

policy issues include tax incentives, antitrust, immigration, and market access. 

Universities must ensure that they are training people with the skills that industry 

needs, and workers must invest their own time and money to acquire those skills 

even as more highly skilled knowledge work is moved offshore.
The impacts of globalization have been debated extensively. An optimistic 
view is that U.S. ˜rms are outsourcing and offshoring lower-end manufacturing 

and routine engineering work, freeing resources to focus on more dynamic in
-novation that will sustain pro˜tability and create new jobs in the United States. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 21A more pessimistic view is that innovation will follow manufacturing offshore, 
leaving U.S. ˜rms uncompetitive and draining the United States of the innovation 
that drives growth and employment (Kotkin and Friedman, 2004).
While macro-level data can be useful in analyzing the impacts of globaliza
-tion, trends and impacts can be easier to spot at the industry level, especially 

when looking at more dynamic industries where change is happening faster. 

Personal computing is one such industry. Therefore, this chapter examines the 

globalization of innovation in the PC industry, its causes, its impacts, and its strat
-egy and policy implications. The focus is mainly on innovation-related activities 

in U.S.-branded PC companies set in their global context; it is not an analysis of 

PC companies in other economies such as Japan, Taiwan, or China, although it 

brings them in as part of the global supply chain and the competitive context.
This chapter is a fact-based analysis grounded in over 200 personal inter
-views with industry executives in the United States and Asia, data from the In
-ternational Data Corporation (IDC), Taiwan™s Market Intelligence Center, Reed 

Electronics Research and other sources, published empirical research, and our 

study of the industry for over 20 years.
We ˜nd that the global division of innovation-related activities can be char
-acterized as follows: component-level research and development (R&D), concept 

design, and product planning are performed mostly in the United States and 

Japan; applied R&D and development of new platforms mostly take place in 

Taiwan; and product development for mature products and a majority of produc
-tion and sustaining engineering are performed in China.
U.S. PC ˜rms have bene˜ted from this international division of labor, which 
has supported rapid innovation and quicker integration of new technologies into 

their products. The growing demand for smaller, more mobile products plays to 

U.S. ˜rms™ strengths in product architecture and early-stage development. Their 

bigger problem is earning pro˜ts from innovation in an industry dominated by 

Microsoft and Intel, who capture very high pro˜t margins thanks to their control 

of key standards. From the perspective of U.S. knowledge workers, the situation 

is more mixed. The shift in production away from the United States has pulled 

many new product development jobs to Asia, whereas design and early-stage 

development work has remained largely in the United States. Still, the new jobs 

created by the industry™s growth are largely outside of the United States. Finally, 

consumers in the United States have been clear bene˜ciaries of the very low cost 

structure that globalization has produced in PCs as average selling prices have 

been reduced continually.
Following this Introduction, the structure of this chapter is as follows. The 
section ﬁInnovation in the Industryﬂ analyzes the nature of innovation in PCs and 

how production and innovation are organized across the value network. ﬁChang
-ing International Structure of Demand and Supplyﬂ describes international trends 

in PC demand and production. The fourth section, ﬁGlobalization of Innovation,ﬂ 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
reviews the global structure of innovation in the PC industry and the factors driv
-ing globalization. ﬁImplications of Globalization of Innovationﬂ considers the 
implications of the foregoing trends for ˜rm strategy and U.S. national policy.
INNO
VATION IN THE INDUSTR
YThe PC industry has introduced many innovations in its 25-year history. 
Product innovation includes the creation of new product categories such as 

notebook PCs and PDAs, as well as the creation of new product platforms such 

as multimedia PCs and wireless ﬁmobilityﬂ notebooks. The scope and outcome 

of product innovation in PCs is shaped by the presence of global architectural 

standards set originally by IBM and now largely controlled by Microsoft and 

Intel. Common interface standards enable innovators to reach a global market 

with standard product lines; thus, economies of scale can be achieved to support 

investments in product development and manufacturing capacity. This is different 

from other industries, such as mobile phones or video games, in which multiple 

incompatible standards exist. An example of the bene˜ts of standardization is the 

acceptance of 802.11 as a common standard, which spurred the introduction of 

wireless networking as a standard feature on notebook PCs. On the other hand, 

standardization battles can constrain innovation because PC makers are reluctant 

to incorporate technologies before a standard is set, as is the case with second-

generation DVD technology.
When PC makers do innovate, they face hard choices in trying to capture 
pro˜ts from their innovations. One alternative is to incorporate the innovation 

only in their own products to differentiate their PCs from those of competitors, 

but there is a question of whether they can convince customers to pay for the 

differentiation and also whether customers will want to adopt a nonstandard 

technology. Another is to license the technology broadly, which might bring in 

license fees and even establish the technology as an industry standard, but which 

will eliminate product differentiation. One current example is Hewlett-Packard™s 

(HP™s) Personal Media Drive (PMD), a portable hard drive that slides into a spe
-cial slot in HP Media Center PCs. HP incorporated the special slot into some of 

its own products, while letting customers connect the PMD to competitors™ PCs 

using a slower USB connection, thus differentiating HP™s PCs. By contrast, HP 

has licensed its LightScribe technology, for labeling DVDs and CDs, to other 

PC makers. In either case, it can be dif˜cult to translate innovation into pro˜ts 

suf˜cient to justify the R&D effort.
Despite these challenges, which may discourage more fundamental product 
innovation, PC makers are pushed to incremental innovation by component 

makers (such as for semiconductors, storage, or power supply) who introduce 

frequent changes in their products (faster speed, greater capacity, smaller form 

factor, longer life) in efforts to gain greater market share within their industry 

sector. They also are pushed by consumers who want the latest technologies. PC 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 23makers feel they have to adopt these often-incremental changes rather than risk 
being left behind by a competitor that does adopt.
As a result, PC makers have tended to concentrate on operational ef˜ciency, 
marketing, and distribution rather than trying to use product differentiation as a 
source of sustainable competitive advantage (Porter, 1996). Product innovation 

at the system level tends to be incremental and emphasizes developing slightly 

different products for narrowly de˜ned market niches, such as PC gamers who 

demand high performance or business travelers who desire ultralight notebooks, 

rather than more distinctively innovative products.
1 Instead, most product innova
-tion occurs upstream in components and software, which are then incorporated 

by PC makers.
Consistent with the emphasis on ef˜ciency and distribution, the industry has 
introduced business process innovations such as outsourced manufacturing, using 

the Internet as a direct sales channel, vendor-managed inventory, third-party lo
-gistics, and build-to-order (BTO) production. At the plant level, some ˜rms have 

replaced assembly lines with small production cells to facilitate BTO production 

and have adopted process improvements such as reducing the number of steps 

and improving quality in ˜nal assembly. They also have employed a range of in
-formation technologies such as shop ˚oor management systems, bar coding, and 

automated software downloads to improve manufacturing performance (Kraemer 

et al., 2000). However, while early adoption of these innovations bene˜ted some 

companies, particularly Dell Inc., competing PC makers have since adopted these 

and other process innovations and closed the gap on key measures such as inven
-tory turnover and time to market for new products (Dedrick and Kraemer, 2005). 

Today, most companies use a mix of build-to-forecast and BTO processes that is 

optimal for their targeted markets. The result is greater ef˜ciency in the industry 

as a whole, but the biggest bene˜ts have not gone to the PC makers. They have 

mostly gone to consumers in the form of lower prices, and to Microsoft and Intel, 

as software and microprocessors account for an ever greater share of the total 

cost of a PC.
2To understand innovation in the industry, it is important to look at the struc
-ture of the innovation network, the innovation processes, the key personal com
-puting products, and interdependencies among innovation processes, products, 

and the structure of the network.
1 
An exception is Apple, which emphasizes attractive design and close integration of hardware and 
proprietary software in its products. While this has been very successful in its iPod line, Apple™s mar
-ket share in PCs is under 4 percent worldwide, so it is unclear that its innovative PCs have done more 
than satisfy a small core of Mac users who are willing to pay a premium for its products. By adopting 

Intel processors for all of its products, Apple has abandoned its proprietary hardware platform in favor 

of global economies of scale and greater compatibility with Windows PCs.
2 
Even these two face challenges: Intel from AMD and Microsoft from Linux in one product cat
-egory (servers).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
The Innovation Network
The PC industry™s innovation network consists of component makers, con
-tract manufacturers (CMs) and original design manufacturers (ODMs), branded 
PC ˜rms, distributors, and resellers (Figure 1).
3The industry can be characterized as horizontally specialized, with the branded 
˜rms as the ﬁsystem integratorsﬂ doing design and outsourcing development and 

production to CMs or ODMs. There are less than a dozen globally competitive 

PC makers and many smaller local assemblers, supported by another dozen ma
-jor CMs and ODMs. There are several major suppliers of most key components 

(e.g., motherboards, hard drives, displays, optical drives, memory, and batteries). 

Farther upstream in the supply chain, there are several thousand suppliers of less 

expensive parts and components, most of which are small- and medium-sized 

˜rms. Distribution is mostly decentralized and local, although there are a few large 

distributors who operate internationally such as Ingram Micro, Tech Data, and 

Arrow Electronics. Our main focus in this chapter is on the branded PC vendors 

and ODMs who collaborate to bring new products to market using components 

from upstream suppliers.
Most R&D is done upstream in the industryŠby the suppliers of micropro
-cessors, software, peripherals, and components. This innovation is global in the 

sense that there are major component makers in the United States (microproces
-sors, graphics, memory, hard drives, networking, software), Japan (liquid crystal 

displays [LCDs], memory, hard drives, batteries), Korea (LCDs, memory), and 

Taiwan (LCDs, memory, optical drives, power supply, various peripherals). 

However, although some companies have set up R&D labs around the world, 

most R&D is still done in the home country. Some PC makers such as HP, 

Toshiba, Sony, and Samsung also make components and peripherals, but these 

are generally done in separate business units who sell to competing PC makers 

as well as their internal PC units.
The pace of this upstream innovation is a major factor shaping innovation 
by branded PC vendors who innovate through ﬁsystems integration.ﬂ The PC 

vendors identify new product markets and design systems that incorporate new 

technologies to serve those markets. For instance, PC makers identi˜ed mobile 

PC users who want network access without having to plug into a phone line or 

local area network. This capability was made possible when wireless networking 

technologies such as WiFi were introduced by component makers. It was then 

up to PC makers to incorporate the technology into their products. More impor
-3 
The terms contract manufacturer and original design manufacturer are used commonly, but 
not always consistently, in the electronics industry. 
Contract manufacturers 
provide a range of 
manufacturing services, including subassembly, ˜nal assembly, logistics, and even customer service. 
Original design manufacturer 
is a term coined in Taiwan when its contract manufacturers began 
to offer product design and engineering as well as manufacturing of notebooks, motherboards, and 

other products.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 25PC industry-1.eps
Product innovation
Customer relations    
Component 
suppliers
Contract manufacturers/ODMs
Direct
PC vendors
Indirect
Distributors
Component 
suppliers
Component 
suppliers
Component 
suppliers
Customers
R& DDesignEngineering       ManufacturingAssembly
DistributionSales, service
Activities
Components, subassemblies, box-builds
Complete systems
Resellers
Operations
FIGURE 1
 The PC industry innovation network. SOURCE: Adapted from Curry and 
Kenney (1999).
tant, they had to introduce a new technology at a time when the infrastructure 
to support wireless networking was nearly nonexistent, hoping that this would 

create the impetus for ˜rms and consumers to invest in wireless networks. Apple 

initially jumped in by incorporating 802.11 wireless technology in all of its note
-books, and was soon followed by other PC makers. Soon, wireless networks were 

available in of˜ces, homes, schools, airports, and coffee shops around the world. 

Apple™s early decision was very risky, as there were few networks available, but 

taking the risk helped to create the market for them.
The creation of new markets by PC makers, in turn, can shape the direction 
of upstream innovation in components. For wireless notebooks, PC vendors had 

to decide which networking standard(s) to incorporate as well as ˜nd components 

with low power consumption, longer battery life, and light weight. Available 

components seldom meet all these needs, so the lead PC vendors each developed 

their own product roadmaps, which signal to the component suppliers where the 

˜rm is headed, the target markets and expected volumes, and the price and per
-formance of components needed to succeed. By doing so, they provided advance 

knowledge to the upstream suppliers who could respond in terms of feasibility, 

aggregate demand across PC vendors, plan for the coming changes, and inform 

their own suppliers. These PC maker roadmaps, which are different from those 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
provided by Intel and Microsoft to the PC makers, are essential to knowledge 
integration along the supply chain.
Innovation Processes
Product innovation in the industry occurs through two broad processesŠ
R&D and new product development. 
R&D
 is an ongoing activity that generates 
knowledge that can be applied to multiple products. 
New product development
 is 
a multistage process of design, development, and production that creates physical 
products for target markets.
4 Although conceptually distinct, there is often a close 
interaction between the two in practice. New product development integrates 

knowledge developed by R&D, and R&D is often called on to solve a speci˜c 

problem in product development. Given that most R&D is done upstream by 

the component suppliers, the process of knowledge integration occurs between 

the supplier and the PC maker. The focus is on knowledge needed to integrate 

a standard component, but occasionally it involves customization or even more 

intensive joint development. This is especially the case when an entirely new 

product is being created, such as the wireless notebook that requires integration 

of communication technologies, or in the case of a new product category such 

as the Apple iPod.
Products and Innovation Activities
Although new form factors are emerging, desktops and notebooks remain 
the leading products in the industry, with important differences between them 

that affect innovation activities. For 
desktops
, product innovation mainly cen
-ters on conventional systems integrationŠincorporating new parts, components, 

and software into a system and ensuring that they work together. The system is 

largely standardized with respect to components, parts, and interfaces. So in
-novation involves the selection of components to be included for different target 

markets (e.g., home, of˜ce, game, ﬁvalueﬂ or ﬁpowerﬂ user). Most use a standard 

full tower or midtower chassis with industrial design applied mainly to the bezel 

(face) to re˚ect a certain brand image. A few newer models aimed at consumers™ 

living rooms have moved away from the ﬁbeige boxﬂ to smaller and more stylish 

designs with unique chassis and industrial designs. PC vendors generally keep 

concept design and product planning in-house for close control over brand image, 

user interface, features, cost, and quality. Outsourcing of physical development 

has occurred in a series of steps since the mid-1990sŠ˜rst motherboard design, 

then mechanical design, system test, and ˜nally software build and validation. 
4 
A detailed discussion of these phases and the activities within each is provided by Dedrick and 
Kraemer (2006b).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 27Intel facilitated this trend by providing support and reference designs to ODMs 
who develop motherboards and full systems.
For 
notebooks
, innovation involves high-level system integration with com
-plex mechanical, electrical, and software challenges. Design of such a small form 
factor presents special challenges with respect to heat dissipation, electromag
-netic interference, and power consumption, while the need for portability requires 

greater ruggedness. Although components such as disk drives and ˚at panels are 

mostly standardized, notebooks involve many custom parts. For example, to ˜t 

the modular components within the notebook chassis, the motherboard and bat
-tery pack may have to be customized for each notebook model. The chassis and 

other mechanical parts require custom tooling.
PC vendors usually keep notebook design in-house but coordinate physical 
development jointly with the ODM because there is a strong interdependency 

between the physical product development and manufacturing. It is critical that 

product development take manufacturability into account from the beginning; 

otherwise a product may be developed that cannot be produced at the neces
-sary volume, cost, or quality. Most notebook PCs are designed to be built in a 

particular assembly plant with speci˜c manufacturing process requirements. As 

a result, product development and ˜nal assembly are almost always handled by 

one company. In some cases, this means the PC maker keeps both in-house. In 

most cases it means outsourcing both development and manufacturing of each 

model to a single ODM.
Thus, the interdependencies of PC form factors and new product develop
-ment (NPD) activities have led to different organizational arrangements for 

desktops and notebooks (Figure 2). Because desktops are less complex and more 

standardized, a complete product speci˜cation can be handed off for develop
-ment and production to ODMs, or a fully developed product can be turned over 

to a CM for manufacturing. However, because of their greater complexity and 

customization, notebooks tend to be designed and developed jointly by the PC 

vendors and ODMs.
PC industry-2.eps
R&D
DesignDevelopmentProduction
Notebook
MS/Intel,
Components
PC
vendors
ODMs
Desktop
MS/Intel,
Components
PC
vendors
CMs/ODMs
NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
FIGURE 2
 Organization of innovation for desktops and notebooks.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
As a result of the interdependencies in notebook PC development, leading 
PC makers HP and Dell have set up design centers in Taiwan to work closely 
with ODMs, whereas others frequently send staff from the United States. The 

ODMs may divide product development and manufacturing between Taiwan and 

China but keep very close interaction between the two locations. For desktops, 

it is easier to separate development and manufacturing geographically as well as 

across ˜rm boundaries.
CHANGING INTERNATIONAL STRUCTURE 
OF DEMAND AND SUPPL
YTrends in Demand
PC demand has been shifting steadily for over a decade toward smaller, more 
integrated, and more communications-oriented products. The global demand for 

PCs is changing in terms of form factor, commercial versus consumer markets, 

and regional consumption. Portable devices (laptops and notebooks) are the fast
-est growing form factor, totaling 32 percent of unit demand in 2005 compared 

to just 10 percent in 1990 (Figure 3), and are expected to exceed desktops in the 

next 5 years (IDC, 2006b). Other portable devices such as smart phones have seen 

rapid growth as well. This means that there will be more demand for complex 
PC industry-3.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70

80
90
100
19
9019
91
19
9219
93
19
9419
95
19
96
19
971998
19
99
200
020
0120
0220
032004
2005
Percentage 
Desktops
Portables
FIGURE 3
 Global demand for desktops and portables, 1990-2005 (percent of units sold). 
SOURCE: Juliussen (2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 29innovation in concept, design, and engineering in the future and that coordination 
among these stages will have to become closer.
Continued price and performance gains in key components as well as the 
shift of production to lower-cost locations have driven prices lower, expanding 
overall demand for PCs. One impact is in consumer markets, whose share of the 

total market increased from 28 to 38 percent between 1994 and 2005 (Figure 

4). Another impact is in emerging country markets where economic growth is 

providing the income to afford these ever-cheaper PCs. Although North and 

South America are still the biggest market in the world, followed by Europe, the 

Middle East, and Africa (EMEA), the Asia-Paci˜c region is the fastest-growing 

market (Figure 5). The United States is the single largest market, with 61 million 

units shipped in 2005, but fast-growing China has surpassed Japan as the second 

biggest market.
PC industry-4.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005
WW Consumer 
WW Commercial 
Percentage
FIGURE 4
 Global PC consumption by commercial/consumer markets (percent of units 
sold). SOURCE: IDC (2006d).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
PC industry-5.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
1994
19
95
19
96
1997
1998
19
992000
20
01
20
02
20
0320
04
20
05
Percentage 
The Americas
EMEA
Asia-Pacific
FIGURE 5
 Global PC consumption by region, 1990-2005 (percent of units sold). 
SOURCE: Juliussen (2006).
Geographic Location of Production
With desktop PCs, ˜nal assembly by the branded vendors historically was 
located close to end-user demand because of logistics (they are too heavy to ship 
affordably by air) and greater customization for national or regional markets. 

Major PC vendors such as IBM, Compaq, HP, Apple, and Gateway initially had 

their own production facilities in each world region, but they later outsourced 

production to CMs such as SCI, Flextronics, Solectron, Mitac, and Foxconn (the 

registered trade name of Hon Hai Precision Industry Co.), starting in the late 

1990s. Dell kept ˜nal assembly in-house, but it outsourced base unit production, 

including chassis with cables, connectors, drive bays, fans, and power supplies. 

Japanese and Asian vendors generally kept production in-house.
As the branded PC vendors moved offshore and then outsourced, there 
was a shift in the location of production from the Americas and EMEA to the 

Asia-Paci˜c region (Figure 6). Initially, production was spread throughout East 

Asia in Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, and Korea. Production of desktop 

base units and various components and subassemblies by Taiwanese companies 

shifted to the Pearl River Delta in Southern China, but ˜nal assembly was usually 

done regionally: in the United States and Mexico for the Americas, in Ireland 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 31
PC industry-6.eps
050,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
198
519
8719
89
19
9119
9319
95
19
97
1999
20
012003
US$ Millions
The Americas
EMEA
Asia Pacific
and Scotland for EMEA and Malaysia, and in Taiwan and China for the Asia-
Paci˜c region.
5Some U.S. companies outsourced notebook production to Japanese, Tai
-wanese, and Korean manufacturers but eventually shifted mostly to Taiwanese 
ODMs. In 2001, the Taiwanese government changed investment limitations for 

Taiwanese ˜rms and the notebook industry moved en masse to the Yangtze River 

Delta near Shanghai.
6 Japanese ˜rms such as Toshiba moved their own notebook 
production to the region to take advantage of the supply base, but they also out
-sourced much of their production. Chinese ˜rms such as Lenovo used these same 

supply bases for their own production and outsourced some as well.
75 
These locations are now changing once again. For example, Dell is moving ˜nal assembly and 
suppliers to Poland for EMEA; both Dell and HP are encouraging their CMs to move to India for the 
Asia region; and Dell is setting up ˜nal assembly in India.
6 
Some notebook ODMs and suppliers moved to the area as early as 1998 so there was already a 
supply base when most of the industry moved. For example, Asustek had 300 employees in China in 

1999 and 45,000 by 2005 (Einhorn, 2005).
7 
This was the case with the IBM PC Company and Lenovo both before and after their 
integration.
FIGURE 6
 Computer hardware production by region, 1985-2004. 2004 data are a fore
-cast. The graph includes parts and subassemblies such as base units that are speci˜cally 
produced for use in computer equipment. SOURCE: Reed Electronics Research (2005).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
By 2005 China was the single largest producer of PCs and computer equip
-ment in the world. Although the production facilities were located in China, they 
were mostly owned and managed by Taiwanese ˜rms, such as HonHai/Fox
-conn and Mitac for desktops, and Quanta, Compal, Wistron, and Inventec for 

notebooks.
8 The supply chain was also composed largely of Taiwanese ˜rms. 
Foxconn has a huge facility in Shenzhen that employs over 100,000 workers and 

produces base units and complete systems for nearly every branded PC vendor, 

while also assembling products such as game consoles and iPods and making 

components such as cables, connectors, chassis, and motherboards. Taiwanese 

ODMs produced 85 percent of all notebooks in the world in 2005 (Table 1), 

mostly in the Shanghai/Suzhou region of China.
In the past, the location of ˜nal assembly was driven by the need for prox
-imity to demand in the United States and Europe but now appears to be driven 

by growing demand in Asia as well as by the growing capability of ˜rms to ex
-ploit lower costs for labor, land, and facilities, the availability of cost-effective 

skilled labor, and government incentives in China.
9 For instance, low-cost sea 
shipment of standard (not BTO) desktop PCs from China to the United States, 

supported by more sophisticated demand forecasting and planning tools, allows 

PC makers to build a 3-week shipment time into the new product introduction 

cycle. Notebooks can be economically shipped by air, so even BTO production 

can be centralized in Asia. Also, with most of the supply chain in Asia, it can be 

cheaper to assemble there and minimize shipment time for components because 

the supply base is concentrated there.
GLOBALIZATION OF INNO
VATION
The location of NPD activities by the branded PC ˜rms is driven by the 
product and process interdependencies discussed earlier, the capabilities and 

relative costs of different locations, and relational factors that tend to ﬁpullﬂ in
-novation outside the PC vendor or offshore. The relative capabilities and costs 

of U.S. ˜rms and those in other countries have resulted in a new global division 

of labor: higher-value architectural design and business management, along with 

associated ﬁdynamicﬂ and analytical engineering work, is done in the United 

States, whereas the development and manufacturing of the physical product, 

along with the more routine, ﬁtransactionalﬂ product and process engineering, is 

done in Taiwan and increasingly in China. The result is that both component and 

system innovation is increasingly global, but U.S. ˜rms continue to play leading 

roles in both.
8 
After IBM sold its PC Division to Lenovo, only Dell (among the U.S. PC companies) had its own 
˜nal assembly plant in China. Dell™s largest assembly site in Asia is still in Penang, Malaysia.
9 
Dell is the only U.S. PC maker who still assembles desktop PCs in the United States; most ˜nal 
assembly of notebooks is centralized in Malaysia. The subassemblies come from the Pearl River 
Delta (desktops) and the Yangtze River Delta (notebooks) in China. Dell also does ˜nal assembly in 

China and other major markets.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 33
Capabilities and Cost
The 
design
 of desktops and notebooks involves understanding markets and 
customer demand, as well as technology trends, anticipating how customer de
-mand and technology trends are converging, and coordinating mixed teams of 
marketing people and technologists. It requires people with skills and experience 

in high-level architectural design, with the associated dynamic engineering skills, 

industrial design, and business and product management.
10
 In terms of proxim
-ity, it is important to be located in leading markets where new technologies are 

developed and adopted ˜rst.
Development 
for desktops or notebooks involves more routine, transactional 
product and process engineering. Therefore, it requires people with mechanical, 

electrical, and software engineering skills and technical project management 

experience. In addition, notebook development requires specialized skills in ther
-mal and electromagnetic interference, shock and vibration, power management, 

materials, radiofrequency, and software. These require a combination of formal 

training and experience working in a particular engineering specialty, as well as 

working on the speci˜c product type.
Such knowledge and skill levels vary signi˜cantly in different locations due 
to at least three factors: (1) historical industrial development leading to creation 

of specialized skills, (2) output of educational systems, and (3) the nature of de
-mand, including market scale and the extent to which the local or regional market 

may be described as cutting edge, with demanding and innovative customers.
In the United States, there are business skills such as market intelligence 
and product management that are hard to ˜nd elsewhere. There are also leading 

industrial design ˜rms that specialize in small electronic products such as note
-books and cell phones, and strong software and high-level engineering skills. 

These skills are taught in universities, invested in by leading domestic ˜rms in 

the industry, and honed through proximity to leading-edge users.
In Japan, there are industrial designers that are very good at designing for 
the Japanese market, but who also have experience designing for global markets. 

Japanese engineering teams have deep skills in design and development, with 

specialties such as miniaturization that have developed to meet Japanese demand 

for small, lightweight products. Japan also is very strong in process engineering 

and manufacturing operations, thanks to its historical and continued emphasis 

on manufacturing.
In Taiwan, mechanical and electrical engineers are available with strong 
10
 Geref˜ and Wadhwa (2006) distinguish between dynamic and transactional engineers, a classi
-˜cation that we ˜nd useful in characterizing the engineering workforces in different countries based 
on our interviews. Dynamic engineers are capable of abstract thinking and high-level problem solving 

using scienti˜c knowledge and are able to work in teams and work across international borders. These 

engineers have at least 4-year degrees in engineering and are leaders in innovation. Transactional 

engineers have engineering fundamentals but not the skill to apply this knowledge to larger problems. 

They usually have less than 4-year degrees and are responsible for rote engineering tasks.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
practical experience as well as formal training. Taiwan™s historical specialization 
in the PC industry, and with notebooks in particular, has created a pool of engi
-neers with a great depth of knowledge of these products. Taiwan also has strong 
process and manufacturing skills. These have developed over time as Taiwanese 

˜rms have taken on greater responsibilities in PC development and manufactur
-ing. Taiwan mostly lacks marketing skills and industrial design skills that would 

allow it to take over the concept and product planning stages, because of its focus 

on original equipment manufacturer/ODM production rather than development 

of branded products.
China has many well-trained mechanical and electrical engineers, but most 
lack the hands-on skills that come with experience. Industrial design is weak, and 

marketing and business skills are very underdeveloped. A large number of engi
-neers are produced each year, but quality varies greatly by university. According 

to one interviewee, China™s engineers ﬁwork perfectly at doing what they have 

been told, but cannot think about what needs to be done; they lack both creativity 

and motivation. They are good at legacy systems, but not new things; they can™t 

handle ‚what if™ situations.ﬂ
In comparing cost across countries, the average salary for electronics engi
-neers in all industries in the United States is about $80,000, compared to $60,000 

in Japan, $20,000 in Taiwan, and under $10,000 in China (Dedrick and Kraemer, 

2006b). Obviously there are cost advantages to moving engineering to China, 

but differences in productivity related to education and experience can negate 

the direct cost differences. Also, it is reported that engineering salaries are rising 

quickly in China, especially in industry clusters such as the Shanghai/Suzhou 

area, as multinationals and Taiwanese ˜rms compete with domestic companies 

for talent. The willingness of multinationals to pay higher salaries gives them ac
-cess to more experienced engineers and graduates of top universities, but turnover 

rates are high.
Based on a survey of Taiwanese PC and electronics ˜rms, Lu and Liu (2004) 
found that the main reason these companies were moving R&D (primarily de
-velopment) to China was the availability of well-educated and cost-effective 

local engineers. This ˜nding is supported by our own interviews with Taiwanese 

companies. As Taiwan™s supply of engineers has failed to keep up with demand, 

the attraction of a large pool of engineers with both linguistic and geographical 

proximity has been strong. This has enabled Taiwanese engineers to concentrate 

on more advanced development activities while lower-value activities such as 

board layout and software testing have moved to China.
The New Global Division of Labor
This con˚uence of product and process interdependencies with changing ca
-pabilities and costs in different locations has led to a new global division of labor 

(Figure 7). In 1990, the entire NPD process was located in the United States (and 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 35
Japan) in large vertically integrated companies like IBM, HP, Digital Equipment 
Corporation, and Toshiba, or PC specialists like Apple, Compaq, and Dell, which 
handled virtually all elements of system-level design and integration. By 2000, 

only design remained in the United States, while development and manufacturing 

of notebooks was outsourced mainly to Taiwan and manufacturing of desktops 

outsourced to major world regions. Japanese PC ˜rms still kept NPD in-house, 

at least for higher-value products.
In 2006, the U.S. position was unchanged. However, PC vendors like HP 
and Dell had set up design centers in Taiwan to manage NPD for some products 

(usually more mature product lines). Locating design in Taiwan allows closer 

coordination with CMs and ODMs and potentially speeds up NPD, allowing 

better quality control and problem resolution. They also use these design centers 

to transfer knowledge to the ODMs and to train locally hired hardware and soft
-ware engineers to take on more project management and advanced development 

activities. This division of labor is similar for notebooks and desktops, although 

some U.S. companies keep desktop development in the United States and then 

outsource manufacturing to Asia. However, desktop development is being shifted 

to Taiwanese ODMs in many cases.
The next critical development was the rapid shift of production to mainland 
China. Encouraged by U.S. PC vendors, Taiwanese manufacturers had moved 

the production of desktops and many components and subassemblies to the Pearl 
PC industry-7.eps
United States
Japan
Taiwan
China
United States
Japan
1990
2006
Design
Development
Mfg.
Concept 
Product
planning
Design 
review
Pilot 
Prod.
Mass
Prod.
Sust.
support
2000
United States
Japan
Taiwan
type
Proto-
FIGURE 7
 New global division of labor in the PC industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
River Delta near Hong Kong in the 1990s. Even more dramatic was the shift of 
notebook production to the Shanghai/Suzhou area after 2000. Many Taiwanese 
suppliers to the notebook industry had moved to China before 2001. When the 

Taiwanese government lifted its restrictions on notebook production in China, the 

ODMs and the rest of their local suppliers moved nearly all of their production 

to the mainland (Dedrick and Kraemer, 2006a).
In response to U.S. PC makers outsourcing production to Taiwanese ODMs 
in China, the Japanese PC makers also shifted signi˜cant production to China, 

both through their own subsidiaries and through outsourcing to the Taiwanese 

ODMs. This further illustrates the compelling economics of the production bases 

in China as Japanese ˜rms have previously tended to keep production in-house, 

either in Japan or in Southeast Asia.
China™s Expanding Role as a Locus of Innovation
As a result of ﬁproduction pullﬂ as well as the large pool of lower-cost en
-gineering skills, there is an ongoing shift of product development activities from 

Taiwan to China. During our interviews with notebook makers in Taiwan and 

China, one major ODM told us that they did all of their board layout and most 

packaging design in China, while doing mechanical engineering and software 

engineering in Taiwan. They were in the process of training people in their elec
-tronic engineering methods in China in order to move more development there. 

As one manager said, ﬁChina is a gold mine of human resources, but if you don™t 

get in and train them you won™t be able to take advantage of it.ﬂ
It is expected that more of the NPD process and the associated engineer
-ing tests will be conducted in China by many notebook makers (Dedrick and 

Kraemer, 2006a). These will be relocated from Taiwan and, in some cases, Japan. 

The shift of product development to China is distinguished not only by which 

activities have moved or are moving, but also by the type of products that are 

being developed. Some ODMs are moving product updates to China. However, 

the development of completely new products and platforms is still done by the 

ODMs in Taiwan, or by PC makers such as Lenovo (for Thinkpad notebooks) 

and Toshiba in Japan. More recent interviews with Taiwanese companies suggest 

that they are hesitant to move these activities to China. This is due in part to the 

high turnover rate of engineers in China, which makes it hard to create cohesive 

development teams and also raises the risk of intellectual property loss. Also, 

unless intellectual property protections are strengthened, China is not likely to 

become a center for advanced component-level R&D (e.g., in microprocessors, 

LCDs, or wireless technologies).
A near-term division of labor for product development is likely to be as 
follows: component-level R&D, concept design, and product planning in the 

United States and Japan; applied R&D and development of new platforms in 

Taiwan; and product development for mature products, and nearly all production 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 37
and sustaining engineering,
11
 in China. It is dif˜cult to estimate how long this 
division of labor will last. A recent study of Taiwanese manufacturers (Li, 2006) 
shows that the rapid growth of low-margin outsourcing business from foreign 

multinational corporations has provided Taiwanese ˜rms with the resources and 

motivation to invest more in R&D to develop greater technology expertise and 

capture more high-value design work. As the ODMs™ expertise grows, multina
-tional corporations have greater incentive to outsource more design activities to 

further lower costs. Li also shows that Taiwanese ˜rms are attempting to capture 

value from their innovation efforts by ˜ling for more patents. So the shift from 

Taiwan to China may be slowing but the shift from the United States to Taiwan 

could continue.
In addition, Taiwanese manufacturers such as Acer, Asus, BenQ, D-Link, 
and Lite-on have developed their own brand-name PCs, motherboards, monitors, 

networking equipment, smart phones, and other products. Acer and Asus brands 

have captured 14.1 percent of the world market for notebooks (Digitimes, 2006), 

whereas D-Link has become the top seller of wireless routers for the consumer 

market. As these companies enhance their R&D, design, and marketing capabili
-ties, U.S. companies may ˜nd Taiwan to be a source of competition as well as 

cooperation.
As China gains experience, it is still possible that the ODMs will shift more 
of the development process and newer products there, but, unless it becomes a 

key ˜nal market for PCs, it is not likely to capture the market-driven functions 

of concept design and product planning. As of now, China™s PC market is still 

only about one-third the size of the U.S. market and does not have leading-edge 

users who are de˜ning what features and standards are developed for the global 

market. However, as China™s PC market continues to grow, and its users become 

more demanding, it may become the leading market at least for the Asia-Paci˜c 

region, and de˜nition and planning of products suitable for the region may be 

done there. Finally, while Chinese brands remain minor players in the global PC 

industry for the most part, this may change. Chinese companies such as Lenovo, 

Huawei, and Haier are already leading brands at home and are expanding to in
-ternational markets for PCs, network equipment, and other electronics products. 
11
 Sustaining engineering is the second of two phases in production; the ˜rst is mass production. 
Mass production
 involves the physical manufacturing of a product in large volumes. It requires 
manufacturing engineers to manage and plan the production process and test facilities and quality 
engineers to continually improve product and process quality. Over time, these engineers come to 

know the product extremely well and are best positioned to provide sustaining engineering support 

that was previously provided by the original product development teams. 
Sustaining engineering
 deals with changes that occur because of new chips, failing or end-of-life components, or improved 

components. Each change must be evaluated in terms of its implications for system performance and 

assembly, and incorporated into the production process. The sustaining engineers also provide the 

highest level of technical support when problems occur during use during a product™s 2- to 3-year 

warranty period.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Lenovo™s acquisition of IBM™s PC business has put it directly in competition with 
HP and Dell around the world, while Huawei uses its relationship with 3Com to 
access technology and markets and compete with Cisco and others. These com
-panies can use the supply base of Taiwanese and foreign companies in China to 

match the multinationals on cost, develop products that ˜t the local market, and 

then target other emerging markets where innovations developed for the Chinese 

market are likely to be attractive.
Measurement of the Globalization of Innovation
Measuring the globalization of innovation is more dif˜cult than measuring 
globalization of manufacturing, which can be captured in national production, 

trade, and foreign investment accounts. Innovation might be indirectly mea
-sured by R&D spending and employees, patents, and new product introductions. 

While some public data on these measures are available, often the data are not 

suf˜ciently disaggregated at the ˜rm level so that they can be tied to a product 

line such as PCs. This is especially true of multidivision ˜rms such as HP, Fu
-jitsu, Toshiba, Hitachi, Samsung, and Sony. Also, ˜rm-level data do not show 

the extent to which R&D or other innovative activity is carried out in the home 

country or other locations.
Given these dif˜culties, an alternative approach is to measure the innovation 
effort by the CMs and ODMs who are doing much of the manufacturing in the 

industry. The share of global notebook shipments produced by Taiwanese ODMs 

rose from 40 percent in 1998 to 85 percent in 2005 (Table 1). Since manufactur
-ing and development are usually outsourced together, this suggests that the share 

of offshore product development activity has increased proportionately. This 

trend is supported by data showing that R&D spending by Taiwanese ODMs and 

CMs increased signi˜cantly from 2000 to 2005 (Table 2), as did the proportion of 

employees with Ph.D. and master™s degrees in these ˜rms. However, most of this 

R&D spending is on the development side rather than the research side.
Also, reiterating a point made earlier that most innovation is done by up
-stream component makers, the R&D spending by the ODMs and CMs, as well as 

nearly all of the PC makers, is minor in comparison to that of upstream suppliers. 

For example, Table 3 shows that in 2005 some of the lead PC makers
12
 spent 1.4 
percent of revenues on R&D on average (weighted), the leading ODMs and CMs 

spent 1.3 percent, and the upstream suppliers, which is where innovation occurs 

in the PC industry, spent an average of 11.8 percent, or nearly nine times greater 

than the PC makers, ODMs, and CMs.
12
 We could not get public estimates of R&D investment for the PC divisions of large multidivision 
companies such as HP, Fujitsu, Toshiba, Sony, and NEC, so they are excluded from the table.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 39
TABLE 1
 Taiwanese Notebook Industry Share of Global Shipments, 
1998-2005
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Shipments 
volume 
(thousands)
a6,088
9,703
12,708
14,161
18,380
25,238
33,340
50,500
Global market 
by volume 

(thousands)
15,610
19,816
24,437
25,747
30,033
37,857
46,110
59,411
Taiwan™s share of 
global market 

volume
40%
49%
52%
55%
61%
66%
72%
85%
 aShipments by Taiwan-based ˜rms, regardless of location of production.
SOURCES: For 1998-2004, MIC (2005); for 2005, Digitimes (2006).
TABLE 2
 R&D Investment by Taiwanese ODMs and CMs (million U.S. 
dollars)
Company Name
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Quanta
27.13
38.36
54.55
74.31
92.56
102.36
Compal
24.77
44.69
62.11
70.21
78.78
Wistron
61.12
55.06
68.94
72.49
Asustek Computer
31.97
40.57
53.14
65.87
97.38
128.57
Mitac
24.37
24.70
25.28
32.66
36.90
46.62
Inventec
30.75
25.14
27.38
39.42
48.56
Arima
13.42
12.74
14.85
15.00
19.60
16.71
ECS
3.58
7.20
21.03
14.98
12.74
11.00
First International Computer (FIC)
28.21
10.91
46.72
44.58
Clevo
8.71
8.10
8.97
9.28
10.28
10.05
Twinhead
7.24
5.31
1.10
0.31
0.43
0.47
Uniwill
7.27
8.20
9.89
11.15
11.55
12.48
Foxconn (HonHai)
32.43
58.14
64.45
66.69
128.78
132.86
Subtotals
239.85
239.37
433.17
491.42
549.37
660.95
NOTE: Blank cells occur where data was not available in annual reports or elsewhere.

SOURCE: Annual reports of the companies.
Industry-Level Drivers of Globalization of Innovation
The globalization of innovation in the PC industry has been driven primar
-ily by economic factors and secondarily by relational factors that involve inter
-dependencies of activities, as well as social networks that often in˚uence the 
choice of suppliers or location. Examples of relational factors include the close 

interdependence between development and manufacturing of notebook PCs, and 

the ﬁguanxiﬂ social networks that link Taiwanese ˜rms and managers.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 3
 R&D Investment as Percent of Firm Revenues, 2005
PC Makers
R&D as % 
of Revenue
Taiwan ODMs 

& CMs
R&D as % 

of Revenue
Component 

Suppliers
R&D as % 

of Revenue
Dell
0.9
Quanta
1.1
Microsoft
15.5
Apple
3.8
Compal
1.4
Intel
13.3
Gateway
n.a.
Wistron
1.6
AMD
19.6
Lenovo
1.7
Asustek
1.7
ATI Technology
14.7
Acer
0.1
Mitac
2.0
Seagate (HDD)
8.5
Inventec
1.4
Western Digital 

(HDD)
6.6
Arima
a2.8
Maxtor (HDD)
7.5
ECS
a1.6
Chunghwa 

(Displays)
3.4
FIC
an.a.
Tatung (Displays)
2.6
Clevo
a4.2
AU Optronics 

(Displays)
2.2
Twinhead
a0.2
Molex (Cables/

connectors)
5.2
Uniwill
a1.6
Delta (Power 

supply)
4.8
HonHai
1.0
Creative (Sound 

cards)
6.7
Total ˜rm revenues 

(millions)
$92,535
$76,191
$128,773
R&D (% of 

revenues) for 

selected ˜rms 

(weighted)
1.4
1.3
11.8
NOTE: Large multidivision PC makers like HP, Toshiba, Sony, Fujitsu, and NEC are omitted because 

R&D investment is not available by division.
 aValue calculated from data in company annual reports.
SOURCE: Electronic Business Top 300 (2006), unless otherwise indicated.
Regarding economic factors, the manufacturing of desktops was primarily 
pushed offshore to major world regions to reduce production cost, and second
-arily for proximity to markets. Manufacturing was then outsourced to CMs as 
most PC makers looked to further cut costs and concentrate on product design, 

branding, sales, and marketing. These CMs are currently moving to new loca
-tions within each region (Eastern Europe for EMEA, Mexico for North America, 

and China for Asia-Paci˜c)Šonce again to reduce costs. As noted earlier, for 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 41
standard build-to-stock desktops, production is increasingly done in China for 
the U.S. market, because low-cost shipping by sea is viable when fast order 
turnaround is not necessary.
Cost was also the key factor for notebooks, where both development and 
manufacturing were outsourced or offshored almost from the beginningŠ˜rst to 

Japan, then to Taiwan, and currently to China. Japan™s capabilities with develop
-ment and manufacturing of small form factors provided an initial pull, but lower 

costs, development of strong indigenous engineering capabilities, and the fact 

that Taiwanese ˜rms were considered less likely to compete directly with U.S. 

˜rms resulted in U.S. PC vendors shifting to Taiwan. In turn, Taiwan has moved 

manufacturing to China for lower-cost labor, and manufacturing is now pulling 

some development activities to China as well. Taiwan is trying to expand its role 

in R&D, design, and other high-value activities, and PC vendors have facilitated 

this through continued outsourcing and by setting up design centers in Taiwan.
Regarding relational factors in the PC industry, it appears that once produc
-tion moves to a low-cost location, it will pull some higher-level activities to it. 

Reinforcing our ˜ndings about production pulling knowledge work, Lu and Liu 

(2004) found that the second major location factor for R&D (after access to 

low-cost engineers) is proximity to the manufacturing site. This is particularly 

true for notebook PCs given the importance of design-for-manufacturability. For 

example, production engineering and sustaining engineering clearly bene˜t from 

proximity to manufacturing, because production problems can be addressed im
-mediately on the factory ˚oor and engineering changes in existing products can 

be tested in production models from the assembly line. It also makes sense to 

move pilot production to China rather than to maintain an assembly line in Tai
-wan just for this purpose. Then the question arises whether to move the expensive 

test equipment from Taiwan to China. If so, then there is more reason to relocate 

the design review and prototype processes as well.
Beyond proximity considerations in manufacturing, there is a relational 
ﬁpullﬂ from the ODMs. They often bundle development with manufacturing in 

order to win contracts. But once the ODM has a contract, the relationship creates 

incentives for the PC maker to work with the same ODM for future upgrades and 

enhancements to the product. In addition, there is a great deal of tacit knowledge 

created in the development process that is known only by the ODM, which cre
-ates a further pull. Finally, the close linkage of development activities to manu
-facturing and the feedback to design from manufacturing has created linkages 

that favor continuing the ODM relationships.
The concentration of product development and manufacturing in Taiwan and 
China has reduced cost and accelerated new product innovation, driving down 

average unit prices, and helping to expand markets. For example, the worldwide 

average unit price for a PC and monitor has declined markedly over the past 15 

years (Figure 8), with desktops and notebooks selling at an average of under 

$1,100 and $1,400, respectively, in the United States in 2005, and many models 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
PC industry-8.eps
00.5
11.5
22.5
33.5
44.5
19
9019
91
19
92
19
9319
9419
95
19
96
19
971998
1999
20
0020
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
US$ (in thousands)
Desktops
Portables
FIGURE 8
 Average unit price, desktops and notebooks, 1990-2005. SOURCE: Juliussen 
(2006).
available for well under $1,000. Of course, when adjusted for quality improve
-ments, the price decline is much more dramatic. Moreover, the price differences 
between the United States and other regions have declined so that there is now 

effectively one world price.
Beyond cost reduction, the globalization of innovation also has been driven 
by a desire to develop a better understanding of the needs of big emerging mar
-kets such as China, India, and Brazil to enable the right versioning of existing 

products. Some PC vendors and ODMs (as well as other suppliers like AMD, 

Intel, and Microsoft) are seeking new markets in less-developed economies 

by developing new PCs with much lower price points while also tailoring the 

technologies to the more extreme environments of these countries. These new 

product concepts include the One-Laptop-Per-Child design, Intel™s Classmate 

PC, and Asus™s eeePC. While previous efforts to develop very-low-cost PCs for 

developing countries have failed, PC makers and others continue to experiment 

with new designs.
IMPLICATIONS OF GLOBALIZATION OF INNO
VATION
The globalization of innovation has led to a new global division of labor as 
described earlier. This new international structure of the PC industry has implica
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 43
tions for ˜rm competitiveness and strategy, location of innovation, employment, 
and U.S. policy.
Implications for U.S. Firm Competitiveness
Overall, the changes in the industry appear not to have hurt the competitive
-ness of U.S. ˜rms. U.S. companies dominate key components such as micropro
-cessors, graphics and other chips, and hard drives, and PC vendors Dell, HP, and 
Apple hold nearly 40 percent of the world market for PCs. U.S. ˜rms are still 

unquestioned leaders in operating systems and packaged applications. On the 

other hand, Asian ˜rms are leaders in displays, memory, power supplies, batter
-ies, motherboards, optical drives, and other components and peripherals. Asia 

has some leading PC brands such as Lenovo, Toshiba, Acer,
13
 and Sony, and 
Taiwan™s CMs and ODMs increasingly compete with U.S. contract manufactur
-ers for outsourced development and manufacturing. On another measure of ˜rm 

competitiveness, the largest share of industry pro˜ts ˚ows to U.S. companies, 

particularly Microsoft and Intel, but also to Apple, Dell, HP, and to component 

makers such as Nvidia, TI, and Broadcom. The pro˜tability of most Japanese and 

Asian companies is generally lower.
Implications for Firm Strategy
For branded PC vendors, the international innovation network described 
earlier enables faster product cycles with quicker integration of new technologies 

because the Taiwanese companies are good at fast turnaround and there is a good 

supply of cost-effective engineers in Taiwan and China to handle more models, 

changes, and upgrades. It has increased consumer choice, helped grow the mar
-ket, and for a long time was advantageous for Dell because its direct model gave 

it an advantage in getting those products to the business customer. But now that 

most ˜rms are ef˜cient in minimizing inventory and getting new products into 

the market, the fast product cycles could be seen as an expensive race to the 

bottom that no PC vendor or component supplier really wins (except Intel and 

Microsoft).
14
 Some PC vendors complain that component innovation is too fast, 
13
 Acer, which has been a successful Taiwanese branded company, purchased Gateway Computer 
and Packard Bell in October 2007.
14
 As desktop PCs in particular have become commoditized, business model innovations such as 
direct sales, BTO, and just-in-time inventory have provided temporary advantage in the industry. 
They provided an initial advantage to Dell and Gateway, who were the ˜rst to adopt direct sales, but 

Gateway stumbled badly and Dell™s ef˜ciency advantage has been reduced as other PC vendors have 

gone to direct BTO sales. The Dell model also has proved less successful in overseas markets where 

direct sales are less popular than in the United States. The most important impact of past business 

model innovation has been a general improvement in the ef˜ciency of the industry as a whole, as 

most vendors have adopted these practices.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
and they feel pressured to introduce too many products for too small markets. 
For example, one major PC vendor introduces around 1,000 different consumer 
desktop SKUs (stock-keeping units) in one year globally (Dedrick and Kraemer, 

2006b). A question raised by more than one company that we have interviewed 

is whether the cost of managing so many products might outweigh the bene˜ts of 

being able to offer products that more closely match the needs of customers.
Beyond desktop and notebook PCs, the growing demand for new products 
that are smaller, are more mobile, and integrate new functions is bringing new 

innovation and new players into the personal computing industry. Hit products 

such as RIM™s BlackBerry and Palm™s Treo have been developed by ˜rms with 

no traditional PC business, while Apple™s iPod was developed on an entirely dif
-ferent platform from the Macintosh computer line. Such radical or architectural 

product innovation (Henderson and Clark, 1990; Utterback, 1990) has important 

differences from the incremental model of development as illustrated in Table 4. 

The scale and scope of global collaboration is often greater for radical innova
-tion, as existing technologies are adapted to new uses and new technologies are 

developed. As a result, there is greater need for joint development with partners, 

while key technologies (particularly software) are developed internally and the 

entire process is shaped by strong central vision, integration, and control.
An example of the nature of radical innovation is the iPod, which was 
developed by Apple in collaboration with many external partners in multiple 

geographic locations. Apple used its internal capabilities to create a closely 

integrated hardware and software design, while relying on outside partners for 

both standard and custom components, and for manufacturing. For instance, 

Apple used a reference design and worked jointly with PortalPlayer to develop 

the microchip that controlled the iPod™s basic functionality. It worked with oth
-ers for additional chips (e.g., United Kingdom™s Wolfson Microelectronics for 

the digital-to-analog sound chip; New York-based Linear Technology for power 

management chips; California-based Broadcom for a video decoder chip); with 

Toshiba for the 1.8-inch hard drive; and with Taiwan™s Inventec for manufactur
-ing (Murtha et al., forthcoming).
Apple designed the system architecture that affected critical features such 
as sound quality and power consumption and developed the distinctive industrial 

design of the iPod; it developed most of the iPod and iTunes software in-house or 

adapted others™ software. Apple tightly managed the whole process, coordinating 

closely with outside partners so that it could design the iPod, and its manufac
-turer and suppliers could concurrently prepare the tooling and supply chain for 

large-volume manufacturing, and bring it to market in 8 months. As put by the 

iPod™s lead engineer, ﬁToday, there is too much complexity in products for one 

person or organization to understand. You need a team of internal and external 

resources working with you to conceive, design, and implement new productsﬂ 

(Murtha et al., forthcoming). The resulting design process is much different from 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 45
TABLE 4
 Features of Incremental and Radical Innovation
Design
Development
Production
Radical
innovation 

(iPod, iPhone, 

Treo)
Š Set system architecture, 
sometimes building on 
external reference design
Š Strong central vision and 
industrial design
Š 
Tightly control all aspects 
of NPD
Š 
Develop key software 
internally
Š 
Integrate hardware, software, 
even services (e.g., iTunes, 
iTMS)
Š Design or license 
complementary assets (SW, 
content) and distribution 

system
Š Collaborate closely with a 
few key partners for core 
components
Š Collaborate with many 
partners in multiple 
geographies
Š Collaborate with partners of 
partners
Š 
Get partners to adapt 
existing technologies to 
proprietary architecture
Outsourced 

to CM or 

ODM
Incremental 

innovation 

(desktops, 

notebooks)
Š Innovate on Wintel 
architecture
Š 
Control product planning, 
brand image, marketing, 
concept design internally
Š Internal or outsourced 
industrial design
Š 
HW and SW are modular
Š 
Leverage existing 
complementary resources 
and distribution
Š Collaborate with one 
established ODM in one 
geography
Š Outsource detailed physical 
design, test, and software 
built within standard 

architecture
Outsourced 

to ODM
that in PCs, with more internal development and much closer interaction with 
key component suppliers.
Finally, for the iPod to be successful in the market, Apple created a new 
business model that integrated hardware, software, and online content delivery. 

It developed iTunes software to collect and manage content on a PC or Mac and 

easily transfer that content to the iPod. It also developed the online iTunes Mu
-sic Store and tightly integrated that with the iTunes application. Apple licensed 

content from all the major music labels and subsequently from the audio book, 

movie, and television industries, and established pricing and digital rights models 

that were attractive to consumers. The result was a U.S. market share of over 70 

percent in both the personal music player and the music download markets.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Given that such design innovation has the potential for creating differen
-tiation in products and gaining competitive advantage, the strategies of at least 
some branded PC ˜rms are likely to focus more on creating new product plat
-forms. However, examples such as the iPod, Treo, and BlackBerry suggest that 

radical innovation requires a different process of new product development. As 

illustrated by our earlier discussion of these innovations, elements of the process 

include leveraging a ˜rm™s unique internal capabilities with those of external 

partners; working closely with external partners in multiple geographies; engag
-ing in a global search for technologies that can be adapted and integrated into new 

products; maintaining tight architectural and managerial control over the process; 

and possibly introducing new business models to provide complementary content 

and services.
This kind of process is far removed from the incremental innovation within 
a well-established product architecture and the mature market of the Wintel PC 

world. As a result, it has been more diversi˜ed companies such as Samsung and 

Sony, wireless specialists such as Nokia, as well as many startups that are trying 

to innovate with new product platforms that mix communications, entertainment, 

and computing capabilities in smaller form factors. In these cases, ˜rms have 

worked with outside partners to exploit external sources of knowledge while 

keeping their own innovative activities mostly in-house and close to their home 

base.
Increasingly, hardware-software integration is becoming important as a means 
of tailoring products to different market requirements such as communications 

standards, power consumption, language, and customer tastes. Such integration 

also helps to reduce product costs by enabling standard physical platforms to be 

produced in large volumes for global sales. More important, it enables greater 

product differentiation for ever-˜ner market segments by customizing through 

changes in software, rather than through costly physical changes in hardware.
Location of Innovation
Innovation at the national level is closely tied to the presence of both tech
-nically skilled and entrepreneurial individuals, the quality of infrastructure, and 

the presence of advanced users who drive ˜rms to innovate. Rapid diffusion of 

Internet infrastructure in the United States led to ongoing innovation in hardware 

(e.g., routers, switches), software (e.g., browsers, search engines), and services 

(e.g., online retailing, banking, stock trading, travel services). The United States 

has seen strong user-driven innovation (Von Hippel, 1998) such as IT-enabled 

business process redesign and e-commerce in the corporate world and user-

created content in the consumer world. From Cisco and Amazon, to Dell and 

Wal-Mart to Google and MySpace, innovation on the web has largely occurred 

in the United States.
By contrast, the relatively slow adoption of broadband and advanced mobile 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 47
technologies in the United States has left the country falling behind in new areas 
of innovation. For instance, South Korea is a leader in online computer gaming, 
thanks in part to its widespread deployment of cheap broadband Internet service. 

Japan™s iMode system for mobile Internet was years ahead of similar services 

in the United States. High rates of wireless adoption have bene˜ted ˜rms from 

South Korea, Japan, and Northern Europe, while China™s large mobile phone 

market has attracted ˜rms such as Motorola, Nokia, and Siemens to do product 

development there. In short, the lack of innovation in industries that are providers 

of complementary assets (which in turn may re˚ect the outmoded infrastructure 

underpinning the large and otherwise highly sophisticated U.S. domestic market) 

is a major factor hampering innovation in the PC industry. If the United States is 

to retain its position as a leading market for computing innovation, it cannot af
-ford to remain behind in providing high-quality, low-cost infrastructure to support 

user-led innovation and drive demand for new personal computing products.
Our ˜eld interviews indicate that design innovation, especially concept de
-sign and product planning, is likely to remain concentrated in the United States 

for the major U.S. ˜rms in the personal computing industry. However, there will 

be increasing use of offshore R&D and design centers in locations that have 

specialized and cost-effective talent, that lead in particular technical innovations, 

or that represent important markets in terms of growth potential, special market 

opportunities (fewer regulatory requirements, government incentives), or chal
-lenges (need for cheaper or environmentally friendly PCs), or that may in˚uence 

technical standards (as China is trying to do in a number of technologies). Private 

interviews with industry executives indicate that the primary motivation for such 

offshore outposts is cost reduction, through hiring less costly engineers, program
-mers, and managers to perform activities previously performed in-house in the 

United States or in a foreign subsidiary. In time, secondary bene˜ts may also arise 

as these locations gain capabilities or as local markets develop.
Other product development activities tend to be pulled by production, begin
-ning with manufacturing process engineering, then moving up to prototyping and 

testing and eventually electrical, mechanical, and software engineering. These 

are in the process of shifting to China from Taiwan and Japan, although R&D, 

design, and development of the newest generation of products is still likely to be 

concentrated in the home countries of the manufacturers (Dedrick and Kraemer, 

2006a).
Impacts on Jobs and Employment
With respect to U.S. workers, much of the potential shift of jobs offshore 
has already taken place with the offshoring and outsourcing of production from 

1990 to 2005. There has also been a shift in innovation-related jobs after 2000, as 

production has pulled development and some design activities to Asia (Dedrick 

and Kraemer, 2006a). Further movement of jobs offshore is likely to occur in 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
the future to meet competitive pressure for continuous cost reduction. The jobs 
will be in engineering, software, industrial design, engineering management, 
and project management at all levels. As one PC industry executive told us in 

interviews, he has to ﬁpushﬂ more physical design and project management jobs 

overseas in order to keep concept design jobs at home.
The number of jobs directly moved offshore is not large and occurs incre
-mentally. However, another indicator of the impact of offshoring is the number 

of new jobs that are created offshore rather than in the United States to support 

the industry™s continued growth and proliferation of products. One indicator of 

this impact is the growth of knowledge jobs in the notebook industry in Taiwan 

as these ˜rms take on more design and development activities for the United 

States and other ˜rms. Interviews and company data on the top ODMs in the 

notebook industry indicate that they hired thousands of new R&D personnel and 

product engineers in Taiwan between 2000 and 2005, while also hiring thousands 

more for product and process engineering, testing, and production in China. For 

example, Quanta, which is the largest notebook ODM, has increased the number 

of R&D engineers from 750 in 2001 to around 7,000 in 2005 (company annual 

reports).
As software becomes an increasingly important part of new PC products, 
there will be a proportionately greater increase in software jobs being moved 

offshore. In one company we interviewed, 50 percent of the 1,000 employees are 

engineers and 80 percent of these are software engineers. These jobs are currently 

in the United States, but the ˜rm is experimenting with offshore teams. While 

there is broad awareness of the shift of jobs to India and elsewhere by software 

and IT services companies, there is less awareness of the number of software 

jobs within the computer hardware industryŠjobs that are likewise vulnerable 

to offshoring.
For the United States, the fact that growth and innovation in the industry are 
not creating new knowledge jobs (engineering, software, design) in the United 

States but are creating them in Taiwan and China appears to be a negative. But 

the number of U.S. engineering jobs in the broader computer industry is fairly 

stable at about 60,000 between 2002 and 2005 (Dedrick and Kraemer, 2006b), 

and without globalization there may not be as much growth and innovation. The 

risks of globalization for the United States are that individuals, ˜rms, or related 

industries will lose technological advantage and the ability to innovate. A Korn/

Ferry International report posed the issue for industry executives as follows:
North American industrial executives must choose between two fundamental 
responses to their current competitive environment. One approach is to simply 

accept that their companies need to focus exclusively on marketing, ˜nance and 
the design and development functions, while of˚oading their manufacturing 
needs and technologies to more accommodating locations, usually overseas. 

While this strategy can generate short-term pro˜ts, it almost inevitably guaran
-tees that a company will lose control of its design and production capabilities. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 49
Eventually, if history is a reliable guide, even home of˜ce and corporate func
-tions will cease to exist. (Kotkin and Friedman, 2004)
However, earlier industry innovations as well as recent innovations like the 
iPod, the Treo, and the Microsoft Xbox were developed mostly in the United 
States, even though some component innovations came from offshore suppliers 

and all the manufacturing was done offshore. Moreover, there is little evidence 

thus far that these ˜rms have ﬁlost controlﬂ of the designs or technology for these 

products. Such innovation is less likely to move offshore and should continue to 

support engineering and other knowledge jobs in the United States, as long as the 

United States retains the capabilities needed for such innovation.
Implications for Policy: Sustaining U.S. Innovation Leadership
Although U.S. PC vendors still lead innovation in the industry, they are mov
-ing more innovation activities offshore both through setting up design centers 

and through outsourcing design and development activities to ODMs. The U.S. 

suppliers of key components such as microprocessors, storage, and software are 

also setting up R&D and design centers offshore, sometimes in locations with 

specialized skills such as Israel or Japan, and sometimes in big emerging markets 

with low-cost engineering talent such as India and China.
The engineering, software development, and management skills associated 
with these activities are key to the innovation capabilities of the United States and 

therefore consideration needs to be given to developing people with these skills if 

such innovation is to remain in the United States (Committee on the Engineer of 

2020, National Academy of Engineering, 2005). Our interviews with executives 

indicate there is a growing need across the PC industry for engineers who are 

speci˜cally trained to work at the interface between hardware engineering, com
-munications, and computer science. The executives also indicate that many U.S. 

engineering schools produce specialists in a single engineering discipline, but few 

schools produce people who can work at the interfaces of these disciplines. There 

is a need, for example, for hardware engineers who can work with communica
-tions standards, and software engineers who can produce embedded software that 

enables customization of products for markets. When universities fail to develop 

such talent, ˜rms may rely on on-the-job training, look offshore for experienced 

people with the needed skills, or develop the skills offshore through on-the-job 

training of low-cost specialists.
It is also likely that U.S. ˜rms need to make greater efforts to hire rookies 
and develop them. Several of the companies we interviewed prefer to hire fairly 

experienced engineers rather than beginners and report no problems in doing so 

in Silicon Valley or elsewhere. They simply hire people away from other com
-panies, or bring in engineers from foreign countries under immigration policy. 

However, one highly innovative company we interviewed hired engineers as 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
interns from the best engineering schools in the United States (e.g., Cornell, 
MIT, UC Berkeley, Carnegie-Mellon) and, if they worked out, made commit
-ments to hire them even before they graduated. Starting as interns, they worked 
as part of project teams with operational roles and real challenges to overcome. 

Such on-the-job training can help sustain a career ladder for new engineers as 

˜rms offshore more lower-level jobs that would normally be ˜lled by entry-level 

engineers. An executive for the ˜rm argued that this process bene˜ts the ˜rm as 

well, by giving it access to the best talent available and the chance to incorporate 

that talent into product development teams and learn how the company works 

before the engineers develop bad habits elsewhere.
From a policy perspective, the U.S. government can encourage cross-
disciplinary education and more university-industry cooperation through its 

funding choices, and by documenting and publicizing the need for such changes. 

While universities are responsive to employer needs, there can be signi˜cant iner
-tia in academic departments and university bureaucracies, and external resources 

and pressure can encourage greater responsiveness and ˚exibility.
All of the ˜rms we interviewed indicated a need for more H-1B visas, or 
for reform of the visa process. One issue involves procedures for keeping people 

who have been educated in the United States and perhaps interned with the ˜rm. 

Another involves recruiting from abroad for skills for which the U.S. supply of 

talent is limited, but for which other countries are noted for having people with 

the needed skills. For example, it appears that the supply of engineers in analog 

˜elds in the United States such as radiofrequency is limited, whereas there is a 

good supply in some European countries. A reported problem with the current 

immigration process is that the nature of U.S. supply of talent is not considered. 

From an immigration standpoint, an engineer is an engineer regardless of educa
-tion level (bachelor, master™s, Ph.D.) and there is no way to identify and respond 

to shortages of very speci˜c skills or levels (e.g., bachelor vs. Ph.D.).
In addition to such human resource issues, another key concern is sustain
-ing the demand for innovation. PC demand, and associated innovation, has been 

driven in the past decade largely by the Internet and networking in general. With 

the United States leading in Internet adoption, the PC industry was quick to 

adopt networking technologies such as Ethernet and wireless networking, and 

new products such as the BlackBerry and Treo were developed in the United 

States. However, the United States has fallen behind a number of countries in 

both wireless and broadband adoption and is not the lead market for products 

and services such as mobile phones and online gaming. As a result, innovations 

in new personal computing devices such as smart phones, video game consoles, 

and other network devices are likely to target foreign markets initially, making it 

more likely that innovation will occur in those markets rather than in the United 

States.
While speci˜c policy issues with regard to telecommunications, Internet 
regulation, content, and pricing are beyond the scope of this chapter, those deci
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSONAL COMPUTING
 51
sions should be made with an awareness of their potential impact on U.S. inno
-vation in industries such as personal computing. Innovation in PCs can require 
cooperation by providers of complementary assets, such as content or communi
-cation infrastructure. Government policies on telecommunications can in˚uence 

the speed of diffusion of infrastructure like broadband, 3G, or municipal WiFi 

networks. Similarly, government policies on copyright can in˚uence the terms 

under which content can be distributed. While these policy issues are usually 

debated in terms of impacts on competition, intellectual property rights, or even 

consumer choice, policy makers also should consider their impact on innovation 

in high-technology industries.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
The research on which this chapter is based has been supported by grants to 
the Personal Computing Industry Center of the Paul Merage School of Business 

at UC Irvine from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the U.S. National Science 

Foundation, the National Academy of Sciences, and the California Institute for 

Telecommunications and Information Technology. Any opinions, ˜ndings, and 

conclusions or recommendations expressed in these materials are those of the 

author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of these sponsors. The authors 

acknowledge the very helpful comments of David Mowery, Jeffrey Macher, and 

anonymous reviewers on drafts of this chapter.
REFERENCES
Committee on the Engineer of 2020, National Academy of Engineering. (2005). 
Educating the En
-gineer of 2020: Adapting Engineering Education to the New Century. 
Washington, D.C.: The 
National Academies Press.
Curry, J., and M. Kenney. (1999). Beating the clock: Corporate responses to rapid change in the PC 
industry. 
California Management Review
 42(1):8-36.
Dedrick, J., and K. L. Kraemer. (1998). 
Asia™s Computer Challenge: Threat or Opportunity for the 
United States and the World?
 New York: Oxford University Press.
Dedrick, J., and K. L. Kraemer. (2005). The impacts of IT on ˜rm and industry structure: The personal 
computer industry. 
California Management Review
 47(3):122-142.
Dedrick, J., and K. L. Kraemer. (2006a). Is production pulling knowledge work to China: A study of 
the notebook computer industry. 
Computer
 39(7):36-42.
Dedrick, J., and K. L. Kraemer. (2006b). 
Impacts of Globalization and Offshoring on Engineering 
Employment in the Personal Computing Industry. Report for the National Academy of Engineer
-ing.
 Irvine, CA: CRITO.
Digitimes. (2006). 
ICT ReportŠ
1Q 200
6: Taiwan™s Notebooks.
 Taipei: Digitimes Research.
Economist. 
(2006a). The dream of the personal computer: The PC™s 25th birthday. 380(8488):17.
Economist.
 (2006b). Getting personal: The PC™s 25th birthday. (July 27):57-58.
Einhorn, B. (2005). Why Taiwan matters. 
Business Week.
 May 16.
Electronic Business Top 300. (2006). 
Electronic Business
 August:3-14.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Geref˜, G., and V. Wadhwa. (2006). Framing the Engineering Outsourcing Debate: Placing the United 
States on a Level Playing Field with China and India. Duke University, Master of Engineering 
Management Program.
Grove, A. (1999). 
Only the Paranoid Survive.
 New York: Time Warner.
Henderson, R. M., and K. B. Clark. (1990). Architectural innovation: The recon˜guration of exist
-ing product technologies and the failure of established ˜rms. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 35(1):9-30.
IDC (International Data Corporation). (2006a). 
Worldwide Black Book, Q2 200
6. Framingham, MA: 
IDC.
IDC. (2006b). 
Worldwide PC Market: 
4Q0
5 and 200
5 Review.
 Framingham, MA: IDC.
IDC. (2006c). 
Worldwide Software 200
6-20
10 Forecast Summary.
 Framingham, Mass.: IDC.
IDC. (2006d). 
IDC Worldwide Quarterly PC Tracker.
 December 2006.
Juliussen, E. (2006). 
Worldwide PC Market: May, 200
6 Version.
 Arlington Heights, IL: 
eTForecasts.
Kotkin, J., and D. Friedman. (2004). Executive leadership in the industrial economy. Korn Ferry 
International. Available at: 
http://www.kornferry.com/Library/ViewGallery.asp?CID=865&
 LanguageID=1&RegionID=2
3.Kraemer, K. L., J. Dedrick, and S. Yamashiro. (2000). Dell Computer: Re˜ning and extending the 
business model with information technology. 
Information Society
 16:5-21.
Li, W. C.-Y. (2006). Global Sourcing in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Information 
Technology Hardware Industry. Los Angeles: UCLA. Working paper. 46 pp.
Lu, L. Y. Y., and J. S. Liu. (2004). R&D in China: An empirical study of Taiwanese IT companies. 
R&D Management
 34(4):453-465.
Mann, C. (2003). Globalization of IT services and white collar jobs: The next wave of productivity 
growth. 
International Economics Policy Briefs
 PB03-11:1-13.
MIC (Market Intelligence Center). (2005). The Greater Chinese Notebook PC Industry, 2004 and 
Beyond. Taipei: Asia IP Report
Murtha, T., F. Giarratani, and T. Sturgeon, eds. (Forthcoming). 
Massive Coordination: Creating and 
Capturing Value in Global Knowledge Networks.
Porter, M. (1996). What is strategy? 
Harvard Business Review
 (November-December):1-22.
Reed Electronics Research. (2005). 
Yearbook of World Electronics Data. 
Vols. 1-4.
Utterback, J. M. (1990). Radical innovation and corporate regeneration. 
Journal of Research Technol
-ogy Management
 37(4):10-21.
Von Hippel, E. (1998). Economics of product development by users: The impact of ﬁstickyﬂ local 
information. 
Management Science
 44(5):629-644.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53
 2  Software
ASHISH
 A
RORA
Carnegie Mellon University
CHRIS
 F
ORMAN
Georgia Institute of Technology
JIWOONG
 Y
OON
Kyung Hee University, Seoul, South Korea
INTRODUCTION
The global movement of software services activities (de˜ned to include soft
-ware engineering services and research and development [R&D] as well as the 
development of software products) to locations outside of the United States is an 

important and growing phenomenon that has recently attracted widespread atten
-tion. Over the period 1995-2002, exports of business services and computer and 

information services grew at an average annual rate of over 40 percent in India 

and at a rate of 20 percent in Ireland. These changes have received widespread 

attention within the United States and have led to concerns of a ﬁhollowing outﬂ 

of the American information technology (IT) sector and about the potential loss 

of American technological leadership.
However, despite these changes in the location of production of IT services, 
there is relatively little evidence of global changes in the location of new software 

product development. U.S. companies have historically been and continue to be 

the leading exporters of software products. Moreover, evidence from software 

patents suggests that inventive activity in software continues to be concentrated 

in the United States. In the short run, the United States will continue to enjoy a 

signi˜cant lead over other countries in the stock of highly skilled programmers 

and software designers that provide it with an advantage in the production of new 

software products. Moreover, proximity to the largest source of IT demand and 

potential agglomeration economies arising from proximity to competitors and 

complementors provide software product companies located in the United States 

with a signi˜cant advantage.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
DISPERSION OF IN
VENTI
VE ACTI
VIT
Y IN SOFTWARE
In this chapter we provide evidence on the geographic distribution of inven
-tive activity in software. Economists have long made a distinction between in
-novation and invention in the study of technological change. Schumpeter (1934) 
de˜ned innovations as new, creative combinations that upset the equilibrium 
state of the economy. Mokyr (2002) de˜nes invention as an increment in the set 
of technological knowledge in a society. Schumpeter pointed out that invention 

does not imply innovation, and that it is innovation that provides capitalism with 

its dynamic elements. Because it is more easily measured, in this chapter we will 

focus on the geographic dispersion of inventive activity. However, we adopt the 

position of Mokyr (2002), who argues that in the long run invention is a neces
-sary precursor to innovation.
Unlike some of the other industries studied in this volume, one feature of 
software development is that it is frequently performed both by suppliers of 

software packages and services and by users. As a result, software development 

occurs throughout all industries in the economy, and so to understand the location 

of inventive activity in software it is insuf˜cient to examine where one or two 

industries are located.
To understand this point further, it is helpful to gain a better understanding of 
the types of software development activity. The design, installation, implementa
-tion, and use of software consist of several phases. Messerschmitt and Szyperski 

(2002) identify two distinct value chains in software development. First, there is 

a 
supply value chain 
in which software creators develop software artifacts that 
provide value for the end user. This part of the software value chain consists 

primarily of design and development activities that can be thought of as software 

ﬁproduction.ﬂ In the past this role had been played primarily by independent us
-ers, third-party programmers, or independent software vendors creating custom 

software, but over the past 20 years this role has passed increasingly to indepen
-dent software vendors creating software products.
The output of this value chain contains all of what we would traditionally de
-˜ne as software products, such as word processors, operating systems, enterprise 

software such as enterprise resource planning (ERP) and business intelligence 

software, as well as middleware software, such as some transaction processing 

middleware and enterprise application integration. The total value of production 

in the software product industry was $61,376.9 million in 1997,
1 and 195,200 
persons were employed in this industry in the same year.
2 Firms that operate in 
1 
Data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output tables. This ˜gure includes the total 
value of products made in NIPA industry 511200 (Software Publishers); 1997 is the latest benchmark 
year for the input-output tables. More recent years do not separate software producers from other 

information publishers.
2 
Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on the number of employees in the software 
publishing industry (NAICS 5112), available at http://www.bls.gov/ces/home.htm.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 55
this value chain include all of the well-recognized names that are traditionally 
regarded as ﬁsoftwareﬂ ˜rms, including Microsoft, Adobe, Oracle, and the SAS 
Institute, as well as smaller ˜rms such as Oblix and Primatech.
This value chain also includes the activity of third-party ˜rms involved 
in custom programming and software analysis and design. Such ˜rms create 

custom software products for their customers and include ˜rms like CIBER, 

Inc., Intergraph Corp., and xwave Solutions. The total value created in custom 

programming and design services was $115,834.6 million in 1997 while total 

employment was 675,000 in 1997, indicating that both revenue and employment 

in this sector are greater than that in the packaged software industry.
3 Moreover, 
custom programming and design services are also growing faster than is the soft
-ware publishing industry. Though 1997 is the last year for which we have data 

on revenues by industry, we can compare employment growth across these two 

industries. Employment in custom programming and design services has grown 

from 675,000 in 1997 to 1,025,300 in 2005, for an average annual growth rate 

of 5.8 percent. In contrast, employment in software publishing has grown from 

195,200 in 1997 to 238,700 in 2005, for an average annual growth rate of 2.5 

percent.
Second, there is a software 
requirements 
value chain in which users add 
functionality to software to meet their own needs. Users engage in co-inventive 

activity (Bresnahan and Greenstein, 1996) to translate general-purpose software 

into a speci˜c application. Such co-inventive activity may include modi˜cations 

to packaged software applications or development of new applications. However, 

in business software it also involves changes to business processes or organiza
-tion design.
Activity in this value chain includes both programming by professional pro
-grammers and software designers employed by IT-using ˜rms and programming 

activities performed by users themselves. The activity of both groups is dif˜cult 

to measure but represents a major share of value created. Scaf˜di, Shaw, and 

Myers (2005) estimate that there were approximately 80 million end-user pro
-grammers in 2005,
4 compared to 3 million professional programmers. Moreover, 
occupation data from the United States indicate that over two-thirds of software 

professionals do not work for IT ˜rms but rather work for IT-using industries.
5 Neither this software development activity performed by users nor the work 

performed by software professionals working for IT users is measured in any 

systematic statistics.
3 
These calculations are based on total sales in custom computer programming services (NAICS 
541511) and computer systems design services (NAICS 541512). This latter category may include 
activities outside of programming, such as IT systems design and integration. A conservative estimate 

of the value and employment of third-party custom programming services uses only NAICS 541511 

and yields estimates of $86,326.8 million and 522,300, respectively.
4 
This estimate includes those who create user-developed software that is not sold in markets.
5 
Data from BLS Occupational Employment Statistics.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Though systematic evidence is rare, what we do know suggests that eco
-nomic activity in this value chain is likely to be far greater than that in the supply 
value chain. According to Gormely et al. (1998), though the typical cost of imple
-menting an ERP application suite is $20.5 million, only $4 million of this cost 

is related to hardware and software; the rest is due to the costs of implementing 

and deploying the software within the business. Using data on sales of software 

products and services in several Western European countries, Steinmueller (2004) 

estimates that for every 
1 spent on software there is an additional 
2.36 spent 
on IT-related business services. However, this estimate is likely a lower bound, 

because it includes only software services conducted through market transactions 

and excludes software development activities within IT-using ˜rms themselves.
The importance of the software requirements value chain has two implica
-tions for the measurement of where inventive activity in software takes place. 

First, a large part of value creation in software takes place outside of ˜rms that 

reside in what is considered the software product industry. The value of this activ
-ity goes largely unmeasured in traditional government statistics, as it often occurs 

as a labor expense within ˜rms developing or implementing packaged software.
Second, it is very dif˜cult to place a precise de˜nition of what exactly con
-stitutes inventive activity in software. Creation and modi˜cation of source code is 

of course one major component, but so are user modi˜cation and business process 

change. Should these latter activities be included as well?
6 Moreover, how should 
we treat changes to software code that are embedded in IT hardware? Are these 

hardware or software inventions? As we will discuss next, given available data, a 

precise estimate of inventive activity in software is probably not feasible. Instead, 

we provide a variety of metrics that enable us to estimate broad trends and orders 

of magnitude in economic and inventive activity in software.
In the section ﬁTrends in the Location of Value Creationﬂ we provide evi
-dence of recent trends in globalization of software services. These data provide 

evidence on globalization of activity in the software requirements value chain and 

some inventive activity conducted by services ˜rms in the supply value chain, 

though they will largely miss changes in cross-country software service activi
-ties that are undertaken by ˜rms outside of the software services industry. In the 

section ﬁEmpirical Evidence on the Location of Inventive Activityﬂ we use U.S. 

software patent data to examine changes in the global dispersion of inventive 

activity in software product development.
TRENDS IN THE LOCATION OF 
VALUE CREATION
In this section we investigate broad trends in the location of value creation 
activities in software. We begin with some statistics describing global variation in 
6 
It is interesting to note that the U.S. Patent Of˜ce has struggled with similar de˜nitional issues, 
within the context of so-called business method patents (Allison and Tiller, 2003). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 57
the exports and imports of software products and services, followed by a qualita
-tive description of recent trends in countries that have been known to be active 
producers in the market for software products and services.
Statistical Trends
Software Products
Figure 1 shows the percentage of total 2002 software 
product 
exports and 
imports by selected Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

(OECD) countries. The ˜gure shows that among OECD countries the United 

States continues to be the leader by a wide margin in the export of software prod
-ucts, accounting for 21.7 percent of total software exports. The next closest coun
-try is Ireland, which accounts for 16 percent of software exports. However, as we 

will discuss in further detail, most of Ireland™s software exports arise from U.S. 

multinational companies that utilize Ireland as a base of operations to localize 
0%5%10%15%20%25%
Austria
Canada
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
All Others
Exports % TotalImports % Total
software-1.eps
FIGURE 1
 Percentage of total 2002 software product exports and imports by OECD 
country. SOURCE: OECD (2004, Table C.1.8; OECD trade in software goods, 1996-
2002). Compiled from International Trade Statistics database.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
U.S. software products to be shipped to countries in the European Union.
7 Since 
the bulk of software product exports from Ireland are due to U.S. multinationals 
in IrelandŠSands (2005) shows that over 92 percent of Irish software exports 

are from foreign ˜rmsŠthis suggests that the share of U.S. software exports in 

global trade ˚ows is probably closer to one-third rather than the one-˜fth that the 

OECD statistics indicate. Following that, the next largest exporters are Germany 

(due in part to software exports from ERP giant SAP) and the United Kingdom. 

No other country accounts for more than 10 percent of software exports. Most 

notably, Japan accounts for only 2.5 percent of total software exports.
Figure 2 presents total packaged software product sales by region. The story 
here remains the same: North America represents the largest share of packaged 

software sales, and this percentage has been increasing over time from 47 percent 

in 1990 to 54 percent in 2001. We explore why other countries have not been 

more successful in developing software products in further detail in the next 

section.
Software Services
Figure 3 shows data from the OECD Economic Outlook (2006) and reports 
the global share of 1995 and 2004 exports in IT services, obtained by summing 
the categories ﬁcomputer and information servicesﬂ and ﬁother business servicesﬂ 

from the IMF Balance of Payments data. Though subject to a variety of caveats 

about measurement and coverage, Figure 3 suggests that the distribution of IT 

service exports is more evenly distributed across countries than is the distribu
-tion of software product exports. Many smaller countries are experiencing rapid 

growth in their exports of IT services, though some are starting from a very small 

base.
To explore trends in imports, we use data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic 
Analysis (BEA) on International Trade in Services. Table 1 provides data on in
-ter˜rm trade in exports and imports of IT services in 1998 and 2004, calculated 

by summing the categories ﬁComputer and Information Servicesﬂ and ﬁRoyal
-ties and License Fees.ﬂ
8 Exports of these services grew from $6,900 million to 
$10,862 million from 1998 to 2004, while imports grew from $1,992 to $2,591 

million from 1998 to 2004.
Cross-border exports to and imports from unaf˜liated foreign ˜rms of com
-7 
Localization activities include activities such as manual translation or adapting software products 
to local markets. 
8 
The columns labeled ﬁComputer and Information Servicesﬂ provide data on exports and imports 
of private services among unaf˜liated ˜rms. The columns, ﬁRoyalties and License Feesﬂ in the same 
table include computer-related services that were delivered to foreign markets through cross-border 

software licensing agreements. These data do not include intra˜rm exports of computer services 

because BEA does not in general release statistics on many of the countries in Table 1. They also do 

not include wages of U.S. residents who provide computer services to nonresidents.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 59
with type replaced200199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001
180160140120
10011%
35%47%54%30%9%806040200200180
160140120
100
806040200OECD: North America
OECD: EU-14OECD: Asia
Other OECDRest of the worldFIGURE 2
 Packaged software sales by region, 1990-2001 (U.S. dollars). SOURCE: 
OECD (2002) using International Data Corporation data. Reported in Thoma and Torrisi 
(2006).
USUKGermanyNetherlandsIrelandFranceItalyJapanChinaHong Kong (1)BelgiumSpainAustriaSingaporeSwedenIndia (1)CanadaDenmarkSwitzerlandKoreaIndonesiaIsraelNorwaySaudi Arabia
LuxembourgBrazilRussiaThailandAustraliaLebanonExports1995141210864202004with type replacedPercentFIGURE 3
 Top 30 country shares of reported exports of other business services and 
computer and information services, 1995 and 2004 (2004 data not yet available for all 

countries). For Hong Kong (China), India, and the Slovak Republic, data are for 2003. 
Republished with permission from OECD Economic Outlook (2006). Based on IMF Bal
-ance of Payments Database, March 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
puter and information services are shown in Table 1. Computer and information 
services (NAICS 518) include the categories computer and data processing ser
-vices (NAICS 5181) and database and other information services (NAICS 5182). 
This table was reorganized based on the tables of Business, Professional, and 

Technical Services with Unaf˜liated Foreigners from BEA. Ireland is included 

in all other EU and is not identi˜ed in BEA™s tables. These export and import 

transactions with unaf˜liated foreigners are inter˜rm transfers, which are tradi
-tional trades. Note that ﬁaf˜liated foreignersﬂ are locally established af˜liates of 

multinational ˜rms. The Asian Tigers consist of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and 

Hong Kong. There are three things to notice about this table. First, at present the 

numbers are small relative to total U.S. trade in services: exports and imports 

of software services represent 3.3 and 1.0 percent of total exports and imports 

of services, respectively. Second, the United States maintains a positive overall 

balance in trade and services; moreover, over the period 1998-2004 exports of 

computer services grew at a faster rate than imports (7.86 vs. 4.48 percent aver
-age annual growth rate [AAGR]). Third, although imports of computing services 

from India grew rapidly from 1994 to 2004, overall U.S. imports from India and 

the other software underdogs are small relative to other estimates.
Data from other sources suggest that the U.S. data may underestimate imports 
of software services. An OECD estimate indicates that over 90 percent of Indian 

service exports to OECD countries are not accounted for in the data on service 

imports published by these countries (OECD, 2004). Other analyses report similar 

dif˜culties in tracking Indian software services exports to the United States. A 

recent General Accounting Of˜ce (GAO) report notes that, for 2002, the United 

States reported $240 million in unaf˜liated imports of business, professional, and 

technical (BPT) services from India, whereas India reported about $6.5 billion 

in af˜liated and unaf˜liated exports in similar services categories (GAO, 2005).
9 For 2003, the United States reported $420 million in unaf˜liated imports of BPT 

services from India, whereas India reported approximately $8.7 billion in af˜li
-ated and unaf˜liated exports of similar services to the United States. The bulk 

(40-50 percent) of the difference, according to the GAO, is because the United 

States does not count the earnings of temporary workers resident in the United 

States in services imports. Other sources include differences in coverage (e.g., 

embedded software is counted as exports of goods by the United States, or IT-

enabled ˜nancial services are not classi˜ed as IT services by the United States), 

and because U.S. data do not indicate af˜liated imports by country of origin.
As noted earlier, services trade data do not capture intra˜rm migration of 
software activity abroad. The BEA data on U.S. MNCs provide detailed informa
-tion on the investment and production activities of U.S. companies abroad.
9 
Af˜liated trade occurs between U.S. parent ˜rms and their foreign af˜liates and between foreign-
owned ˜rms in the United States and their foreign parent. Unaf˜liated trade occurs between U.S. 
entities and foreign entities that neither own nor are owned by the U.S. entity. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 61
TABLE 1
 Computer and Information Services with Unaf˜liated Foreigners (million dollars)
Years
AAGR, 1998-2004
1994
1998
2004
Computer and 
Information 

Services
Computer and 

Information 

Services
Royalties 

and License 

Fees
Total
Computer and 

Information 

Services
Royalties 

and License 

Fees
Total
Computer and 

Information 

Services
Royalties 

and License 

Fees
Total
Exports
 All countries
2,332
3,705
3,195
6,900
6,601
4,261
10,86210.10
4.92
7.86
 Canada
333
430
125
555
1,144
279
1,423
17.71
14.32
16.99
 Europe
899
1,767
1,508
3,275
3,281
1,328
4,609
10.87
Œ2.10
5.86
 Japan
177
306
724
1,030
327
1,568
1,895
1.11
13.75
10.70
 Asian Tigers
117
200
––163
––Œ16.34
––Underdogs
 Brazil
48
136
...
...
149
81
230
1.53
....
...
 Israel
51
24
32
56
38
13
51
7.96
Œ13.94
Œ1.55
 China
17
29
46
75
48
51
99
8.76
1.73
4.74
 India
938
17
55
227
29
256
34.70
9.31
29.21
Imports
 All countries
286
1,494
498
1,992
2,002
589
2,591
5.00
2.84
4.48
 Canada
34
589
9598
1,189
12
1,201
12.42
4.91
12.32
 Europe
122
259
449
708
400
562
962
7.51
3.81
5.24
 Japan
20
41
26
67
15
116
Œ15.43
Œ41.90
Œ21.23 Asian Tigers
618
––31
––55.98
––Underdogs
 Brazil
11121...
...
0.00
...
...
 Israel
09211
7310
Œ4.10
6.99
Œ1.58
 China
26...
...
7...
...
2.60
...
...
 India
7100
...
...
315
6321
21.07
...
...
NOTE: Omitted cells include either transactions below $500,000 or data that were omitted to maintain con˜dentiality. AAGR, average annual growth rate.
SOURCE: BEA Data on U.S. International Trade in Services.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Table 2 shows that growth in employment in IT services and computer de
-sign industries has been faster for foreign af˜liates of U.S. ˜rms than for their 
domestic operations (AAGR 5.1 vs. 3.9 percent) due to faster growth among 

foreign af˜liates in computer design and related services.
Financing of Software Products and Services
Table 3 includes data on one of the inputs to software product and service 
˜rms: ˜nancial capital. It includes data on disclosed rounds of venture capital ˜
-nancing by year and by destination country as reported in the Venture Economics 
VentureXpert database. As is well known, venture ˜nancing exhibits signi˜cant 

yearly variation (e.g., Gompers and Lerner, 2006) and our data may not capture 

all venture ˜nancing rounds. However, some broad trends are suggested. First, 

similar to our data on inventive outputs (described in further detail later), the 

United States clearly dominates in inputs of ˜nancial capital to emerging soft
-ware ˜rms. However, based on data from 2002-2005, there is some evidence that 

rounds of venture ˜nancing to the software underdogs declined less from their 

2000 peak than did ˜nancing to U.S. ˜rms.
10
 However, there was an apparent 
decline in venture ˜nancing to these countries in 2005. In short, more years of 

data are needed to discern whether there is a trend of increasing venture capital 

˜nancing to the software underdogs.
Regional Trends in Packaged Software and Software Services
In the previous section we showed that the United States represents the ma
-jority of world sales in packaged software. However, other regions of the world 

have a large and increasing percentage of software services. In this section we 

discuss some regional trends that are partially responsible for the geographic 

variance in economic activity in packaged software and services.
Software Producers in Europe and Japan
In Western Europe, the software industry has long been dominated by cus
-tom software development and software services (Malerba and Torrisi, 1996; 
Steinmueller, 2004).
Table 4 shows sales of software products and IT services in the EU15 dur
-ing 2003-2005.
11
 IT professional services such as consulting, implementation, 
10
 The software underdogs consist of India, Ireland, Israel, Brazil, and China.
11
 The EU15 comprised the following 15 countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United 
Kingdom.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 63
TABLE 2
 Growth in Employment for Foreign Af˜liates of U.S. Firms vs. 
Growth for All U.S. Establishments, Selected Industries, 1999-2002
1999
2002
AAGR
Information services and data processing services
 Foreign af˜liates of U.S. ˜rms
104.5
132.0
8.1
 All U.S. establishments
371.9
473.8
8.4
Computer system design and related services
 Foreign af˜liates of U.S. ˜rms
157.9
172.9
3.1
 All U.S. establishments
997.0
1,061.3
2.1
Total
 Foreign af˜liates of U.S. ˜rms
262.4
304.9
5.1
 All U.S. establishments
1,368.9
1,535.1
3.9
NOTE: AAGR, average annual growth rate.
SOURCE: Data on foreign af˜liates of U.S. ˜rms from table on selected data for majority-owned 

nonbank foreign af˜liates and nonbank U.S. parents in all industries, 2003. From BEA International 

Economic Accounts, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Financial and Operating Data for U.S. Multina
-tional Companies. Data on all U.S. establishments from U.S. County Business Patterns data.
TABLE 3
 Disclosed Rounds of Venture Financing by Country, 1988-2005 
(thousands of dollars)
United States
Other G-7
Underdogs
All Other
Total
1988
2,565
660
003,225
1989
15,000
2,465
0017,465
1990
6,350
464
248
07,062
1991
1,100
0001,100
1992
1,607
1,418
003,025
1993
15,247
582
0015,829
1994
7,403
138
007,541
1995
14,340
00014,340
1996
92,784
1,466
02,766
97,016
1997
242,873
007,049
249,922
1998
300,355
9,359
06,039
315,753
1999
1,068,310
68,011
28,666
21,102
1,186,089
2000
2,036,591
221,297
73,307
169,636
2,500,830
2001
460,911
83,944
32,256
16,629
593,740
2002
99,836
23,295
6,831
3,815
133,777
2003
173,205
14,607
15,251
167
203,230
2004
151,025
9,492
10,600
1,848
172,965
2005
138,428
2,000
2,000
59
   142,487
SOURCE: Venture Economics VentureXpert database, and author™s calculations. Software in
-cludes rounds of ˜nancing from software and e-commerce software ˜rms. Dates are round date of 

˜nancing.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 4
 Sales of Software Products and IT Services in the EU15
2003
2004
2005
Average Growth (%)
Software products
59,235
61,707
64,979
4.74
 System software
30,944
32,537
34,536
5.64
 Application software
28,291
29,169
30,443
3.73
IT services
112,472
116,149
120,913
3.68
 Professional services
81,376
84,380
88,147
4.08
 Support services
31,096
31,769
32,766
2.65
Total software
171,707
177,856
185,892
Percent services
52.67%
53.13%
53.74%
SOURCE: European Information Technology Observatory (2006).
and operations management are larger than the entire software products market. 
Malerba and Torrisi (1996) identify several reasons for this focus on software 

services, including a weak local IT hardware industry, ˜rst-mover advantages by 

U.S. software product ˜rms, fragmentation of local demand, and relatively little 

interaction between European universities and industry. The largest European 

producer of packaged software is SAP, the producer of enterprise software. SAP 

is currently the third largest software product company by sales, behind Microsoft 

and Oracle.
One surprising result in Figures 1 and 2 is that, in contrast to many other 
technology industries, Japanese ˜rms account for a very small share of the total 

export market for packaged software. This is not a recent result; Japanese ˜rms 

have not ever been major players in the world market for packaged software, 

despite their success in video games and in other IT markets. Japan runs a sig
-ni˜cant negative trade imbalance in software: In 1997, Japan imported US$3.93 

billion of software but exported only US$23.33 million (Asahi Shimbun, reported 

in Anchordoguy, 2000).
A number of reasons have been provided for the relative weakness of Japa
-nese software producers, including challenges created by the Japanese language, 

weak venture capital markets, weakness in intellectual property protection, and 

weak university computer science education (Anchordoguy, 2000; Baba et al., 

1996; Cottrell, 1996; Fransman, 1995). Cottrell (1996) argues that weakness in 

Japanese PC software production was due historically to a fragmented standards 

environment, while Anchordoguy (2000) argues that the aforementioned proxi
-mate reasons were ultimately caused by Japan™s economic system of ﬁcatch-up 

capitalism.ﬂ
12
12
 In particular, she argues that some of the key elements of the Japanese economic systemŠinclud
-ing state targeting policies, its keiretsu industrial groups, bank-centered ˜nancial system, and weak 
intellectual property systemŠhave been bene˜ted by its development of successful industries in steel, 

semiconductors, and IT hardware but have hindered the development of its IT software industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 65
Other Countries That Are Large Software Producers
Rapid growth in the size of the Indian software industry has recently at
-tracted much attention in the academic and popular press (e.g., Athreye, 2005a; 
Arora et al., 2001). Data from NASSCOM show that Indian IT services exports 

grew from $22 million in 1984 to $10 billion in 2005, with an additional $3 bil
-lion due to R&D services, engineering services, and software products. As this 

makes clear, the Indian software industry has largely been built around software 

services rather than products. Athreye (2005a) estimates that in 2000, revenue 

per employee among Indian software ˜rms was approximately $35,100, up from 

only $6,200 in 1993.
Some anecdotal evidence suggests that Indian ˜rms are increasingly per
-forming more R&D-intensive activities. Athreye (2005a) notes the growth of a 

new innovative sector of small niche companies. Moreover, there is evidence of 

a deepening of R&D skills and the emergence of informal networks among local 

˜rms in India. This is also some evidence of success in certain niche technolo
-gies such as wireless and embedded systems (Parthasarathy and Aoyama, 2006; 

Ilavarasan, 2006); software for mobile phones represents a substantial category. 

Some Indian ˜rms have also had success in developing software products for the 

developing countries market: one example is CITIL (now i-˚ex), a Citibank sub
-sidiary that initially produced software products for developing country markets 

before eventually moving on to head-to-head competition with the established 

incumbent producers in developed countries (Arora, 2006; Athreye, 2005b). 

There are also some data on substantial and growing R&D activities in countries 

such as India; Arora (2006) reports that total revenues for engineering services 

and R&D by Indian producers in 2006 were estimated to be US$4.8 billion, a 

23.1 percent increase over the prior year. In the next section we attempt to shed 

some additional light on this issue by examining U.S. patent data.
The Irish software industry consists of two very separate subindustries, each 
with very different characteristics. First, there is an overseas sector that is domi
-nated by MNCs. These ˜rms primarily are engaged in software logistics (such 

as media replication and printing and packaging production and distribution), 

localization (such as translating and adapting software to suit European markets), 

and development (O™Riain, 1999). Second, there is an indigenous sector that is 

populated by smaller ˜rms that is engaged in software development and product 

development activities.
The number of MNCs in Ireland grew rapidly throughout the 1990s, from 
74 foreign ˜rms in 1991 to 140 foreign ˜rms in 2000. As Arora, Gambardella, 

and Torrisi (2004) note, this rapid growth was due to a number of factors, in
-cluding the liberalization of economic policies that began in 1991, a large and 

well-educated English-speaking workforce, an advantageous site for localization 

activities, as well as potential agglomeration economies that were ignited after 

the Irish software-producing industry reached suf˜cient scale. MNC subsidiaries 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
are engaged primarily in ﬁlow-value-added, low-skill activities such as porting 
of legacy products on new platforms, disc duplication, assembling/packaging, 
and localizationﬂ (Arora et al., 2004). Revenues and exports in the Irish software 

industry have always been dominated by these MNCs. Sands (2005) notes that 

total industry revenues grew from $2.66 billion in 1991 to over $18 billion in 

2002, with MNCs continuously accounting for over 90 percent of the total. In 

contrast, the indigenous sector is more product-based: it accounts for just under 

half of employment; however, it accounts for only 9 percent of revenues. Indig
-enous companies are usually young and small, and often produce primarily for 

niche or vertical (i.e., industry-speci˜c) markets (Sands, 2005).
The software industry in Israel looks considerably different from that in 
either Ireland or India. Compared to locally owned Indian or Irish ˜rms, Israeli 

˜rms are more product-based and are more R&D intensive. Breznitz (2005) notes 

that revenue per employee for Israeli software ˜rms was US$255,172 in 2000. 

By his calculations, the similar statistic in 2000 for U.S. software publishers was 

US$231,621 and for locally owned Irish software producers was US$90,000. 

Breznitz (2005) examines the reasons for Israel™s product-based industry. He 

provides several reasons: tight links between the R&D activities of Israeli univer
-sities and high-tech industries in the country; the presence of a highly successful 

indigenous hardware industry; the presence of local market demand for new 

products; the presence of American MNCs locating R&D facilities in Israel; and 

the ability of the Israeli IT industry to raise capital in U.S. ˜nancial markets.
EMPIRICAL E
VIDENCE ON THE LOCATION 
OF IN
VENTI
VE ACTI
VIT
YIn this section we examine the global geographic distribution of inventive ac
-tivity in software. The data presented in the preceding section pointed to expand
-ing markets for software services abroad. Those data also show that the market 

for packaged software continues to be highly concentrated in the United States, 

and little evidence indicates that this trend is reversing. However, authors such 

as Athreye (2005a) report increasing inventive activity in Indian ˜rms, and other 

authors have reported similar trends in Ireland (Sands, 2005) and China (Tschang 

and Xue, 2005), as well as well-established software product industries in Israel 

(Breznitz, 2005) and Brazil (Botelho et al., 2005). Software product sales are a 

lagging indicator of inventive activity in software: Could inventive activity in 

software be picking up in other areas of the world but not yet re˚ected in product 

sales? If so, how signi˜cant are these developments in terms of number of inven
-tions and their importance? To answer these questions, one needs a measure of 

R&D and inventive activity that is comparable across countries.
Patent data have long been used as one measure of inventive activity. Patents 
have also been found to be correlated, although weakly, with R&D spending, so 

they provide a weak measure of raw inputs into innovation (Griliches, 1990). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 67
There are, of course, signi˜cant limitations to the use of software patents as 
a measure of inventive activity. As Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002) note, not all 
inventions meet the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce (USPTO) criteria for pat
-entability,
13
 and inventors must make an explicit decision to patent an invention, 
as opposed to relying on some other method of intellectual property protection. 

In particular, there may be incremental inventive activity that is not patented and 

therefore is not re˚ected in patent statistics. Moreover, ˜rms may sometimes 

choose to use trade secrecy rather than patenting to protect groundbreaking inven
-tions because of incomplete enforcement of property rights. To the extent that 

intellectual property regimes differ across countries, this may make comparison 

of levels of patents across countries more dif˜cult.
Conversely the high growth rate of patenting that we observe in our sample 
may be in˚uenced by strategic patenting behavior. As Hall and Ziedonis (2001) 

document in the semiconductor industry, ˜rms may patent not to protect stand-

alone technological inventions but rather to protect against holdup by external 

patent holders or to negotiate access to external technologies. Thus, when inter
-preting our results, readers should be aware of how patent statistics may deviate 

from the level of inventive activity across countries. However, so long as the 

propensity to patent does not change signi˜cantly over time, these biases should 

not appreciably affect our interpretation of the time trends of patenting behavior 

across countries (and their interpretation as a metric of inventive activity).
Historically, inventions in software were not patentable
14
 and for a time 
copyright was the predominant form of formal intellectual property protection 

in software. However, a series of court decisions widened the scope of software 

patents. Eventually, this culminated in the Commissioner of Patents issuing 

guidelines for the patenting of software that allowed inventors to patent any 

software embodied in physical media (Hall and MacGarvie, 2006). In contrast, 

over the same period, a series of cases, including several copyright infringement 

cases brought by Lotus Development, weakened the intellectual property pro
-tection offered by copyrights. Graham and Mowery (2003) show that over this 

period the number of granted software patents has increased dramatically while 

the propensity of ˜rms to copyright has declined.
15
 Recent research has shown 
that the stock of patents is correlated with ˜rm success in the software industry 
13
 Note that not all inventions also meet the criteria for patentability for the European Patent Of˜ce 
(EPO) and Japanese Patent Of˜ce (JPO). 
14
 The following provides a necessarily brief overview of the history of intellectual property pro
-tection in software. For a more detailed overview, see Graham and Mowery (2003) and Hall and 
MacGarvie (2006). 
15
 The set of patentable inventions is narrower in Europe than in the United States. To be patent
-able, the European Patent Convention requires that inventions address a particular technical problem 

and suggest a technical means to solve this problem (Thoma and Torrisi, 2006). The implication of 

this requirement is that ﬁinventions having a technical character that are or may be implemented by 

computer programs may well be patentableﬂ (EPO, 2005). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
(Merges, 2006), suggesting that patents may be a potentially useful metric of the 
inventive output of ˜rms.
A second issue in using software patents to measure inventive activity in 
software is identifying exactly which patents are software patents.
16
 Software 
patents are not assigned to a particular class or subclass in either the USPTO or 
International Patent Classi˜cation (IPC) schemes. Moreover, there is no unique 

software classi˜cation ˜eld for patents. Graham and Mowery (2003) were the 

˜rst to systematically identify software patents for research purposes. They 

identi˜ed the IPC classes used by the six largest producers of PC software over 

the period 1984 to 1995. This search resulted in a list of 11 IPC classes,
 which 
account for over half (57 percent) of the more than 600 patents assigned to the 

100 largest packaged software ˜rms in 1995 (as identi˜ed in the trade news 

publication 
Softletter
).
The Graham-Mowery approach of using the patent classi˜cation system 
to identify software patents has been used and revised by others. Graham and 

Mowery (2005) identify software patents using USPTO classi˜cations. Hall and 

MacGarvie (2006) identify software patents by ˜nding the USPTO class-subclass 

combinations in which 15 large software ˜rms patent. To identify their ˜nal 

sample, they intersect the resulting set of patents with another keyword de˜nition 

used by Bessen and Hunt (2004).
Bessen and Hunt (2004) identify software patents through the use of a Bool
-ean query that searches for keywords in the text of patents. They arrive at a patent 

sample that is broader than that used by other researchers (Layne-Farrar, 2005). 

Other researchers have identi˜ed a smaller sample of patents by reading them 

manually. Allison and Tiller (2003) identify Internet business method patents and 

Allison et al. (2005) identify university software patents.
17
For this chapter, we use a version of the Graham-Mowery approach based on 
the IPC system. We began by identifying the top 10 ˜rms by revenue volume in 

1995 according to the Corptech Directory of Technology Companies.
18
 We then 
examined the IPC classes in which they patented. Because we found that the Gra
-ham-Mowery set of IPC classes covered only 46 percent of the patents of these 

top 10 ˜rms, we added two additional IPC categories. Our complete list of patent 

classes covered more than 80 percent of the patents of these top 10 ˜rms. Table 5 

provides a list of the included IPC classes and subclasses and their descriptions.
16
 This section provides an overview of the issues in identifying software patents. For a more com
-plete discussion, see Layne-Farrar (2005) and Hall and MacGarvie (2006). 
17
 Thoma and Torrisi (2005) compare several of these methods in a study of European software 
patents. 
18
 These are Adobe, Autodesk, Cadence, Macromedia Inc., Microsoft, Novell, Oracle, SAP, Sybase, 
and Symantec Corp. Note that Corptech™s coverage of foreign ˜rms is more limited than its coverage 
of U.S. ˜rms; however, so long as the distribution of patent classes used by software patenting ˜rms 

does not vary substantially for U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms, this issue should not appreciably in˚uence 

our results. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 69
By using a broader set of IPC classes than Graham and Mowery, we are more 
likely to include patents that may be assigned to the aforementioned classes but 
are not software patents. As we will see, software patenting outside of the United 

States is relatively rare, so we utilize a conservative de˜nition that includes as 

many such patents as possible in hopes of achieving an ﬁupper boundﬂ on the 

stock of software patents invented outside of the United States. However, we 

recognize that, if the rate of patenting in related technologies outside of software 

is higher than that inside and if the share of inventive activity in these other tech
-nologies is higher in the United States than abroad, then our measure may arti˜
-cially in˚ate the gap in software patenting between the United States and other 

nations. To address this possibility, we compare our results using several software 

patenting de˜nitions, including those of Graham and Mowery (2003, 2005).
TABLE 5
 List of IPC Patent Classes Used in Analyses
Class/Subclass
Description
G06F 3/00
Input arrangements for transferring data to be processed into a form capable of 
being handled by the computer; output arrangements for transferring data from 
processing unit to output unit (e.g., interface arrangements)
G06F 5/00
Methods or arrangements for data conversion without changing the order or 
content of the data handled
G06F 7/00
Methods or arrangements for processing data by operating upon the order or 
content of the data handled
G06F 9/00
Arrangements for program control (e.g., control unit)
G06F 11/00
Error detection; error correction; monitoring
G06F 12/00
Accessing, addressing, or allocating within memory systems or architectures
G06F 13/00
Interconnection of, or transfer of, information or other signals between 
memories, input/output devices, or central processing units
G06F 15/00
Digital computers in general
G06F 17/00
Digital computing or data processing equipment or methods, specially adapted 
for speci˜c functions
G06K 9/00
Methods or arrangements for reading or recognizing printed or written characters 
or for recognizing patterns (e.g., ˜ngerprints)
G06K 15/00
Arrangements for producing a permanent visual presentation of the output data
G06T 11/00
Two-dimensional image generation (e.g., from a description to a bit-mapped 
image)
G06T 15/00
Three-dimensional image rendering (e.g., from a model to a bit-mapped image)
G09G 5/00
Control arrangements or circuits for visual indicators common to cathode-ray 
tube indicators and other visual indicators
H04L 9/00
Arrangements for secret or secure communication
NOTE: Class names are as follows: G06F, Electric Digital Data Processing; G06K, Recognition of 

Data, Presentation of Data, Record Carriers, Handling Record Carriers; G06T, Image Data Processing 

or Generation, in General; G09G, Arrangements or Circuits for Control of Indicating Devices Using 

Static Means to Present Variable Information; H04L, Electric Communication Technique. SOURCE: 

International Patent Classi˜cation System, World Intellectual Property Organization, http://www.

wipo.int/classi˜cations/ipc/ipc8/?lang=en.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
FIGURE 4
 Percent of U.S. patents invented in United States under different software 
de˜nitions. SOURCE: USPTO data and authors™ calculations.
software-4.eps
45
50
55
60
65
70
Percent U.S. Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
GM 03
GM 05
AFY
As an illustration, we computed the percentage of patents produced by in
-ventors who reside in the United States (regardless of assignee location) under 
different de˜nitions and then compared them.
Figure 4 presents these results. All three de˜nitions show similar percentages 
for U.S. patents. Moreover, the three de˜nitions have similar trends: increas
-ing throughout the 1990s before reaching a peak around 2000 before declining 
slightly. Given the similarity in results across these different de˜nitions, we will 
continue to focus on our original de˜nition described earlier.
Results of Patent Data Analysis
Figure 5 shows the number of U.S. patents invented in the United States, Ja
-pan, other G-7, and all other nations (based on inventor address) by year of patent 

grant. The steep increase in the number of patents granted after 1995 is consistent 

with prior work that has shown an increase in the propensity to patent software 

after increases in the scope of intellectual property rights afforded by software 

patents (Graham and Mowery, 2003; Hall and MacGarvie, 2006). In 2004, 4,695 

software patents were issued to inventors in the United StatesŠa larger number 

of patents than inventors from all other areas of the world combined (2,811). The 

average annual growth in software patenting between 1988 and 2004 was also 

greater in the United States than in all other G-7 nations: patenting by U.S. inven
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 71
software-5.eps
01000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Number of Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Japan
Other G-7
All Others
US
FIGURE 5
 U.S. software patents invented in United States and other countries. SOURCE: 
USPTO data and authors™ calculations.
tors grew at an average annual rate of 19.5 percent, compared to 16.1 percent for 
inventors in Japan and 18.0 percent in other G-7 nations.
These ˜gures may re˚ect a ﬁhome country biasﬂ: U.S. ˜rms may be more 
likely to patent in the U.S. market than foreign ˜rms. Thus, in our data on patent
-ing by location of inventor, the high percentage of U.S. patents may re˚ect (1) 

higher rates of U.S. patenting by U.S. ˜rms (compared to ˜rms in other countries) 

and (2) a higher propensity for U.S. ˜rms to invent in the United States. More 

broadly, there may be some concern that there are potential differences between 

the site of inventive activity in U.S.-assigned U.S. patents that have EPO or JPO 

equivalents and the site of inventive activity in U.S.-assigned U.S. patents that do 

not have such equivalents. We address this potential concern in two ways. First, 

we look at the location of inventive activity for patents assigned to ˜rms from 

outside of the United States. Second, we compare our results to recent work that 

has examined software patenting behavior in European patents.
We examined the percentage of patents assigned to the home country by 
country of assignee ˜rm, based on year in which the patent was granted. Figure 6 

shows that Japan-assigned U.S. software patents are predominantly invented in 

Japan, although this share appeared to decline during 2000-2004. Similarly, the 

location of invention in Israeli- and G-7-assigned patents (excluding the United 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
States and Japan) is predominately sited in those countries and regions. To be 
clear, comparing the propensity of U.S. software patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms 
to be invented in the United States with the propensity of U.S. software patents 

assigned to ˜rms from other countries to be invented in that (home) country is 

not an ﬁapples to applesﬂ comparison. However, given this important caveat, this 

˜gure does not suggest that patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms are signi˜cantly more 

likely to be invented in the home country (United States) than are the patents from 

other countries. In fact, for several years, the U.S. patents assigned to Japanese 

and Israeli ˜rms were more likely to be invented in the home country than U.S. 

patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms. In recent years, however, this ﬁhomeﬂ percentage 

has been higher for patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms than for others, though this is 

largely attributable to a decline in the home invented share for patents assigned 

to ˜rms from other countries.
Thoma and Torrisi (2006) examine the rate of software patenting in Euro
-pean patents. Figure 7 shows the number of patents granted by country of patent 

assignee and year of patent application. There are some differences in the way 

Thoma and Torrisi de˜ne software patents and other differences in their sample 

construction: in particular, Thoma and Torrisi examine the distribution of patent
-software-6.eps
80
85
90
95
100
Percent invented in home country
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
US
Japan
Israel
G-7 Excluding US and Japan
FIGURE 6
 Percentage of U.S. software patents invented in home country by country of 
assignee. SOURCE: USPTO data and authors™ calculations.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 73
ing activity by site of assignee rather than inventor.
19
 However, the broad trends 
are very similar to those in Figure 5: U.S. ˜rms are responsible for the majority 
of software patenting activity, followed by Japanese ˜rms, and then all others. 

Moreover, Thoma and Torrisi (2006) note that, of the European software patents 

in their database, 80.3 percent have also been granted by the USPTO and 73.8 

percent have also been granted by JPO. If the majority of European software 

patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms are also invented in the United States (not an un
-reasonable assumption given evidence presented in the earlier paragraph that the 

majority of U.S. software patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms are invented in the United 

States), then the graph suggests that, even using European software patent data, a 

large share of the inventive activity in software takes place in the United States. 

Further, we note that while the levels of software patenting expressed in Figures 

4 and 5 may be in˚uenced by home country bias, so long as this bias does not 

change systematically over time, the time trends shown in these ˜gures will not 

be as in˚uenced by such bias.
19
 In particular, Thoma and Torrisi use a variant of Hall and MacGarvie™s (2006) method of con
-structing a software patent sample based on patent classes and Bessen and Hunt™s (2004) keyword 
method. Moreover, this graph shows patenting by assignee country rather than inventing country; 

however, according to our data 93.4 percent of patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms were also invented in 

the United States. Last, this ˜gure shows patenting by year of application rather than year of granting; 

however, the broad trend of greater patenting among U.S. assignees is robust to this difference. 
software-7.eps
bitmap image
with type replaced
12000100008000600040002000019791980
1981
1982
1983
198419851986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
199619971998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003OthersJPUSITGBFRDEFIGURE 7
 European Patent Of˜ce software patent grants by country of the assignee and 
year of application. SOURCE: Thoma and Torrisi (2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Patenting Activity by Region
Figure 8 shows the number of U.S. patents invented in the underdog coun
-tries based on inventor location. Israel is the only one among them to have a 
signi˜cant number of U.S. patents. Israeli patenting activity increased from 3 in 

1998 to a high of 90 in 2003. No other country has had more than 20 patents in 

any one year, though the number of patents invented in India has risen slightly in 

recent years, from an average of 0.5 throughout the 1990s to 16 in 2004.
Figure 9 shows the number of patents invented in the East Asian Tigers 
based on inventor location.
20
 The number of patents invented in these countries 
is signi˜cantly higher than that of the underdogs. However, evidence suggests 

that many of these patents may be related to electronics.
21
 Patenting among these 
countries is dominated by inventors from indigenous electronics companies in 

Korea and Taiwan: in 2004, 264 of the 280 patents granted were from this set of 

assignees.
20
 For the purposes of this paper, the Asian Tigers consist of Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong 
Kong. This is a separate and distinct set from the software underdogs. 
21
 The top patenting ˜rms in these countries include Daewoo Electronics Co. Ltd. (33), Electron
-ics and Telecommunications Research (60), Hyundai Electronics Industries Co. Ltd. (57), Industrial 
Technology Research Institute (55), Inventec Corporation (25), LG Electronics (102), and Samsung 

Electronics (463). All of these companies are heavily involved in electronics research.
software-8.eps
020
40
60
80
100
Number of Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Brazil
India
China
Ireland
Israel
FIGURE 8
 Number of U.S. software patents invented in underdog countries. SOURCE: 
USPTO data and authors™ calculations.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 75
software-9.eps
050
100
150
Number of Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Korea
Taiwan
Singapore
Hong Kong
FIGURE 9
 Number of U.S. software patents invented in East Asian Tigers. SOURCE: 
USPTO data and authors™ calculations.
Assignee Location for Patents Invented Abroad
As noted earlier, multinational ˜rms have played a major role in the devel
-opment of software industries in other countries such as India and Ireland and 
may be driving the patenting activity by overseas inventors. To investigate this 

question further, we examined the location of U.S. software patent assignees for 

U.S. software patents invented in different countries. The overwhelming majority 

of patents invented in the United States were also assigned to U.S. ˜rms. This 

fraction ranges from 93 to 97 percent over the period 1988-2004. No other region 

ever exceeded 6 percent in these data.
Figure 10 shows the distribution of assignee country for patents invented in 
the underdog countries. Here, the fraction of patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms has 

generally been increasing over time, ranging from 20 percent in 1990 to a high 

of 65.7 percent in 2002. Excluding Israel (which has a robust software product 

industry) from the software underdogs, the top assignees in the software under
-dogs are 3Com (12), IBM (25), and Texas Instruments (12); no other company 

has more than ˜ve patents. The percentage of patents invented in underdog na
-tions that are assigned to underdog ˜rms has similarly been declining over time, 

from 80 percent in 1990 to 32.7 percent in 2004.
The increasing share of patents invented abroad in one of the software un
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
derdogs but assigned to U.S. ˜rms suggests that there may be some shift in the 
location of inventive activity for U.S. ˜rms to offshore locations. There is some 
evidence of a shift to more offshore invention for patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms. 

However, the shift is small and offshore software invention in underdog countries 

by U.S. ˜rms accounts for a very small share of the total patents assigned to U.S. 

˜rms. We also examine the trends in the site of inventive activity for U.S. software 

patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms; note that these trends, because they only examine 

the site of inventive activity for patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms, are not subject to 

concerns of home country bias. The percentage of U.S.-assigned patents invented 

in the United States fell from 93.5 percent in 1996 to 92.1 percent in 2005.
22
 This 
decrease in the share of U.S. patents is due in large part to the increase in offshore 

activity in the underdogs: the percent of U.S.-assigned patents invented in the 

underdogs rose from 1.1 percent in 1996 to 1.8 percent in 2005.
We next examined whether there were any systematic differences in the 
industrial classi˜cation of the patent assignees by region where the patent was in
-22
 The share of U.S.-assigned patents invented in the United States was 96.2 percent in 1988 and 
93.0 percent in 1989, though the number of software patents in these years was much lower than in 
1996 (260 in 1988 and 387 in 1989 compared to 1,519 in 1996) which, as described earlier, was one 

of the ˜rst years in which software patenting began to grow rapidly.
software-10.eps
020
40
60
80
100
Percentage of
Total Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
020
40
60
80
100
Percentage of
Total Patents
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
Year
Asian Tigers
Other G-7
Underdogs
All Others
FIGURE 10
 Distribution of assignee country for U.S. software patents invented in soft
-ware underdogs. Top panel, United States; bottom panel, all other countries.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 77
vented. To do this, using assignee (company) name, we merged our U.S. software 
patent data with the Corptech Database of High Technology Companies.
Table 6 shows the distribution of assignee industry for patents by inventor 
region. Due to the way the Corptech data are collected, the industries of many 
Asian and G-7 countries in the Corptech database are classi˜ed as holding com
-panies, so we focus our analyses on patents invented in the United States and in 

the underdog countries. One fact that is immediately apparent across all rows 

of the table is that patents are assigned to companies that belong to a variety 

of industries. Outside of the ﬁHolding Companyﬂ category, most patents are 

from the ﬁOtherﬂ category. Moreover, most patents are not assigned to ˜rms in 

the ﬁSoftware Publishersﬂ industry (SIC 7372)Šthe SIC industry for packaged 

software producers. Second, the distributions of industries in the United States 

and underdog countries are broadly similar, with U.S. ˜rms slightly more likely 

to be in industrial machinery and equipment and the underdogs more likely to 

be in electronics.
In Table 7 we provide some descriptive statistics on top patenting ˜rms in 
major software-producing countries. To construct this table, we identi˜ed the ˜ve 

˜rms with the largest number of U.S. patents in each of nine countries: China, 

Germany, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Israel, India, Japan, South Korea, and 

the United States. Two major facts emerge. First, as noted earlier, the top patent
-ing ˜rms in software are usually not packaged software producers. Second, the 

top patenting ˜rms in the underdog countries are usually large U.S. producers of 
TABLE 6
 Assignee Industry for U.S. Patents by Region, 1988-2005
Industrial 
Machinery 

(SIC 35)
Electrical & 

Electronic 

Equip. 

(SIC 36)
Holding 

Companies 

(SIC 67)
Software 

Publishers 

(SIC 7372)
All Other
United States
9,741

(27.48)
5,291

(14.92)
4,770

(13.45)
2,217

(6.25)
13,434
(37.89)
Other G-7
1,023

(5.87)
153

(0.88)
12,561

(72.11)
98

(0.56)
3,585
(20.58)
Asian Tigers
47

(2.77)
51

(3.00)
781

(46.00)
1
(0.06)
818
(48.17)
Software underdogs
133

(18.02)
136

(18.43)
56

(7.59)
59

(7.99)
354
(47.97)
All other
85

(6.42)
44

(3.33)
609

(46.03)
15

(1.13)
570
(43.08)
SOURCE: Author™s manipulation of data from USPTO and Corptech Database of Technology Com
-panies. Numbers represent frequencies of row and column combinations. Numbers in parentheses 

represent the percentage of assignees in an industry conditional on invention in the country in the 

row. The unit of observation in the table is a patent.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 TABLE 7
 Leading Recipients of U.S. Software Patents, by Country of Inventor, 1988-2005
Name
Year 
Company 

was 

Founded
Industry
Number of 
Employees
Revenue
Home Country
Number 

of Patents
CHINA

Microsoft
1975
Software
71,553
$44 billion
United States
6IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
5United Microelectronics Corp.
1980
Electronics
12,000
Taiwan
4Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
2Huawei Technologies
1988
Telecommunication
44,000
$8.2 billion
China
1GERMAN
YSiemens
1847
Conglomerate
472,000
$75 billion
Germany
252
Robert Bosch GmbH
1886
Automotive
251,000
$55 billion
Germany
178
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
98
In˜neon Technologies
1999
Electronics
36,000
$7 billion
Germany
41
Daimler Chrysler AG
1998
Automotive
383,000
$150 billion
Germany
38
UNITED 
KINGDOM
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
140
International Computers Limited
1968
Computers
United Kingdom
40
British Telecommunnications PLC
1846
Telecommunications
104,400
$37 billion
United Kingdom
38
Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
IT hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
35
Philips Corporation
1891
Electronics
159,226
$36 billion
The Netherlands
32
IRELAND

3Com Corporation
1979
Networks
1,925
$800 million
United States
11
Analog Devices Inc.
1965
IT Hardware 
8,800
$2.4 billion
United States
3Richmount Computers Limited
3Hitachi Ltd.
1920
IT hardware, electronics
323,072
$80.5 billion
Japan
3IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
3ISRAEL

IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
69
Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
58
Motorola Inc.
1928
Electronics
88,000
$37 billion
United States
32
Scitex Corporation (now Scailex 
Corporation)
aIT hardware, now venture capital
$128.2 million
Israel
12
Applied Materials Inc.
1967
Semiconductor
12,576
$7 billion
United States
11
INDIA
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
17
Texas Instruments
1930
Hardware
30,300
$13 billion
United States
12
Honeywell International Inc.
1886
Aerospace
116,000
$26 billion
United States
3Veritas Operating Corporation (acquired by 
Symantec)
b1989
Software
16,000
$4.1 billion
United States
3Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
Hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
2JAPAN
Hitachi Ltd.
1920
IT hardware, electronics
323,072
$80.5 billion
Japan
1,403
Canon
1937
Imaging
100,000
$35 billion
Japan
1,286
Fujitsu
1935
Hardware
158,000
$40 billion
Japan
1,127
NEC Corporation
1899
Electronics
148,540
$41 billion
Japan
976
Toshiba
1904
Electronics
165,000
$60 billion
Japan
820
SOUTH 
KOREA
Samsung
1938
Electronics
$80 billion
South Korea
460
LG Electronics
c1958
Electronics
66,614
$23.5 billion
South Korea
100
Electronics and Telecommunications 
Research Institute
1976
South Korea
55
Hyundai Electronics (now Hynix 
Semiconductor)
Semiconductors
13,000
$5.6 billion
South Korea
49
Hyundai Motor Company
1967
Automotive
51,000
$57 billion
South Korea
30
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 79
TABLE 7
 Leading Recipients of U.S. Software Patents, by Country of Inventor, 1988-2005
Name
Year 
Company 

was 

Founded
Industry
Number of 
Employees
Revenue
Home Country
Number 

of Patents
CHINA

Microsoft
1975
Software
71,553
$44 billion
United States
6IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
5United Microelectronics Corp.
1980
Electronics
12,000
Taiwan
4Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
2Huawei Technologies
1988
Telecommunication
44,000
$8.2 billion
China
1GERMAN
YSiemens
1847
Conglomerate
472,000
$75 billion
Germany
252
Robert Bosch GmbH
1886
Automotive
251,000
$55 billion
Germany
178
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
98
In˜neon Technologies
1999
Electronics
36,000
$7 billion
Germany
41
Daimler Chrysler AG
1998
Automotive
383,000
$150 billion
Germany
38
UNITED 
KINGDOM
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
140
International Computers Limited
1968
Computers
United Kingdom
40
British Telecommunnications PLC
1846
Telecommunications
104,400
$37 billion
United Kingdom
38
Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
IT hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
35
Philips Corporation
1891
Electronics
159,226
$36 billion
The Netherlands
32
IRELAND

3Com Corporation
1979
Networks
1,925
$800 million
United States
11
Analog Devices Inc.
1965
IT Hardware 
8,800
$2.4 billion
United States
3Richmount Computers Limited
3Hitachi Ltd.
1920
IT hardware, electronics
323,072
$80.5 billion
Japan
3IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
3ISRAEL

IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
69
Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
58
Motorola Inc.
1928
Electronics
88,000
$37 billion
United States
32
Scitex Corporation (now Scailex 
Corporation)
aIT hardware, now venture capital
$128.2 million
Israel
12
Applied Materials Inc.
1967
Semiconductor
12,576
$7 billion
United States
11
INDIA
IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
17
Texas Instruments
1930
Hardware
30,300
$13 billion
United States
12
Honeywell International Inc.
1886
Aerospace
116,000
$26 billion
United States
3Veritas Operating Corporation (acquired by 
Symantec)
b1989
Software
16,000
$4.1 billion
United States
3Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
Hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
2JAPAN
Hitachi Ltd.
1920
IT hardware, electronics
323,072
$80.5 billion
Japan
1,403
Canon
1937
Imaging
100,000
$35 billion
Japan
1,286
Fujitsu
1935
Hardware
158,000
$40 billion
Japan
1,127
NEC Corporation
1899
Electronics
148,540
$41 billion
Japan
976
Toshiba
1904
Electronics
165,000
$60 billion
Japan
820
SOUTH 
KOREA
Samsung
1938
Electronics
$80 billion
South Korea
460
LG Electronics
c1958
Electronics
66,614
$23.5 billion
South Korea
100
Electronics and Telecommunications 
Research Institute
1976
South Korea
55
Hyundai Electronics (now Hynix 
Semiconductor)
Semiconductors
13,000
$5.6 billion
South Korea
49
Hyundai Motor Company
1967
Automotive
51,000
$57 billion
South Korea
30
continued
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 Name
Year 
Company 

was 

Founded
Industry
Number of 
Employees
Revenue
Home Country
Number 

of Patents
UNITED STATES

IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
4,981
Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
1,648
Microsoft
1975
Software
71,553
$44 billion
United States
1,136
Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
Hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
1,088
Hewlett-Packard Inc.
1939
Hardware
150,000
$89 billion
United States
682
 aData are for Scailex.
 bData are for Symantec.
 cLG Electronics and LG Semicon Co. Ltd. are each part of the LG Group. LG Phillips is a joint venture with the LG Group and Philips. Data missing are 
because data on some subsidiaries of the LG Group are not separately available.

SOURCE: The top ˜ve ˜rms with the largest number of U.S. patents, identi˜ed from our calculations of USPTO data. Company data are from Hoover™s Online, 

company annual reports, company web pages, and Wikipedia. Revenues are in U.S. dollars and for the most current year available. Missing cells represent 

˜rms for which we were unable to recover data.
TABLE 7
 Continued
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 81
Name
Year 
Company 

was 

Founded
Industry
Number of 
Employees
Revenue
Home Country
Number 

of Patents
UNITED STATES

IBM
1888
IT hardware, software, services
330,000
$91 billion
United States
4,981
Intel
1968
Electronics
99,900
$39 billion
United States
1,648
Microsoft
1975
Software
71,553
$44 billion
United States
1,136
Sun Microsystems Inc.
1982
Hardware
31,000
$11 billion
United States
1,088
Hewlett-Packard Inc.
1939
Hardware
150,000
$89 billion
United States
682
 aData are for Scailex.
 bData are for Symantec.
 cLG Electronics and LG Semicon Co. Ltd. are each part of the LG Group. LG Phillips is a joint venture with the LG Group and Philips. Data missing are 
because data on some subsidiaries of the LG Group are not separately available.

SOURCE: The top ˜ve ˜rms with the largest number of U.S. patents, identi˜ed from our calculations of USPTO data. Company data are from Hoover™s Online, 

company annual reports, company web pages, and Wikipedia. Revenues are in U.S. dollars and for the most current year available. Missing cells represent 

˜rms for which we were unable to recover data.
electronicsŠand to a much lesser extent European and Japanese producersŠsuch 
as IBM, Intel, Texas Instruments, and Sun Microsystems. One exception is China, 

where one Taiwanese and one Chinese ˜rm are included among the leading pro
-ducers. However, as noted earlier, the number of U.S. software patents produced 

in China is very small.
U.S. MAR
KET AD
VANTAGES FOR INNO
VATI
VE ACTI
VIT
YThe data in the prior two sections show two very different stories occurring 
in the globalization of software activity. On one hand, as has been well docu
-mented, there has been increasing growth in the production of IT service activity 

outside the United States. This trend has been going on for some time now and 

shows no signs of abating. Second, there is evidence that inventive activity in 

software development (at least as measured by patents) is highly concentrated 

in the United States and heavily controlled by U.S. ˜rms. Though there is some 

evidence that inventive activity is picking up outside the United States, at current 

rates of growth this activity will not catch up with the U.S. software industry any 

time soon. Moreover, though there is some evidence that some inventive activity 

by U.S. ˜rms has shifted abroad, at present the shift is small and this remains a 

small share of U.S. ˜rms™ overall inventive activity.
However, these trend rates of growth can change, so it is useful to examine 
the conditions that are widely thought to be conducive to innovation and inven
-tive activity in new technologies. The literature has long examined some of the 

factors in˚uencing the variance in innovative activities across countries.
23
 These 
include R&D investments and human capital (e.g., Romer, 1990), supportive pub
-lic policies (e.g., Nelson and Rosenberg, 1994; Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998), 

and more localized factors supporting the growth of clusters, including spillovers 

and user-producer interactions (Porter, 1990). In general, the United States has 

advantages over other rich and poor countries in all of these dimensions. We focus 

our attention on one area that we believe has received insuf˜cient attention: the 

importance of geographic proximity to lead user innovation.
A key factor in the development and growth of a local software industry is 
the relationship with users. The transition of new inventions to usable economic 

products is a dif˜cult process. Solving the problems that remain after initial con
-ceptualization requires sustained innovative activity. User innovation and input 

are often an important part of this process (Rosenberg, 1963), and the willingness 

and ability of individuals to acquire and use new products and technologies is 

often as important as the developments of such products and technology them
-selves (Rosenberg, 1983).
Such user activity is particularly important in software. Business software 
in particular is often bundled with a set of business rules and assumptions about 
23
 For a recent overview and review of this literature, see Furman et al. (2002). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
business processes that must be integrated with the existing business organiza
-tion, its activities, and its processes. Recent research indicates that proximity 
between software developers and users is particularly important for this activity 

to occur.
The software industry has a long history of user innovation and interac
-tions with users leading to path-breaking new products. For example, IBM™s 

collaboration with American Airlines on the SABRE airline reservation system 

in the 1950s and 1960s was an important early use of information technology 

in ﬁreal-timeﬂ applications that would later be used in airline reservations, bank 

automation, and retail systems (Campbell-Kelly, 2003; Copeland and McKenney, 

1988). The genesis of this project was a serendipitous event: the chance meet
-ing on a ˚ight of R. Blair Smith of IBM™s Santa Monica sales of˜ce with C. R. 

Smith, the president of American Airlines. The eventual outcome of this project 

was the SABRE system. Both IBM and American Airlines made extensive invest
-ments and contributions to the project: ﬁWe tapped almost all types of sources of 

programming manpower. The control (executive) program was written by IBM 

in accordance with our contract with them. We used some contract programmers 

from service organizations; we used our own experienced data processing people; 

we tested, trained, and developed programmers from within American Airlines, 

and hired experienced programmers on the open market.ﬂ
24
 Similarly, the early 
development of ERP software by SAP occurred through a series of incremental 

improvements during development of real-time software for clients (Campbell-

Kelly, 2003).
One major challenge to offshoring software product development work will 
result from the dif˜culty of coordinating software development activity across a 

globally distributed team. As is well known, partitioning complicated software 

development projects across multiple team members is dif˜cult and often sub
-stantially increases the costs of software development (Brooks, 1995).
These problems may become still greater when management of such projects 
is attempted at a distance. Globally distributed team members do not have access 

to the rich communication channels that co-located developers have. Moreover, 

differences in language and culture may make it much more dif˜cult to establish 

common ground among team members and ensure that miscommunications do 

not occur (Armstrong and Cole, 2002; Olson and Olson, 2000). These projects 

face other challenges, including an inability to engage in informal communication 

as well as the dif˜culty of managing team members who may believe that such 

projects are a prelude to job cuts.
A number of techniques have been proposed for lowering the costs of distrib
-uted software development. Going back as far as March and Simon (1958), one 

common technique in distributed development is to reduce the interdependencies 

among software components. The increasing modularization of software code and 
24
 Parker (1965), as quoted in Campbell-Kelly (2003). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 83
the use of object-oriented software development techniques has likely reduced 
some of the costs of distributed development over time. However, schedules and 
feedback mechanisms are necessary when interdependencies are unavoidable 

(March and Simon, 1958). The recent successes of large-scale open-source proj
-ects such as Linux and Apache have led some to consider whether open-source 

project management methodologies could be utilized in traditional corporate 

software development. Globally distributed teams rely heavily on coordination 

tools such as e-mail, phone, and more recently instant messaging as well as con
-˜guration management tools. However, several authors have shown that initial 

meetings are often necessary both to detail project requirements and for project 

members to become familiar with one another (e.g., Herbsleb et al., 2005). In 

general, the literature has demonstrated that, despite the continued development 

of tools and techniques to manage distributed projects, globally distributed work 

is dif˜cult and can involve signi˜cant coordination costs.
Despite the considerable work that has been done in examining the chal
-lenges of software project management in a distributed environment, there has 

been heretofore relatively little systematic widespread empirical evidence on 

how distance from software suppliers impacts ˜rm decisions to offshore software 

development.
Arora and Forman (2007) attempt to gather such systematic evidence by 
examining which IT services can be effectively performed from a distance or, 

to put it another way, which IT services are tradable. One way of examining the 

tradability of IT services is to examine the extent to which they are clustered near 

local demand. If markets for IT services are local, then we should expect the entry 

decisions of IT services ˜rms to depend in part on the size of the local market. 

If markets are not local, then the composition of local demand should matter 

little; rather, suppliers should locate in low-cost regions. By providing evidence 

of the geographic reach of markets, this analysis also provides evidence on the 

tradability of services: Markets for services that are not tradable will be local, 

whereas those for services that are tradable need not be local.
Arora and Forman examine the clustering of local market supply for two 
types of IT services: 
programming and design
 and 
hosting
. ﬁProgramming and 
designﬂ refers to programming tasks or planning and designing information 

systems that involve the integration of computer hardware, software, and com
-munication technologies. These projects require communication of detailed user 

requirements to the outsourcing ˜rm in order to succeed. Hosting involves man
-agement and operation of computer and data-processing services for the client.
25
 After an initial setup period, the requirements of such hosting services will be 

relatively static and will require relatively little coordination between client and 
25
 While hosting activities do not ˜t most de˜nitions of ﬁinnovationﬂ or ﬁinventionﬂ in software 
per se, they do provide a useful benchmark to compare tradability of services that require complex 
communication and coordination between supplier and customer and those that do not.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 8
 Average Outsourcing by Size of Metropolitan Statistical Area
Programming (%)
Programming 
and Design (%)
Hosting Ex 

Internet (%)
Rural Area 
17.81
24.30
15.91
(0.38)
(0.43)
(0.37)
Small MSA (
 250,000)
17.87
23.85
15.04
(0.54)
(0.60)
(0.50)
Medium MSA (250,000 to 1 million)
18.48
26.30
16.41
(0.35)
(0.40)
(0.34)
Large MSA (
 1 million)
18.54
26.08
15.31
(0.21)
(0.24)
(0.20)
NOTE: Calculations are for 2002; standard errors in parentheses. The difference between rural/small 

and medium/large is signi˜cant at the 5 percent level for all three types. SOURCE: Arora and Forman 

(2007).
service provider. Thus, ex ante we would expect that hosting activities may more 
easily be conducted at a distance than other activities. Using data from U.S. Cen
-sus County Business Patterns, Arora and Forman (2007) ˜nd that the elasticity of 

local supply to local demand characteristics is higher for programming and design 

(0.806) than for hosting (0.1899). That is, a 10 percent increase in local market 

demand will translate into an 8.1 percent increase in the supply of programming 

and design ˜rms but only a 1.9 percent increase in the supply of hosting ˜rms.
Arora and Forman also examine whether ˜rm decisions to outsource pro
-gramming, design, and hosting services depend on local market supply. Table 8 

shows how 2002 outsourcing varied by the size of geographic area in the United 

States. Average outsourcing of programming and design is clearly increasing in 

the size of a location, though the pattern for hosting is less clear. Outsourcing of 

programming and design increases from an average level of 24.2 percent in small 

metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and rural areas to 26.1 percent in medium 

and large MSAs, and these levels are signi˜cantly different from one another at 

the 1 percent level. In contrast, outsourcing of hosting declines slightly from an 

average level of 15.61 percent in rural areas and small MSAs to 15.60 percent 

in medium and large MSAs; these levels are not statistically different from one 

other. Since the supply of outsourcing establishments is increasing in location 

size, these results suggest that the decision to outsource programming and design 

is increasing in the local supply of outsourcing ˜rms. Controlling for industry 

differences, establishment size, and other factors yields the same conclusion.
This evidence, combined with that on the costs of distributed software 
development described earlier, suggests that proximity to users is an important 

determinant of inventive activity in software. The contrast with other products 

and industries in this volume is informative. For other products, such as wireless 

devices or PDAs, lead users have signi˜cant concentration in locations outside 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 85
of the United States such as East Asia. However, the lead users of software are 
predominantly large organizations, and the leading large organizations in use of 
software and IT remain in the United States. This is especially true for the large 

market segment of business applications software, for which software products 

and services are frequently embedded in business process. User requirements in 

this setting often involve the transfer of tacit knowledge, and so proximity to lead 
users is particularly salient. Thus, as long as the United States remains the major 
market for software products, and the locus of the vast majority of lead users, it 

is unlikely to lose its technical leadership.
SOME RECENT TRENDS AND PROJECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
Trends in Computer Science Education
Continued success in any innovative industry like software requires a tal
-ented and highly educated workforce. There is widely reported concern about a 

perceived shortage of domestic-born scientists and engineers in the United States 

(e.g., Ricadela, 2005).
Figure 11 shows data from the National Center for Education Statistics 
(NCES) on the number of undergraduate and master™s degrees in computer sci
-ence earned in the United States over the period 1983-2002.
26
 The numbers of 
both undergraduate and master™s degrees rose sharply from a combined ˜gure of 

35,200 in 1996 to 65,700 in 2002. This increase was in˚uenced by the boom in 

the IT sector in the late 1990s.
More recent indicators of undergraduate- and master™s-level enrollments in 
computer science are currently unavailable using of˜cial U.S. statistics. Figure 12 

presents data from an annual survey of incoming freshmen. Mirroring the NCES 

statistics, these data show intention to major in computer science rising through
-out the late 1990s and remaining high until 2001. However, intentions to major in 

computer science drop sharply thereafter. The Computing Research Association™s 

Taulbee Survey shows similar ˜ndings. These data survey Ph.D.-granting institu
-tions in the United States. Aspray et al. (2006) argue that data from the Taulbee 

Survey closely match trends in the NCES data, and so these data are a good 

leading indicator of the national educational statistics. Figure 13 shows a sharp 

decline in newly declared computer science majors after 2000.
Somewhat more recent of˜cial data are available for doctoral degrees con
-ferred by U.S. universities. Figure 14 shows the number of doctoral degrees 

earned in computer science and mathematics during the period 1983-2003. In 

contrast to bachelor™s or master™s degrees, the number of doctoral degrees granted 

has generally been on the decline in the United States over the past decade. The 
26
 Data from the NCES and other of˜cial government statistics in this subsection are from the 
National Science Foundation publication 
Science and Engineering Indicators
.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
software-11.eps
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
1983
1984
1985
Thousands
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
2000
2001
2002
Bachelor™sMaster™s
FIGURE 11
 Undergraduate and master™s degrees earned in computer science. SOURCES: 
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Post
-secondary Education Data System, Completions Survey; and National Science Foundation, 
Division of Science Resources Statistics, WebCASPAR database, http://webcaspar.nsf.
gov. See appendix Table 2-26 from 
Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6 for further 
details; 1999 data are not available.
˜gure shows that the number of computer science Ph.D.s peaked in 1995 at 
about 1,000 and then has fallen over time. In 2003 the number of such degrees 

advanced slightly, from 810 to 870. However, due to the very long lag between 

entry and graduation in doctoral programs, this increase likely re˚ects enrollment 

decisions in the middle to late 1990s, when demand for computer scientists was 

particularly strong.
While the number of students entering computer science programs appears to 
have fallen recently, there is evidence that such enrollments have been picking up 

in other countries. Figure 14 also shows the number of doctoral degrees granted 

in mathematics and computer science in selected countries other than the United 

States. The number of doctoral degrees in computer science and mathematics has 

recently been increasing in Asian countries such as China, Korea, and Taiwan.
27
Unfortunately, similar statistics are not easily available for the production of 
27
 These statistics, presented in 
Science and Engineering Indicators
 and collected from a variety of 
places, are unfortunately available only with some lag, and may not be strictly comparable. Moreover, 
they do not provide educational statistics on computer science graduates for India.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 87
FIGURE 12
 Freshman intentions to major in computer science. SOURCE: 
Globalization 
and Offshoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force
 (2006), eds. 
Aspray, Mayadas, and Vardi.
FIGURE 13
 Newly declared computer science majors. SOURCE: 
Computing Research 
Association and Globalization and Offshoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job 
Migration Task Force 
(2006), eds. Aspray, Mayadas, and Vardi.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
software-14.eps
0500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1983198519871989199119931995199719992000200120022003
Thousands
US
China
Germany & UK
Korea & Taiwan
FIGURE 14
 Doctoral degrees in mathematics and computer science by region. SOURCES: 
ChinaŠNational Research Center for Science and Technology for Development and Edu
-cational Yearbook, 2002; Division of Higher Education, special tabulations (2005); South 
KoreaŠOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Center for Education 
Research and Innovation, Education database, http://www1.oecd.org/scripts/cde/members/

EDU_UOEAuthenticate.asp; and TaiwanŠMinistry of Education, Educational Statistics 

of the Republic of China (annual series).
bachelor™s and master™s degrees. Geref˜ and Wadhwa (2005) provide evidence on 
the number of bachelor™s and subbaccalaureate engineering, computer science, 

and IT degrees for the United States, India, and China in 2004.
Figure 15 shows that the number of degrees awarded in engineering by India 
and the United States are roughly similar. Although the numbers of engineering 

graduates in China are much larger than that of either the United States or India, 

Geref˜ and Wadhwa (2005) note that educational statistics on engineers from 

China include degrees from 2- or 3-year programs that include students graduat
-ing from technical training programs that may be qualitatively different from 

baccalaureate programs in the United States. When normalized by population, 

the United States continues to lead in the production of bachelor™s degrees in 

engineering, producing 468.3 bachelor™s degrees per million compared to 103.7 

in India and 271.1 in China.
However, recent work by Arora and Bagde (2006) shows that the number 
of engineering baccalaureate degrees awarded in India is growing much faster 

than in the United States. Table 9 shows that, although the number of engineer
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 89
ing baccalaureate degrees awarded in 2003 is roughly the same as that reported 
by Gerri˜ and Wadhwa, this number has grown steeply over time. From about 
42,000 in 1992, the total more than tripled to greater than 128,000 in 2003.
28
 Moreover, since the number of baccalaureates produced re˚ects the capacity 

added with a 4-year lag, it is important to note that sanctioned engineering bac
-calaureate capacity in India now exceeds 440,000, although a substantial portion 

is of dubious quality.
Figure 16 shows that the number of foreign students enrolled in graduate 
computer science programs in the United States declined in 2003 for the ˜rst 

time since 1995, re˚ecting visa restrictions imposed after September 11, 2001, 

the growth in degree-granting programs in other countries, as well as declines 

in the demand for engineers and computer scientists that took place in the early 

years of the most recent decade (NSF, 2006).
Overall, the data show that the United States continues to maintain a lead in 
the production of computer science graduates at all levels. However, recent data 

suggest that enrollments in computer science may be declining in the United 

States and picking up in other nations. As we will show in the next section, how
-ever, these changes in domestic supply are likely not due to long-term declines in 

the demand for computer science graduates within the United States.
28
 These numbers are based on data reported by 14 states, which include all the major states except 
Bihar, and probably represent 80-90 percent of the engineering baccalaureates produced in India.
software-15.eps
137,437
112,000
351,537
84,898
292,569
103,000
0100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
U.S.
India
China
Bachelors Degrees
Subbaccalaureate Degrees
FIGURE 15
 Bachelor™s and subbaccalaureate degrees in engineering, 2004. SOURCE: 
Geref˜ and Wadhwa (2005).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 9
 Output of Engineering Graduates (B.S. and B.E.) in 
India, Various Years
Year
Total Number of Engineering Graduates Produced
199042,022
199144,281
199246,762
199348,281
199452,905
199556,181
199657,193
199761,353
199867,548
199975,030
200079,343
200197,942
2002107,720
2003128,432
NOTES: These data are based on the ˜gures for the 14 major states (except the 
State of Bihar) in India, which account for 80% of the gross domestic product 

and likely more than that number of the total production of engineering gradu
-ates. These data are based on ﬁAnnual Technical Manpower Reviewﬂ (ATMR) re
-ports published by National Technical Manpower Information System (NTMIS), 

India. These reports are prepared by a state-level nodal center of NTMIS and give 

details of sanctioned engineering college capacity and outturn for all undergradu
-ate technical institutions in the state. See cited source for more details.

SOURCE: Arora and Bagde (2006).
Labor Market Trends
There is some evidence that growth in the number of computer science de
-grees awarded over the past 25 years has not been fast enough to keep pace with 
demand for workers with computer science training. Figure 17 shows that the 

annual growth rate in the production of all mathematics and computer science 

degrees averaged 4.2 percent during the period 1980-2000, signi˜cantly less than 

the average annual growth of 9.3 percent in occupations directly associated with 

these ˜elds.
29
 In comparison, over the same period, growth of all science and en
-gineering graduates (including math and computer science) averaged 1.5 percent 

while growth in all science and engineering occupations averaged 4.2 percent 

(Table 10). Thus, the difference between degree growth and employment growth 

is larger in mathematics and computer science than it is for science and engineer
-29
 Occupational data from these ˜gures were compiled by the National Science Foundation, Division 
of Science Resources Statistics, from U.S. Census data.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 91
software-16.eps
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

2003
Thousands
ForeignCitizens
FIGURE 16
 U.S. graduate enrollment in computer science by citizenship. SOURCE: 
Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6.software-17.eps
012345678910
All
Bachelor™s
Master™s
Doctoral
Employment
FIGURE 17
 Average annual growth of degree production and occupational employment 
in mathematics and computer science, 1980-2000. SOURCE: 
Science and Engineering 
Indicators 200
6.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
ing overall. These data are now several years old and do not account for students 
receiving degrees from outside of computer science but moving into computer 
science professions. However, despite these quali˜cations, they do suggest that 

the United States may have relied in part on workers from abroad to make up for 

the shortfall of native workers with computer and math skills.
Recent data suggest that the in˚ation-adjusted median salaries for master™s 
graduates in mathematics and computer science rose 54.8 percent between 1993 
and 2003, higher than any other broad class of science and engineering graduates 
and higher than the average across all non-science and engineering graduates.
30
 Growth in salaries was similarly competitive for graduates with bachelor™s de
-grees (28.0 percent AAGR, second only to engineering graduates among science 

and engineering graduates) and those with doctoral degrees (18.6 percent AAGR, 

second only to graduates in engineering and physical sciences among science 

and engineering graduates). Furthermore, 2003 median salaries for computer 

science master™s graduates are higher than any other broad category of science 

and engineering graduates ($80,000), whereas levels for bachelor™s ($50,000) 

and doctoral ($67,000) degree graduates remain similarly competitive. Thus, 

even when one uses data that include the recent technology downturn, salaries of 

occupations requiring skills in mathematics and computer science have remained 

quite competitive when compared to other occupations in science and engineering 

and compared to the national average.
As noted earlier, there has been a signi˜cant shortfall in the rate of com
-puter science degrees conferred relative to the rate of employment growth, and 

this excess demand for workers with computer science and engineering skills 

has been partially offset by the immigration of skilled workers from abroad. In 

˜scal year 2001 there were 191,397 H-1B visa admissions to the United States 

from computer-related occupations, 57.8 percent of total such admissions and 
30
 The source for these data is the National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resource 
Statistics, National Survey of College Graduates.
TABLE 10
 Output of Engineering Graduates (B.S. and B.E.) in India, Various 
Years
Degree Growth
Employment in Occupation
All science and engineering
1.5
4.2
Mathematics/computer science
4.2
9.3
NOTES: Degree growth includes undergraduate, master™s, and doctoral degrees.
SOURCE: 
Science and Engineering Indicators
 200
6.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 93
the largest of any such category.
31
 Kapur and McHale (2005a) list the top com
-panies that petitioned for H-1B visas in October 1999 through February 2000, a 
list that includes some of the leading IT hardware and software ˜rms: Motorola 

(618 petitions), Oracle (455 petitions), Cisco (398 petitions), Mastech (398), 

Intel (367), Microsoft (362), Rapidigm (357), Syntel (337), Wipro (327), and 

Tata Consulting (320).
Changes in immigration represent one mechanism that has the potential to 
affect the U.S. software industry in the relatively short term, and recent changes 

in the environment outside the United States can potentially affect immigra
-tion ˚ows. The rapid growth in the software industries of countries like India 

and Ireland has increased the attractiveness of those countries to highly skilled 

indigenous workers. This has been particularly evident in Ireland, where rapid 

growth has encouraged an increasing number of highly skilled workers to remain 

in Ireland or return to Ireland from the United States. Kapur and McHale (2005a) 

report that emigration of male Irish graduates fell from about 25 percent in 1987 

to under 15 percent in 1997, with similar trends for female graduates. Of the 

644,444 Irish who had spent one year outside of Ireland in a 2002 census, 42 per
-cent reported taking up residence in Ireland between 1996 and 2002, suggesting 

that a large fraction are recently returning Irish (Kapur and McHale, 2005a).
32
With the continuing growth of the software industries in India and Ireland, 
it is likely that these historically important sources of highly skilled software 

professionals will retain a growing fraction of their indigenous software workers. 

Moreover, as noted by Kapur and McHale (2005b), the international market for 

software professionals is increasingly competitive. Richer countries such as the 

United States, Canada, Australia, Germany, and the United Kingdom increasingly 

compete for talent from other countries. In many cases, this competition has 

manifested itself as a decline in the traditional barriers to short- and long-term 
migration (Kapur and McHale, 2005b). This competition is likely only to increase 
with the aging demographics of these countries as well as the increasing require
-ments for a skilled workforce in software and in other industries.
Federal Government Spending on Software R&D
U.S. federal government investment in computer hardware and software 
R&D is thought to be one of the contributing success factors to both industries 

(Flamm, 1988; Langlois and Mowery, 1996). Early government R&D investment 

in software provided the computer facilities for universities to conduct early 

software research (Langlois and Mowery, 1996) and federal agencies such as 
31
 Administrative data from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Bureau of Citizenship and 
Immigration Services.
32
 These data include migration of Irish citizens that have returned after studying in U.S. universi
-ties, including those studying for computer science degrees.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) have been long-standing supporters of com
-puter-related research. Federal grants remain a major source of funding for doc
-toral students in computer science: in 2003, 17.4 percent of full-time computer 
science graduate students reported that their primary source of funding was from 

the federal government.
33
In the 1990s, though funding from the Department of Defense had largely 
˚attened out, R&D spending grew rapidly throughout the decade through ex
-panded funding from agencies such as the Department of Energy and NSF. 

However, over the period 2001-2003 (the most recent data available), government 

R&D spending in computer science remained largely ˚at. Moreover, the percent 

of total R&D spending on computer science (relative to other ˜elds) declined over 

the period 2001-2003, from 4.5 to 4.0 percent.
34
 We discuss the implications of 
these spending patterns in the next section.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
Public Policy Implications
The trends that we have described in this paper have several public policy 
implications. First, our results have provided evidence of a sizable export-driven 

software services sector in countries like India and Ireland, though there is less 

evidence of substantial inventive activity in software going on outside of the 

United States. These results suggest that entry- and mid-level programming jobs 

can be performed away from the point of ˜nal demand, though inventive activ
-ity that requires proximity with lead users is most effectively done in the United 

States. However, these entry- and mid-level programming jobs have traditionally 

provided U.S. IT workers with the skills needed to perform more complicated 

development activities such as creation of new software programs (Levy and 

Murname, 2004). In other words, training by U.S. ˜rms has traditionally be
-stowed a bene˜cial externality upon entry-level workers by providing them with 

general human capital that workers appropriate later in their careers. This human 

capital is not easily provided by traditional publicly funded primary or secondary 

school education programs (Levy and Murname, 2004). As a result, a declining 

demand for entry-level programming jobs could hurt U.S. workers™ future abil
-ity to perform more complex software development activity (e.g., new packaged 

software development). If this is true, then there are two ways that U.S. workers 

could obtain the general human capital needed. One would be for U.S. workers 
33
 National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resource Statistics, Survey of Graduate Stu
-dents and Postdoctorates in Science and Engineering, WebCASPAR database (
Science and Engineer
-ing Indicators
, 2006). 
34
 Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 95
to internalize the externality by accepting jobs for lower salaries. Of course, 
in the short run, workers may prefer instead to accept jobs in other (relatively 
higher-paying) ˜elds. Alternatively, the government could attempt to subsidize 

entry-level employment, for example, by raising the costs of H-1B visas or by 

direct labor market subsidies. However, if the cost of remote software develop
-ment remains lower than that in the United States, then clearly implementation 

of this policy may be problematic.
We have provided evidence of recent declines in computer science enroll
-ments at the graduate and undergraduate levels. In our view, it is too soon to 

speculate whether these changes are evidence of a new trend or instead re˚ect 

temporary student reactions to business cycle ˚uctuations, particularly the IT 

downturn that began in the early part of this decade. Still, there is evidence that 

for some time, U.S. software developers have been using skilled labor from 

abroad as inputs into their innovation production function, presumably in part 

to supplement the pool of skilled labor available locally. As noted earlier, there 

is increasing competition from other industrialized countries for these skilled 

workers, and there is no sign that this competition will abate in the near future. 

Decreasing the costs of H-1B visas or lowering the costs of permanent migration 

is unlikely to be feasible in the short run because of the aforementioned concerns 

of labor substitution between foreign and indigenous workers. As a result, ensur
-ing an adequate supply of local workers with suf˜cient basic or enabling skills 

(Levy and Murname, 2004) in mathematics, computer science, and related ˜elds 

taught in the nation™s school and university system will be important to the long-

term success of software producers in the United States.
Another area of public policy concern is in government funding of computer 
science research. As noted earlier, federal funding of computer science has ˚at
-tened out in recent years. A continuation of this trend could negatively impact 

innovative activity in software in the United States in two ways: by decreasing 

an important source of ˜nancial capital for basic research as well as potentially 

accentuating the negative downturn in enrollments in computer science graduate 

programs in the United States through a decline in graduate student funding.
Summary and Conclusions
There are currently two very different stories in the globalization of soft
-ware development. On the one hand, the IT services industries in countries such 

as India, Ireland, and other countries continue to grow rapidly. The production 

of IT services is quite dispersed globally, and this dispersion will only increase 

over time. In contrast, both sales and inventive activity in packaged software are 

localized in the United States and undertaken primarily by U.S. ˜rms. While 

differences in the levels of patent activity across countries should be interpreted 

with some caution because of divergence between the rate of patenting and inven
-tive activity, examination of patent growth rates is less subject to these concerns 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
and they show there is no sign of these trends reversing in the short to medium 
term.
Recent trends in computer science enrollments have attracted considerable 
attention in the popular press. We do ˜nd evidence of some declines in enroll
-ments in U.S. computer science in recent years.
35
 However, of likely equal or 
greater importance in the short run may be the increasing incentives for skilled 
foreign workers to remain in their home countries or to depart from the United 

States immediately or some years after degree conferral. There is already some 

evidence that improving educational systems and employment opportunities in 

the underdog countries is causing some skilled software professionals to remain 

at home or to return.
Nonetheless, there are powerful forces at work that are likely to keep the 
development of new software products and software innovation concentrated in 

the United States for some time to come. Despite recent trends, the United States 

continues to have the best postsecondary educational systems in the world for 

training computer scientists, and it continues to enjoy substantial albeit declin
-ing inward migration that bene˜ts the software (and other) industries. Beyond 

the education and human capital issues, U.S. software innovators continue to 

enjoy substantial advantages due to agglomeration economies arising from the 

preexisting concentration of the industry, as well as a generally favorable business 

environment. Perhaps the most signi˜cant advantage that U.S. software product 

innovators enjoy is proximity to lead users. U.S. ˜rms have been among the most 

innovative users of IT in the world, and these users have bene˜ted U.S. software 

producers in the past and will continue to do so for some time to come.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jeffrey Macher and David Mowery for their comments and sug
-gestions, and Nicholas Yoder and Kristina Steffenson McElheran for outstanding 

research assistance.
REFERENCES
Allison, J., and E. Tiller. (2003). Internet business method patents. Pp. 259-257 in 
Patents in the 
Knowledge-Based Economy
, W. M. Cohen and S. A. Merrill, eds. Washington, D.C.: The 
National Academies Press.
Allison, J., A. Rai, and B. N. Sampat. (2005). University Software Ownership: Trends, Determinants, 
Issues. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Anchordoguy, M. (2000). Japan™s software industry: A failure of institutions? 
Research Policy 
29:391-408.
35
 In graduate programs these declines appear to be concentrated primarily among immigrants. 
Among undergraduate degree programs current data are not available to indicate whether these de
-clines are from U.S. nationals or immigrants. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 97
Armstrong, D.J., and P. Cole. (2002). Managing distances and differences in geographically distrib
-uted work groups. Pp. 167-186 in 
Distributed Work
, P. J. Hinds and S. Kiesler, eds. Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Arora, A. (2006). The Indian Software Industry and its Prospects. Working Paper, Heinz School of 
Public Policy & Management, Carnegie Mellon University.
Arora, A., and S. Bagde. (2006). The Indian Software Industry: The Human Capital Story. Working 
Paper, Heinz School of Public Policy & Management, Carnegie Mellon University.
Arora, A., and C. Forman. (2007). Proximity and Software Programming: IT Outsourcing and the 
Local Market. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference in System Sci
-ences, Waikoloa, Hawaii. Available at 
http://www.hicss.hawaii.edu/diglib.ht
m.Arora, A., V.S. Arunachalam, V.S. Asundi, and R. Fernandes. (2001). The Indian software services 
industry. 
Research Policy 
30(8):1267-1287.
Arora, A., A. Gambardella, and S. Torrisi. (2004). In the footsteps of Silicon Valley? Indian and 
Irish software in the international division of labor. Pp. 78-120 in 
Building High-Tech Clusters: 
Silicon Valley and Beyond
, T. Bresnahan and A. Gambardella, eds. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Aspray, W., F. Mayadas, and M. Y. Vardi. (2006). Globalization and Offshoring of Software: A Report 
of the ACM Job Migration Task Force. Available at http://www.acm.org/globalizationreport/
pdf/full˜nal.pdf.
Athreye, S. (2005a). The Indian software industry. Pp. 7-40 in 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise 
and Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel
, A. Arora and 
A. Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Athreye, S. (2005b). The Indian Software industry and its evolving service capability. 
Industrial and 
Corporate Change 
14(3):393-418.
Baba, Y., S. Takai, and Y. Mizuta. (1996). The user-driven evolution of the Japanese software industry: 
The case of customized software for mainframes. Pp. 104-130 in 
The International Computer 
Software Industry
, D. C. Mowery, ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Bessen, J., and R. M. Hunt. (2004). An Empirical Look at Software Patents. Working Paper 03-17/R, 
Research on Innovation.
Botelho, A. J. J., G. Stefanuto, and F. Veloso. (2005). The Brazilian software industry. Pp. 99-130 
in 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, 
India, Ireland, and Israel
, A. Arora and A. Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Bresnahan, T., and S. Greenstein. (1996). Technical progress in computing and in the uses of comput
-ers. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics
 1-78.
Breznitz, D. (2005). The Israeli software industry. Pp. 72-99 in 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise 
and Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel
, A. Arora and 
A. Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Brooks, F. (1995). 
The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering, 20th Anniversary 
Edition
. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Campbell-Kelly, M. (2003). 
From Airline Reservations to Sonic the Hedgehog: A History of the 
Software Industry. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Copeland, D. G., and J. L. McKenney. (1988). Airline reservations systems: Lessons from history. 
MIS Quarterly 
12(3):353-370.
Cottrell, T. (1996). Standards and the arrested development of Japan™s microcomputer software indus
-try. Pp. 131-164 in 
The International Computer Software Industry
, D. C. Mowery, ed. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.
European Information Technology Observatory. (2006). 
European Information Technology Observa
-tory 200
6. Berlin, Germany: European Information Technology Observatory (EITO)ŠEuropean 
Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
European Patent Of˜ce (EPO). (2005). Computer-Implemented Inventions and Patents. Law and 
Practice at the European Patent Of˜ce.
Flamm, K. (1988). 
Creating the Computer: Government, Industry, and High Technology. 
Washington, 
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Fransman, M. (1995). 
Japan™s Computer and Communications Industry: The Evolution of Industrial 
Giants and Global Competitiveness. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Furman, J. L., M. E. Porter, and S. Stern. (2002). The determinants of national innovative capacity. 
Research Policy 
31(6):899-933.
GAO (General Accounting Of˜ce). (2005). U.S. and India Data on Offshoring Show Signi˜cant Dif
-ferences. GAO Report GAO-06-116.
Geref˜, G., and V. Wadhwa. (2005). Framing the Engineering Outsourcing Debate: Placing the United 
States on a Level Playing Field with China and India. Report, Master of Engineering Program, 
Duke University.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner. (2006). 
The Venture Capital Cycle: Second Edition.
 Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Gormely, J., W. Blustein, J. Gatloff, and H. Chun. (1998). The runaway costs of packaged applica
-tions. 
The Forrester Report 
3(5).
Graham, S. J. H., and D. C. Mowery. (2003). Intellectual property protection in the U.S. software 
industry. Pp. 219-258 in 
Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy
, W. M. Cohen and S. A. 
Merrill, eds. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Graham, S. J. H., and D. C. Mowery. (2005). Software patents: Good news or bad news. Pp. 45-80 in 
Intellectual Property Rights in Frontier Industries: Software and Biotechnology
, R. W. Hahn, 
ed. Washington, D.C.: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators. 
Journal of Economic Literature 
28(4):
 1661-1707.
Hall, B. H., and M. MacGarvie. (2006). The Private Value of Software Patents. NBER Working 
Paper 12195.
Hall, B. H. and R. H. Ziedonis. (2001). The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting 
in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. 
RAND Journal of Economics 
32(1): 101-128.
Herbsleb, J. D., D. J. Paulish, and M. Bass. (2005). Global software development at Siemens: Expe
-rience from nine projects. Pp. 524-533 in 
International Conference on Software Engineering
. St. Louis, Mo.
Ilavarasan, P. V. (2006). R&D in Indian software industry. Pp. 134-143 in 
Managing Industrial 
Research Effectively
, R. Varma, ed. ICFAI University Press.
Jaffe, A., and M. Trajtenberg. (2002). 
Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowl
-edge Economy. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kapur, D., and J. McHale. (2005a). Sojourns and software: Internationally mobile human capital and 
high-tech industry development in India, Ireland, and Israel. Pp. 236-274 in 
From Underdogs 
to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and 

Israel
, A. Arora and A. Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Kapur, D., and J. McHale. (2005b). 
Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global Hunt for Talent and 
Its Impact on the Developing World. 
Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development.
Langlois, R. N., and D. C. Mowery. (1996). The federal government role in the development of the 
U.S. software industry. Pp. 53-85 in 
The International Computer Software Industry
, D. C. 
Mowery, ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Layne-Farrar, A. (2005). De˜ning Software Patents: A Research Field Guide. Working Paper 05-14, 
AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.
Levy, F., and R. J. Murname. 2004. 
The New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating the 
Next Job Market. 
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOFTWARE
 99
Malerba, F., and S. Torrisi. (1996). The dynamics of market structure and innovation in the Western 
European software industry. Pp. 165-196 in 
The International Computer Software Industry
, D. C. Mowery, ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
March, J. G., and H. A. Simon. (1958). 
Organizations. 
New York: Wiley.
Merges, R. P. (2006). Patents, Entry, and Growth in the Software Industry. Working Paper, University 
of California, Berkeley.
Messerschmitt, D. G., and C. Szyperski. (2002). 
Software Ecosystem: Understanding an Indispensible 
Technology and Industry. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Mokyr, J. (2002). 
The Lever of Riches. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Mowery, D. C., and N. Rosenberg. (1998). 
Paths of Innovation. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni
-versity Press.
Nelson, R., and R. Rosenberg. (1994). American universities and technical advance in industry. 
Re
-search Policy 
23(3):323-348.
NSF (National Science Foundation). (2006). 
Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6. 
Washington, 
D.C.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2002). 
OECD Information 
Technology Outlook.
 Paris: OECD.
OECD. (2004). 
OECD Information Technology Outlook.
 Paris: OECD.
OECD. (2006). 
OECD Information Technology Outlook.
 Paris: OECD.
Olson, G. M., and J. S. Olson. (2000). Distance matters. 
Human-Computer Interaction
 15(2-3):
 139-178.
O™Riain, S. (1999). Remaking the Developmental State: The Irish Software Industry in the Global 
Economy. Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Sociology, University of California, Berkeley.
Parker, R. W. (1965). The SABRE System. 
Datamation 
(September):49-52.
Parthasarathy, B., and Y. Aoyama. (2006). From software services to R&D services: Local en
-trepreneurship in the software industry in Bangalore, India. 
Environment and Planning A
 38(7):1269-1285.
Porter, M. E. (1990). 
The Competitive Advantage of Nations. 
New York: Free Press.
Ricadela, A. (2005). Q&A: Bill Gates on supercomputing, software in science, and more. 
Information 
Week. 
November 18.
Romer, P. (1990). Endogenous technological change. 
Journal of Political Economy 
98:S71-S102.
Rosenberg, N. (1963). Technological change in the machine tool industry, 1840-1910. 
Journal of 
Economic History 
23:414-443.
Rosenberg, N. (1983). 
Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sands, A. (2005). The Irish software industry. Pp. 41-71 in 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and 
Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel
, A. Arora and A. 
Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Scaf˜di, C., M. Shaw, and B. Myers. (2005). Estimating the numbers of end users and end user pro
-grammers. Pp. 207-214 in 
Proceedings of the 200
5 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and 
Human-Centric Computing
. Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Computer Society.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934). 
The Theory of Capitalist Development. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer
-sity Press.
Steinmueller, E. (2004). The European software sectoral system of innovation. Pp. 193-242 in 
Sec
-toral Systems of Innovation: Concepts, Issues, and Analyses of Six Major Sectors in Europe
, F. 
Malerba, ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Thoma, G., and S. Torrisi. (2006). The Evolution of the Software Industry in Europe. Working Paper, 
CESPRI, Bocconi University.
Tschang, T., and L. Xue. (2005). The Chinese software industry. Pp. 171-206 in 
From Underdogs 
to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and 
Israel
, A. Arora and A. Gambardella, eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101 3  Semiconductors
JEFFREY
 T. M
ACHER
Georgetown University
DAVID
 C. M
OWERY
University of California, Berkeley
ALBERTO
 D
I M
ININ
Scuola Superiore Sant™Anna, Pisa, Italy
INTRODUCTION
The determinants, patterns, and consequences of globalization of the innova
-tive activities of U.S. high-technology ˜rms are the subject of a large empirical 
literature. Among the central questions addressed within this research is the ex
-tent to which international ˚ows of research and development (R&D) investment 

and the offshore movement of other forms of innovative activity are linked with 

U.S. ˜rms™ foreign investments in manufacturing and related activities. A sec
-ond important issue concerns measurement of the internationalization of ˜rms™ 

innovative activitiesŠ˜rm-level R&D investment data often do not capture 

developments within individual technological or industrial ˜elds, and R&D data 

may provide little information on important aspects of the internationalization of 

˜rms™ innovation-related activities. Partly because of the imperfections of these 

data, analyses of the globalization of innovative activity rarely consider develop
-ments within individual industries.
This chapter addresses these challenges in an examination of trends in the 
globalization of innovation-related activities in a single industryŠsemiconduc
-tors. We consider several measures of innovative activity within this industry, 

including R&D investment, technology-development alliances, and patenting. 

As is often the case in empirical work, the insights from this approach are ob
-tained at some cost, con˜ning our analysis to a relatively short time period and 

limiting our discussion of trends in the globalization of non-U.S. semiconductor 

˜rms™ innovation-related activities. In addition, the data themselves represent 

imperfect proxies for the actual phenomena that we wish to examine. The dif
-ferent innovation-related indicators also do not aggregate in a straightforward 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
way, which complicates efforts to develop strong conclusions concerning the 
consequences of these trends. Remarkably, after more than 30 years of intensive 
study of the internationalization of R&D and other innovation-related activi
-ties in the semiconductor industry, the data on these trends remain fragmented 

and limited in their coverage. Nevertheless, the results of our analysis highlight 

several distinctive trends in the globalization of innovation-related activities in 
this industry:
1.
 The share of industry-funded R&D investment devoted to offshore R&D 
by U.S. ˜rms in ﬁelectronics componentsﬂ manufacturing (an industry category 
that includes semiconductors, along with several other electronics product seg
-ments) grew only modestly during 1985-2001.
2.
 The number of technology-development alliances in the global semi
-conductor industry declined during the 1990s, although alliances among foreign 

˜rms appear to have grown more substantially than alliances among U.S. semi
-conductor ˜rms during this period.
3.
 Process-technology R&D remains ﬁhomeboundﬂ in the home countries 
of U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, based on trends in the siting of ﬁde
-velopmentﬂ fabrication facilities (ﬁfabsﬂ).
4.
 The patenting activity of large U.S. integrated semiconductor ˜rms 
(those that both design and manufacture their products) remains predominantly 

ﬁhomebound,ﬂ with little increase in offshore inventive activity in their patents 

during the period 1991-2003.
5.
 Patenting by European, Japanese, and Taiwanese semiconductor ˜rms is 
similarly dominated by domestic inventive activity and this dominance by ﬁhome 

countryﬂ inventive activity appears to have increased slightly during the period 

1996-2003.
6.
 The patenting activity of U.S. ﬁfablessﬂ semiconductor ˜rms, which de
-sign and market but do not manufacture their products, indicates modest growth 

in offshore inventive activity during the period 1991-2003.
7.
 Although the vast majority of inventive activity undertaken by non-U.S. 
˜rms remains homebound, the United States is the predominant location for off
-shore inventive activity of all but Canadian semiconductor ˜rms.
8.
 There is little evidence that the changing international structure of U.S. 
semiconductor ˜rms™ innovation-related activities has had negative consequences 

for engineering employment in the U.S. semiconductor industry, re˚ecting the 

limited offshore movement of innovation-related activities documented by these 

indicators.
Taken as a whole, our ˜ndings underscore the importance of a broad view of 
the array of activities that contribute to innovation in the semiconductor industry. 

These results also highlight the in˚uence of growing vertical specialization on the 

globalization of innovation in this industry. Interestingly, the expanded offshore 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 103investment by U.S. semiconductor ˜rms in production capacity does not appear to 
have in˚uenced movement of their R&D activities to non-U.S. locations. Instead, 
the most important in˚uence on the expanded offshore inventive activities of a 

subset of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms (the fabless ˜rms) may be the emergence of 

new segments of market demand that are concentrated in Southeast Asia. But 

even within the fabless segment of the U.S. semiconductor industry, the contribu
-tions of ﬁoffshoreﬂ innovation-related activities are modest thus far.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN THE GLOBAL 
SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTR
YThe global semiconductor industry experienced signi˜cant structural change 
during the 1990s. The market for semiconductor components shifted from one 

dominated by personal computers (PCs) to a more diverse array of heterogeneous 

niches associated with the Internet and wireless communications applications. 

The integrated device manufacturers (IDMs) that both design and manufacture 

semiconductor components no longer dominate industry production and innova
-tion; instead, a vertically integrated industry segment coexists with a vertically 

specialized segment. IDMs compete and often collaborate with ˜rms that special
-ize in either design and marketing (fabless ˜rms) or manufacturing (foundries). 

As is the case in other high-technology industries, semiconductor-related market 

demand and technical expertise are growing in geographic regions that formerly 

accounted for smaller shares of global demand for semiconductor components 

(e.g., Malaysia, Taiwan, Singapore, China).
The Decline of the PC and Emergence of New Component Markets
The market for end-use semiconductor components during the late 1990s and 
early 2000s experienced a gradual shift away from one dominated by computer 

applications (especially PCs) to a more fragmented market in which wireless 

communications and other non-PC consumer products are more signi˜cant (Lin
-den et al., 2004). Figure 1 depicts the shares of chip consumption accounted for 

by different end-use markets during the period 1994-2004. Computer applications 

still represent the predominant end-use market for semiconductor components, 

but most industry observers agree that non-computer (i.e., communications and 

consumer product) markets for semiconductor components will grow more rap
-idly during the next decade.
Differences between PC and non-PC markets for semiconductor components 
mean that this shift in consumption patterns has important implications for the 

organization of innovative activities in the semiconductor industry. The PC mar
-ket is characterized by an entrenched architectural standard (the so-called Wintel 

standard), with well-de˜ned and stable interfaces among semiconductor compo
-nents and PC components. This stable architectural standard contrasts with the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
semiconductors-1.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Year
Percentage
Military
Automotive
Industrial
Communications
Consumer
Computer
FIGURE 1
 Semiconductor end-use markets by application, 1994-2004. SOURCE: Inte
-grated Circuit Engineering (ICE) and IC Insights.
situation in many non-PC markets, where new products require more extensive 
ﬁdesign-inﬂ efforts on the part of component suppliers, and the interfaces govern
-ing the design and compatibility of components for these products can change 

signi˜cantly through successive product generations. No single product dominates 

semiconductor end-use demand in these applicationsŠanother contrast with PC 

component markets. As a result, production runs of new component designs are 

likely to be smaller and the cost savings through production-based learning will 

decline in signi˜cance. Smaller production runs also mean that new semiconduc
-tor production capacity, the costs of which continue to rise, must become more 

˚exible and capable of producing a wider variety of component designs.
The relative decline of the PC market for semiconductors has important im
-plications for the geographic location of demand for semiconductor components. 

The PC market has been dominated by designs developed in the United States and 

by an architecture that was largely under the control of U.S. ˜rms. But designers 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 105semiconductors-2.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Year
Percentage
North America
Japan
Europe
Asia-Pacific
FIGURE 2
 Semiconductor end-use markets by geographic region, 1994-2004. SOURCE: 
Integrated Circuit Engineering (ICE) and IC Insights.
and producers of the systems for which markets are growing more rapidly (e.g., 
wireless communications and consumer products) are more heavily concentrated 

in Southeast Asia, especially in Taiwan, Japan, and Singapore. Figure 2 illustrates 

the shifting geographic structure of demand during the period 1994-2004, high
-lighting declines in the share of global chip consumption accounted for by Japan 

and the United States and a corresponding rise in Southeast Asia™s share.
Producers of these electronics systems often require that functionality be 
based on features in the semiconductor components incorporated in the prod
-uctsŠso-called system-on-chip designs that are more complex and require more 

intensive interaction between system and chip designers (Ernst, 2005). Moreover, 

the number of new applications that use semiconductors has increased dramati
-cally. The needs of an increasing variety of system providers mean that a one-

size-˜ts-all model for semiconductor components is appropriate in only a limited 

number of cases. As a result, close interaction between designers of components 

and designers (as well as producers) of these more heterogeneous electronics sys
-tems is essential to product development. Proximity to system customers, more 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
and more of whom are located in Southeast Asia, therefore is likely to grow in 
importance for developers of state-of-the-art semiconductor devices.
GROWTH OF 
VERTICAL SPECIALIZATION IN 
THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTR
YFor the ˜rst two decades of the computer and semiconductor industries, 
large integrated producers such as AT&T and IBM designed their own solid-
state components, manufactured the majority of the capital equipment used in the 

production of these components, and utilized internally produced components in 

the manufacture of electronic computer systems that were leased or sold to their 

customers (Braun and MacDonald, 1978). During the late 1950s, ﬁmerchantﬂ 

manufacturers entered the U.S. semiconductor industry and gained market share 

at the expense of ˜rms that produced both electronic systems and semiconductor 

components. Specialized producers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment 

began to appear by the early 1960s.
Since 1980, the interdependence between product design and process devel
-opment has weakened in many semiconductor product segments (Macher et al., 

1998). This shift has been associated with the entry of new types of ˜rms that 

specialize in semiconductor component design or production. Hundreds of so-

called fabless semiconductor ˜rms that design and market semiconductor com
-ponents have entered the global semiconductor industry since 1980. These ˜rms 

rely on contract manufacturers (so-called foundries) for the production of their 

designs. Contract manufacturers include ﬁpure-play foundriesﬂ that specialize in 

semiconductor manufacturing, as well as the foundry subsidiaries of established 

integrated device manufacturers (IDMs) seeking to fully utilize excess fabrication 

capacity. Fabless semiconductor ˜rms serve a variety of fast-growing industries, 

especially computers and communications, by offering more innovative designs 

and shorter delivery times than integrated semiconductor ˜rms. Fabless-˜rm 

revenues increased from slightly less than 4 percent of global industry revenues 

in 1994 to more than 15 percent by 2004 (Figure 3). The increasing demand for 

and variety of communications and consumer products (e.g., GPS systems, game 

controllers, appliances, automatic lighting) suggests that the demand for special-

purpose functionality has also increased. The so-called embedded systems and 

software market represents a growing and increasingly important segment of 

the semiconductor industry, with its own vertically specialized market structure. 

Measuring the growth of this market segment, however, is hampered by a lack 

of data.
The growth of vertical specialization in the semiconductor industry re˚ects 
the in˚uence of developments in markets and technology (Macher and Mowery, 

2004). The expansion of markets for semiconductor devices enables vertically 

specialized semiconductor design and production ˜rms to exploit economies 

of scale and specialization. Scale economies lower production costs, expanding 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 107semiconductors-3.eps
050
100
150
200
250
19941995199619971998199920002001200220032004
Year
Revenue ($ Billion)
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
Share (%)
Fabless
Industry
Fabless % of Industry
FIGURE 3
 Fabless and overall industry revenues, 1994-2004. SOURCE; Fabless Semi
-conductor Assocation (FSA) and Integrated Circuit Engineering (ICE). 
the range of potential end-user applications for semiconductors and creating ad
-ditional opportunities for entry by vertically specialized ˜rms. The increasing 
capital requirements of semiconductor manufacturing provide another impetus 

to vertical specialization, since these higher ˜xed costs make it necessary to pro
-duce large volumes of semiconductor components in order to achieve lower unit 

costs. The design cycle for new semiconductor products also has become shorter 

and product life cycles more uncertain. As a result, it is more dif˜cult to predict 

whether demand for a single product will fully utilize the capacity of a fabrication 

facility that is devoted exclusively to a particular product, increasing the risks of 

investing in such ﬁdedicatedﬂ capacity. Since foundries tend to produce a wider 

product mix, they are less exposed to these risks.
At the same time, however, a number of large semiconductor ˜rms (IDMs) 
still combine semiconductor device design and manufacture. The advantages of 

integrated management of design and manufacture are greatest in product lines 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
at the leading edge of semiconductor technology, especially in DRAMs (Macher, 
2006). The relationship between the specialized foundry producers and the IDMs 
combines elements of cooperation and competition. For example, U.S. IDMs 

negotiated license agreements for the supply of product and process technolo
-gies to less-advanced semiconductor ˜rms operating in Japan and South Korea 

during the 1970s, and U.S., Japanese, and European IDMs also supplied product 

and process technologies to Taiwanese and Singaporean foundry ˜rms during the 

1980s and 1990s. Many of these IDMs provided advanced process technologies 

to foundries in exchange for a guaranteed supply of semiconductor components. 

The development of a semiconductor intellectual property market also spurred 

growth in the number and importance of specialized product design ˜rms (Linden 

and Somaya, 2003). Product and process licensing in the semiconductor industry 

has facilitated entry by both vertically specialized and integrated ˜rms.
Increased vertical specialization in the semiconductor industry has been 
associated with the entry of new ˜rms and geographic redistribution in produc
-tion capacity. Figure 4 shows the regional distribution of fabrication capacity 

(measured in terms of wafer starts per month
1) during the period 1995-2003. 
The North American and Japanese shares of global semiconductor production 

capacity fell signi˜cantly during the period, and the shares attributable to ﬁAsia/

Paci˜cﬂ countries increased, re˚ecting capacity growth in China, Taiwan, South 

Korea, and Singapore. These Southeast Asian countries now collectively account 

for the largest regional share of global production capacity, and their share will 

continue to grow in the near future.
Figure 5 reclassi˜es manufacturing capacity by region of ownership rather 
than location for the period 1997-2003, revealing a slightly different pattern. 

The share of global manufacturing capacity owned by ˜rms headquartered in 

Southeast Asian countries trails that of Japanese and North American producers. 

North American, Japanese, and (to a lesser extent) European semiconductor ˜rms 

have shifted much of their production capacity to Southeast Asia since the mid-

1990s and have entered joint ventures with Southeast Asian producers. Southeast 

Asian ˜rms, on the other hand, have invested primarily within their home regions 

during this period.
The growing concentration of manufacturing capacity in Southeast Asia is 
attributable in large part to the success of the foundry business model, which is 

re˚ected in foundry ˜rms™ growing share of semiconductor-industry revenues 

(Figure 3). The most advanced foundries are located in Singapore and (espe
-cially) Taiwan. A few Taiwanese ˜rms have opened foundries in the United 
1 
There are many possible measures of fab capacity, including the number of wafers processed 
over a given time period, the total wafer surface area that can be processed, the amount of installed 
processing equipment, and so on. Leachman and Leachman (2004) measure fabrication capacity as 

the estimated number of electrical functions that are produced by chip manufacturers, where a func
-tion is a memory bit or logic gate.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 109semiconductors-4.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
199519961997199819992000200120022003
Year
Percentage
ASIA NEC
EUROPE NEC
TAIWAN
CHINA
S. KOREA
JAPAN
USA
FIGURE 4
 Geographic location of semiconductor manufacturing capacity, 1995-2003.
SOURCE: Strategic Marketing Associates.
semiconductors-5.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1997199819992000200120022003
Year
Percentage
ASIA NEC
EUROPE NEC
TAIWAN
CHINA
S. KOREA
JAPAN
USA
FIGURE 5
 Location of ownership of semiconductor manufacturing capacity, 1997-2003. 
SOURCE: Strategic Marketing Associates.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
States, and Taiwan™s dominant position in the foundry industry faces competition 
from lower-cost production sites in other areas of Southeast Asia (particularly 
Malaysia and China) and elsewhere.
U.S. DOMINANCE IN PRODUCT DESIGN
Although semiconductor manufacturing capacity now is widely distributed 
among mature and fast-growing regions within the global economy, semicon
-ductor design activities, especially those associated with fabless ˜rms, remain 

more concentrated. U.S. fabless semiconductor ˜rms accounted for more than 

60 percent of the value of orders received by the top four foundry ˜rms (TSMC, 

UMC, Chartered, and SMIC) during the period 2000-2004.
Nonetheless, the growth of fabless ˜rms in other countries is one indication 
of the widening geographic distribution of semiconductor-design activity and 

expertise. Table 1 indicates that several non-U.S. clusters of fabless ˜rms have 

emerged in Israel, Canada, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, and South Korea. Al
-though hundreds of fabless ˜rms now operate in dozens of other countries, most 

of these ˜rms are smaller than their U.S. counterparts.
2A number of factors have contributed to the success of U.S. ˜rms in semi
-conductor design. Established regional high-technology clusters in areas such as 

Silicon Valley, Boston™s Route 128, and Austin, Texas, attract large numbers of 

semiconductor designers. These clusters are located near universities and other 

research centers that produce new design techniques, design software, and engi
-neering talent. The role of U.S. universities in developing new design software 

and chip architectures has long outstripped their function as a source of new 

manufacturing methods, in part because the cost of constantly re-equipping the 

necessary facilities exceeds the resources of most academic institutions.
Although we lack data to track these trends more systematically, most indus
-try observers suggest that Southeast Asian countries account for a growing share 

of global semiconductor industry design activities (Brown and Linden, 2006a). 

As U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, and especially fabless ˜rms, seek to collaborate 

more closely with the systems ˜rms that are located in Southeast Asia, a regional 

or local design presence is important. In addition, countries such as Taiwan and 

South Korea have developed product development expertise in digital consumer 

electronics and wireless communications, among other areas (Ernst, 2005). Off
-shore design centers, particularly in China and India, may offer cost savings and 

comparable productivity in less-sophisticated design activities (Brown and Lin
-den, 2006b). But most observers assess the semiconductor design capabilities of 
2 
The data in Table 1 that form the basis for this discussion include 640 fabless ˜rms that are mem
-bers of the Fabless Semiconductor Association (FSA) or nonmembers veri˜ed by the FSA. At least 
300 other small fabless ˜rms are thought to exist but have not been veri˜ed by the FSA.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 111
TABLE 1
 Fabless Firms by Country of Location, 2002
Country
Fabless Firms
Non-U.S. City
Fabless Firms
United States
475
Tel Aviv, Israel
14
Canada
30
Ottawa, Canada
13
Israel
29
Hsinchu, Taiwan
13
Taiwan
22
Seoul, South Korea
9United Kingdom
22
Taipei, Taiwan
8South Korea
13
Toronto, Canada
8Germany
8Cambridge, England
4France
6Japan
5Sweden
5Switzerland
4India
3Spain
3Others
15
TOTAL
640
SOURCE: Arensman (2003).
Chinese and Indian centers as lagging those of Canada, Israel, Taiwan, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States, as well as other industrial economies.
In summary, the structure of production activities in the global semiconduc
-tor industry has shifted from one dominated by vertical integration to a more 

complex structure that blends vertical specialization and vertical integration. 

Specialized design and manufacturing ˜rms have entered the industry in large 

numbers, and the growth of foundry ˜rms has been associated with a substantial 

shift in production capacity investment to Southeast Asia. Vertical specialization 

has facilitated the entry of new ˜rms, many of which are located outside of the 

regions that were homes to established ˜rms. But, thus far, increased vertical 

specialization in this industry appears to be associated with shifts in the location 

of production to a much greater extent than shifts in the location of product design 

and R&D activities.
MEASURING GLOBALIZATION OF INNO
VATION-
RELATED ACTI
VITIES IN SEMICONDUCTORS
Indicators of Offshore Innovation-Related Activities
We use four indicators to examine trends in the offshore R&D activities 
of U.S. and non-U.S. other ˜rms in the global semiconductor industry: (1) the 

share of industry-funded R&D expenditures supporting offshore R&D (available 

only for U.S. ˜rms) during the period 1985-2001; (2) the number and location 

of development fabs established by U.S. and non-U.S.  ˜rms within the global 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
semiconductor industry during the period 1995-2003; (3) the number of interna
-tional and domestic alliances formed by U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor manu
-facturing ˜rms during the period 1990-1999; and (4) the site of inventive activity 
resulting in U.S. patents issued to U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms during 

the period 1994-2004. Each measure by itself provides an incomplete portrait of 

ﬁglobalizationﬂ of innovation-related activities within the global semiconductor 

industry, but taken together, they do shed light on the extent of globalization or 

nonglobalization of innovation within the industry.
Industry-Funded Offshore R&D Investment
Figure 6 displays trends in offshore R&D investment (measured as a share of 
industry-funded R&D spending) by U.S. manufacturers of electronic components 

during the period 1985-2001. The data in the ˜gure suggest minimal change in 

the share of offshore R&D within total industry-funded R&D, which drops to 

less than 3 percent by 2000 from its 1985 share of more than 4 percent.
3 The 
sharp increase during 2000-2001 in the offshore share of industry-funded R&D 

may or may not indicate a signi˜cant departure from this ˚at trend. In addition 

to the fact that this ﬁreversalﬂ covers only one year of data, the magnitude of the 

increase in reported offshore R&D during this period (more than doubling, from 

$327 million in 2000 to $852 million in 2001) suggests that a change in sample 

composition or other factors may be responsible, rather than a long-term shift in 

U.S. ˜rms™ R&D investment behavior.
The industry-level R&D investment data compiled by the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) that are the source for Figure 6 have a number of well-known 

problems. Coverage by the NSF R&D survey of smaller ˜rms (e.g., entrants), 

particularly for the longer time period depicted in Figure 6, is problematic since 

the NSF sample frame was not updated frequently during the 1980s and early 

1990s. The ﬁelectronic componentsﬂ product line for which these data were 

compiled by the NSF also includes a number of other products in addition to 

semiconductor components. Moreover, the de˜nition of this and other product 

lines for which NSF collects R&D data have undergone some revisions during 

the period covered in Figure 6.
Even if the reported R&D data accurately summarize the trends in semi
-conductor-related offshore R&D investment, there is reason to suspect that the 

R&D investment data reported by semiconductor ˜rms do not capture many of 

the activities that contribute to innovation in this industry. For example, R&D 
3 
We examined several sources of R&D data related to the globalization of innovation-related 
activity in the semiconductor industry. Most of these data, including publicly available information 
such as company Annual Reports and Form 10-Ks, did not yield time series that were consistent or 

covered most of the ˜rms in the industry. We therefore narrowed our data sources to indicators that 

most effectively underscore trends in the offshore R&D activities of U.S. and other ˜rms in the global 

semiconductor industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 113
semiconductors-6.eps
1.0
02.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Year
Percentage
FIGURE 6
 Foreign R&D as percentage of industry-funded R&D (electronic compo
-nents), 1985-2001. SOURCE: National Science Foundation (NSF).
investment data may not include process innovation or the ﬁtweakingﬂ that occurs 
within the production facilities of IDMs. As we note later in the chapter, much 

of the process innovation within foundries (few of which are operated by U.S.-

headquartered ˜rms) relies heavily on production-facility upgrades that may or 

may not be included in the R&D investments reported by ˜rms. Design activities, 

especially those carried out by fabless ˜rms, are another important source of in
-novations that may or may not be reported consistently as R&D investment.
These problems aside, the lack of a strong trend during the period 1985-2001 
in reported offshore R&D investment is striking. This widely accepted measure 

of ﬁglobalization of innovationﬂ indicates that U.S. semiconductor ˜rms do not 

appear to be expanding this portion of their offshore innovation-related activi
-ties signi˜cantly, and the offshore portion of their self-˜nanced R&D investment 

remains modest.
Offshore Process-Development Facilities
A second indicator of the offshore movement of semiconductor ˜rms™ 
innovation-related activities is the location of their process-technology develop
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
ment facilities during the period 1995-2003. These facilities are important sites 
for process innovation in the semiconductor industry, since they are used for the 
development and ﬁdebuggingﬂ of new manufacturing technologies (Appleyard 

et al., 2000; Hatch and Mowery, 1998). But this type of process innovation is 

irrelevant to innovation by fabless ˜rms, whose designs are manufactured by 

foundries. Moreover, foundries rarely use development fabs. Rather than devel
-oping new manufacturing processes in dedicated R&D facilities and transferring 

these process technologies to full-volume production sites, foundries instead 

incrementally upgrade manufacturing processes within their full-volume pro
-duction facilities. This approach enables the foundry ˜rms to maintain stability 

and predictability in the evolution of the component designs that they produce 

for their customers. This indicator of the location of innovation-related activities 

therefore applies only to one segment of the global semiconductor industryŠthe 

IDM and systems ˜rms.
The source for our data on the siting of semiconductor ˜rms™ development 
facilities is Strategic Marketing Associates (SMA), a market research ˜rm that 

tracks investment in semiconductor manufacturing facilities. The SMA data pro
-vide information on the home country for each ˜rm in the dataset; years in opera
-tion and facility type (production, R&D, development, etc.) for each production 

facility; the technological sophistication (e.g., smallest linewidth of components 

produced), capacity, and size for each facility; and other information. Although 

the SMA database includes hundreds of public and private semiconductor enti
-ties, we exclude government and university-based facilities that are used solely 

for research and teaching purposes, research labs that possess production facili
-ties for consulting purposes, and similar organizations.
The SMA data are collected through surveys. The development fabs that 
are included in the following discussion are used for the characterization of new 

(i.e., state-of-the-art) manufacturing processes and are typically much smaller 

(less than 5,000 wafer starts per month) than full-volume production facilities. 

The manufacturing facilities that we categorize as development fabs thus in
-clude facilities in which a variety of innovation-related activities are carried out. 

Nonetheless, these data are the only tabulation of which we are aware that can 

shed some light on the organization of the process R&D activities of IDMs and 

systems ˜rms.
Figure 7 displays the number of ﬁdomesticﬂ and ﬁforeignﬂ development fabs 
in operation during the period 1995-2003. Domestic development fabs are de˜ned 

as those located in the home country of the semiconductor ˜rm and foreign devel
-
opment fabs are located in a different host country. The overwhelming majority 

of development fabs are located in semiconductor ˜rms™ home countries. The 

ﬁhomeboundﬂ nature of process-technology development appears to re˚ect the 

demanding technical requirements of this activity, the need for close coordina
-tion between product design and process-technology development, the need for 

an iterative approach to the introduction of new manufacturing processes, and the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 115
FIGURE 7
 Foreign and domestic development fabs in operation, 1995-2003. SOURCE: 
Strategic Marketing Associates.
semiconductors-7.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
199519961997199819992000200120022003
Year
Number
FOREIGN
DOMESTIC
importance of close coordination between the process-technology development 
activities and commercial-scale production operations of the ˜rm. Other empiri
-cal work has corroborated the importance of co-location of manufacturing and 
process-technology development activities (Hatch and Mowery, 1998; Macher 

and Mowery, 2003).
Figure 7 also reveals a decline in the number of development fabs during the 
period 1995-2003. This trend is another re˚ection of the structural change in the 

semiconductor industry that we discussed earlier. A growing share of global pro
-duction capacity in the semiconductor industry now is accounted for by foundries, 

which typically do not use development fabs. Even within the IDM/systems-˜rm 

segment of the industry, the high capital costs of new commercial-volume pro
-duction facilities (now more than $3 billion) have raised the minimum ef˜cient 

scale of production fabs and appear to have contributed to some shrinkage in the 

number of new commercial-volume facilities.
Table 2 and Figure 8 provide additional detail on the location of development 
fabs. Table 2 disaggregates foreign development facilities by country of loca
-tion and country of ownership. The United Kingdom, Germany, and the United 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 2
 Foreign Development Facilities in Operation, 1995-2003
Country of Location
199519961997199819992000200120022003Canada
000000000United Kingdom
221000000France
000110000Germany
002111102Italy
000010000Japan
100010000Netherlands
000000000Taiwan
000000001United States
110000000Country of Ownership
199519961997199819992000200120022003Canada
010000000United Kingdom
000000000France
000000000Germany
002111102Italy
000010000Japan
100000001Netherlands
221000000Taiwan
000000000United States
100130000SOURCE: Strategic Marketing Associates.
semiconductors-8.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
199519961997199819992000200120022003
Year
Number
Canada
China
England
Germany
Japan
S. Korea
Taiwan
U.S.
FIGURE 8
 Geographic location of domestic development fabs, 1995-2003. SOURCE: 
Strategic Marketing Associates.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 117
States are the leading locations for foreign-owned development fabs (keeping 
in mind that these represent a small fraction of total development-fab capac
-ity). Semiconductor ˜rms headquartered in Germany, the Netherlands, and the 
United States have a greater tendency to invest in foreign development fabs than 

do semiconductor ˜rms based in other countries. Although interesting, the very 

small number of observations on offshore development fabs make it dif˜cult to 

conduct additional analyses of the reasons for these differences.
Figure 8 disaggregates ﬁdomesticﬂ development facilities by country of lo
-cation (as in Table 2, these data refer to the stock of development fabs in opera
-tion). Japanese and U.S. semiconductor ˜rms operate the majority of domestic 

development fabs, and those operated by U.S. semiconductor ˜rms outnumber 

Japanese ﬁhomeboundﬂ development fabs during this period. Consistent with 

Figure 7, the number of domestic development fabs owned by Japanese and U.S. 

˜rms fell during the period 1995-2003. Also notable within these data is the lack 

of Taiwanese-owned domestic production facilities, re˚ecting the fact that the 

Taiwanese semiconductor industry is dominated by foundries.
International Technology-Development Alliances
Our third indicator of globalization of innovation-related activities is the 
innovation-related alliances formed by U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms 

during the period 1990-1999. The data that we use to track alliances in this in
-dustry cover both domestic and international alliances and were obtained from 

the 
Pro˚les of IC Manufacturers and Suppliers
 published by Integrated Circuit 
Engineering (ICE), a semiconductor industry market research ˜rm.
Alliances in the ICE database include a number of different activities related 
to innovation and technology development in semiconductors. Some of these al
-liances consist of production sourcing agreements between fabless and foundry 

˜rms, whereas others cover the development and transfer of process technology 

among ˜rms. These data unfortunately do not include alliances focused on col
-laborative product development between fabless semiconductor ˜rms and sys
-tems ˜rms. The alliance data also lack information on the revenues, investments, 

or assets associated with individual alliances, which means that we are unable 

to weight individual alliances by some measure of their economic importance. 

In spite of these problems, the ICE data have some advantages. They enable us 

to track the dissolution as well as the formation of alliances, and thus provide 

information on both the rate of new alliance formation and the ﬁstockﬂ of semi
-conductor industry alliances in existence during our sample period.
Figure 9 displays the number of newly formed and ongoing alliances in the 
semiconductor industry during the period 1990-1999. The number of alliances 

grew during the early 1990s, reached a peak during the middle of the decade, and 

has gradually declined since 1995 as the rate of alliance formation has decreased. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
semiconductors-9.eps
0200
400
600
800
1000
1990199119921993199419951996199719981999
Year
Number
In Operation
Created
semiconductors-10.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1990199119921993199419951996199719981999
Year
Percentage
SE ASIA
EUROPE
JAPAN
N. AMER
FIGURE 9
 Semiconductor industry alliances, 1990-1999. SOURCE: Integrated Circuit 
Engineering (ICE).
FIGURE 10
 Home region of semiconductor alliance participants, newly formed alliances, 
1990-1999. SOURCE: Integrated Circuit Engineering (ICE).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 119
The annual ﬁstockﬂ of alliances in operation averaged more than 400 during the 
period 1990-1999.
The regional composition of alliances also changed substantially during the 
1990s. Figure 10 depicts trends in the regional composition of alliance partner 
˜rms for newly formed alliances during the period 1990-1999, based on partner-

˜rm home countries. The share of North American ˜rms in newly formed alli
-ances decreased from roughly 70 percent in 1990 to slightly more than 50 percent 

in 1999, while the share of European and Southeast Asian ˜rms increased.
Figure 11 disaggregates the stock of alliances in Figure 9 by the national
-ity of the ˜rms participating in them. Domestic alliances are those in which all 

partner ˜rms are headquartered in the same country, and international alliances 

are those for which at least one partner ˜rm is headquartered in a different coun
-try. U.S. domestic alliances declined from roughly 35 percent of semiconductor 

industry alliances in 1990 to slightly more than 20 percent in 1999, although 

the 1999 share represented an increase from its low point of 10 percent in 1996. 

The share of alliances between U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms (ﬁU.S. Intlﬂ) within total 

industry alliances was essentially unchanged in 1999 from its 1990 level of 40 

percent, although this share grew to more than 60 percent by 1996 before declin
-semiconductors-11.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
1990199119921993199419951996199719981999
Year
Percentage
U.S. DOM
U.S. INTL
NON-U.S. DOM
NON-U.S. INTL
FIGURE 11
 Home region of semiconductor industry alliance participants, alliance 
ﬁstock,ﬂ 1990-1999. SOURCE: Integrated Circuit Engineering (ICE).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
ing. The share of non-U.S. domestic alliances also declined during the period 
1990-1999, while non-U.S. international alliances increased from slightly more 
than 25 percent of total alliances in 1990 to roughly 35 percent by 1999.
Taken together, Figures 9, 10, and 11 suggest a slowdown in the rate of 
formation of alliances for R&D and technology development by all ˜rms in the 

semiconductor industry during the 1990s, keeping in mind that we lack informa
-tion on the size or economic signi˜cance of individual alliances. But the behavior 

of U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms presents some contrasts that are not 

well understood. U.S. semiconductor ˜rms experienced a period of signi˜cant 

growth during the early 1990s in their international alliance activities, followed 

by a decline in international alliance formation. These trends contrast with those 

for non-U.S. ˜rms, which appear to have expanded their share of the shrinking 

number of newly formed international alliance activities throughout the 1990s. 

Non-U.S. ˜rms also use alliances to team with ˜rms from other nations or re
-gions. If anything, globalization through alliances therefore appears to have been 

more persistent and intensive for non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms during the latter 

half of the 1990s.
Another analysis of alliance formation during the late 20th century by Hage
-doorn (2002) used a different source of data but also concluded that the share of 

international undertakings declined from the 1980s through the 1990s. Moreover, 

Hagedoorn found that ﬁinformation technologyﬂ R&D alliances (including semi
-conductors and a number of other industries) were less likely to involve cross-

border relationships than was true of other sectors. The reasons for the apparent 

decline in the propensity of semiconductor ˜rms to enter international R&D 

alliances, along with the (apparently) lower rate of formation of international 

R&D alliances by ˜rms in semiconductors and related industries, remain unclear. 

Hagedoorn™s (2002) examination of R&D alliance data also does not shed light 

on the relative importance of participant ˜rms from the United States and other 

industrial economies. Nonetheless, the results of the Hagedoorn analysis are 

broadly consistent with our ˜ndings, suggesting that this vehicle for globalization 

of innovation-related activities in the semiconductor industry declined somewhat 

in importance during the 1990s, especially for U.S. ˜rms.
Patenting
Patents, our ˜nal indicator of globalization in innovation, are an input to the 
innovation process rather than a direct measure of innovation. Nevertheless, these 

data, which are based on the semiconductor technology classi˜cation developed 

by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce (USPTO), have several useful features, 

not least in making it possible to locate the site of the inventive activity that 

resulted in the patent. We are also able to weight our patent observations by vari
-ous citation-based measures of the signi˜cance of individual patents, to control 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 121somewhat for the skewed distribution of patents by economic or technological 
importance.
4The semiconductor industry is a high-technology sector for which patents 
for many years were viewed as unimportant, re˚ecting the fact that (among 
other things) much of the most important innovative activity related to process 

innovation was protected through secrecy or inimitability, and cross-licensing of 

patents was widespread. As Hall and Ziedonis (2001) point out, however, pat
-enting by both IDMs and fabless semiconductor ˜rms grew rapidly during the 

1980s, following changes in U.S. patent policy and some large ˜nancial awards 

in patent-infringement cases. We therefore believe that the period covered by our 

patent analysis is one during which semiconductor ˜rms patented extensively, and 

patents therefore should serve as a reasonable proxy for inventive activity.
Our empirical analysis utilizes patents assigned to 217 U.S. and non-U.S. 
semiconductor ˜rms during the period 1991-2003 (based on year of application). 

This dataset includes almost 114,000 patents from more than 80 patent classes, 

as identi˜ed by the USPTO™s Of˜ce of Technology Assessment and Forecast 

and Hall and Ziedonis. (The Appendix in this chapter lists the patent classes 

included in our dataset.) We also collected data on citations to these patents in 

subsequently issued patents in all patent classes.
We use information on the location of the inventors listed on each patent as 
an indicator of the site of the inventive activity that produced the patent. Based on 

a comparison of the reported site of the invention with the headquarters location 

for each company in our dataset, each patent is assigned to one of the following 

mutually exclusive categories.
Ł Domestic Patents:
 patents whose inventors are all located in the home 
country of the controlling company;
Ł Foreign Patents:
 patents whose inventors are all located in countries 
other than the home country of the controlling company; and
Ł International Collaboration Patents:
 patents that have at least one 
inventor located in the home country and at least one inventor located in another 

country.
5We corrected patent data for self-citations (excluding citations to other pat
-ents ˜led by the assignee), and created forward citation windows of 2, 3, and 4 
4 
Patent citation data were collected with the help of the Metrics Group Division of UTEK-EKMS, 
an IP strategy company based in Boston.
5 
Bergek and Bruzelius (2005) argue that the ﬁinventor locationﬂ data often yield misleading in
-formation, because of ˜rm-speci˜c differences in the attribution of patents to inventors or inventor 
mobility between the time of application and the time of issue of the patent. It is plausible that such 

ﬁnoiseﬂ may affect inferences from cross-sectional analyses of patent data. We use the ﬁinventor 

locationﬂ information for longitudinal analysis, however, and there is little reason to believe that the 

problems identi˜ed by Bergek and Bruzelius have become signi˜cantly more severe during the time 

period of this analysis.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
years after publication for each patent, yielding a total of 402,865 forward cita
-tions that omit self-citations. In our citation analysis that follows, we use a 3-year 
ﬁwindowﬂ for patent citations (i.e., we limit the count of citations to those in the 

˜rst 3 years after the year of issue of the relevant patent).
Any comparisons of patents issued to U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms must be in
-terpreted carefully. For most non-U.S. ˜rms, the higher costs of seeking a patent 

in the United States in addition to a home-country patent mean that U.S. patent 

protection will be obtained for only the more valuable patents in these ˜rms™ 

portfolios. A simple comparison of U.S. patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms with those 

assigned to non-U.S. ˜rms thus may yield misleading results because of the dif
-ferent underlying ﬁqualityﬂ of the two patent groups.
Accordingly, our comparisons of U.S. patents assigned to U.S. and non-U.S. 
˜rms use only U.S.-assigned patents with ﬁequivalentsﬂ in either the Japanese 

Patent Of˜ce (JPO) or the European Patent Of˜ce (EPO). In other words, our 

discussion of U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ patenting that follows (but 

only that discussion) includes only the semiconductor patents assigned to U.S. 

˜rms for which a patent on the same or a very similar invention also has been 

issued in one of these other major markets. We used the Delphion international 

patent database to identify U.S.-assigned patents for which an equivalent patent 

has been issued by either the JPO or the EPO.
Figure 12 depicts trends during the period 1991-2003 in the share of all semi
-conductor patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms that were created by domestic inventors 

(either an individual located in the United States or an ﬁall-domesticﬂ inventor 

team) and the share of semiconductor patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms that involved 
semiconductors-12.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003
Percent Distribution of Patents
Domestic Inventors only
At least one foreign inventor
Application Year
FIGURE 12
 Domestic and offshore U.S.-assigned semiconductor patents, 1991-2003 
SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 123semiconductors-13.eps
010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003
Application Year
Percent Distribution of Patents
Domestic Inventors only
At least one foreign inventor
FIGURE 13
 Domestic and offshore U.S.-assigned semiconductor patents, IDM and sys
-tems ˜rms, 1991-2003. SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting.
semiconductors-14.eps
The plotted points in the electronic file look different
from the hard copy.
010
20
30
40
60
50
70
80
90
100
1991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003
Application Year
Percent Distribution of Patents
Domestic Inventors only
At least one foreign inventor
FIGURE 14
 Domestic and offshore U.S.-assigned semiconductor patents, fabless ˜rms, 
1991-2003. SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting.
at least one offshore inventor (combining foreign and international collaborative 
patents). The absence of any strong trend during the decade in this measure of off
-shore inventive activity is strikingŠthe domestic share remains stable at roughly 

90 percent throughout the period. A similar lack of growth in offshore inventive 

activity also is apparent in Figure 13, which shows the same ﬁsite of inventionﬂ 

trends for the IDM and systems ˜rms in our sample. Although the number of 

patents for fabless ˜rms in our sample is considerably smaller, Figure 14 reveals 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
a modest shift toward greater offshore inventive activity among fabless ˜rms.
6 Even for this group of ˜rms, however, patenting remains dominated by home-
country inventive activity.
Table 3 includes patents assigned to U.S. (for which an international ﬁequiva
-6 
We also analyzed the share of forward citations accounted for by the ﬁhome-inventedﬂ and ﬁoff
-shore participantﬂ subsamples in our patent database. Interestingly, citations are proportionate to the 
patent shares (i.e., there is no evidence that home-invented patents are cited much more intensively 

than those for which offshore inventors are involved).
TABLE 3
 Firm HQ and Location of Inventive Activity, U.S. Patents
1994-2003
One Inventor Located in
USA
Europe
Japan
Taiwan
Korea
Israel
CanadaSingapore
Others
Firm HQ in
USA
86.5%
6.5%
3.8%
0.2%
0.2%
0.9%
0.4%
0.3%
0.7%
Europe
28.4%
60.0%
1.5%
7.1%
1.3%
0.2%
0.3%
0.5%
0.4%
Japan
4.2%
0.7%
94.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
Taiwan
7.6%
0.1%
1.0%
90.7%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.5%
Korea
2.5%
0.1%
0.5%
0.0%
96.1%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
0.8%
Israel
5.3%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
91.6%
3.1%
0.0%
0.0%
Canada
13.3%
19.1%
1.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
66.5%
0.0%
0.0%
Singapore
18.5%
1.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
80.4%
0.3%
1996-1999
One Inventor Located in

USA
Europe
Japan
Taiwan
Korea
Israel
CanadaSingapore
Others
Firm HQ in
USA
86.9%
6.4%
4.1%
0.1%
0.2%
0.7%
0.4%
0.4%
0.5%
Europe
30.6%
57.2%
1.4%
9.1%
0.6%
0.3%
0.2%
0.3%
0.3%
Japan
4.2%
0.7%
94.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
Taiwan
9.2%
0.1%
1.5%
88.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.4%
Korea
2.4%
0.0%
0.5%
0.0%
96.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.9%
Israel
6.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
88.9%
4.4%
0.0%
0.0%
Canada
13.1%
20.4%
1.5%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
65.0%
0.0%
0.0%
Singapore
25.0%
0.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
73.9%
0.8%
2000-2003
One Inventor Located in

USA
Europe
Japan
Taiwan
Korea
Israel
CanadaSingapore
Others
Firm HQ in
USA
85.1%
8.1%
3.8%
0.2%
0.2%
0.3%
0.3%
0.2%
0.9%
Europe
23.8%
62.6%
2.0%
6.4%
2.7%
0.2%
0.5%
0.7%
0.7%
Japan
4.0%
0.8%
95.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
Taiwan
5.7%
0.1%
0.5%
92.8%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.2%
0.3%
Korea
8.7%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
82.6%
0.0%
0.0%
4.3%
4.3%
Israel
3.8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
94.9%
1.3%
0.0%
0.0%
Canada
16.0%
15.4%
0.6%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
67.9%
0.0%
0.0%
Singapore
14.2%
1.4%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
84.5%
0.0%
SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 125lentﬂ patent, as de˜ned earlier, was found) and non-U.S. ˜rms, disaggregating the 
data by home country of patent assignee and site of inventive activity for 1994-
2003, and further splitting the data into 1996-1999 and 2000-2003 subperiods. 

Japanese ˜rms™ inventive activity is dominated by home-country inventors to a 

greater extent than is true of either U.S. or European semiconductor ˜rms for the 

1994-2003 period. Japanese inventors are listed on almost 95 percent of Japa
-nese ˜rms™ U.S. patents, whereas U.S. inventors are listed on almost 87 percent 

of U.S. patents and European inventors appear on 60 percent of European ˜rms™ 

U.S. patents. Looking at the off-diagonal portions of Table 3, European inventors 

account for almost twice as large a share of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ patents 

as Japanese inventors. U.S. inventors appear on nearly 30 percent of European 

˜rms™ U.S. patents, and Japanese inventors on less than 2 percent. A comparison 

of the two subperiods does not reveal signi˜cant differences, although there is 

some indication that the ﬁhomeboundednessﬂ of the inventive activities of Eu
-ropean, Japanese, and Taiwanese semiconductor ˜rms is increasing slightly. For 

all but Canadian semiconductor ˜rms, the single most important offshore site 

for inventive activity is the United States, which on the basis of this evidence 

remains the dominant site for the offshore inventive activities of most non-U.S. 

semiconductor ˜rms. For U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, the leading offshore site for 

inventive activity in both the 1996-1999 and the 2000-2003 subperiods is Europe, 

followed closely by Japan.
Figure 15 depicts the leading locations of offshore inventors in the semi
-conductor patents assigned to U.S. ˜rms for the 1996-1999 and 2000-2003 sub
-periods. The ˜gure highlights considerable change in these locations over time 

and differences in the location of offshore inventive activity between fabless and 

other ˜rms in the U.S. semiconductor industry. Canadian inventors play a more 

prominent role in the offshore patenting of U.S. fabless ˜rms than is true of IDM 

and systems ˜rms, accounting for less than 4 percent of the offshore inventive 

activity of IDMs and system ˜rms versus more than 20 percent for fabless ˜rms, 

in both periods. The Japanese share of U.S. fabless ˜rms™ offshore patenting also 

declines between the two subperiods, perhaps re˚ecting the growth in systems 

design in non-Japanese Asia (notably Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore). 

European inventors are of comparable importance for both U.S. IDMs and U.S. 

fabless ˜rms in both time periods. A comparison of the two subperiods for both 

groups of ˜rms also highlights the shift in the importance of non-Japanese Asian 

inventors. The share of ﬁother Asiaﬂ inventors (particularly Singapore) for fabless 

˜rms increases more than sixfold (albeit from a very modest initial level), and the 

ﬁother Asiaﬂ share for IDMs and systems ˜rms nearly doubles.
Figures 16 and 17 compare the invention locations for U.S. semiconductor 
patents assigned to U.S. and non-U.S. ˜rms, using only the U.S.-assigned patents 

for which an international ﬁequivalentﬂ patent exists. The data in the ˜gures are 

based on a random sample of 5,000 patents from the semiconductor patent portfo
-lios of Asian, European, and U.S. ˜rms. The random-sampling procedure, which 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
is strati˜ed by year and patent class within our overall semiconductor-patent 
ﬁfamily,ﬂ was adopted to provide a patent sample that was not affected by the 
different propensities of U.S., Asian, and European ˜rms to obtain foreign as well 

as domestic patents. Figure 16 displays data on the reported site of inventions 

for the 1996-1999 and 2000-2003 subperiods, and Figure 17 displays data on the 

shares of citations within the ˜rst 3 years after issue for these patents. Although 

the United States is the largest single site of inventive activity resulting in pat
-ents throughout the 1996-2003 period, its dominance declines modestly between 

the 1996-1999 and 2000-2003 subperiods. The share of patents attributable to 

Japanese or Taiwanese sites is essentially unchanged throughout the 1993-2003 

period, whereas the European share of inventive activity increases between the 

1996-1999 and 2000-2003 subperiods.
Comparing the shares of patents with the shares of citations in Figure 17 
FIGURE 15
 Offshore invention sites, U.S.-assigned semiconductor patents, 1996-2003  
SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting.
semiconductors-15.eps
Europe
47%
Japan
21%
Taiwan
2%
Korea
2%
Canada
4%
Other Asia
18%
Israel
4%
Others
2%
IDMS/SYSTEMS Firms (2000-2003)
Europe
40.6%
Japan
27.8%
Taiwan
5.3%
Korea
1.8%
Canada
3.6%
Other Asia
9.1%
Israel
8.0%
Others
3.8%
IDMS/SYSTEMS Firms (1996-1999)
Europe
43.2%
Japan
7.1%
Taiwan
5.8%
Korea
0.0%
Canada
23.9%
Other Asia
16.8%
Israel
1.3%
Others
1.9%
Fabless Firms (2000-2003)
Europe
41%
Japan
27%
Taiwan
0%
Korea
0%
Canada
24%
Other Asia
3%
Israel
1%
Others
4%
Fabless Firms (1996-1999)
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 127reveals that patents from Japanese and European invention sites tend to be ﬁun
-dercitedﬂ (their share of citations is smaller than their share of overall patents), 
whereas U.S. patents are ﬁovercitedﬂ relative to their share of overall patenting. 

Patents with Taiwanese invention sites are cited slightly more intensively relative 

to their share during the 2000-2003 subperiod.
Overall, the results of our analysis of the site of inventive activity resulting 
in U.S. patents support the original ˜ndings of the analysis of patenting by ˜rms 

from a broader sample of industries by Patel and Pavitt (1991), who found that 

large multinational ˜rms™ patenting was dominated by home-based inventive 

activity. The evidence on post-issue citations suggests that the most ﬁimportantﬂ 

semiconductor patents are slightly more likely to result from domestic inventive 

activity, but this conclusion should be quali˜ed by a recognition of the small size 
FIGURE 16
 Distribution of invention sites, all USPTO semiconductor patents, 
1996-1999.
FIGURE 17
 Distribution of citations by invention site, all USPTO semiconductor patents, 
1991-2003. SOURCE: Thomson Delphion Consulting and UTEK-EKMS.
semiconductors-16.eps
SEA
1.0%
Others
0.2%
Israel
0.6%
Korea
1.2%
Canada
0.9%
Taiwan
7.2%
Japan
27.9%
Europe
29.5%
USA
31.4%
2000-2003
SEA
0.6%
Others
0.2%
Israel
0.5%
Korea
2.1%
Canada
1.2%
Taiwan
7.3%
Japan
27.9%
Europe
22.2%
USA
38.1%
1996-1999
SEA
0.9%
Others
0.2%
Israel
0.7%
Korea
0.7%
Canada
1.5%
Taiwan
8.2%
Japan
29.0%
Europe
18.8%
USA
40.0%
2000-2003
semiconductors-17.eps
SEA
0.6%
Others
0.2%
Israel
0.5%
Korea
2.0%
Canada
1.5%
Taiwan
9.7%
Japan
23.4%
Europe
14.9%
USA
47.4%
1996-1999
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
of the sample on which it is based. The trends in patenting for fabless ˜rms sug
-gest that the demanding requirements for close collaboration between semicon
-ductor component designers and systems ˜rms may be causing some shift within 
this segment of the semiconductor industry toward greater reliance on foreign 

inventive activity in patenting; but any such trend is very modest. Although addi
-tional analysis is required, this ˜nding concerning fabless ˜rms™ offshore patent
-ing is consistent with the ﬁmarket demand-exploitationﬂ motive for locating R&D 

offshore discussed by Gerybadze and Reger (1999)Šan important factor in the 

location of ˜rms™ R&D is their need to be near their innovative customers.
IMPLICATIONS FOR ENGINEERING EMPLO
YMENT
The evidence presented in this chapter suggests that globalization and struc
-tural change in the semiconductor industry have resulted in signi˜cant growth in 

offshore manufacturing capacity, much of which remains owned by U.S. produc
-ers. But this growth in offshore production capacity has had far less signi˜cant 

effects on the location of innovation-related activities within the semiconductor 

industry, including the innovation-related activities of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms. 

Indeed, the growth of offshore foundry production capacity in Southeast Asia 

has helped sustain the growth of employment of engineers and designers in U.S.-

based fabless semiconductor ˜rms.
Innovation-related activities in this industry include a number of different ac
-tivities, such as semiconductor chip design, process-technology development, and 

product-technology development. The limited evidence on these three activities 

discussed earlier in this chapter suggests that semiconductor chip design is the 

least ﬁhomeboundﬂ of the three. Process-technology development, as measured 

by the siting of development fabs, does not appear to have moved offshore to any 

extent, while patenting (which includes product- and process-technology devel
-opment) also displays little evidence of signi˜cant offshore relocation.
A recent analysis of engineering-employment trends in the U.S. semiconduc
-tor industry (Brown and Linden, 2006b) suggests that the employment effects of 

shifts in the location of chip design for U.S. engineers have been modest thus 

far. Brown and Linden (2006b) found that employment and earnings growth were 

higher during the 2000-2005 period for engineers employed in the U.S. semi
-conductor industry than in other U.S. industries. Employment growth during this 

period was strongest for electrical, computer hardware, and electronic engineers, 

but was negative for industrial engineers within the semiconductor industry. 

Brown and Linden (2006b) report some evidence that median earnings for ﬁma
-tureﬂ engineers (50 years and older) employed in the semiconductor industry are 

lower than for younger engineers, but this tendency appears throughout the time 

period (2000-2004) that they analyze, rather than becoming more pronounced in 

the most recent year. Moreover, interpreting these trends is dif˜cult, since they 

re˚ect some tendency for engineers to move into management positions as they 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 129mature. The individuals classi˜ed as ﬁengineersﬂ among this older cohort thus 
have remained out of management, which may affect their reported earnings.
Similarly to many other dimensions of globalization of innovation-related 
activities in the semiconductor industry, the available data are not well suited to 
analysis of the employment effects of any movement of different categories of 

innovation-related activities to non-U.S. locations. The most detailed analysis 

of employment trends in the U.S. semiconductor industry during the 2000-2005 

period does not reveal signi˜cant erosion in engineering employment or earnings 

during the period (Brown and Linden, 2006b). The available evidence, imperfect 

as it is, thus does not support grave concern about the employment consequences 

of recent shifts in the location of innovation-related activities in the semiconduc
-tor industry.
The U.S. employment data are largely ﬁbackward-lookingﬂ indicators of the 
employment consequences of globalization of innovation-related activities in the 

semiconductor industry. The implications for future engineering employment 

trends in the U.S. semiconductor industry associated with the growing numbers 

of design engineers in China, India, and Taiwan are unclear (Brown and Linden, 

2006b). Despite government sponsorship and local access to systems ˜rms, 

China™s chip design capabilities do not yet represent a viable product design 

outsourcing alternative. India offers certain product design advantages given the 

predominant use of the English language and its thriving software sector, but zero 

government involvement, limited manufacturing capacity, and no major fabless 

˜rm presence have hampered success. Taiwan appears best poised to become a 

viable offshoring and outsourcing alternative, as well as a signi˜cant competitive 

threat, to U.S. semiconductor ˜rms in the near term, given its focused government 

programs, locally owned fabless design segment, and close proximity to systems 

houses and foundries. These factors suggest that U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ domi
-nance in product design could be challenged in the future, potentially reducing 

U.S. employment in this innovation-related activity. But here too, even a partial 

ﬁhollowing outﬂ of the U.S. product design segment seems unlikely.
IMPLICATIONS FOR FIRM STRATEG
Y AND PUBLIC POLIC
YAn earlier study of the U.S. semiconductor industry™s innovative and com
-petitive performance (Macher et al., 1999) noted that U.S. ˜rms™ development 

of new products (including microprocessors and digital-signal processing chips) 

and new business models (notably the growth of fabless ˜rms) had enabled them 

to overcome a signi˜cant competitiveness crisis during the late 1980s and early 

1990s. U.S. semiconductor ˜rms remain globally competitive in the face of rapid 

innovation by non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, but structural change in the global 

semiconductor industry has resulted in considerable change in the structure of 

the innovation process.
Fabless ˜rms in particular seek to develop closer collaborative relationships 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
with major systems ˜rms based outside of the United States. Shorter product life 
cycles and the increased variety of individually smaller applications that utilize 
semiconductor components mean that the IDMs face greater risks from swings in 

demand as the costs of their production facilities continue to rise. The design and 

(especially) the manufacturing capabilities of foreign regions also have improved 

signi˜cantly since the 1980s, creating new opportunities for U.S. ˜rms to exploit 

a global division of labor in semiconductor design and manufacturing. Among 

other things, this emergent division of labor has supported the rapid growth of 

fabless semiconductor ˜rms in the United States.
In contrast to the industry challenges of the 1980s that threatened the vi
-ability and very survival of the U.S. semiconductor industry, the challenges of 

the early 21st century stem from the need to manage this global division of labor 

effectively and strategically while maintaining leadership in innovation. These 

challenges are hardly new, as lower-productivity, labor-cost-sensitive functions 

in many U.S. manufacturing industries (and a growing array of U.S. nonmanu
-facturing industries, such as software and ˜nancial servicesŠsee Chapters 2 and 

10, respectively) have moved to lower-cost areas of the global economy. Many 

of these regions have developed strong educational and economic infrastructures 

that can support the creation of productive labor forces and contribute to such 

innovation-related activities as product design and process engineering.
The offshoring and outsourcing of various activities by U.S. ˜rms has a long 
history, but so too do the innovative responses of successful U.S. ˜rms. Even as 

the more cost-sensitive, lower-value-added activities have been shifted to offshore 

locations, U.S. ˜rms have maintained their global competitiveness by developing 

and introducing innovative new products (e.g., PCs and communications) and 

business models (e.g., fabless semiconductor ˜rms). In the semiconductor indus
-try, product innovation will remain central, and manufacturing-process innovation 

is likely to focus on a narrower range of products in which U.S. IDMs remain 

dominant. In other words, the strategic management of innovation becomes even 

more important for the competitive performance of semiconductor ˜rms that seek 

to exploit the emerging global division of labor in product design and manufactur
-ing while maintaining strength in product and process innovation.
It seems likely, for example, that the remaining U.S. IDMs will continue 
to exploit offshore sites for manufacturing while relying on foundries to serve a 

larger portion of their production requirements for products that are slightly be
-hind the ﬁbleeding edgeﬂ of technologyŠthe ﬁfab-liteﬂ model of production. The 

continuing growth of semiconductor foundries will provide further opportunities 

for expansion by U.S. fabless ˜rms, although these ˜rms also are likely to shift 

at least some of their design-related activities to offshore locations because of the 

presence of major customers in these areas.
In spite of the powerful forces that are shifting some design, manufacturing, 
and other functions to offshore locations, the bulk of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ 

ﬁinventive activityﬂ did not shift during the 1990s. As measured imperfectly 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 131
by the reported residence of inventors listed on U.S. patents, the inventive ac
-tivities of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms remain concentrated in the United States. 
Moreover, the inventive activities of non-U.S. semiconductor ˜rms, as measured 

by similar information for their U.S. patents, also appear to be concentrated in 

their home countries. This tendency for inventive activity to remain homebound 

was ˜rst pointed out in an analysis by Patel and Pavitt (1991) of patenting by 

multinational ˜rms. The ﬁnonglobalizationﬂ of patenting activity seems to re˚ect 

the strong dependence of inventive activity on domestic sources of fundamental 

research and skilled researchers. Despite remarkable advances in the codi˜cation 

and global transmission of scienti˜c research, access to such research results for 

purposes of inventive activity remains surprisingly national in scope. And the 

apparent importance of the national science and engineering base for domestic 

inventive activity reinforces the importance of another key governmental func
-tionŠfunding the scienti˜c and engineering research and education that support 

this domestic knowledge pool.
The most important implications of this study for U.S. public policy thus 
relate to (1) the importance of continued (and arguably renewed) federal funding 

for R&D in the engineering and physical sciences in industry and universities 

and (2) the importance of public support (which may be ˜nancial or regulatory) 

for more rapid development of the ﬁinformation infrastructureﬂ (e.g., broadband 

communications) that can support the growth of a large domestic market of 

demanding and sophisticated consumers that will in turn spawn innovations in 

information and electronics technologies.
Much of the remarkable record of innovation in the U.S. semiconductor and 
related IT industries that spans the 1945-2006 period rested on substantial invest
-ments of public funds in R&D that supported industrial research and innovation, 

as well as the training of generations of engineers and scientists. Much of this 

federal R&D investment was linked to national-security goals, and the end of the 

Cold War and associated defense ﬁbuild-downﬂ led to signi˜cant reductions in 

growth and in some cases the level of federal funding for R&D in the physical 

and engineering sciences, especially in academic institutions. Growth in federal 

R&D investment since the late 1980s has been dominated by growth in biomedi
-cal R&D funding. Although a portion of this biomedical R&D investment has 

supported education and training in the physical sciences and engineering, the 

imbalance in investment trends, if not reversed, could have detrimental conse
-quences for the continued innovative vitality of the U.S. semiconductor industry 

and related industries.
The importance of market demand in the locational structure of innovation 
in the semiconductor industry and other high-technology industries (see Chapters 

8, 9, and 10, which illustrate the importance of local demand in service indus
-tries as well) is dif˜cult to overstate. We have noted that the declining share of 

semiconductor consumption accounted for by the PC has been associated with 

the growth of new markets for semiconductor components (e.g., wireless com
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
munications devices) that involve major non-U.S. systems ˜rms. Moreover, many 
of the most innovative, demanding, and sophisticated users of such devices now 
are located in non-U.S. markets (e.g., South Korea for wireless devices, or Fin
-land for broadband-based applications). Historically, U.S. semiconductor ˜rms 

have derived enormous competitive advantages from their ability to serve (and 

learn from) a large domestic market populated by sophisticated and demanding 

usersŠin some cases, these demanding users were major institutions, such as 

the military.
One important reason for the rapid development of browser-based applica
-tions and new business models in the early days of the World Wide Web, which 

relied on innovations developed in Europe, was the broad diffusion and low cost 

of PCs within the United States, as well as the low costs of accessing computer 

networks (Mowery and Simcoe, 2002). Government policy can play a signi˜cant 

role in the creation or support of markets for advanced technologies (recall that 

the Internet was aided by substantial federal as well as private funding) by sup
-porting investment in the infrastructure that proved so fruitful in the early days of 

computer networking and developing regulatory policies that create incentives for 

the large private investments in the communications infrastructures needed for the 

emergence of new applications, products, and services. R&D and related invest
-ments from around the globe are likely to ˚ow to markets in which users demand 

the most advanced technologies and where these users have access to an array 

of options for developing new applications of these technologies. Such markets 

are likely to rely in part on a sophisticated wireless and high-speed broadband 

communications infrastructure.
CONCLUSION
The U.S. and global semiconductor industries have experienced signi˜cant 
structural change since 1980 with the growth of specialized design and manu
-facturing ˜rms. The growth of new products that use semiconductor components 

and the entry of ˜rms from Southeast Asia also have contributed to growth in 

offshore manufacturing capacity within the industry, much of which remains 

under the control of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms. Nevertheless, there is surprisingly 

little evidence that the innovation-related activities of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms 

have moved offshore to a comparable extent. Overall, the results of this descrip
-tive examination of an array of measures of the ﬁglobalizationﬂ of innovation-

related activities in the semiconductor industry support the ˜ndings of Patel and 

Pavitt (1991) from more than a decade ago. The innovation-related activities of 

otherwise global ˜rms in this industry remain remarkably nonglobalized, even in 

the face of expanded international ˚ows of capital and technology, far-reaching 

change in the structure of semiconductor manufacturing, and signi˜cant shifts in 

the structure of demand.
How can one explain these ˜ndings? The homebound nature of process inno
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 133
vation investments is perhaps the least surprising, given the complexity of process 
technology within the semiconductor industry and the demanding requirements 
for coordination between product and process innovation. Moreover, the emer
-gence of vertically specialized foundries that do not rely on development facilities 

to the same extent as IDMs means that our data on the location of development 

fabs exclude process innovation in a segment of semiconductor manufacturing 

that has grown considerably and gives every indication of continued growth. It 

is also important to highlight the retrospective nature of these indicators, which 

(especially in the case of patents) re˚ect R&D and related investments made years 

before their effects appear in these data. Trends in patenting in the late 1990s thus 

re˚ect actions or strategies that were put in place in the early 1990s and, like most 

other scholars, we have almost no forward-looking indicators.
Some of our other indicators, such as the NSF R&D investment data, exclude 
non-U.S. ˜rms, and the data themselves may well omit signi˜cant innovation-

related activities. It is plausible, for example, that much of the design work of 

U.S.-based fabless ˜rms is not captured by the NSF R&D surveys. U.S.-based 

semiconductor ˜rms also bene˜t from the strength of their home-based innova
-tion system, especially in the product design area. ﬁHome-base augmentationﬂ 

(Kuemmerle, 1999) thus may be a relatively minor factor for U.S. ˜rms™ R&D 

investment strategies and a signi˜cant motive for non-U.S. ˜rms™ R&D invest
-ments in the United States and elsewhere. Moreover, the exploitation by U.S. 

semiconductor ˜rms of these ﬁhome-baseﬂ advantages may not require signi˜
-cant offshore R&D investment to complement offshore production investment. 

Indeed, one hypothesized motivation for offshore R&D that receives the most 

support from our analysis is the ﬁmarket-demand exploitationﬂ hypothesis of 

Gerybadze and Reger (1999), which may be particularly relevant to the patenting 

activities of U.S.-based fabless ˜rms.
The trends highlighted in our discussion of technology-development and 
R&D alliances in this industry also raise interesting questions. The declining 

rate of formation of domestic and international alliances by semiconductor ˜rms 

throughout the industry is surprising but may re˚ect some exhaustion of the pool 

of potential alliance partners or projects. Nontariff barriers to U.S. ˜rms™ access 

to foreign markets resulting from government procurement restrictions or other 

policies have been reduced during the past decade in several industries (OECD, 

2005), and it is possible that these reductions in market-access barriers have 

reduced U.S. ˜rms™ incentives to pursue collaborative ventures with non-U.S. 

˜rms. Our alliance data also do not fully capture the types of alliances that are 

important to the fabless ˜rm segment of the U.S. semiconductor industry, and 

thereby understate the signi˜cance of international alliances within the overall 

industry. These data nevertheless suggest some growth in the participation by 

non-U.S. ˜rms in domestic and foreign alliances, especially among non-Japanese 

Asian ˜rms. Some portion of this alliance activity may be motivated by access to 

the Chinese mainland market, where nontariff barriers remain signi˜cant.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
The results of our analysis of patents provide the strongest support for the 
original ˜ndings of Patel and Pavitt (1991), but these results also must be treated 
with caution. As we pointed out earlier, patents omit many of the innovation-

related activities that are most important to the creation or maintenance of com
-petitive advantage for IDMs and fabless ˜rms alike, and our ˜ndings for these 

indicators accordingly must be quali˜ed.
Does the nonglobalized character of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ innovation-
related activities differ signi˜cantly from that of semiconductor ˜rms based 

in other nations? The data presented in Table 3 indicate that the homebound 

character of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms™ patenting is similar to that of semicon
-ductor ˜rms headquartered in other nations, as is the homebound character of 

the process-technology development facilities that U.S. and non-U.S. IDMs and 

systems ˜rms operate.
Are the trends discussed in this paper for the semiconductor industry repre
-sentative of other high-technology industries, or is this industry unique? Com
-paring the extent of ﬁnonglobalizationﬂ in the semiconductor industry with that 

of other knowledge-intensive industries is dif˜cult, since few detailed studies of 

these trends have been undertaken for other industries. Offshore R&D investment 

by U.S. ˜rms in electronic components accounted for a smaller share of industry-

funded R&D during the 1990s than is true of U.S. ˜rms in pharmaceuticals, 

where more than 14 percent of industry-funded R&D was performed offshore in 

2001 (National Science Board, 2006). Like semiconductors, the pharmaceuticals 

industry underwent considerable structural change and vertical specialization 

during the 1990s (see Chapter 6), particularly through the entry of biotechnology 

˜rms that often specialize in drug discovery and contract research organizations 

that specialize in drug development (i.e., clinical trials). Unlike semiconductors, 

however, the structure of market demand in pharmaceuticals has undergone little 

signi˜cant changeŠthe U.S. remains the most pro˜table single national market, 

thanks to the peculiar structure of its health care delivery system.
Why do we observe such contrasts between these two industries in the (ap
-parent) share of offshore sites in innovation-related activities? One hypothesis 

appeals to the more diverse structure of products in the pharmaceuticals industry, 

combined with substantial scienti˜c research capabilities (in many cases, based 

on public funding) in many non-U.S. industrial economies. The science under
-lying product innovation in various therapeutic classes, to say nothing of the 

growing variety of delivery mechanisms (topical, inhaled, subdermal, as well as 

oral), arguably spans a wider variety of ˜elds and has become much more diverse 

during the past 20 years than is true of product innovation in semiconductors. 

These factors have supported the growth of signi˜cant clusters of scienti˜c 

expertise in speci˜c therapies or diseases that attract the R&D investments of 

U.S. pharmaceuticals ˜rms. A large part of the ﬁDﬂ in pharmaceutical R&D 

also represents costs associated with conducting and administering clinical tri
-als to diverse patient populations. The situation in semiconductors arguably is 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 135
quite differentŠthe structure of products and markets remain less complex, and 
government R&D programs have not created comparably accessible clusters of 
scienti˜c and technological expertise.
As this speculative discussion suggests, the dynamics of globalization and 
nonglobalization in innovation are complex and re˚ect contrasting paths of evo
-lution (at the industry level) within different national innovation systems, as 

well as the interplay among these national innovation systems, trade policy, and 

other in˚uences. Still another important in˚uence on the globalization of at least 

some types of pharmaceuticals R&D is regulatory policy in the offshore as well 

as domestic markets in which all global pharmaceuticals ˜rms operate. Main
-taining a signi˜cant R&D presence in their offshore markets may facilitate the 

management of clinical trials for new products that U.S. ˜rms seek to introduce 

into these markets.
Even in the pharmaceuticals industry, however, Narin et al. (1997) have 
pointed out that the patents ˜led in the United States by non-U.S. (as well as U.S.) 

inventors tend to rely disproportionately on ﬁhome-countryﬂ science, as measured 

by the citations to scienti˜c publications in their patent applications. The links 

between science and technology that contribute to much of the inventive activity 

that is embodied in patenting retain a considerable homebound element, rather 

than operating seamlessly and frictionlessly across national boundaries.
Overall, this discussion of the globalization of innovation-related activities 
in the U.S. semiconductor industry does not indicate an imminent policy-related 

ﬁcrisisﬂ in the innovative capabilities of U.S. ˜rms. The implications of our 

discussion for the employment of engineers in innovation-related activities in 

the U.S. semiconductor industry also are reasonably positive. As we have noted 

repeatedly, U.S. ˜rms have reacted to the growth of offshore innovative and pro
-ductive capabilities by developing novel business models that have enabled them 

to compete successfully in an array of new markets. The success of these innova
-tive strategies has sustained innovation and employment in the U.S. semiconduc
-tor industry. Nonetheless, it seems clear that much of the innovative performance 

of U.S. semiconductor ˜rms relies on the health of a complex domestic R&D 

infrastructure that has bene˜ted from large investments of public funds during 

the past six decades. A second important historical contributor to the innovative 

performance of U.S. ˜rms is the large domestic market of innovative users that 

these ˜rms face. Sustaining both of these factors that have contributed to the in
-novative performance of U.S. semiconductors in an intensely competitive global 

industry will require innovations in policy by both government and industry for 

decades to come.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
Research for this chapter was supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, 
the Ewing M. Kauffman Foundation, and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
A portion of David Mowery™s research was supported by the National Science 
Foundation (SES-0531184). A portion of Alberto Di Minin™s research was sup
-ported by the In-Sat Laboratory, Scuola Superiore Sant™Anna, Pisa, Italy. Deepak 
Hedge provided valuable comments on an earlier draft of this chapter.
REFERENCES
Appleyard, M. M., N. W. Hatch, and D.C. Mowery. (2000). Managing the development and transfer 
of process technologies in the semiconductor manufacturing industry. Pp. 183-207 in 
The Na
-ture and Dynamics of Organizational Capabilities
, G. Dosi, R. R. Nelson, and S. G. Winter, 
eds. London: Oxford University Press.
Arensman, R. (2003). Fabless goes global. 
Electronic Business. 
March 21.
Bergek, A., and M. Bruzelius. (2005). Patents with inventors from different countries: Exploring 
some methodological issues through a case study. Paper presented at the DRUID conference, 
June 27-29, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Braun, E., and S. MacDonald. (1978). 
Revolution in Miniature: The History and Impact of Semicon
-ductor Electronics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, C., and G. Linden. (2006a). Offshoring in the semiconductor industry: A historical perspec
-tive. In 
Brookings Trade Forum 200
5: Offshoring White-Collar Work
, S. M. Collins and L. 
Brainard, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Brown, C., and G. Linden. (2006b). 
Semiconductor Engineers in a Global Economy. National Acad
-emy of Engineering Workshop on the Offshoring of Engineering: Facts, Myths, Unknowns and 

Implications. 
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Ernst, D. (2005). Complexity and internationalisation of innovation: Why is chip design moving to 
Asia? 
International Journal of Innovation Management
 9(1):47-73.
Gerybadze, A., and G. Reger. (1999). Globalization of R&D: Recent changes in the management of 
innovation in transnational corporations. 
Research Policy
 28(2-3):251-275.
Hagedoorn, J. (2002). Inter-˜rm R&D partnerships: An overview of major trends and patterns since 
1960. 
Research Policy
 31:477-492.
Hall, B. H., and R. H. Ziedonis. (2001). The patent paradox revisited: An empirical study of patenting 
in the U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995. 
RAND Journal of Economics
 32(1):101-128.
Hatch, N. W., and D. C. Mowery. (1998). Process innovation and learning by doing in semiconductor 
manufacturing. 
Management Science
 44(1):1461-1477.
Integrated Circuit Engineering (1990-1999). Pro˜les: A worldwide survey of IC manufacturers and 
suppliers. Scottsdale, AZ: Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation.
Kuemmerle, W. (1999). The drivers of foreign direct investment into research and development; An 
empirical investigation. 
Journal of International Business Studies
 30(1):1-24.
Leachman, R. C., and C. H. Leachman. (2004). Globalization of semiconductors: Do real men have 
fabs, or virtual fabs? In 
Locating Global Advantage: Industry Dynamics in the International 
Economy
, M. Kenney and R. Florida, eds. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Linden, G., and D. Somaya. (2003). System-on-a-chip integration in the semiconductor industry: 
Industry structure and ˜rm strategies. 
Industrial and Corporate Change
 12(3):545-576.
Linden, G., C. Brown, and M. Appleyard. (2004). The net world order™s in˚uence on global leadership 
in the semiconductor industry. Pp. 232-257 in 
Locating Global Advantage: Industry Dynam
-ics in the International Economy
, M. Kenney and R. Florida, eds. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford 
University Press.
Macher, J. T. (2006). Technological development and the boundaries of the ˜rm: A knowledge-based 
examination in semiconductor manufacturing. 
Management Science
 52(6):826-843.
Macher, J. T., and D. C. Mowery. (2003). Managing learning by doing: An empirical study in semi
-conductor manufacturing. 
Journal of Product Innovation Management
 20(5):391-410.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 137
Macher, J. T., and D. C. Mowery. (2004). Vertical specialization and industry structure in high tech
-nology industries. Pp. 317-356 in 
Business Strategy over the Industry LifecycleŠAdvances in 
Strategic Management
 (Vol. 21), J. A. C. Baum and A. M. McGahan, eds. New York: Elsevier.
Macher, J. T., D. C. Mowery, and D. A. Hodges. (1998). Reversal of fortune? The recovery of the 
U.S. semiconductor industry. 
California Management Review
 41(1):107-136.
Macher, J. T., D. C. Mowery, and D. A. Hodges. (1999). Semiconductors. Pp. 245-286 in 
U.S. Industry 
in 2000: Studies in Competitive Performance
, D. C. Mowery, ed. Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy Press.
Mowery, D. C., and T. S. Simcoe. (2002). Is the Internet a U.S. invention? An economic and techno
-logical history of computer networking. 
Research Policy
 31:1369-1387.
Narin, F., K. S. Hamilton, and D. Olivastro. (1997). The increasing linkage between U.S. technology 
and public science. 
Research Policy
 26(3):317-330.
National Science Board (2006). 
Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6. Arlington, VA: National 
Science Foundation.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2005). 
Looking Beyond Tariffs: 
The Role of Non-Tariff Barriers in World Trade.
 Paris: OECD Trade Policy Studies.
Patel, P., and K. Pavitt. (1991). Large ˜rms in the production of the world™s technology: An important 
case of ﬁnonglobalisationﬂ. 
Journal of International Business Studies
 22(1):1-20.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
APPENDIX: SEMICONDUCTOR PATENT CLASSES
Ł 029. Subclasses: 116.1; 592; 602.1; 613; 729; 740; 827; 830; 832; 835; 
840; 841; 854; 855; 025.01; 025.02; 025.03
Ł 065. Subclass: 152
Ł 073. Subclasses: 514.16; 721; 727; 754; 777; 862; 031.06
Ł 084. Subclasses: 676; 679
Ł 102. Subclasses: 202
Ł 117 Subclasses: all
Ł 118: Subclasses: 407; 408; 409; 410; 411; 412; 413; 414; 415; 669; 715; 
716; 717; 718; 719; 720; 721; 722; 723; 724; 725; 726; 727; 728; 729; 730; 731; 
732; 733; 900
Ł 134. Subclasses: 902; 001.2; 001.3
Ł 136. Subclasses: 243; 244; 245; 246; 247; 248; 249; 250; 251; 252; 253; 
254; 255; 256; 257; 258; 259; 260; 261; 262; 263; 264; 265
Ł 148. Subclasses: 239; 033
Ł 156. Subclasses: 345; 625.1; 626; 627; 628; 636; 643; 644; 645; 646; 
647; 648; 649; 650; 651; 652; 653; 654; 655; 656; 657; 658; 659; 660; 661; 

662
Ł 164. Subclass: 091
Ł 174. Subclasses: 102; 261; 015.1; 016.3; 052.4; 052.5
Ł 194. Subclass: 216
Ł 204. Subclasses: 192; 206
Ł 205. Subclasses: 123; 157; 656; 915
Ł 206. Subclasses: 334; 710; 711; 832; 833
Ł 216. Subclasses: 002; 014; 016; 017; 023; 079; 099
Ł 219. Subclasses: 121.61; 385; 500; 501; 505; 638
Ł 228. Subclasses: 122.2; 123.1; 179.1; 903
Ł 250. Subclasses: 200; 208; 338.4; 339.03; 341.4; 370; 371; 390; 492; 
552; 559
Ł 252. Subclasses: 950; 062.3
Ł 257. Subclasses: all
Ł 264. Subclasses: 272.17
Ł 307. Subclasses: 201; 270; 272; 291; 296; 355; 443; 446; 454; 455; 456; 
463; 465; 468; 473; 475; 530; 651
Ł 310. Subclass: 303
Ł 313. Subclasses: 366; 367; 498; 499; 500; 523
Ł 315. Subclass: 408
Ł 323. Subclasses: 217; 223; 235; 237; 263; 265; 268; 300; 311; 313; 314; 
315; 316; 319; 320; 350; 902; 907
Ł 324. Subclasses: 207.21;235; 252; 719; 722; 763; 765; 767; 768; 769; 
158F; 158R
Ł 326. Subclasses: all
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORS
 139
Ł 327. Subclasses: 109; 112; 127; 170; 186; 188; 189; 192; 193; 194; 195; 
196; 203; 204; 206; 207; 208; 209; 210; 211; 212; 213; 214; 223; 224; 258; 262; 
281; 288; 306; 324; 327; 328; 334; 366; 367; 368; 369; 370; 371; 372; 373; 389; 

390; 391; 404; 405; 409; 410; 411; 412; 413; 416; 417; 419; 420; 421; 422; 423; 

424; 425; 426; 427; 428; 429; 430; 431; 432; 433; 434; 435; 436; 437; 438; 439; 

440; 441; 442; 443; 444; 445; 446; 447; 448; 449; 450; 451; 452; 453; 454; 455; 

456; 457; 458; 459; 460; 461; 462; 463; 464; 465; 466; 467; 468; 469; 470; 471; 

472; 473; 474; 475; 476; 477; 478; 479; 480; 481; 482; 483; 484; 485; 486; 487; 

488; 489; 490; 491; 492; 493; 494; 495; 496; 497; 498; 499; 500; 501; 502; 503; 

504; 505; 510; 511; 513; 527; 528; 529; 530; 536; 537; 538; 539; 541; 542; 543; 

546; 562; 563; 564; 565; 566; 568; 569; 570; 571; 574; 575; 576; 577; 578; 579; 

580; 581; 582; 583; 584; 585; 586; 587; 051; 065; 081; 408; 409; 410; 411; 412; 

413
Ł 329. Subclasses: 301; 305; 314; 326; 342; 362; 364; 365; 369; 370
Ł 330. Subclasses: 114; 116; 117; 118; 124; 127; 128; 129; 140; 141; 142; 
143; 144; 146; 147; 148; 149; 150; 151; 152; 153; 154; 155; 156; 157; 168; 172; 

181; 182; 183; 185; 186; 192; 193; 199; 200; 202; 250; 252; 253; 254; 255; 260; 

263; 264; 267; 269; 270; 272; 275; 277; 282; 285; 290; 292; 296; 297; 004.9; 

007; 009; 044; 051; 056; 059; 061; 069; 070; 075; 076; 087; 299; 3
Ł 331. Subclasses: 107; 111; 008; 052; 1A
Ł 332. Subclasses: 102; 105; 110; 113; 116; 130; 135; 136; 146; 152; 164; 
168; 177; 178
Ł 333. Subclasses: 103; 247
Ł 334. Subclasses: 015; 047
Ł 338. Subclass: 195
Ł 340. Subclasses: 146; 598; 634; 814; 815.45; 825
Ł 341. Subclasses: 118; 136; 143; 145; 156
Ł 346. Subclass: 150.1
Ł 347. Subclasses: 130; 238; 001; 059
Ł 348. Subclasses: 126; 294; 390; 391; 420; 801; 087
Ł 349. Subclasses: 140, 202, 041, 042, 047, 053
Ł 355. Subclass: 053
Ł 356. Subclass: 030
Ł 358. Subclasses: 261; 426; 482; 483; 513; 514; 037
Ł 359. Subclasses: 109; 248; 332; 342; 343; 344; 359; 360; 006
Ł 360. Subclasses: 051
Ł 361. Subclasses: 100; 196; 197; 198; 277; 519; 523; 525; 527; 537; 600; 
697; 703; 717; 718; 723; 737; 763; 764; 783; 813; 820; 001; 056; 091
Ł 362. Subclass: 800
Ł 363. Subclasses: 108; 109; 114; 123; 125; 126; 127; 128; 131; 135; 159; 
160; 163; 010; 027; 037; 041; 048; 049; 053; 054; 056; 057; 060; 070; 077
Ł 364. Subclasses: 232; 249; 468; 477; 488; 489; 490; 491; 578; 579; 715; 
716; 748; 750.5; 754; 760; 787; 862; 927; 954; 514R
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Ł 365. Subclasses: 103; 104; 105; 106; 114; 145; 156; 174; 175; 176; 
177; 178; 179; 180; 181; 182; 183; 184; 185; 186; 187; 188; 189; 200; 201; 203; 
205; 207; 208; 210, 212; 218; 221; 222; 225; 226; 227; 230; 233; 015; 049; 053; 

096
Ł 368. Subclasses: 239; 241; 083
Ł 369. Subclasses: 121; 044; 047
Ł 370. Subclasses: 013; 060; 062; 085; 094.1
Ł 371. Subclasses: 005; 010; 011; 021; 022; 037; 040; 047
Ł 372. Subclasses: 043; 044; 045; 046; 047; 048; 049; 050; 075; 081
Ł 374. Subclasses: 163; 178
Ł 375. Subclasses: 118; 224; 351; 356
Ł 376. Subclass: 183
Ł 377. Subclasses: 127; 057; 069
Ł 379. Subclasses: 253; 287; 292; 294; 361; 405
Ł 381. Subclasses: 175; 015
Ł 382. Subclasses: 144; 145; 151
Ł 385. Subclasses: 131; 014; 049; 088
Ł 395. Subclasses: 182.03; 200; 241; 250; 275; 280; 290; 296; 309; 325; 
375; 400; 403; 425; 430; 445; 500; 519; 550; 575; 650; 700; 725; 750; 800
Ł 396. Subclasses: 211; 236; 321; 081; 099
Ł 414. Subclass: 935
Ł 417. Subclass: 413
Ł 422. Subclass: 245
Ł 427. Subclasses: 457; 074; 080; 098; 099; 523; 524; 525; 526; 527; 528; 
529; 530; 531; 532; 533, 534; 535; 536; 537; 538; 539; 540; 541; 542; 543; 544; 

545; 546; 547; 548; 549; 550; 551; 552; 553; 554; 555; 556; 557; 558; 559, 560; 

561; 562; 563; 564; 565; 566; 567; 568; 569; 570; 571; 572; 573; 574; 575; 576; 

577; 578; 579; 580; 581; 582; 583; 584; 585; 586; 587; 588, 589; 590; 591; 592; 

593; 594; 595; 596; 597; 598; 599; 600; 601
Ł 428. Subclasses: 209; 450; 457; 620; 641; 650; 680; 938
Ł 430. Subclasses: 311; 312; 313; 314; 315; 316; 317; 318; 319; 005
Ł 436. Subclasses: 147; 149; 151; 004
Ł 437. Subclasses: all
Ł 445. Subclasses: 001
Ł 455. Subclasses: 169; 180.4; 191.2; 193.3; 252.1; 331; 333
Ł 505. Subclasses: 190; 191; 220; 235; 329; 330; 703; 917; 923
Ł 510. Subclasses: 175
Ł 524. Subclass: 403
Ł 902. Subclass: 026
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141
 4  Flat Panel Displays
JEFFREY
 A. H
ART
Indiana University
INTRODUCTION
This chapter focuses on the ˚at panel display (FPD) industry, an industry that 
manufactures display components for various types of electronic systems from 
cell phones to high-de˜nition televisions. This is a relatively young but highly 

competitive and dynamic industry that got its technological start in the United 

States in the 1960s but quickly migrated to Japan, then to Korea and Taiwan. 

Despite the fact that FPDs are now manufactured almost entirely in East Asia, a 

number of U.S. ˜rms (such as IBM, Corning, Applied Technologies, and Photon 

Dynamics) are central participants in the industry. This chapter examines changes 

in the structure and geographic location of the industry™s innovation process since 

1990 and discusses the effects of these changes on U.S. ˜rms and workers.
One way to address these issues is to examine whether innovative activity 
has followed the movement of investment in FPD manufacturing. Since invest
-ment in manufacturing has been primarily in East Asia since 1990Š˜rst in Japan 

and then later in Korea and TaiwanŠone might also expect most innovative 

activity to be located there. In actuality, some important innovative activity is 

still located outside East Asia, primarily in supplier ˜rms in the United States and 

Western Europe. U.S. and European ˜rms remain important in the industry™s in
-novative processes, but it will be dif˜cult for them to remain so unless they work 

closely with the manufacturers in East Asia. Several U.S. ˜rms have done this 

and have remained, as a result, at the center of the innovation process. A major 

implication is that public policy should not punish U.S. ˜rms for their efforts to 

follow the action in globalizing industries like this one.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
BAC
KGROUND
 I
NFORMATION
 ON
 THE
 I
NDUSTR
YIn 2005, the total value of FPD
1 sales worldwide was $65.25 billion (see Fig
-ure 1). Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) accounted for over 95 percent of FPD sales 
by value; thin-˜lm transistor (TFT) LCDs accounted for over 90 percent of LCD 

sales; and 
large-sized
 TFT LCDs accounted for about 75 percent of the value of 
TFT LCD sales.
2 The unit volume of large-sized TFT LCD panels in 2004 was 
138.5 million displays. The unit volume of small- and medium-sized LCDs in that 

year was around 650 million (Young, 2005). The average annual growth rate from 

1990 to 2005 in the real value of FPD sales was 23 percent. Real growth rates for 

TFT LCD sales are likely to be somewhat higher than those for FPDs.
Demand for TFT LCDs is a function of the demand for a wide variety of 
products, including, among others, televisions, personal computers, PDAs, cam
-corders, cell phones, and digital cameras (see Figure 2). The market for TFT 

LCDs and other FPDs became larger and increasingly diversi˜ed as the consumer 

electronics market moved toward digital and high-de˜nition televisions and por
-table digital devices and as the size and quality of TFT LCDs increased.
Innovations in process technology along with vigorous competition permit
-ted consumers to bene˜t from steadily declining prices over time. For example, 

prices of TFT LCDs declined with each successive generation of production 

equipment. Every time the glass substrate size for processing displays increased, 

a new generation of production equipment was created to match that size. With 

the entry of Korean and Taiwanese ˜rms into the market, the demand for TFT 

LCDs increased in all markets where thinness and low power consumption were 

valued by consumers.
The potential market for FPDs is enormous. About 780 million cell phones 
were sold globally in 2005; 176 million TV sets; 145 million desktop personal 

computers; 62 million notebook computers; 9 million Personal Digital Assistants 

(PDAs); 10 million camcorders; 50 million MP3 players; and 85 million digital 

cameras.
3 And yet, while TFT LCDs accounted for almost all notebook computer 
displays, camcorder view˜nders, PDA displays, and handheld TVs in 2005, they 

accounted for only around 60 percent of computer monitors and 10 percent of 

televisions. Until recently, most cell phones used Super Twisted Nematic (STN)  
1 
The term ˚at panel display encompasses a variety of display technologies, including LCDs, plasma 
displays, organic light-emitting diodes, and electroluminescent displays. Many of the statistics col
-lected about the industry focus on the largest segment of the ˚at panel display marketŠLCDs. This 
chapter focuses mainly on LCDs.
2 
An LCD is a thin, ˚at display device made up of any number of pixels arrayed in front of a light 
source or re˚ector. See 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_crystal_displa
y for details. A color ˜lter 
is required for color displays and, since the mid 1990s, most LCDs sold use a multiplexed active-

matrix method of addressing the pixels that depends on the deposition of very small TFTs on the 

bottom glass panel of the device. See 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TFT_LC
D. A large-sized panel is 
10 inches or more, measured diagonally. Small- and medium-sized panels are less than 10 inches.
3 
Various business press sources. The estimate for PDAs is for 2004.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 143
flat panel-1.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 1
 Global ˚at panel display revenues, 1990-2005 (current and constant 2003 
dollars).
NOTE: The statistics in the ˜gure include revenues for a variety of FPD products including 
LCDs, plasma displays, electroluminescent displays, and organic light-emitting diodes. 
SOURCE: DisplaySearch.
FIGURE 2
 Global ˚at panel display sales by application, 2005. SOURCE: Frost and 
Sullivan, http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/cio/FA1F-01-02-01-01/chart2.1.gif.
LCDs because of their lower price. In 2005, however, 47 percent of cell phones 
had TFT LCD displays, up from 30 percent the previous year (
Softpedia News
, 2005). Even in those display markets where TFT LCDs competed with alternative 

technologies, growth rates were impressive. For example, in 2005, sales of LCD 
Notebook PC Panel
LCD TV
Plasma TV
Mobile Phones
Public Info Displays
Industrial Applications
Automotive Applications
Medical Applications
Portable Media Player
Other Applications
Desktop Monitor Panel
PDA
flat panel-2.eps
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TVs grew to over 17 million units, up from 181,000 in 2000 (Cantrell, 2005). 
Figure 2 shows global sales of FPDs in 2005 by application.
Display size was initially a major constraint on demand for TFT LCDs. In the 
early 1980s, when the maximum size of TFT LCDs was 2 to 3 inches (measured 
diagonally), sales were limited to handheld TVs and camcorder view˜nders. 

In the late 1980s, when the maximum size was 13 inches and prices were still 

relatively high, computer monitor sales were limited primarily to displays for 

expensive notebook computers. Most notebook computers had passive-matrix
4 STN LCD displays until the price of TFT LCDs came down suf˜ciently to attract 

buyers. By the late 1990s, high-quality TFT LCD monitors for computers were 

being produced in high volume and prices had declined to the point where they 

were competitive in the marketplace with cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors.
By 2005, when the maximum size of TFT LCDs that could be produced in 
high-volume factories was over 40 inches, the main constraint on sales was price 

and quality relative to alternative similarly sized computer and TV displays, in
-cluding plasma display panels (PDPs)
5 included in the FPD revenues discussed 
earlier. By 2005, TFT LCDs were competing successfully in television markets 

with 42-inch or smaller CRT-based televisions and PDPs. Given the previous 

price declines in smaller TFT LCDs, however, it was clear that TFT LCDs would 

soon be competing successfully in the larger screen sizes as well.
PATTERNS
 OF
 I
NVESTMENT
 IN
 M
ANUFACTURING
In 1996, over 95 percent of all TFT LCDs produced globally were made in 
Japan. In 2005, less than 11 percent were made there; the top two production 

locations were Korea and Taiwan (see Figure 3), each producing roughly 40 

percent of global supply. The change over time in the location of TFT LCD pro
-duction was a result of a sequence of investment decisions on the part of major 

˜rms in the three countries. Japan was the dominant production site until 2001, 

when Korean ˜rms took the lead. Taiwanese production accomplished the same 

in 2002 but remained a bit below Korean production in 2002 and 2003. By 2004, 

the Koreans and Taiwanese were running neck and neck. Whereas the Koreans 
4 
A passive-matrix display is one in which each pixel must retain its state between screen refreshes 
without the bene˜t of a steady electrical charge. Pixels in passive-matrix displays are addressed via 
row and column drivers. TFT LCDs are active-matrix displays because a transistor associated with 

each pixel holds the steady charge that is lacking in an STN LCD. A key advantage of active-matrix 

displays over passive-matrix displays is that it is not necessary to address each pixel via row and 

column drivers during each screen refresh. Only those pixels that need to change are addressed 

during a refresh. This generally permits active-matrix displays to have faster response times than 

passive-matrix displays.
5 
A PDP is an emissive FPD in which visible light is generated by phosphors excited by a plasma 
discharge between two panels of glass.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 145
flat panel-3.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 3
 Production shares of FTF LCDs by location, 1993-2004 (percentages). 
SOURCE: Murtha et al. (2001).
began to produce TFT LCDs in high volume around 1995, the Taiwanese did not 
begin to do so until 1998.
The main reasons for this shift in production within East Asia were lower en
-gineering and labor costs in Korea and Taiwan and the ability of ˜rst Korean and 

then Taiwanese ˜rms to raise the large amounts of capital needed for investing 

in state-of-the-art fabrication facilities. It is important to note that most Japanese 

˜rms were not able to do this after the beginning of the bubble economy in 1991.
6 This provided a window of opportunity for the entry of Korean ˜rms in the mid-

1990s. Similarly, a window of opportunity was created for Taiwanese ˜rms in the 

wake of the Asia Crisis of 1997-1998, as Korean ˜rms temporarily experienced 

dif˜culties in ˜nancing new plants.
The ownership of production was similar to the location of production with 
some notable exceptions. Some of the production (less than one-fourth) located in 

Japan in the mid-1990s was owned by IBM through its joint venture with Toshiba 

(Display Technologies, Inc.). Some of the production (about one-fourth) located 

in Korea in the late 1990s was owned by Philips (a European ˜rm) in its joint 

venture with LG (LG Philips Displays). After 2000, Sony also owned some of the 
6 
After the collapse of the Japanese stock market in 1990 and a major decline in the value of real 
estate, Japanese banks suffered from a shortage of capital. Since many loans to small businesses 
were backed by property and small business loans constituted more than a majority of total loans, the 

entire banking system began to look shaky after 1990. Financial regulators failed to force the banks 

to write off their bad loans, so bank depositors began to look elsewhere for places to invest their 

capital and corporate borrowers began to look to overseas capital markets for loans (see Hutchison, 

1998; Wood, 1992).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
production in Korea through its joint venture with Samsung (S-LCD). Japanese 
˜rms provided some of the capital and technology for new entrants in Taiwan and 
China. They did this in order to have access to dependable supply sources of ˚at 

panels so that they would be able to compete with low-cost producers in Japan 

(such as Sharp) and Korea in end-user markets for computers and televisions. 

Taiwanese ˜rms supplied assembled displays to Japanese ˜rms on an original 

equipment manufacturer basis. Table 1 provides a list of the largest producers of 

TFT LCDs in 2005.
TFT-LCD Manufacturing
TFT LCD manufacturing is technically challenging, expensive, and risky. 
The seventh generation of TFT LCD fabrication plants required an investment of 

between $1.5 billion and $2 billion per plant. Because of learning-curve econo
-mies (dynamic economies of scale) in TFT LCD production, the price for any 

given size of display declined over time, just as it did for integrated circuits (ICs). 

But the competition among display ˜rms was so intense that it was not always 

possible to enjoy the pro˜ts that are sometimes connected with learning-curve 

economies, hence the risk of making large investments with limited payoffs.
The technology for manufacturing TFT LCDs is quite complex, bearing 
many similarities to that for ICs. Both TFT LCD and IC production require 

advanced clean rooms, advanced lithography equipment, chemical or physical 

vapor deposition equipment, specialized testing equipment, and robotic handling 

equipment. TFT LCDs, like ICs, require many process steps; an error at any 

step may produce a faulty device. TFT LCD and IC production is highly capital-

intensive, and extensive training is required for clean-room production workers 

and, even after a factory is producing at full capacity, a large team of production 

engineers must be on hand to diagnose and ˜x production problems. The propor
-tion of engineers to production workers increases as one moves from generation 

to generation (as does the necessity to employ automated handling and convey
-ance technologies) because of the increasing dif˜culty of maintaining high yields 

and throughput.
TABLE 1
 Major TFT LCD Manufacturers by Location, 2005
Japan
Korea
Taiwan
U.S.
China
Sharp
Ł Samsung
Ł LG Philips Display
Ł 
 Sony-Samsung LCD
Ł AU Optronics
Ł Chi Mei Optoelectronics

Ł HannStar

Ł Quanta Display

Ł Chunghwa Picture Tubes
None
Ł 
 Beijing Orient 
Electronics
Ł SVA-NEC
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 147
As the glass substrate size increased in TFT LCD production (see Figure 4), 
some physical properties changed, thus creating new challenges for equipment 
manufacturers. For example, large glass substrates required special handling tech
-nologies because of the tendency of glass to sag when transported horizontally. 

Photolithography equipment had to be updated to be capable of transferring de
-signs onto the larger and larger substrates. Filling the LCD cells with liquid crys
-tal materials became more challenging as the cell and module size increased.
One important difference between TFT LCDs and ICs is that ICs are always 
shrinking in size in order to achieve a greater number of chips per silicon wafer 

and to speed the performance of the chip itself. In contrast, a signi˜cant portion of 

the global market for TFT LCDs tends to shift toward larger-sized displays (e.g., 

for computer monitors and TVs) while the demand for smaller displays (e.g., for 

cell phones) also has tended to grow rapidly, so the only way to reduce average 

unit costs is by increasing yields and by reducing defects on larger and larger 

glass substratesŠthe large sheets of glass on which multiple display panels are 

processed (see Figure 4).
This episodically requires a shift to the next generation of production tech
-nology, new tools and handling equipment geared to the larger substrates, and 

manufacturers to have ˚exible strategies with regard to the production of a vari
-ety of display sizes. Figure 4 shows that there have been six generational shifts 

between 1991 and 2005, so the average time between shifts has been 2.3 years. 

While the IC industry also has gone through transitions to larger wafer sizes 

(the latest being from 200- to 300-mm-diameter wafers), these transitions are 
flat panel-4.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 4
 Glass substrates, ˜rst through seventh generation. SOURCE: Samsung Corn
-ing Precision, http://www.scp.samsung.com/content/en/product/generation.asp.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
less frequent and ICs of a given type generally do not increase in size over time 
(rather they tend to shrink).
Firm Strategies
The strategy for manufacturers of TFT LCDs consists mainly of deciding if 
and when to invest in the construction of a new fabrication facility. Along with 
the decision to invest in a new line comes the even more important decision of 

whether to move to the next generation of substrates (see Figure 4). It is a risky 

decision for a number of reasons: (1) there is always uncertainty about the future 

demand for TFT LCDs of various sizes, (2) there is uncertainty about how many 

competitors will match the investment and when (hence uncertainty about future 

supply), (3) there are uncertainties about both product and process technologies, 

and (4) there are uncertainties about how well the ˜rm itself will be able to ex
-ecute its selected strategy.
Product technologies are uncertain because of the potential competition from 
alternative display technologies. For example, it was not clear that LCD televi
-sions would be able to compete with CRT-based televisions and PDPs in the 

market for digital televisions until ˜fth-generation TFT LCD plants were built. 

Not only was there the question of relative price, there was also a question of 

relative quality of displays and the premium that consumers would be willing to 

pay for higher quality.
Process technologies are uncertain because of the problems connected with 
scaling up equipment and altering handling systems for each generation of sub
-strates. In the move from second- to third-generation substrates, for example, it 

was necessary to move to new types of conveyor systems and automated guided 

vehicles to transfer partially processed glass substrates from one machine to 

another on the factory ˚oor. This was done to reduce both breakage and particle 

contamination rates.
Besides having to deal with technological and other uncertainties, manufac
-turers have to decide which suppliers to work with. This can be crucial because 

of the need to ramp up production quickly in order to exploit whatever temporary 

advantages might accrue to early investors. Suppliers can fail manufacturers in 

a number of ways: Materials suppliers might not be able to provide key inputs 

at the right time; equipment suppliers might not be able to deliver or maintain 

equipment that is crucial to raising yield and throughput. Because of the extreme 

time pressures in this industry, most manufacturers work with established suppli
-ers who have extensive experience with high-volume TFT LCD manufacturing. 

Only if a new and inexperienced supplier has a very important technological edge 

will a manufacturer be willing to work with them.
Consider the strategies selected by Japan™s pioneer TFT LCD manufacturer, 
Sharp, in the early 1980s. Sharp invested earlier than other Japanese ˜rms in the 

˜rst generation of TFT LCD plants mainly because management believed that not 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 149
having an internal source for CRTs had hurt Sharp™s ability to compete with other 
Japanese ˜rms in the television business. As an early producer of handheld TVs 
and calculators, Sharp saw a bright future for other devices that required informa
-tion displays. Sharp management accepted the risk of investing in an unproven 

display technology because they felt they had no other choice.
Sharp initially worked with only a few external suppliers and tried to de
-velop its own manufacturing equipment. When the IBM-Toshiba joint venture, 

DTI, built a third-generation plant in Japan that outperformed Sharp™s earlier-

generation plants, it did so by relying more than Sharp had done on external 

suppliers. As production moved from Japan to Korea to Taiwan, ˜rms in the other 

East Asian countries generally became increasingly dependent on external suppli
-ers, mainly because they lacked the ability to develop quickly all the necessary 

capabilities in-house. In addition, they moved some of the more labor-intensive 

processes, such as module assembly, to lower-wage locations, including China.
Third-generation plants were considerably more automated than earlier-
generation plants, so external equipment ˜rms that could work with manufac
-turers to perfect their automation systems had an opportunity to become key 

participants in the industry. (We will later see how this approach worked for two 

U.S. ˜rmsŠApplied Materials and Photon Dynamics.)
During the bubble economy period in Japan, most Japanese ˜rms were un
-able to invest in new plants. Instead they retro˜tted their old plants to produce 

higher value-added products like low-temperature polysilicon TFT LCDs, which 

were mainly used for small displays such as those used in cell phones. Later sev
-eral of these ˜rms moved their display operations to Taiwan and China through 

foreign investment and technology transfers.
The decision of the Taiwanese ˜rms to invest in ˜fth-generation plants when 
Korean ˜rms were investing in sixth- and seventh-generation plants requires 

some explanation. The logic of entry via the latest generation may not have held 

for Taiwanese entry because of the ability of the Taiwanese to ˜nd other ways to 

become cost-effective manufacturers. Being the ˜rst mover to a new production 

technology can be quite expensive, especially if the rest of the industry is not 

ready to make the jump. Nevertheless, since their entry in the late 1990s, Taiwan
-ese ˜rms have invested in latest-generation plants as soon as they were able.
The development and introduction of each successive production generation 
occurred in a variety of locations, but importantly the successful integration of 

each generation of production equipment depended on investment in high-volume 

production. This meant that developers of equipment had to work with whatever 

˜rms had decided to be early adopters of the latest generation in order to remain 

competitive. Similarly, ˜rms that supplied key inputs, like glass substrates and 

color ˜lters, also had to do this.
To be more speci˜c, the development of lithographic equipment occurred 
primarily in Japan, the United States, and Western Europe, even though instal
-lation and testing of that equipment was primarily in East Asia from the 1980s 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
onward. Similarly, liquid crystal materials were developed and fabricated primar
-ily in Western Europe and then sold to East Asian producers. Chemical vapor 
deposition (CVD) equipment was developed primarily in the United States and 

Western Europe. Testing equipment was developed mainly in Japan and the 

United States. In short, new materials and equipment did not have to be devel
-oped in the same countries that invested in manufacturing, but ˜rms that supplied 

the manufacturers had to work closely with them to remain competitive.
Unlike the semiconductor industry, where design and manufacturing became 
less integrated over time (in fabless ˜rms and foundries), no such vertical disin
-tegration of that part of the value chain occurred in the FPD industry. However, 

in other parts of the value chain it was possible for some disintegration to occur, 

particularly between the glass-processing phase and the ˜nal assembly phase of 

production.
Materials and equipment suppliers became more important over time be
-cause of the time pressures created by the rapid changeover from one generation 

of production technology to the next. Korean and Taiwanese ˜rms were generally 

unable to emulate Japanese leaders, mainly Sharp and NEC, in building their 

own production equipment; instead, they had to rely on external suppliers to a 

greater extent.
THE
 S
TRUCTURE
 OF
 I
NNO
VATION
Innovation in this industry (as in other manufacturing industries) occurs in 
both the design of new products and the re˜ning of manufacturing processes. 

For example, as TFT LCDs started penetrating the market for televisions, panels 

had to be improved to meet the need for wider viewing angles than is necessary 

for displays in notebook and desktop computers. A key innovation was ﬁin-plane 

switchingﬂ technology because it increased viewing angles along with contrast 

ratios and brightness of displays. The response times required for real-time video 

in video games and television also required innovations in product technology. In 

2001, NEC developed its ﬁfeed forwardﬂ technology to speed up response times 

for televisions. Various types of ﬁoverdriveﬂ or ﬁresponse time compensationﬂ 

technology were developed by Samsung, LG Philips, CMO, BenQ, and View
-Sonic for their displays.
7 An example of a major recent innovation in process 
technology was the invention of ﬁone drop ˜llﬂŠa new way of inserting liquid 

crystal material between the two processed glass plates of a TFT LCD (Kamiya 

et al., 2001). With every increase in the size of substrates came a demand for new 

processing and handling machines.
While manufacturers must innovate both process and process technologies, 
they are often helped by suppliers. When suppliers who are not manufacturers 

themselves provide new materials or processing equipment, they must work 
7 
ﬁAdvanced Technology,ﬂ 
TFT Central
, 
http://www.tftcentral.co.uk/advanced.ht
m.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 151
closely with manufacturers to ensure that the materials and equipment will meet 
the needs of their customers. The intense competition in TFT LCD end-user 
markets from other manufacturers and from alternative technologies means that 

manufacturers must bring new plants online as quickly and cheaply as possible, 

and to do this they increasingly turn to external suppliers.
Patenting activity can be used as a crude indicator of innovation. Location 
of patenting activity in the TFT LCD industry tends to follow investment in 

manufacturing with a lag (see Figure 5). For example, the ˜ve largest holders of 

U.S. LCD patents as of 2005 were Sharp, LG Philips, Canon, Hitachi, and Seiko-

Epson. LG Philips™s U.S. patenting activity began in 2000 just as Sharp™s patent
-ing activity declined. Samsung™s patenting activity was markedly lower than that 

of LG Philips but it also took a turn upward from 1995 onward. Between 2000 

and 2005, the four major Taiwanese ˜rms (AU Optronics, Chungwha Picture 

Tubes, Chi Mei Optoelectronics, and HannStar Display) successfully ˜led for 

LCD patents in the United States but the total patents granted were considerably 

fewer in number than those held by Japanese and Korean ˜rms (see Figure 6).
U.S. ˜rms accounted for a decreasing percentage of total patents between 
1969 and 2005 (see Figure 6). This ˜gure was generated by counting the annual 

number of U.S. patents for which patent holders were either U.S.-owned ˜rms 

or U.S.-located laboratories and comparing that number to the total. Even before 

IBM decided to exit the TFT LCD market as a manufacturer, U.S. ˜rms were not 

keeping up with the increased patenting activity of foreign ˜rms.
Because of rapid technological change, the role of tacit knowledge, and 
the importance of proximity to physical production, much of the innovative 
flat panel-5.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 5
 U.S. LCD patents granted annually to the top ˜ve patent holders, 1969-2005. 
SOURCE: U.S. Patent Of˜ce, http://www/uspto.gov/go/taf/tecasga/349_tor.htm.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
FIGURE 6
 Number of LCD patents issued to U.S. ˜rms or laboratories compared with 
total number of patents, 1969-2005. SOURCE: U.S. Patent Of˜ce, http://www/uspto.
gov/go/taf/tecasga/349_tor.htm.
activity takes place within the manufacturing ˜rms themselves and particularly 
within their associated laboratories. In East Asia, most scientists and engineers 

employed by domestic ˜rms are nationals of the home country. There is very 

little research and development (R&D) done by these ˜rms outside their home 

countries. Other than Sharp™s laboratory in Camas, Washington, no major display 

research laboratory was established by an Asian ˜rm in the United States. This 

contrasts markedly with the nationality and location of scientists and engineers 

employed by U.S. and European ˜rms. IBM Japan operated an important display 

laboratory in Yamato; Philips acquired the laboratories of Hosiden in Japan and 

then worked in collaboration with LG in Korea after the joint venture was estab
-lished. Many members of the top management of Korean and Taiwanese ˜rms 

were previously employed by U.S. or European ˜rms and received graduate train
-ing in U.S. and European universities. For example, the head of Samsung™s TFT 

LCD operations was Jun Souk, who had previously worked for IBM.
Some important innovations occur in government and university laboratories 
or in supplier ˜rms and in collaborations between suppliers and manufacturing 

˜rms. To demonstrate this, I turn to a discussion of the historical importance of 

U.S. ˜rms as both suppliers and manufacturers in the TFT LCD industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 153
U.S. Participants in the Industry
The story of TFT LCD manufacturing in the United States began in the late 
1960s with a number of important successes in the research efforts of major 
˜rms like RCA, Westinghouse, Exxon, Xerox, AT&T, and IBM. However, none 

of these ˜rms (except IBM) decided to invest in volume manufacturing of TFT 

LCDs. IBM decided in 1986 to invest in high-volume production only in Japan 

and only in a joint venture with Toshiba. During the 1980s, in the wake of the 

high dollar and Japanese successes in semiconductors, U.S. ˜rms (other than 

IBM) decided not to invest in TFT LCD manufacturing. In contrast, all the major 

Japanese electronics ˜rms had invested in high-volume TFT LCD manufacturing 

by the late 1980s.
Nevertheless, a number of U.S. ˜rms decided to participate in the industry, 
most notably IBM, Corning, Applied Materials, and Photon Dynamics (to name 

the four important ˜rms). These ˜rms remained key players in the market thanks 

to their ability and willingness to acquire knowledge by working collaboratively 

with manufacturers outside the United States.
All U.S. manufacturers of TFT LCDs other than IBM were relatively small, 
niche producers.
8 These ˜rms engaged in a variety of efforts to catch up with 
the Japanese leaders, some of which involved help from the U.S. government, 

particularly the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of De
-fense. They failed mostly because U.S. governmental policies made it dif˜cult 

for ˜rms receiving government funds to work closely with manufacturers in Asia. 

But government policy was not solely to blame for this. Most U.S. ˜rms had not 

grasped the essence of the problem: To succeed in entering the industry at this 

stage, they had to work with partners experienced in high-volume production.
9 Firms that understood thisŠIBM, Corning, Applied Materials, and Photon Dy
-namicsŠwere successful, as discussed next.
IBM
In 1986, IBM and Toshiba entered into 2 years of joint research on TFT 
LCD manufacturing. The research would be conducted jointly by researchers at 
IBM™s Yorktown Heights laboratories, IBM Japan, and Toshiba. Each company 

would host the project for 1 year in its respective facilities in Japan, starting at 

Toshiba, where a rudimentary R&D line was to be erected as soon as possible. 

At the end of the joint research project, each company would be free to pursue 

its own manufacturing plans or to walk away. On the strength of these discus
-sions, Toshiba engineers apparently went immediately to work designing the line 
8 
My collaborators and I have written about these small manufacturers elsewhere (see, e.g., Lenway 
et al., 2000).
9 
For details, see Lenway et al. (2000) and Of˜ce of Technology Assessment of the U.S. Congress 
(1990).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
and ordering equipment. The contract was of˜cially signed and work began on 
August 1, 1986. One month later the R&D line was up and running.
By July 1988 both Sharp (Japan™s pioneer and still-dominant TFT LCD 
manufacturer) and IBM-Toshiba had developed 14-inch TFT LCD prototypes, 
demonstrating a potential for ˚at video reproduction that had seemed remote only 

5 years earlier. Sharp publicly announced its achievement, as is customary for 

Japanese companies. IBM-Toshiba did not at ˜rst announce their achievement, 

which was consistent with IBM company policy.
10
 Toshiba later prevailed, and 
an announcement was made in the wake of the Sharp press conference. Both 

companies claimed the laurels for largest size and best resolution.
Nearly a year after the IBM-Toshiba prototype announcement, on August 30, 
1989, the two companies announced their agreement to form a manufacturing al
-liance called Display Technologies, Inc. (DTI). The alliance was to be structured 

as a 50/50 joint venture between Toshiba and IBM Japan. The partners initially 

capitalized DTI at about $140 million (
Los Angeles Times
, 1989),
 of which 
$105 million was earmarked for a high-volume TFT LCD fabrication facility. 

DTI™s headquarters and ˜rst fab would be located in Himeji City, next to one of 

Toshiba™s STN LCD fabs. DTI of˜cially started up on November 1, 1989. R&D 

for DTI was conducted in three laboratories, one in the United States and two in 

Japan: IBM™s Thomas J. Watson Laboratory in Yorktown Heights, New York; 

IBM Japan™s laboratory in Yamato; and Toshiba™s laboratory in Himeji.
Thus, IBM was the only large U.S. ˜rm to invest in high-volume TFT LCD 
manufacturing. It is important to note that IBM decided to do this in Japan with a 

large Japanese partner, Toshiba, partly because it believed this was the only way 

to become globally competitive. Japan was where the TFT LCD action was and 

where learning about the new industry could be maximized. The most important 

customer for IBM FPDs was the IBM PC Division in Florida, so locating produc
-tion in Japan had little to do with servicing customers. IBM divested itself of its 

stake in DTI in 2001 when it no longer saw a need to have an internal supplier 

of TFT LCD panels. By then, there was plenty of competition in the global TFT 

LCD market and no dif˜culty ˜nding the high-quality displays needed for IBM 

end products. IBM was not interested in LCD television sales (although perhaps 

it should have been). Like all the large Japanese electronics ˜rms, except Sharp, 

IBM turned its attention to higher-value-added businesses, including very-high-

de˜nition FPDs, and to advanced services where potential pro˜ts and revenue 

growth were higher.
11
10
 Out of sensitivity to U.S. antitrust law, IBM has remained reluctant since the 1950s to announce 
technology breakthroughs prior to the availability of products in markets.
11
 To date there has been no high-volume production of IBM™s very-high-resolution displays. 
See IBM Research, Roentgen Project Page, Roentgen Introduction, 
http://www.research.ibm.com/
 roentgen
/.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 155
Corning
In fall 1986, a group of top executives in Corning held a meeting to decide 
on entering the market for LCD substrates. Corning research in New York and the 
marketing organization in Japan had followed FPD developments since the early 

1980s through several major turning points. Around the time of Matsushita™s 1986 

pocket television introduction, a number of senior managers in Corning came to 

envision TFT glass substrates as a major business opportunity for Corning.
Corning gained experience selling glass in Japan for STN LCDs over many 
years, beginning in the early 1970s with sales to makers of watch and calculator 

displays. Corning researchers made an effort to develop extremely thin sheet 

glass for these applications, using a product the company was selling for use 

as microscope slide covers for medical laboratories. Corning had developed its 

proprietary fusion glassmaking technology as a method of fabricating extremely 

thin, optical-defect-free glass without the need for grinding or polishing.
Early LCD technologies, however, did not require the advanced properties of 
fusion glass. Most of Corning™s sales for these applications continued to consist 

of glass manufactured using more conventional methods. But in the early 1980s, 

managers in Corning Japan noted with some surprise that the laboratories of sev
-eral major electronics groups were placing regular, gradually increasing orders 

for a more advanced product, Corning™s 7059 fusion-formed borosilicate glass.
Corning™s proprietary fusion glass technology seemed uniquely matched to 
the apparent technological trajectory of TFT LCDs. Corning Japan™s managers 

had worked diligently to nurture relationships with Japanese manufacturers. Even 

a technologically well-matched Japanese competitor would have faced dif˜culties 

building the same network and familiarity with market needs. For a competitor 

from outside Japan, these barriers would be insurmountable.
Corning™s main research unit, located in Sullivan Park in Corning, New York, 
developed new products and manufacturing processes for LCD glass substrates. 

The ˜rst fusion glass machine was built there in the late 1970s. In 1982, Sullivan 

Park developed an ultrathin glassŠCorning™s 7059 fusion-formed borosilicate 

glassŠthat was used in TFT LCD laboratories around the world. Sullivan Park 

also developed the fusion glass process that was used in Harrodsburg in 1984. 

The collaboration between Sullivan Park and Harrodsburg continues to the pres
-ent. The two locations recently co-developed a new glass called Eagle XG, which 

provides all the desirable properties required for TFT LCD substrates but does not 

contain arsenic, antimony, or barium. Eagle XG is therefore a greener product than 

its predecessor, Eagle
2000
, which was introduced in 2000 and contained the three 
heavy metals. Corning tries out all new TFT LCD glass products and processes 

at Harrodsburg before transferring knowledge to its other facilities.
Corning opened a new glass melting and ˜nishing facility for TFT substrates 
and a new TFT research center in Shizuoka Prefecture in 1989. Its growing TFT 

customer base in Japan would be served from both Shizuoka and Harrodsburg. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
As the industry grew, Corning had to expand production rapidly. Demand for 
thinner substrates resulted in volume production of 0.7-mm glass in 1990 and 
0.5-mm glass in 1998.
Samsung Corning Precision (a 50/50 joint venture established in 1995 be
-tween the two ˜rms) began to produce substrates for Korean producers in Kumi 

in 1996. A major expansion in production capacity in all three locationsŠthe 

United States, Japan, and KoreaŠoccurred in 2000. A second Korean plant was 

opened in Cheonan in 2002 and reached volume production in 2003.
12
In 2004, the ˜rm began to produce TFT substrates in Tainan, Taiwan. It soon 
opened another plant in Taichung to service the rapidly growing demand for sub
-strates in Taiwan. The governments of both Korea and Taiwan were concerned 

about the dependence of domestic TFT LCD manufacturers on foreign suppliers 

and the impact of that dependence on the balance of trade. Accordingly, they 

encouraged the establishment of domestic suppliers wherever possible but also 

urged foreign ˜rms to establish local operations as soon as possible.
Corning broke ground for a substrate ˜nishing plant in China in November 
2006. Apparently the ˜rm had started its manufacturing operations in Korea and 

Taiwan with ˜nishing plants before establishing melting operations. Corning was 

waiting to see how rapidly the Chinese TFT LCD ˜rms would be ramping up 

production before committing to a melting plant there.
Corning followed the shift in manufacturing of TFT LCDs as it moved suc
-cessively from Japan to Korea to Taiwan. Corning had to move manufacturing 

and some research to East Asia, but most of the research on fusion glass remained 

in the United States (Guan, 2004). By 2004, roughly a third of Corning™s total 

revenues ($3.8 billion) depended on the sales of TFT LCD substrates (
Newsday
, 2006). Corning™s ability to remain a key participant in the TFT LCD industry 

depended on its proprietary fusion glass technology.
Applied Materials/AKT
Applied Materials, the U.S. semiconductor manufacturing equipment maker, 
started a display arm called Applied Display Technology in 1991. In 1993, Ap
-plied Materials initiated a strategic alliance with Komatsu, the Japanese heavy 
equipment maker, called Applied Komatsu Technology (AKT). AKT developed 

and manufactured TFT LCD manufacturing equipment in the United States us
-ing globally sourced components. The company maintained principal R&D and 

engineering facilities in Santa Clara, California; funded basic research in outside 

institutions such as universities; and also relied on the specialized R&D and basic 

research capabilities of its global supply network. In 1993, AKT established its 
12
 Samsung Corning Precision Glass, ﬁCompany: General Information: History,ﬂ 
http://www.scp.
samsung.co
m.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 157
headquarters in Kobe, Japan, and set up a technology center there but most R&D 
remained in California.
13
The motivation for forming AKT did not revolve around the conventional 
joint venture criteria of market, technology, or capital seeking. The R&D was 
complete, the funds invested, and Applied Materials already enjoyed a prestigious 

position in Japan™s semiconductor industry. Rather, Applied Materials actively 

sought an alliance partner to address the personnel requirements of sustaining and 

growing the new business. The industry would grow rapidly (no one at Applied 

Materials knew how quickly at the time). To keep pace, the new venture would 

need to expand rapidly in its abilities to conduct site installations and testing as 

well as continuing servicing of its machines at the customers™ premises. Applied 

Materials offered to ally with Komatsu after a rigorous search for a partner that 

shared its beliefs about the necessary marriage of cost effectiveness, quality, and 

technological advancement. Komatsu invested $35 million initially in the new 

venture (
Electronic News
, 1993).
In October 1993, AKT announced that its commercial CVD tool, the AKT-
1600, was ready for sale, for delivery 6-8 months after an order was placed. 

Beginning with the startup of the ˜rst Generation 2 manufacturing lines in mid-

1994, all TFT LCD producers had the opportunity to bene˜t from the innovations 

incorporated in the new CVD tool. The AKT-1600 sold for about $5 million for 

a four-chamber production system, which could process about 40 substrates per 

hour. High-volume Generation 2 fabs needed about four of them.
14 By year™s end, 
AKT had captured CVD market leadership by a wide margin.
Shortly thereafter, Hitachi approached AKT for a design to process a 400 
 500 substrate, out of which they could make four 11.3-inch displays. Hitachi 
ended up with a CVD tool that could process 370 
 470 substrates, a modi˜ca
-tion of the DTI design. By the end of the life cycle for Generation 2, AKT had 

modi˜ed the 1600 to accommodate 400 
 500 mm substrates for a Generation 2.5 
line that Sharp started up in July 1995. Even the largest manufacturers remained 

indecisive regarding the best display size to manufacture and the best substrate 

size on which to manufacture it, but by supplying these ˜rms with tools that 

matched their diverse speci˜cations, AKT acquired knowledge that would al
-low it to be the dominant supplier of CVD equipment for years to come. Along 

with Corning, it would become a key participant in the global effort to establish 

an industry consensus on standards for next-generation equipment. Despite the 

movement of manufacturing from Japan to Korea and Taiwan, development of 
13
 Applied Materials announced the joint venture™s creation on June 17, 1993. According to Ap
-plied™s 1999 Annual Report, the venture ended in 1998. AKT then reorganized as a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Applied Materials. Since the reorganization, Tetsuo Iwasaki has served as AKT™s chair
-man, in addition to his position as chairman and CEO of Applied Materials Japan.
14
 Material for this paragraph was taken from 
DisplaySearch Equipment and Materials Analysis and 
Forecast
 (Austin, Tex.: DisplaySearch, 1999).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
new equipment was accomplished primarily in Northern California even though 
machines had to be built and tested on factory ˚oors in East Asia.
Photon Dynamics
Founded in 1986 by Francois Henley and headquartered in Milpitas, Cali
-fornia, Photon Dynamics initially produced inspection and testing tools for semi
-conductor manufacturing and did not enter the FPD industry until 1991. The ˜rm 
developed test, inspection, and repair systems for FPD manufacturing that were 

used to increase yield, reduce materials loss, get new designs from R&D into 

production, and assist in the rapid startup of new plants.
For TFT LCDs, materials costs (for glass substrates, color ˜lters, and polar
-izers, for example) represent at least 40 percent of the cost of production. As a 

result, test and inspection of substrates is a key part of improving manufacturing 

ef˜ciency. It is critical to identify defects and repair them as soon as possible 

prior to further processing to avoid wasting materials. When defects cannot be 

repaired, the substrate needs to be scrapped. The same goes for cells and as
-sembled modules.
Photon Dynamics was able to sell to high-volume manufacturers in Japan, 
Korea, and Taiwan on the basis of being able to offer products and services com
-petitive with those of its main competitors: Micronics Japan, AKT, and Shimadzu 

in array testing and NEC, NTN, and Hoya in cell and module testing. Two pro
-prietary technologies played a key role in the early success of Photon Dynamics: 

voltage imaging and N-aliasing image processing.
15
 The ˜rm held over 20 patents 
in its intellectual property portfolio.
Unlike Corning and AKT, Photon Dynamics had no overseas research facili
-ties. R&D was done mainly at its headquarters in San Jose, California. In 2005, 

the ˜rm maintained sales and customer support of˜ces in China (Beijing), Korea 

(Seoul, Daejeon, Kumi, and Cheonan), Taiwan (Hsinchu and Taichung), and Ja
-pan (Tokyo and Tsu). Some repair equipment was to be manufactured in Korea 

in 2007, but all other manufacturing was done in California.
Competition in Two TFT LCD Supplier Industries
Three U.S. suppliers were competitive in two industries that supplied impor
-tant inputs to TFT LCD manufacturing: Corning in glass substrates, and AKT 

and Photon Dynamics in manufacturing and testing equipment. Corning™s main 
15
 Voltage imaging produces a two-dimensional image of the voltage distribution across the surface 
of a TFT array. It greatly reduces the amount of time needed to test an array prior to assembly into 
a TFT cell, which can greatly increase the yield and throughput of TFT LCD production facilities. 

N-aliasing image processing refers to special software algorithms used to detect defects or anomalies 

in the images produced by visual imaging equipment.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 159
competitors were Asahi Glass and Nippon Electric Glass (NEG), both Japanese 
˜rms. Neither Asahi Glass nor NEG had developed fusion glass technology; 
therefore, they were at a disadvantage as the industry turned more and more to 

fusion glass as substrates grew larger. Corning™s careful husbanding of its intel
-lectual property rights in fusion glass technology was crucial to maintaining its 

competitive advantage.
AKT™s main competitors in CVD equipment in 2005 were Unaxis-Balzers 
of Western Europe and Jusung of Taiwan. Photon Dynamics™ main competitors 

were Micronics Japan, AKT, and Shimadzu in array testing and NEC, NTN, and 

Hoya in cell and module testing. Both were vigilant in protecting the intellectual 

property rights associated with their equipment and occasionally engaged in pat
-ent infringement suits to protect those rights.
All U.S. suppliers needed to locate warehouses and service facilities in 
Japan, Korea, and Taiwan close to major customers. As the industry matured, 

suppliers also felt pressure to locate manufacturing and R&D facilities in East 

Asia. These pressures arose because of governmental concerns about technologi
-cal dependency and the impact of technological imports on the balance of trade. 

Asian governments wanted key technologies to be developed domestically. If 

domestic ˜rms were unable to do this, then foreign ˜rms would be encouraged 

to locate their development efforts in the country. Such pressures were generally 

resisted because the supplier ˜rms wanted to maintain the core of scienti˜c and 

engineering expertise closer to home. Corning experimented with a joint venture 

with Samsung that proved successful but the joint venture licensed fusion glass 

technology from Corning and was not permitted to compete with the parent ˜rm 

in other markets. Corning located melting facilities in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan 

and was pressured to locate melting facilities in China, but so far had declined 

to do so.
PUBLIC
 P
OLIC
Y I
SSUES
In the background of this limited but important participation by U.S. ˜rms 
in the TFT LCD industry is the slow and steady relative decline of innovative 

activity in LCDs in the United States (see Figure 6). At the very beginning of the 

FPD industry, RCA™s Sarnoff Lab was a key location for cutting-edge research. 

The Sarnoff Lab developed the dynamic scattering mode display that was used 

in the ˜rst calculator with an LCD. Sarnoff licensed the patent to Sharp in 1973, 

the same year that it decided to end its LCD research program (Castellano, 2005; 

Johnstone, 1999). The Westinghouse laboratory™s LCD R&D program, led by 

Peter Brody, was terminated in 1978 (Brody, 1996). Xerox™s display efforts lasted 

considerably longer, culminating in the formation of a spinoff ˜rm named dpiX 

in 1998, but dpiX never attempted to compete in high-volume display markets. 

Products based on its technology were too expensive for consumer markets.
When the U.S. government decided to consolidate a number of R&D pro
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
grams relating to display technology in 1994, there was a ˚urry of research 
activity connected with the new emphasis on advanced displays, particularly on 
the part of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Some 

important technological developments came out of these efforts. For example, 

the deformable mirrors that eventually became Texas Instruments™ digital light 

processor technology now found in many projection televisions and data projec
-tors were partially funded with the aid of DARPA grants and contracts (most of 

the funding came from Texas Instruments itself). DARPA provided some funding 

to ˜rms like Photon Dynamics for TFT-LCD testing equipment. Firms like IBM, 

AKT, and Corning, in contrast, did not participate in these programs, except as 

observers, and did not receive major funding for further development of their 

core technologies.
A good example of decline in U.S. R&D capability in FPDs was the closing 
of a major government-funded display laboratory at the University of Michigan 

in the mid-1990s that had been started with DARPA funds but ended when the 

funding ran out.
16
 The decline in capability was the result of lack of will on the 
part of the Republican-controlled Congress to fund FPD R&D efforts. Globaliza
-tion played a key role in the evolution of the industry because the newer entrants 

in Korea and Taiwan were not able to match the technological resources that were 

available to Japanese ˜rms and thus had to collaborate with ˜rms in Japan, West
-ern Europe, and the United States to solve some of the formidable problems of 

becoming globally competitive. This need to collaborate provided some U.S. sup
-plier ˜rms with opportunities to remain at the technological frontier even though 

no U.S.-owned ˜rms were manufacturing TFT LCDs after the year 2001. How
-ever, since much of the innovation in the industry was connected with designing 

new commercial products and new manufacturing processes, U.S. ˜rms who were 

not major suppliers to the industry and most U.S. laboratories and universities 

were increasingly unable to participate meaningfully in the industry.
CONCLUSIONS
In general, innovative activity has tended to follow investment in manufac
-turing in the FPD industry, but some important innovation continues to occur that 

is not necessarily located close to manufacturing. Scientists and engineers in East 

Asia have an important advantage over U.S. scientists and engineers because of 

the location of manufacturing there; nevertheless, some U.S. ˜rms have remained 

key participants in the industry and their scientists and engineers have been able 

to contribute in very important ways to innovation in the industry. Without ˜rms 

like IBM, Corning, Applied Materials, and Photon Dynamics, the FPD industry 

would not have been able to solve important scienti˜c and technological prob
-lems. While the main bene˜t to date from innovative activity in this industry 
16
 For further details, see Murtha et al. (2001, ch. 6).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FLAT PANEL DISPLAYS
 161
has probably been captured mainly by ˜rms and workers in Japan, Korea, and 
Taiwan, a not insubstantial number of bene˜ciaries can be found in the United 
States as well. The nearly 400 workers employed by Corning in its fusion glass 

facility in Harrodsburg, Kentucky, are an example.
A key lesson to be drawn is that U.S. supplier ˜rms that are willing to 
establish service centers abroad and to work collaboratively with foreign ˜rms 

wherever the latter are located can remain internationally competitive even in 

industries where manufacturing is primarily located abroad. Such willingness 

to collaborate does not necessarily imply the offshoring of formerly U.S.-based 

R&D, as the cases of Corning, AKT, and Photon Dynamics illustrate. On the 

contrary, the willingness to collaborate ensures that some important innovative 

activity will continue to occur in the United States. Any government policies that 

prevent ˜rms from doing this are likely to be highly counterproductive. U.S. ˜rms 

have many strengths that derive from the emphasis on government sponsorship 

of basic research, relatively strict enforcement of competition and intellectual 

property laws, the availability of venture capital for startups, and a generally fa
-vorable climate for entrepreneurship. If the United States wants to participate in 

dynamic, globalized industries like the FPD industry, it has to keep its economic 

nationalists on a short leash.
REFERENCES
Brody, T. P. (1996). The birth and early childhood of active matrix, a personal memoir. 
Journal of 
the Society for Information Display
 (April):117.
Cantrell, A. (2005). Corning™s Rose-Colored Glass, 
CNNMoney.com
, December 2. Available at 
http://money.cnn.com/2005/12/02/markets/spotlight/spotlight_glw
/.Castellano, J. A. (2005). 
Liquid Gold: The Story of Liquid Crystal Displays and the Creation of an 
Industry.
 Hackensack, N.J.: World Scienti˜c.
Electronic News.
 (1993). Komatsu to invest $35M in Applied™s display unit. September 20. Available 
at 
http://˜ndarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0EKF/is_n1981_v39/ai_1441511
0.Guan, W. (2004). China Strategy of Corning™s TFT-LCD Business: Interview with Mr. Nitin S. 
Kulkarni, President of Corning Display Technologies China. 
Digi-Times
, December 23. Avail
-able at 
http://corning.com/displaytechnologies/ww/en/media_center/featured_articles/feature.
asp
x.Hutchison, M. M. (1998). 
The Political Economy of Japanese Monetary Policy.
 Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Johnstone, B. (1999). 
We Were Burning: Japanese Entrepreneurs and the Forging of the Electronic 
Age. 
Boulder, CO: Basic Books.
Kamiya, H., K. Tajima, K. Toriumi, K. Terada, H. Inoue, T. Yokone, N. Shimizu, T. Kobayashi, S. 
Odahara, G. Hougham, C. Cai, J. H. Glownia, R. J. von Gutfeld, R. John, and S.-C. Alan Lien. 
(June 2001). Development of one drop ˜ll technology for AM-LCDs. Pp. 1354-1357 in 
SID 
Symposium Digest of Technical Papers
, Vol. 32.
Lenway, S. A., T. Murtha, and J. A. Hart. (2000). Technonationalism and cooperation in a globalizing 
industry: The case of ˚at panel displays. In 
Coping with Globalization
, A. Prakash and J. A. 
Hart, eds. New York: Routledge.
Los Angeles Times. 
(1989). Toshiba, IBM Set Plant for Large LCDs. p. A3.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Murtha, T., S. A. Lenway, and J. A. Hart. (2001). 
Managing New Industry Creation.
 Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Newsday. 
(2006). Fired Corning, Inc., Employee Pleads Guilty to Selling Glass Secrets to Taiwanese 
Rival. January 19. Available at 
http://www.glassonweb.com/news/index/4187
/.Of˜ce of Technology Assessment of the U.S. Congress. (June 1990). 
The Big Picture: HDTV and 
High-Resolution Systems.
 Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce.
Sharp Corporation. (2005). 
Sharp Environmental and Social Report 200
5. Available at 
http://sharp-
world.com/corporate/eco/report/2005pdf/sharp09e.pd
f.Softpedia News.
 (2005). The Transition to TFT LCD Could Cut Down Prices on Cell Phones. May 
4. Available at 
http://news.softpedia.com/news/The-transition-to-TFT-LCD-could-cut-down-
prices-on-cell-phones-1645.shtm
l.Wood, C. (1992). 
The Bubble Economy: Japan™s Extraordinary Speculative Boom of the ‚
80s and the 
Dramatic Bust of the ™
90s.
 New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
Young, R. (2005). Survival of the Fittest: Managing the Peaks and Valleys of Supply/Demand. Pre
-sented at the 7th Annual DisplaySearch U.S. FPD Conference, Austin, Texas.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.163
 5  Lighting
SUSAN
 W
ALSH
 S
ANDERSON
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
KENNETH
 L. S
IMONS
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
JUDITH
 L. W
ALLS
University of Michigan
YIN
-Y
I L
AI
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
INTRODUCTION
Once a symbol of Edison™s creative genius and the prowess of American 
innovation, the incandescent light bulb represents a mature technology, now mas
-tered by new competitors and imported at pennies apiece from China. Lamp (the 
industry name for a light bulb) manufacturing was dominated for decades by a 

few ˜rms, notably Philips, OSRAM, and General Electric (GE). Related industry 

segments have typically been more fragmented, with thousands of ˜rms produc
-ing ˜xtures ranging from simple sconces to elaborate chandeliers. Increasingly 

both lamp and ˜xture manufacturing have been shifting to offshore locations, 

primarily in Asia.
Not only are North American and European lamp and ˜xture companies 
under the threat from low-cost imports, but solid-state lighting, a semiconduc
-tor- instead of bulb-based technology with greater potential energy ef˜ciency 

and new capabilities, is poised to revolutionize the industry and change how we 

understand and use lightingŠa change that will affect both traditional lamp and 

˜xture producers. Solid-state lighting is challenging incumbents and throwing 

leadership in the future industry up for grabs. As innovative products composed 

of light emitting diodes (LEDs) are developed, new features like colors that 

change on command are expanding architectural possibilities. Other opportunities 

come from the convergence of lighting, information, and display technologies. In 

˜ber optics light is data, and ordinary ˚at panel indoor lighting can serve as data 

transfer hubs, sending information to computers and appliances. Edison™s lamp, 

and its successors, may soon be replaced with glowing ceiling panels or even 

lighting-enhanced wallpaper that changes patterns on command.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Which ˜rms will successfully ride this new wave of innovation and what 
impact these changes will have on incumbents are not yet determined. Although 
the ˜rst wave of lighting innovation in the early 20th century spawned the devel
-opment of global companies like GE, OSRAM, and Philips, these 21st-century 

innovations will create challenges for incumbents. New ˜rms are emerging at 

all levels of the value chain to address the opportunity presented by solid-state 
lighting technologies.
In this chapter we contrast traditional lighting technologies with LED 
technologies. Traditional lighting technologies we de˜ne as incandescent, gas-
discharge, and electric arc lighting (which includes ˚uorescent, high-intensity 

discharge, mercury and sodium vapor, metal halide, and neon lamps). We exclude 

lighting technologies such as chemiluminescence that yield insuf˜cient light for 

illumination (such lights can be seen but not seen by). LED technologies (includ
-ing organic and polymer LEDs) are the only nontraditional technology considered 

because LEDs are the only alternative lighting approach that has reached suf
-˜cient maturity to be considered commercially viable in the trade, technology, 

and technical literatures.
This chapter analyzes changes in lighting technology over the past two 
decades and its implications for U.S. industry competitiveness. We explore 

whether the rise of global competition is limited to low-cost manufacturing or 

whether strategic centers of decision making and research are moving away from 

the regions and ˜rms that once dominated the industry. We examine the causes 

of these changes and what aspects of innovation in lighting, particularly in the 

arena of research and development (R&D), have changed since the 1990s. We 

speculate about the implications of these changes for ˜rm strategy in the new era 

of intense global competition, we analyze how national policies have affected the 

development and diffusion of traditional and new lighting technologies, and we 

explore how public policy can best address the challenges and opportunities of
-fered by solid-state lighting to aid countries in their struggles to conserve energy 

and reduce global warming.
We are entering an era of faster-paced competition as the lighting industry, 
which has been dominated by a few ˜rms (at least in the lamp sector), faces com
-petition from new technologies, ˜rms, and regions. Asian ˜rms, as well as ˜rms 

headquartered in the United States and Europe, have performed strongly in patent 

invention for solid-state lighting and are making key contributions to these new 

technologies. Both new ˜rms and incumbents are investing heavily in solid-state 

lighting technologies, and it remains to be seen which ˜rms will predominate.
Public policy will likely play an important role in future developments by 
stimulating demand for energy-saving lighting, providing funding for R&D, and 

incubating startup companies as they seek to commercialize these new technolo
-gies. But retail ˜rms like Wal-Mart are increasingly playing a role in the diffusion 

of energy-saving lighting technologies. We compare the policies of countries 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 165
supporting development and diffusion of new lighting technologies and specu
-late about how these efforts may affect the location of R&D, manufacturing, and 
headquarters of surviving lighting producers.
EVOLUTION OF THE LIGHTING INDUSTR
YGlobalization of Lighting Production
The global lighting market in 2004 was worth some $40 billion to $100 bil
-lion, about one-third of which represented lamps.
1 U.S. apparent consumption of 
lamps, ˜xtures, and other equipment totaled about $14.8 billion in 2004.
2 U.S. 
production of lamps grew steadily until the early 1970s, then ˚uctuated over the 

next 20 years, stabilized during the 1990s at about 1970 levels, and ˜nally fell 

somewhat at the start of the 21st century, as shown in Figure 1.
The eventual leveling off and downturn in U.S. lamp production in the 1990s 
can be explained, in part, by a steady increase in imports over the past two de
-cades. Total imports, as a percentage of U.S. apparent consumption, increased 

from less than 20 percent in 1989 to around 50 percent in 2004, as shown in 

Figure 2.
3About half of the imports come from China, Mexico, and Japan, with China 
representing the largest share as of 2004. In 1989, less than 3 percent of lamps 

were imported from China. By 2004, Chinese lamp imports represented 26 

percent of all lamp imports, having grown more rapidly than imports from any 

other supplier nation, and 10 percent of apparent lamp consumption in the United 

States. Once concentrated in the hands of three large manufacturers, the incan
-descent bulb industry has new competitors, primarily low-cost manufacturers in 

Asia.
In the ˜xtures industry, broken down in Figure 2, these trends are more 
intense, with 86 percent of all ˜xtures imports in the United States arriving 

from China by 2004. Increased ˜xture imports are the result of both incursion of 

lower-cost Chinese manufacturers and shifting production abroad by U.S. ˜rms 

that seek lower-cost manufacturing sites. An exception to this trend is Genlyte 
1 
Hadley et al. (2004) cite the ˜gure of $40 billion, one-third of which represents lamps, but pub
-licly available estimates of the size of the global lighting industry vary greatly, and the ˜rm Color 
Kinetics in a communication with us cites the ˜gure of $100 billion based on data from Fredonia 

Marketing Research.
2 
Apparent consumption equals U.S. production plus imports less exports, where U.S. production 
is measured as value of shipments from Bureau of Economic Analysis data, and import and export 

data are from the U.S. International Trade Commission. 
3 
Not shown in Figure 2 is an additional trade category ﬁOther Lighting Equipment,ﬂ for which im
-ports increased from 38 percent in 1989 to 57 percent in 2004, with China™s share of imports growing 

from 24 percent in 1996 to 32 percent in 2004.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
lighting-1.eps
$0
$500
$1,000
$1,500
$2,000
$2,500
$3,000
$3,500
$4,000
$4,500
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
$mil
Lamps
Residential Fixtures
Other Lighting Equipment
FIGURE 1
 U.S. shipments of lighting products (real 2004 values). SOURCES: Ship
-ment values: National Bureau of Economic Research (1958-1996), U.S. Department of 
Commerce, U.S. Census Bureau (1997-2001), Bureau of Economic Analysis (2002-2004). 
Producer Price Index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Thomas, the largest lighting ˜xture and control company in North America, 
which manufactures 70 percent of its products in the North American region in 

order to keep close to its design centers and customers (Genlyte Thomas, 2005). 

Genlyte Thomas is introducing new energy-ef˜cient light ˜xtures using compact 

˚uorescent (CFL), high-intensity discharge (HID), and LED lamps and is con
-ducting research on solid-state lighting to remain the premier ˜xtures company 

while the industry transitions to new lighting technologies.
The remaining area of growth for U.S. lighting production in the 1990s was 
in specialty lighting applications, such as Christmas decorations, underwater 

lighting, and infrared and ultraviolet (UV) lamps. This sector grew steadily 

throughout the second half of the 20th century and, as Figure 1 reveals, has sur
-passed the production value of lamps and of residential ˜xtures.
44 
Figures 1 and 2 use the de˜nition of traditional lighting, as de˜ned in the beginning of this article, 
for ﬁlampsﬂ based on SIC (3641, 3648) and NAICS (33511, 335129), which includes all traditional 
lamp types including (regular and compact) ˚uorescent and HID lamps, but excludes LED lamps.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 167
lighting-2.eps
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Lamp Imports
Lamp Exports
Lamp Imports from China
Fixtures Imports
Fixtures Exports
Fixtures Imports 
from China
FIGURE 2
 U.S. imports and exports of lamps and ˜xtures, total and imports from China, 
as percentages of U.S. consumption. SOURCE: U.S. International Trade Commission.
Big Three Lamp Producers
While there are hundreds of small lamp producers, which usually specialize 
in one type of lamp, the global lamp market is dominated by three big players: 
Koninklijke Philips Electronics (Philips), OSRAM-Sylvania (OSRAM), and GE.
5 All three ˜rms produce a wide spectrum of lamps based on distinct technolo
-gies for most major commercial and residential markets. Philips has the largest 

global market share in lamps, and GE has the largest U.S. market share (Mintel, 

2003).
6In the United States, GE has been a dominant player in lighting since the 
industry™s inception (Leonard, 1992). As early as the mid-1890s, GE and West
-inghouse controlled a 75 percent market share. GE eventually gained even greater 

market dominance, so that by 1927 GE and its licensees held 97 percent of the 

U.S. lamp market. Hygrade-Sylvania, whose lighting operations would much 
5 
That most lamp producers specialize on a single type of lamp is apparent from industry directories 
such as www.lightsearch.com.
6 
Philips Lighting employs about 45,500 people and has 70 manufacturing facilities worldwide 
(Philips, 2006, p. 38).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
later be bought by a German producer to form OSRAM-Sylvania, was GE™s larg
-est lamp licensee. Although GE™s market dominance fell in the latter half of the 
20th century, it remained the largest U.S. lamp producer.
In Europe, the lamp market also became concentrated early (Leonard, 1992). 
The leading ˜rm was OSRAM, formed in a 1919 merger of the three leading 

German lamp producers, and now wholly owned by Siemens. Second in the Eu
-ropean market was the Dutch company Philips. In part through cooperation with 

a European cartel set up in the 1930s under Swiss corporation Phoebus S.A., GE 

made substantial inroads in Europe and became the dominant worldwide pro
-ducer.
7 The big three lighting ˜rms all maintained leading positions in traditional 
lighting technology.
Traditional electric lighting patent applications during the period 1990-1993 
were identi˜ed using data for the United States and Western Europe.
8 As noted 
earlier, we de˜ne traditional lighting to include incandescent, gas-discharge, 

and electric arc lighting (which includes ˚uorescent, HID, mercury and sodium 

vapor, metal halide, and neon lamps). All of the big three were leaders in these 

traditional electric lighting technologies, with 257.8 patent applications by Phil
-ips (credit is split equally in the case of multiple assignees); 232.1 applications 

by GE and by Thorn, whose lighting business GE acquired in 1991; and 219.4 

applications by OSRAM, Sylvania, and OSRAM™s parent ˜rm Siemens. The big 

three each had more patent applications than any other ˜rm.
97 
GE™s dominance varied substantially across nations. For example, in the United Kingdom in 
1965-1967, the leading producer was British Lighting Industries, followed by Philips and OSRAM 
(Monopolies Commission, 1968, p. 8).
8 
Patents are included for international patent classi˜cations H01J61-65, ﬁDischarge lampsﬂ; H01K, 
ﬁElectric incandescent lampsﬂ; and H5B31 and H5B35-43, which cover ﬁElectric lighting . . . not 

otherwise provided forﬂ excluding electroluminescent light sources (which provide suf˜cient light to 

see an object but not to see by). Patents are included for applications at patent of˜ces of the United 

States (1,589 applications), Europe (976), Austria (190), Belgium (20), Denmark (49), Spain (976), 

Finland (79), France (121), Germany (1,798), Ireland (3), Italy (31), Netherlands (51), Norway (22), 

Portugal (5), Spain (194), Sweden (20), Switzerland (22), and the United Kingdom (218). Data are 

drawn from the European Patent Of˜ce™s Worldwide Patent Statistics Database, version April 2006 

(with the coverage of the Espacenet online database). Equivalent applications in multiple nations, 

detected by the fact that they share an identical set of priorities (as in Espacenet), were treated as a 

single application by weighting each application in inverse proportion to its number of equivalents 

(including itself).
9 
A German patent trust, Patra Patent Treuhand (possibly associated with OSRAM or Siemens), 
had 185.7 applications. The next three ˜rms in number of patent applications were Toshiba with 

70.2 applications, Motorola with 36 applications, and Matsushita with 33 applications. As in most 

areas of patenting, there were patent applications by many other individuals and companies (the total 

number of relevant patent applications was 3,236 during the period 1990-1993), and meaningful 

analyses are based on relative numbers, not on percentages of total applications. When ˜gures are 

measured in terms of the number of patents actually granted from these applications (by the time of 

data collection), the conclusions are similar: Philips received 213.6 patents; OSRAM, Sylvania, and 

Siemens, 205; GE including Thorn, 181.5; Patra Patent Treuhand, 76.9; Toshiba, 52.6; Motorola, 35; 

and Matsushita, 31.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 169
Evolving Technology
The lighting industry has developed several types of lamps. The incandes
-cent lamp, little changed in form since the Edison era, is an evacuated glass 
tube (usually re˜lled with a gas) in which an electric current passes through a 

thin ˜lament, heating it and causing it to emit light. Mercury vapor lamps, ˜rst 

patented in 1901 by Peter Cooper Hewitt, are high-pressure gas arc lamps and a 

forerunner to ˚uorescent lamps. Neon lamps were invented by Georges Claude 

10 years later. Fluorescent lamps, ˜rst patented by Meyer, Spanner, and Germer 

in 1927, use a glowing phosphor coating instead of glowing wires to increase ef
-˜ciency. Special types of incandescent lamps, such as bulbs ˜lled with halogen 

gas to increase lifetime and ef˜ciency, have also been developed.
Incandescent lamps account for a majority of household sales in the United 
States, but a smaller portion of total sales. In households, incandescent lamps 

represent 66.5 percent of sales revenues, whereas ˚uorescent and other lamps re
-main uncommon (Mintel, 2003). Residential sales, however, make up less than 10 

percent of lighting demand measured in lumen-hours. Combining all economic 

sectors (residential, commercial, industrial, and outdoor), incandescent lamps 

represent 11.0 percent of lumen-hours of light output, as compared to about 57.5 

percent for ˚uorescent, 31.0 percent for HID, and 0.01 percent for solid-state 

lighting (Navigant Consulting, 2003a, p. 7).
Each of these lamp types has experienced a steady march of small improve
-ments in materials, design, light quality, energy ef˜ciency, and manufacturing 

ef˜ciency throughout the past century. While early improvements were made 

by independent inventors in the United Kingdom, more than three-quarters of 

these improvements originated in countries where the big three were headquar
-teredŠthe United States, the Netherlands, and Germany.
10
 In materials, for 
example, thorium oxide added to wires increased shock resistance, nonsag wire 

formulations made possible new con˜gurations for brighter and more easily 

mounted incandescent ˜laments, and safer phosphors replaced the highly toxic 

beryllium coating in ˚uorescent lights. Examples of design changes include ˜ll
-ing incandescent lamps with large-molecule gases to prolong ˜lament lifetimes, 

new layouts of ˜lament mounts to facilitate assembly and automated manu
-facture, and a proliferation of lamp varieties, shapes, and sizes. Light-quality 

changes were achieved by choosing appropriate ˜lament and phosphor materials 

and sometimes by blocking part of the emitted light to attain, for instance, a look 

similar to sunlight.
Energy-saving lamps also progressed steadily but slowly. GE, for example, 
commercially introduced its ˜rst energy-saving incandescent lamp in 1913, but 
10
 We catalogued 134 improvements in lamp technologies between 1905 and 2005. Sources: com
-pany websites of General Electric (2006), OSRAM (2006), Siemens (2006), Philips (2006), and 
Toshiba (2006); websites of Bellis (2006a,b,c), Williams (2005), and Arthur (2006), and Bowers 

(1982).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
not until 1974 was the ˜rst energy-saving ˚uorescent lamp introduced. Manu
-facturing became increasingly ef˜cient with machines and methods that allowed 
faster, higher-quality production with less manual labor. Automatic insertion 

and mounting of components, sealing, exhausting, basing, and ˚ashing were key 

process technologies. Many of these and other improvements took place during 

the ˜rst half of the last century and are documented by Bright (1958, pp. 22-30). 

In the latter half of the century, improvements focused largely on improved ef
-˜ciency and longer lamp lives. The discovery of substances such as narrowband 

phosphors led to the development of CFLs, gases such as xenon yielded brighter 

lamps such as those used in automobiles, and similar improvements had medical 

uses including UV lamps.
Whereas lowering manufacturing costs and streamlining production were the 
key lighting challenges of the late 20th century, saving energy is the new driv
-ing force for 21st-century development. Lighting accounted for about 22 percent 

of total energy used in residential and commercial sectors in the mid-1990s, as 

shown in Figures 3 and 4 (DOE, 1995, 1997). In 2001, 51 percent of the national 

energy consumption for lighting occurred in the commercial sector, 27 percent 

in residences, and 14 percent in industry; the remaining 8 percent was used in 

outdoor stationary lighting (Hong et al., 2005, p. 2). Almost half of the electricity 

used in commercial buildings is used in lighting, as Figure 5 indicates.
In the United States, residential homes largely use incandescent lamps (90 
percent), whereas commercial and industrial sectors use mostly ˚uorescents 

(Hong et al., 2005). If residential homes in the United States replaced all incan
-FIGURE 3
 Energy consumption in U.S. commercial sector, 1995. SOURCE: DOE 
(1995).
Lighting
23%
Space 
heating
32%
Water 
heating
15%
Other
7%
Office 
Equipment
6%
Cooking
4%
Refrigera-
tion
3%
Ventilation
3%
Cooling
7%
Lighting fig 3 NEW
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 171
FIGURE 4
 Energy consumption in U.S. residential sector, 1997. SOURCE: DOE 
(1997).
descent lamps with CFLs, they would save an estimated 35 percent of electricity 
used for all lighting applications (DOE, 1993).
Although advances in energy-saving lighting technologies such as CFL have 
been an important part of the strategies of the big three lamp producers, the big 

three have had some dif˜culty getting residential customers to give up incan
-descent bulbs and replace them with the more energy-ef˜cient but initially more 

expensive bulbs. The rate of adoption of CFLs in U.S. residential households 

has been low, particularly compared to that of Europe and Asia. Researchers at
-tribute those differences to a variety of factors, including national coordination 

of promotional efforts, different cultural attitudes about resource consumption, 

and higher electricity prices (Calwell et al., 1999). U.S. residential consumers 

lack awareness of and knowledge about CFLs. Consumer buying habits, negative 

perceptions, and skepticism about ˚uorescent lighting and relatively low electric
-ity prices have meant that the United States is behind the rest of the world in 

adoption of energy-saving lighting technologies (Sandahl et al., 2006). This may 

soon change; for example, Wal-Mart CEO H. Lee Scott, Jr., is committed to sell 

100 million CFLs a year by 2008 and the ˜rm is making a concerted effort to 

change consumer behavior (Barbaro, 2007).
11
11
 Wal-Mart sold about 40 million CFLs compared to 350 million incandescent light bulbs in 
2005.
Lighting & 
other 
appliances
22%
Space 
heating
51%
Water 
heating
19%
Refrigera-
tion
4%
Aircon
4%
Lighting 4 new
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
FIGURE 5
 Electricity consumption in U.S. commercial sector, 1995. SOURCE: DOE 
(1995).
Since lamp ef˜cacy is central to which lamp types dominate the market, it 
is important to understand ef˜cacy and its role in purchasing decisions. Ef˜cacy 
in lighting can be measured in terms of lumens produced per watt of electricity 

(lm/W). A standard 100-watt incandescent lamp, for example, lasts about 1,000 

hours and produces 15 lm/W. By comparison, a standard 30-watt ˚uorescent lamp 

lasts 20,000 hours and produces 80 lm/W. A longer-lasting and more energy-ef
-˜cient bulb is less costly over the long term but higher initial upfront costs and 

misconceptions about the ef˜cacy of ˚uorescent lights (early ˚uorescents had 

poor color rendering and were noisy) have led to low adoption in residences. Op
-timal lamp choice involves not only energy ef˜ciency but also replacement costs 

for burned-out lamps and labor costs to install lighting systems. In commercial 

and industrial settings, where life-cycle costs are important and companies can 

make upfront investments, ˚uorescents are usually chosen.
RADICAL INNO
VATION IN LIGHTING: LEDS
Nature and Advantages of LEDs
An LED is a semiconductor diode. It is electroluminescent, emitting color 
that depends on the chemical composition of the semiconductor material or com
-pound used and ranges along the spectrum from UV to infrared, as documented 

in Table 1.
Lighting
46%
Cooling
13%
Office 
Equipment
13%
Other
8%
Ventilation
6%
Refrigera-
tion
7%
Cooking
1%
Water 
heating
2%
Space 
heating
4%
Lighting 5--NEWInnovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 173
TABLE 1
 LED Color Spectrum Available from Alternative Materials
Semiconductor Material
Color
AlGaAs (aluminum gallium arsenide)
Red
Infrared
AlGaP (aluminum gallium phosphide)
Green
AlGaInP (aluminum gallium indium phosphide)
Orange-red (bright)

Orange

Yellow

Green
GaAsP (gallium arsenide phosphide)
Red

Orange-red

Orange

Yellow
GaP (gallium phosphide)
Red

Yellow

Green
GaN (gallium nitride)
Green

Pure green (emerald)

Blue
InGaN (indium gallium nitride)
Bluish green

Blue

Near UV
SiC (silicon carbide) as substrate

Si (silicon) as substrate, under development

Al
2O3 (sapphire) as substrate
ZnSe (zinc selenide)
Blue
C (diamond)
UV
AlN (aluminum nitride)

AlGaN (aluminum gallium nitride)
Far UV
SOURCE: Wikipedia (2006).
The ˜rst practical visible-spectrum LED was developed in 1962 by Nick 
Holonyak (
Inquirer
, 2004), and a variety of single-color LEDs followed. White 
LEDs have been a long-standing goal for researchers since they are most likely 
to replace traditional bulbs. White LEDs have been created by coating blue LEDs 

with a yellow phosphor, yielding a blue and yellow glow that appears white to the 

human eye. Another approach, taken by GE, uses UV LEDs driving phosphors, 

and a third approach is to use multiple colors of LEDs and combine them to create 

white light. Current white LEDs are cost-effective only for certain applications, 

such as backlighting and ˚ashlights, and color LEDs remain more widely used.
Although incandescent and ˚uorescent lamps remain the predominant light 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
sources, LEDs have several potential advantages. First, they use less energy: 
LEDs are three- to fourfold more ef˜cient than incandescent and halogen sources. 
However, with the exception of laboratory devices, LEDs still fall short of 

˚uorescent sources for many white light applications. Nevertheless, they are 

semiconductor devices and LED lighting is thought to follow an equivalent of 

Moore™s law in computing, advancing rapidly and continually because of the pace 

of electronic circuit improvements.
Second, in contrast to incandescent lamps, LEDs use most of their energy in 
lighting (Herkelrath et al., 2005). LEDs also have a long life span, typically about 

10 years of on-timeŠtwice that of ˚uorescent lamps and twenty times that of 

incandescent lamps. In terms of luminous ef˜cacy (lm/W), LEDs by 2004 were 

already about four times as ef˜cient as incandescent lamps, and by 2020 they 

are targeted to be about 12 times as ef˜cient as current incandescent lamps and 

more than twice as ef˜cient as current ˚uorescent lamps (Hadley et al., 2004, p. 

5; Tsao, 2002, p. 4). In addition, LEDs light up many orders of magnitude faster 

than incandescent lamps, and, rather than burning out abruptly, they do so slowly. 

LEDs require little maintenance and are cool to the touch, durable, and ˚exible. 

Furthermore, the technology is digitally compatible and, hence, can be integrated 

into digital networks, facilitating customizable electronic control.
LEDs come in many shapes and sizes and have multiple uses. Backlighting 
is one use, for cell phones, cars and other electronics, liquid crystal displays 

(LCDs), and specialized lighting applications. Specialty uses are possible since 

LEDs can be waterproofed, bent, shaped, multicolored, and dimmed.
12
 LED 
applications are common in the entertainment industry, hotels, road signs, exit 

signs, pools, landscaping, and darkrooms.
The main drawback of LEDs is that they have not yet achieved the ef˜cacy 
necessary for many white light applications. They are also still costly because 

they are expensive to produce. But production costs are expected to decline as 

volumes rise and the technology advances. For example, in 2002, the total cost of 

LED lamps (capital cost plus operating costs) was estimated at $16.00 per million 

lumen hours, compared to $7.50 for incandescent bulbs and $1.35 for ˚uorescent 

bulbs (Hadley et al., 2004, p. 8; Tsao, 2002, p. 8). However, by 2020, the total 

(capital plus operating) cost of LED lamps is targeted to be reduced to $0.63 per 

million lumen hours (Hadley et al., 2004, p. 8; Tsao, 2002, p. 8).
An additional limitation of LEDs, relative to incandescent lamps, is their im
-perfect color rendering, given the spectrum of light emitted. White light created 

by multiple color LEDs or by phosphors driven by LEDs involves a combina
-tion of wavelengths of light that differs from the color spectrum of traditional 

lamps and of sunshine, making objects with certain colors appear relatively dark. 
12
 LEDs can also be designed to trap insects (through the use of insect-attracting colors) or to avoid 
attracting insects (since they do not generate UV light) (Bishop et al., 2004).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 175
However, Ashdown et al. (2004, p. 8) indicate that color spectrum limitations are 
likely to be remedied as the technology progresses.
13
Until recently, LEDs have been the only viable technology competing with 
the various types of traditional lamps as electricity-driven sources of illumination 
(Hong et al., 2005). A recently emerged technology that may become competitive 

with LEDs is microwave-driven light bulbs, for which claims of ef˜ciency and 

low cost remain to be assessed; this technology emerged during the ˜nal stages of 

our work and is not assessed here (
Economist
, 2007a,b). Our analysis (including 
patent data presented later) includes two newer types of LEDs: organic light-

emitting diodes (OLEDs) and polymer LEDs. OLEDs, which are LEDs involving 

organic (carbon-based) chemicals, are promising but still in an early develop
-ment stage. Ching Tang and Steven Van Slyke of Eastman Kodak invented the 

˜rst OLED in 1987 (Howard, 2004). The materials in OLED devices have broad 

emission spectra that provide an advantage over inorganic LEDs (minor changes 

in the chemical composition of the emissive structure can tune the emission peak 

of the device). It is believed that good-quality white light is achievable from 

OLEDs (OLLA, 2006a, 2006b).
14
 An important focus of current OLED research 
is on improving operational life.
In particular, OLEDs are of interest to display ˜rms since they are capable of 
producing true black colors, something LCDs cannot achieve since they require 

a backlight to function and are never truly ﬁoff.ﬂ OLEDs can produce a greater 

range of colors, brightness, and viewing angles than LCDs because OLED pixels 

emit light directly. The display industry, with more than 70 companies includ
-ing OLED pioneer Eastman Kodak, is set to commercialize OLED technology 

including OLED displays (Hong et al., 2005).
15
 Kodak launched the ˜rst digital 
camera to use a full-color OLED display in 2003. The big three traditional light
-ing companies have all set up joint ventures to pro˜t from OLED technology for 

the display market.
13
 Other limitations of LEDs are areas of active work. For example, LEDs driven with suf˜cient 
power for automotive headlights and taillights require heat sinks because heat degrades LEDs; rel
-evant heat sinks are improving.
14
 White OLEDs by 2006 had achieved claimed ef˜cacy of 25-64 lm/W (Burgess, 2006; Physorg.
com, 2005; Ledsmagazine.com, 2006). 
15
 In December 2007, Sony released the ˜rst commercially available OLED televisions, although 
they remain far from price-competitive with liquid crystal display (LCD) televisions (Eisenberg, 
2007). Samsung has also been demonstrating prototype OLED displays (Gizmodo, 2008). LCDs, 

which are now dominant in televisions and computer monitors, are akin to (dynamically changing) 

stained glass windows behind which white light is projected, thus allowing some colors of light 

through the liquid crystals while blocking other colors. This means that light not allowed through the 

liquid crystals is wasted, turning electricity into heat, and that the liquid crystals require behind them 

a light source that adds to their thickness, weight, and cost. If OLED displays and their production 

methods can be improved suf˜ciently, therefore, they have potential advantages over LED displays: 

the desired color can be produced at each location on an OLED display with no wasted light and no 

liquid crystal layer. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
LEDs as a Disruptive Technology: Diffusion Among Applications
Disruptive technology has been de˜ned in several ways, and LEDs match 
at least two of the de˜nitions. First, disruptive technology may be de˜ned as a 
new technology that ˜lls a long-standing need and for which the expertise and 

resources of incumbent ˜rms do little to help them with this new approach; in this 

case solid-state lighting ˜lls the need for illumination using a technology that dif
-fers totally from traditional lighting technologies. Second, disruptive technology 

may be de˜ned as a technology in which new ˜rms enter a market and threaten 

the market dominance of incumbent ˜rms; in this case new ˜rms have been en
-tering the lighting market by creating products based on LEDs, and it has been 

unclear whether the leading existing lighting manufacturers can maintain strong 

market positions if purchases shift substantially to LEDs.
LEDs are a novel technology in lighting. LEDs are semiconductors and so 
manufacture of LEDs has little in common with traditional lamp production. The 

supply chain to produce LEDs as indicated in our discussions with industry ex
-perts is quite disaggregated, as is the case for other semiconductor technologies. 

Moreover, Kevin Dowling, Chief Technology Of˜cer at Color Kinetics, stated to 

us that ﬁthe vertically integrated giants of the semiconductor world such as Intel 

and Applied Materials are becoming less numerous and rapidly becoming more 

the exception rather than the rule.ﬂ Data on the participation of ˜rms in each 

stage of the LED supply chain are available from solidstatelighting.net (2006). 

We catalogued the participation of each ˜rm in each stage of the supply chain 

and found that most ˜rms participate in only a single part of the supply chain, 

although a few large ˜rms are involved in many parts of the supply chain. This 

supply chain is illustrated in Figure 6.
Semiconductor ˜rms often specialize in speci˜c stages of the supply chain, 
such as R&D, epitaxy, manufacturing, packaging, testing, and back-end pro
-cessing. Each stage requires unique skills and equipment and signi˜cant capital 

expenditure, which is one reason why ˜rms tend to specialize rather than inte
-grate along the supply chain. Specialization is thought to drive down prices and 

improve performance, and this trend is similar among LED manufacturers. The 

development of this new technology will likely create opportunities at all levels 

of the value chain.
16
The LED market in general lighting is still small compared to traditional 
lamps. LED applications command a high price, but relatively few units are sold 

and all are for specialty purposes. Traditional lamps (incandescent, ˚uorescent, 

and HID) are estimated by Navigant Consulting (2003a, p. 7) to have used 41,051 

trillion lumen hours of electricity in the United States in 2005 compared to only 
16
 As lighting moves to LEDs, traditional bulb manufacture may also be vertically disintegrating 
somewhat, judging from recent comments by Jim Campbell, President and CEO of GE Consumer & 
Industrial (General Electric, 2007).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 177
lighting-6.eps
Raw 
materials 
(compounds)
Wafers
grow 

ingots
slice 

wafer
polish
Wafer 
fabrication
scoretest
deposition 
(growing, 
epitaxy
coating)
removal 
(etching)
patterning 

(lithography)
modification 

(doping)
Assembly
cut wafer 
into dies
attach to 

lead frame
bondingencapsulate
Test
Back-end 

processing
interconnect 
(levels)
test
box, label, 
ship
Arrays/ 
Fixtures/ 
Systems 
Integrators
Integrated circuit
Packaging
Manufacturing
R&D
FIGURE 6
 LED semiconductor supply chain.
5 for LEDs. Nevertheless, the LED market grew by 50 percent between 1995 and 
2000 and has been forecast at $4.7 billion by 2007 (Ashdown et al., 2004, p. 9).
LED technology has some clear advantages over traditional lighting, which 
have allowed LED manufacturers to displace traditional lighting in niche markets 

(Grif˜ths, 2006). Indicator lights were one of the earliest uses, with color LED 

indicators predating the 1990s and white LED indicators used from about 2000 

onward. In 2001, 30 percent of LED sales were for backlighting, 26 percent for 

automotive uses, 26 percent for signs and displays, 10 percent for electronic 

equipment, 4 percent for signals, and 4 percent for general illumination (Mac
-cagno, 2002, cited by Ashdown et al., 2004, p. 9). By 2002, U.S. market penetra
-tion of LEDs was particularly high in exit signs (80 percent), truck and bus lights 

(41 percent), and traf˜c signals (30 percent) (Navigant Consulting, 2003b, p. xii; 

Hadley et al., 2004, p. 9).
Other niches that LEDs have entered include video screen backlights in the 
mid-1990s, decorative lighting in the late 1990s, and automobile lights includ
-ing dashboard, interior, brake, and tail lights since about 2000. Other recent uses 

include architectural lighting, outdoor advertising, and long-lasting white-light 

˚ashlights. One example of the advantage of LEDs is in brake lights, where LEDs 

provide an extra 0.2-second response time and therefore help to prevent acci
-dents. Although ˜rst introduced in luxury cars, LED brake lights are beginning 

to penetrate the more cost-conscious end of the market. Another example is Wal-
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Mart™s adoption of LED lighting for refrigerated display cases, an application 
once dominated by ˚uorescents. As well as lowering operating costs, the LED 
lights are amenable to added motion sensors so that lights come on only when 

shoppers are nearby. As a result, Wal-Mart is investing $30 million and expects 

a 66 percent reduction in freezer lighting energy costs (LIGHTimes, 2006).
17
New LED Lighting Innovators
Advances in solid-state lighting offer an opportunity and a challenge for 
incumbent and startup ˜rms. Although the big three lamp manufacturers have 

been making substantial investments in solid-state lighting, pioneering inventors 

in LED lighting come from universities, research labs, and companies, and R&D 

plays a vital role in development of these technologies.
Advances in red, yellow, and blue LEDs have been led by different research 
groups and companies. Several companies have ﬁspecializationsﬂ in one industry 

sector, due to a combination of strategy and luck in pioneering key product or 

process innovations. Nichia Corp. in Japan, for example, was one of the ˜rst 

companies to develop blue LEDs, a key advance when only red, green, and yel
-low were available. It also produced the ˜rst white LEDs in 1996 (Walker, 2004). 

The company is an illustration of how small ˜rms have been able to penetrate the 

burgeoning industry. Nichia™s key researcher, Shuji Nakamura, now a professor 

at the University of California, Santa Barbara, was largely responsible for the 

development of the blue LED. When Nakamura was hired in 1979, Nichia was a 

small ˜rm in rural Japan with only 200 employees and Nakamura was assigned a 

project to synthesize a commercial-grade blue LED, needed to complete the color 

palette. At the time, large Japanese corporations were spending $85 million a year 

and Nichia had a very small research budget. Today Nichia controls 80 percent 

of the blue LED market with Cree and Toyoda Gosei (Cox, 2003). Nakamura™s 

successful approach departed from the standard thinking in his ˜eld and in his 

company. He chose gallium nitride, a material most researchers thought would 

not yield signi˜cant results, as the basis for his research, and continued to work 

on blue LEDs for 10 years. Nichia™s entry into the LED market was a lucky out
-come of their hiring a particular employee and of that employee™s actions.
The role of individuals in innovative companies in pioneering new lighting 
technologies is typical of the early stages of a technology cycle in which R&D 

efforts are lengthy and costly. Government grants have been instrumental to sup
-port startup companies and university research in the pursuit of emerging LED 

technologies. Government funding has ˜lled key technology gaps, provided fund
-17
 Wal-Mart installations developed in collaboration with GE and Philips represent ﬁthe biggest 
investment to date in LED lighting for interior application [$30 million], and it is also the single 
largest installation of white LED lighting replacing ˚uorescent lighting in a display lighting applica
-tionﬂ (Grif˜ths, 2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 179
ing to develop enabling knowledge and data, and advanced the solid-state lighting 
technology base. A team of researchers from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 
for example, recently received $1.8 million in federal funding from the Depart
-ment of Energy (DOE) to improve the energy ef˜ciency of green LEDs, with a 

goal of doubling or tripling power output. The research was one of 16 projects 

selected for funding through the DOE™s Solid-State Lighting Core Technologies 

Funding Opportunity Announcement, which supports enabling and fundamental 

solid-state lighting technology for general illumination.
ﬁMaking lighting more ef˜cient is one of the biggest challenges we face,ﬂ 
says Christian Wetzel, the Well˚eet Career Development Constellation Profes
-sor, Future Chips, and associate professor of physics at Rensselaer (RPI, 2006). 

To meet aggressive DOE performance targets that call for more energy-ef˜cient, 

longer-lasting, and cost-competitive solid-state lighting by 2025, the team has 

partnered with startups such as Kyma Technologies and Crystal IS. Kyma, a 

North Carolina State University spin-off, specializes in gallium nitride substrates, 

while Crystal IS, founded by two Rensselaer professors, specializes in blue and 

UV lasers based on single-crystal aluminum nitride substrates. The DOE grant 

has funded these startups and researchers.
Government support has also been important for building demand and aid
-ing ˜rms to improve quality and reduce pricesŠkeys to further diffusion. Such 

programs promote early diffusion of energy-saving technologies and are not 

unique to the United States. We will return to the role of national policies and 

government initiatives later in the chapter.
CORPORATE STRATEGIES TOWARD INNO
VATION
The ﬁBig Threeﬂ
The big three traditional lighting manufacturers, Philips, OSRAM, and GE, 
have responded to the opportunities in LED lighting by creating joint ventures 

with semiconductor ˜rms that had preexisting expertise in these technologies. 

They later acquired these joint ventures outright. Philips established a joint 

venture in optoelectronics with Hewlett-Packard (HP) in 1999 (when HP split 

in two in 1999, the optoelectronics group was assigned to a new ˜rm, Agilent 

Technologies) and acquired the venture Lumileds in 2005 for $950 million.
18
 OSRAM established a joint venture with In˜neon Technologies AG (formerly 

Siemens Semiconductors) in 1999, and acquired the venture in 2001, naming it 

OSRAM Opto Semiconductors GmbH.
19 GE established a joint venture, Gelcore, 
18
 Philips™ 2005 Annual Report states that Lumileds is the world™s leading manufacturer of high-
power LEDs.
19
 Siemens gradually spun off its semiconductor division as In˜neon beginning in 1999, and sold 
its ˜nal 18.23 percent stake in the company in 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
with semiconductor maker Emcore in 1999, and acquired Gelcore in August 2006 
for $100 million.
20
 Additionally, Philips and OSRAM announced in January 2007 
a cross-licensing agreement covering patents on LEDs and OLEDs (LIGHTimes, 
2007), and Philips acquired the LED lighting controls ˜rm Color Kinetics in 

August 2007.
Historically, the locus of innovation for traditional (i.e., non-LED) lamps 
originated in the primary R&D centers of the big three lighting ˜rms in Germany, 

the Netherlands, and the United States. While these labs are still very important, 

in recognition of Asia™s increasingly important role in the traditional lighting 

industry, the three ˜rms have set up manufacturing, engineering, and R&D activ
-ity in other parts of the world, principally in Japan and Taiwan. Efforts are also 

being made to penetrate the Chinese market. GE, for example, began investing 

in China through joint ventures. The company combined a ˜nished product 

purchasing center and an R&D center to form the GE Asia Lighting Center in 

Shanghai. By 2002, GE had four major plants in Shanghai and one in Xiamen, 

and had invested over $100 million in China for lighting, according to Matthew 

Espe, former president and CEO of GE Lighting (Zou, 2002).
Philips established an R&D campus with the Shanghai Science and Tech
-nology Commission with annual expenditures of $50 million, the majority of 

which is in lighting. Between 1988 and 2005, Philips Lighting established nine 

solely owned and joint ventures and ˜ve R&D centers, of which one conducts 

global level research while the other four mainly focus on the Asia-Paci˜c region 

(Chinesewings, 2005).
OSRAM China Lighting, Inc., 90 percent of which is owned by OSRAM, 
was formed in April 1995 with an investment of 49.7 million Euros. The company 

is located in Foshan, China, and has two factories in China, employing 6,000. 

In February 2006, OSRAM China Lighting announced it would acquire Foshan 

Electrical and Lighting Co. Ltd.
21
Asian LED Producers
Beyond their expanding importance in the traditional lighting industry, Asian 
˜rms also play a signi˜cant role in the global LED market. Japan™s LED industry 

leads with $918 million in sales, or a world market share of 47 percent, although 

a portion of these revenues are shared with some U.S. companies through joint 

ventures. Taiwan™s industry holds second place at $712 million, or a market share 

of 25 percent (Taiwan Economic News, 2004a,b). LEDs are the largest type of 
20
 Although Gelcore grew about 50 percent from 1995 through 2004, it nonetheless reported a net 
loss of $0.8 million in 2005. Thus, when Emcore sold its 49 percent stake in Gelcore, it traded pos
-sible future value for immediate cash gains.
21
 Source: ﬁOSRAM China Lighting™s Announcement to Acquire Foshan Electrical and Lighting 
Co. Ltd.,ﬂ http://business.sohu.com/20060614/n243727208.shtml (in Chinese).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 181
compound semiconductor production in Taiwan (Liu, 2003). Another source es
-timates the global LED market at $5.4 billion in 2004, with Japan™s share at 51.3 
percent, Taiwan™s 22.7 percent, the United States 12 percent, and Europe around 

9 percent (Ledsmagazine.com, 2005b). Data from www.solidstatelighting.net 

(2006) suggest that most LED R&D is conducted in the United States whereas 

Asia dominates manufacturing and packaging. For example, Taiwan, China, and 

Korea produced the majority of blue LEDs in the world, and more than 80 percent 

of the production of InGaAlP high-brightness (HB) LEDs in 2004. China boasts 

about 600 enterprises directly related to the LED industry in China, employing 

about 40,000 people (Ledsmagazine.com, 2005a).
Because of the youth of the industry, quality remains variable across ˜rms 
and is sometimes dif˜cult to assess. Quality for an LED includes a long operat
-ing lifetime before substantial fading occurs, controls to ensure against defective 

chips, and consistency of operating characteristics including a claimed color 

emission spectrum, light intensity, voltage drop, and viewing angle (Toniolo, 

2006b). The LED industry has seen a surge of new players, which has ˚ooded 

the market with low-quality LEDs (Toniolo, 2006a). The result of such com
-modity production is intense price competition and a ﬁhuge overcapacityﬂ for 

lower-performance LEDs (Arensman, 2005). For high-performance LEDs, com
-petition remains less intense. Among consumers, low-quality LEDs may give a 

bad reputation to all LEDs.
New 
Ventures
The global semiconductor market was worth $262.7 billion in 2006 (Gartner, 
2007), considerably outstripping LED industry revenues of $3.7 billion in 2004 

(www.gelcore.com). A large number of materials, substrates, epitaxy, packaging, 

and manufacturing companies have entered the LED market. In February 2006, 

lighting industry directory Lightsearch.com listed 71 companies that produced 

LED lamps.
22
 Most companies operate at a single stage of the supply chain, illus
-trated in Figure 6. For example, companies that perform epitaxy do not usually do 

manufacturing or packaging. Likewise, most companies that focus on packaging 

do not produce raw materials or substrates. Moreover, companies that focus on 

basic R&D do not operate in the rest of semiconductor production.
23
 Even on a 
national level, specialization sometimes occurs. For instance, Taiwan is strong 

in R&D and manufacturing of LEDs, whereas Korea specializes in packaging, 

and China, a late entrant, is setting up epitaxy, and wafer and chip production 
22
 Recall that ﬁlampﬂ as used in the traditional lighting industry means ﬁbulb,ﬂ and note that the 
former term is most appropriate for LED lighting as no glass bulb is involved. Lamp here means a 
light-producing device, not a ˜xture.
23
 Based on information on semiconductor companies in the LED industry gathered from solid
-statelighting.net (2006). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
(Wang and Shen, 2005). In addition, some countries specialize in the production 
of speci˜c LED colors: Taiwan holds a majority market share for blue GaN LEDs 
at 34 percent, closely followed by Japan at 33 percent, whereas the United States 

and Korea lag with 19 and 12 percent, respectively (Wang and Shen, 2005).
Although LEDs are still a small subset of the semiconductor market, they 
have rapid growth in demand, making this an attractive market for new and 

existing semiconductor ˜rms. LEDs offer opportunities for semiconductor ˜rms 

to diversify into a new market that promises long-term growth potential. For 

example, Avago Technologies, the world™s largest privately held semiconductor 

company, recently announced three new series of HB full-color LEDs for the 

outdoor electronic signs and signals market (
Business Wire
, 2006).
At the other end of the supply chain, LED ﬁintegratorsﬂ like Color Kinetics 
play an important role in LED lighting. Since its establishment in 1997, Color 

Kinetics has built an impressive patented portfolio of these technologies, which 

it uses in LED lighting systems. Color Kinetics has pioneered intelligent LED 

systems that are networked and has created a new niche as a ﬁsystems solutionsﬂ 

and lighting control technology provider. Color Kinetics has initiated several 

major projects that integrate LED lights with sound, movement, and rhythm 

through digital controls, and is working on white light systems. A subway tunnel 

in Chicago, for example, is bathed in several colors of LED light that periodically 

change (giving the impression of a sunset). The company leverages its strengths 

in innovation and engineering and works with selected Chinese manufacturers to 

assemble systems. In August 2007, Philips acquired Color Kinetics, which be
-came Philips Solid-State Lighting Solutions, a business unit of Philips Lighting™s 

Luminaires group.
LED LIGHTING R&D
The big three producers are dominant in traditional lighting technology, as 
shown earlier using data on patents for these technologies. In this section we 

analyze the R&D positions of these and other ˜rms for LED lighting.
Methodology: Analysis of Patent Data
To assess trends in the global location of LED lighting R&D we use patent 
data. Patent data yield information on successful R&D outputs. Although the 

information is partial because many inventions and innovations are not patented, 

within an industry patents are highly correlated with R&D spending and are in
-dicative of R&D success. Moreover, patents yield relatively defensible property 

rights and hence represent an important component of the value of ˜rms™ R&D 

outputs.
To analyze LED-related patents that pertain to lighting, a search criterion 
is needed to identify relevant patents. Choice of a criterion involves a trade-off 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 183
between ˜nding a subset of mainly relevant patents versus ˜nding all relevant 
patents mixed with many more non-LED and non-lighting patents. We therefore 
chose a criterion to identify mainly relevant patents at the cost of excluding some 

LED lighting-related patents.
24
 All patents were identi˜ed whose title contains 
the key word or phrase ﬁLED(s),ﬂ ﬁOLED(s),ﬂ ﬁL.E.D.(s),ﬂ or ﬁlight emitting 

diode(s),ﬂ or the equivalents of the latter phrase in German, French, Spanish, 

Italian, or Portuguese.
25
 Other languages, including Asia-speci˜c languages, ef
-fectively are almost always included in our search because for almost all other 

languages the database we used has English translations of titles. The search 

criterion includes LED applications, including LED-type displays and (rarely) 

lasers, as well as LEDs whose glow is bright enough for general illumination. 

All patents granted are included regardless of whether they originated from ˜rms, 

government programs, or university research labs.
Since both the traditional and the LED lighting industries are global in terms 
of the ˜rms involved and startup efforts, we obtained data for patents issued in 

most nations worldwide, although we focus initially on patents granted in the 

United States and Europe.
26
 For logistical reasons (we had to look up information 
by hand from actual copies of thousands of patents), we restricted the sample in 

the latter analysis to patents whose title included either ﬁLED(s)ﬂ and ﬁlighting,ﬂ 

or the phrase ﬁlight emitting diode(s).ﬂ Our primary focus on U.S. and European 

patents addresses concerns that patents from other nations may face quite differ
-ent approval requirements.
Patents are counted only once if the identical patent is ˜led multiple times 
24
 International patent classi˜cation systems do not identify speci˜c categories for LEDs or for LED 
lighting, and we draw on international data for which this limitation applies.
25
 The non-English terms used are ﬁlichtemittierende Diode(n),ﬂ ﬁLeuchtdiode(n),ﬂ ﬁdiode(s) 
luminescente(s),ﬂ ﬁdiodo(s) electroluminoso(s),ﬂ ﬁdiodo luminescente,ﬂ ﬁdiodi luminescenti,ﬂ 
ﬁdiodo(s) emissores de luz,ﬂ and ﬁdiodo(s) emitindo-se claro(s).ﬂ The verb ﬁledﬂ sometimes appears 

in titles for reasons unrelated to light emitting diodes, so we read all patent titles and eliminated 

patents for which ﬁledﬂ was used as a verb.
26
 Data are obtained from the Espacenet worldwide patent database, maintained by the European 
Patent Of˜ce (EPO). The data include patents granted by the relevant patent authorities in almost all 

nations worldwide (a detailed listing is available from the Espacenet website), including not only the 

most developed world but also Eastern European and developing Asian, Middle Eastern, and African 

nations (or cooperating regions) with signi˜cant innovative activity. The European patent authorities 

for which LED patents appear in the primary sample are the European Patent Of˜ce plus the national 

of˜ces of Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Patents from 

former Soviet-bloc nations are excluded. In our secondary sample of patents from patent authorities 

worldwide, patent authorities that actually granted patents in the data are (ordered by continent) the 

United States, Canada, Mexico; Germany, Great Britain, Belgium, France, Netherlands, Hungary, 

former Soviet Union, European Patent Of˜ce; Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, India, China, Hong 

Kong; Australia, New Zealand; and South Africa.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
in different nations.
27
 Patents granted in nations outside the United States and 
Europe are considered after our main analyses.
Analysis of LED Patenting
The analyses that follow compare the headquarters nationality of patenting 
˜rms and also the national R&D locations where invention was carried out. The 
headquarters location of a ˜rm was identi˜ed as the international headquarters 

nation of the ˜rm to which a patent was assigned. If a ˜rm was owned by a 

ﬁparentﬂ ˜rm, we use the headquarters nation of the parent ˜rm. Rarely, patents 

were applied for by multiple ˜rms or individuals, and assignee credit was divided 

equally among these applicants. The R&D location where invention was carried 

out was determined by the nation listed in the address of each inventor named on 

the patents. Since inventors™ addresses are not generally available in electronic 

bibliographic data, we looked up the nation for each inventor using the original 

patent documents. Rarely, different inventors of a single patent had addresses 

in different nations, in which case credit for each R&D nation was divided in 

proportion to the number of inventors in each nation.
LED patent data are compared in two 4-year periods a decade apart, 1990-
1993 and 2000-2003. These 4-year periods ensure an adequate-sized, representa
-tive sample of patent activity. Comparing between periods facilitates analysis of 

trends in R&D activity in LED lighting.
As LEDs have developed growing markets in new applications, so has LED 
R&D grown. Based on U.S. and European patents, the number of LED patents 

granted quintupled from 200 in 1990-1993 to 1,000 in 2000-2003, as shown in 

Figure 7.
28
Globalization of LED R&D: U.S. and European Patents
The locations of inventors as reported on patent applications re˚ect where 
R&D occurred. We therefore assessed relative inventive activity in each nation, 

for 1990-1993 in Figure 8 and 2000-2003 in Figure 9, by determining the percent
-27
 Equivalent patents ˜led in multiple nations are identi˜ed as catalogued on the EPO™s Espacenet 
patent web server, which de˜nes equivalents based on identical priority claims.
28
 Substantial growth also holds using our worldwide data for a narrower range of patent titles, with 
LED patents granted growing from 438 in 1990-1993 to 1,114 in 2000-2003.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 185
lighting-7.eps
1990
2000
1991
2001
1992
2002
1993
2003
0200
400
600
800
1000
1990s
2000s
Patents
FIGURE 7
 LED patents in sample granted during 1990-1993 and 2000-2003. SOURCE: 
Authors™ analysis of patents granted in the United States and Europe (see text).
FIGURE 8
 Invention locations of LED patents granted in 1990-1993. SOURCE: Au
-thors™ analysis of patents granted in the United States and Europe (see text).
US
48%
Japan
28%
Belgium
1%
Netherlands
1%
Other
2%
France
2%
Sweden
3%
Germany
8%
UK
2%
Taiwan
2%
Korea
3%
Lighting 8 NEW
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
FIGURE 9
 Invention locations of LED patents granted in 2000-2003. SOURCE: Au
-thors™ analysis of patents granted in the United States and Europe (see text).
ages of patents with inventors in each nation.
29
 In the period 1990-1993, inven
-tors located in the United States predominated with 47 percent of all of the LED 
patents. Inventors in Japan held second place with 27 percent of LED patents. 

Inventors in Germany ranked third with 8 percent of LED patents, followed by 

inventors in Sweden, Korea, Taiwan, France, and the United Kingdom, each with 

2-3 percent of LED patents.
30
29
 When computing the percentages of LED invention done in different nations, one concern is 
whether some nations™ inventions might be of systematically poor quality, so that while those nations™ 
inventors 
appear
 to accomplish a lot of R&D, in reality the value of their R&D output is much lower. 
One means to check whether this is the case is to examine only those relatively high-value patents for 

which ˜rms went to the expense and trouble of obtaining equivalent patents in multiple countries or 

on multiple continents. Hence, we also examined patents using these criteria. These analyses yielded 

conclusions similar to the results reported in the text.
30
 Percentages in this section often represent small numbers of patents, so readers are cautioned that 
small variations in patenting activity can sometimes lead to substantial changes in the precise percent
-ages reported. Our primarily conclusions, however, are robust to typical random variations, with statis
-tical signi˜cance tests reported in footnotes. Differences in arrival rates of patents in 1990-1993 were 

statistically signi˜cant between the United States and Japan (
p 
= .0014), between Japan and Germany 
(p 

.001), and (marginally) between Germany and Sweden (
p 
= .0525), using exact 
p-values from 
exact Poisson regressions. (Here and below, exact Poisson tests are actually close approximations 
US
46%
Taiwan
15%
Italy
2%
Korea
1%
China
1%
Other
3%
UK
2%
Germany
11%
Japan
13%
Canada
2%
France
2%
Netherlands
2%
Lighting 9 NEW
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 187
In the period 2000-2003, U.S. inventors™ share of LED patents remained 
dominant at 47 percent. Rapid growth in inventions occurred in Taiwan, whose 
inventors achieved a 15 percent share of LED patents, ahead of Japanese inven
-tors whose share had fallen to third place with 13 percent of LED patents. Ger
-man inventors™ share grew slightly to 11 percent of LED patents.
31
 Other nations™ 
share of LED patent invention remained at 2 percent or less.
Not only did LED innovation become somewhat more international, but non-
U.S. companies became more international in the locations where they carried out 

research. Location of R&D (i.e., of inventors) is compared to locations of corpo
-rate headquarters in Table 2 for 1990-1993 and Table 3 for 2000-2003. During 

the period 1990-1993, the United States was the only country whose companies 

supported substantial LED R&D abroad.
32 LED patents were ˜led by inventors in 
Japan, the United Kingdom, and Germany for ˜rms headquartered in the United 

States. Of the nine U.S. patents that had R&D locations abroad, Eastman Kodak 

was assignee for four, with inventors in Japan, and the remaining ˜ve had inven
-tors in the United Kingdom (twice), France, Japan, and Malaysia.
By 2000-2003, more companies were supporting R&D across the globe. 
Overall, companies in 13 countries sponsored LED R&D abroad. U.S. compa
-nies, however, kept 95.1 percent of R&D within the United States. Asian LED 

invention sites for U.S. ˜rms fell from 5.8 to 1.4 percent, and European sites for 

U.S. ˜rms fell from 2.9 to 1.9 percent. In the period 2000-2003, U.S. companies™ 

foreign-invented patents had inventors in Canada (1.6 percent) and nine other na
-tions (each less than 1 percent). European companies began to support R&D in 

the United States, which now yielded 22.9 percent of European companies™ LED 

patents. Asian companies also began to carry out R&D in the United States, yield
-ing 3.6 percent of Asian companies™ LED patents. Furthermore, Europe yielded 

0.9 percent of Asian companies™ LED patents.
33
because they use rounded-to-integer values of weighted patent counts, rather than making assumptions 
about statistical (in)dependence between locations of inventors of some patents.)
31
 The differences between Taiwanese versus Japanese, and Japanese versus German, patent inven
-tion in 2000-2003 each involve 16-17 patents, and it is dif˜cult to tell whether these re˚ect statistically 

meaningful differences in nations™ propensities to generate LED inventions; these nations™ rankings 

reported here should not be construed to indicate practically or statistically signi˜cant differences. 

(Exact signi˜cance tests are not feasible to compute in these cases, because the numbers of patents 

involved make exact Poisson calculations highly computationally intensive.) German inventors™ arrival 

rate of patents was statistically signi˜cantly (
p 

.001) greater than the highest-ranked of nations with 
less invention, using an exact 
p-value from exact Poisson regression.
32
 This difference between the United States and other nations is marginally statistically sig
-ni˜cant, 
p 
= .059, using Fisher™s exact test (two-tailed). (The test is approximate because it uses 
rounded-to-integer values of weighted patent counts, rather than making assumptions about statistical 

(in)dependence between locations of inventors of some patents.)
33
 Use of inventors outside the home country in 2000-2003 was statistically signi˜cantly less for 
United States patent applicants than for non-United States ˜rms (
p 

.001 using Fisher™s exact test 
as in the preceding footnote), with no signi˜cant difference between United States and Asian patent 

applicants.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 2
 Location of Inventor vs. Firm Headquarters, 1990-1993
Location of HQ
Location of R&D
Asia
Europe
U.S.
Other
Asia
98.4%
1.6%
Europe
100.0%
U.S.
5.8%
2.9%
91.3%
Other
100.0%
SOURCE: Authors™ analysis of patents granted in the United States and Europe (see text).
TABLE 3
 Location of Inventor vs. Firm Headquarters, 2000-2003
Location of HQ
Location of R&D

Asia
Europe
U.S.
Other
Asia
95.2%
 0.9%
 3.6%
  
0.3%
Europe
 0.7%
76.0%
22.9%
  
0.4%
U.S.
 1.4%
 1.9%
95.1%
  
1.6%
Other
100.0%
SOURCE: Authors™ analysis of patents granted in the United States and Europe (see text).
To a slight degree, the United States became an innovation hub for compa
-nies headquartered in other countries, mainly for Philips. Of the LED patents 
assigned to Dutch companies, 67.3 percent were ˜led by inventors located in the 

United States, as were only 1.8 percent of patents assigned to German companies. 

Germany also was an R&D source for 7.4 percent of Dutch ˜rms™ patents. These 

shifts largely re˚ect the internationalization of Philips as it acquired other ˜rms 

and joint ventures.
There was a corresponding shift in the number of companies using inventors 
in other countries. In the period 1990-1993, six U.S.-headquartered companies 

sponsored LED research abroad, totaling nine patents, while only one European 

and one Japanese company sponsored LED research abroad with only one such 

patent each. In the period 2000-2003, 25 companies located in all parts of the 

world sponsored LED research abroad, totaling 95 patents. This a substantial 

shift, but far from complete globalization, as even in 2000-2003 only 5.2 percent 

of LED patents involved work outside companies™ headquarters nations; the vast 

majority of patents still used inventors in ˜rms™ home countries.
As Table 4 shows, there was a shift from 1990-1993 to 2000-2003 in the 
dominant ˜rms in LED patenting.
34
 Dominant ˜rms are ranked here in LED ap
-plications generally, including LED-type displays and LED backlights, not just 
34
 The shift in ˜rms™ rank ordering from 1990-1993 to 2000-2003 is statistically signi˜cant 
(p < .001) using Wilcoxon™s signed-rank test.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 189
TABLE 4
 Leading Firms in LED Patenting, 2000-2003 versus 1990-1993
Rank 
2000-2003
Rank 

1990-1993
Company
Headquarters

Country
Patents 

2000-2003
132
Philips/Lumileds
aNetherlands/U.S.
69.0
29OSRAM/Siemens
bGermany
41.0
3ŠGE/Gelcore
cU.S.
26.5
4ŠUnited Epitaxy/Epistar
dTaiwan
17.2
53Xerox
U.S.
14.5
513
Oki
Japan
14.5
71Eastman Kodak
U.S.
14.0
82HP
eU.S.
9.0
8ŠPara Light Electronics
Taiwan
9.0
10
ŠHon Hai Precision
Taiwan
8.0
11
ŠIBM
U.S.
7.0
11
ŠLite On Electronics
Taiwan
7.0
13
8Samsung
Korea
6.8
14
ŠNichia
Japan
6.0
15
10
Cree
U.S.
5.3
NOTE: Individuals and institutions were excluded from the table SOURCE: Authors™ analysis of 

patents granted in the Untied States and Europe (see text).
 aIncludes all patents by Philips and its subsidiary Lumileds, Agilent as former joint venture partner 
of Lumileds, and Color Kinetics acquired in 2007.
 bIncludes all patents by OSRAM-Sylvania and its parent company Siemens, as well as 6.5 patents 
held by Patra Patent Treuhand.
 cIncludes all patents by GE and its subsidiary Gelcore.
 dIncludes all patents by United Epitaxy, Epistar with which it merged in 2005, and Epitech with 
which it merged in 2007.
 eHP patents in the 1990s pertain to technology such as LED print heads that may not have been 
owned by HP™s spin-off Agilent, which became part of Philips.
LEDs for general illumination. The listed ˜rms are unlikely to include materials 
makers because of the search criteria used. Only 4 of the top 10 ˜rms that ˜led 

LED patents in 1990-1993 remained in the top 10 a decade later (OSRAM plus 

its parent ˜rm Siemens, Xerox, Eastman Kodak, and HP) and 4 entirely new LED 

patent assignees had appeared in the new top 10. All of the big three traditional 

lighting ˜rms featured at the top of LED patenting in 2000-2003 (Philips ranked 

˜rst, OSRAM second, and GE third). Of these big three, Philips and (through 

Siemens) OSRAM had LED patents in 1990-1993. The emergence of the big 

three as the dominant LED ˜rms in 2000-2003 can clearly be attributed to their 

joint ventures that allowed them to enter fully into the semiconductor-based LED 

market.
Many LED patents came from ˜rms not in the traditional lighting industry, 
including established semiconductor ˜rms. Semiconductor ˜rm United Epitaxy, 

founded in 1993, is one of several such Taiwanese ˜rms. Firms™ ranks are 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
measured somewhat noisily here, because the sample of patents used does not 
cover every LED patent (as noted in our earlier description of patent methods).
35
 Nonetheless, the evidence shows an important role in LED technology of Asian 
˜rms, representing half the ˜rms listed in Table 4.
36
Hence, the big three lighting ˜rms have managed to established dominant 
positions in LED lighting technology. Nonetheless, if LED technology develops 

as anticipated there may be greater participation by ˜rms in Japan, Taiwan, and 

perhaps Korea and other Asian nations in the global lighting industry.
Globalization of LED R&D: Worldwide Patents
The results differ somewhat when patents from Japan, Taiwan, and other 
nations are included. These patents were initially excluded because of concerns 

over whether patents are of comparable quality and value in different nations 

and because the U.S. and European markets have been two of the world™s larg
-est. However, focusing only on U.S. and European patents may introduce a bias 

because some applicants develop R&D competence but apply for patents only in 

their home countries. Also there may be international differences in propensities 

to patent in different markets. Filings by individuals (instead of companies) show
-case the differences; in the period 2000-2003 almost four times as many patents 

were granted worldwide as in the United States and Europe, and almost ˜ve times 

as many individuals were granted patent rights, using our worldwide sample of 

data with a restricted de˜nition of LED patents. The majority of individual ˜lings 

originated in Taiwan (35.6 percent) and Korea (28.6 percent).
Among our sample of LED patent invention worldwide, in 1990-1993 Japa
-nese inventors led with 78.3 percent of LED patents, the United States followed 

with 10.7 percent, and all other countries each invented less than 3 percent. 

A decade later in 2000-2003, Japanese invented 41.6 percent of LED patents, 

Taiwanese 22.0 percent, Americans 13.9 percent, and Koreans 12.9 percent of 

patents. Clearly by 2000-2003 more countries, notably Taiwan and Korea, were 
35
 Errors in ranking could result if certain companies are less likely than others to include our search 
terms in their patent titles, and our purpose is not to compute exact rankings. However, the rankings 
computed con˜rm industry impressions and are approximately valid absent any odd variations in 

˜rms™ choice of terminology in patent titles: the difference between Philips and OSRAM in their ar
-rival rate of patents was statistically signi˜cant (
p 
= .010), the difference between OSRAM and GE 
was not statistically signi˜cant at conventional levels (
p 
= .114), the difference between OSRAM and 
United Epitaxy/Epistar was statistically signi˜cant (
p 
= .002), and the difference between GE and 
United Epitaxy/Epistar was not statistically signi˜cant (
p 
= .174), using exact 
p-values from exact 
Poisson regressions.
36
 If cumulative measures of LED patenting were considered, Asia would likewise emerge as 
playing an important role. Asian countries, particularly Japan, had strong early LED R&D, which is 

apparent in the 1990-1993 patent data.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 191
locations for LED R&D.
37
 Hence, these results indicate a possibly greater role of 
Asian inventors, when patents applied for in Asian nations are considered along 
with those in U.S. and European nations.
Other Indicators of R&D
Other indicators of globalization and Asian strength in LED innovation are 
international joint ventures and licensing agreements. Joint ventures in LEDs 

occurred between each of the big three traditional lighting ˜rms and other in
-ternational ˜rms, as discussed earlier, all in 1999, with all three subsequently 

acquiring the joint ventures. International cross-licensing agreements, listed in 

Table 5, now exist between Philips (Dutch) and OSRAM (German), Philips and 

Nichia (Japanese), Philips and Toyoda Gosei (Japanese), OSRAM and Nichia, 

OSRAM and Seoul Semiconductor (Korean), OSRAM and Avago (American), 

Cree (American) and Nichia, and Cree and Seoul Semiconductor. The table also 

indicates other international licensing, disputes, and strategic research partner
-ships. The evidence indicates considerable global dispersion and a growing Asian 

contribution in LED innovation.
NATIONAL PROGRAMS AS INNO
VATION DRI
VERS
Promoting R&D
The development and market penetration of LEDs is closely linked with 
government policies and national programs. This is not uncommon in the semi
-conductor industry. For example, Japan saw extensive growth in semiconductor 

R&D, which displaced U.S. leadership in the DRAM market, following a mid-
37
 Japanese ˜rms dominate the rankings when patents granted worldwide are considered. In the 
period 1990-1993, 9 of the top 10 ranked ˜rms were Japanese. The ˜ve highest ranking ˜rms by LED 
patents were Hitachi (35 patents), NEC (31), Toshiba (30), Mitsubishi (27), and Sanyo (23). Eastman 

Kodak (United States) was the only non-Japanese ˜rm in the top 10 during the period 1990-1993. By 

2000-2003, the top 5 ranking ˜rms for LED patents were also Japanese: Nichia (38), Hitachi (30), 

Sharp (29), Showa Denko (26), and Citizen (25), and 8 of the top 10 were Japanese. Even among the 

Japanese ˜rms, however, only Hitachi, Sharp, and Matsushita stayed in the top 10 ranking over the 

decade. The dominance of Japanese ˜rms could, however, re˚ect differences in patent systems such 

as how often multiple claims are combined in one patent, coupled with the fact that ˜rms are typically 

most likely to apply for patents in their home countries as well as possible international locations. The 

two non-Japanese ˜rms in the top 10 during the period 2000-2003 were Taiwanese: Epistar (founded 

in 1996) held sixth place with 24.5 patents, and United Epitaxy (founded in 1993) held ninth place 

with 18.5 patents. The big three traditional lighting ˜rms did not make the top 10 by this measure: 

Philips/Lumileds is ranked in 12th place, Osram plus Siemens in 15th place, and GE plus Gelcore 

in 36th place. Two Korean ˜rms, LG and Samsung, were in the top 20. When only patents granted 

on multiple continents (a measure of high value) are considered, U.S. inventors are responsible for a 

slightly larger percentage of the sample than indicated here.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 5
 Globalization of LED Patents: Licenses, Alliances, and Disputes
Philips 
(Lumileds)
OSRAM
GE

Lumination
Cree
Nichia
Seoul Semi-

conductor
Philips 

(Lumileds)
OSRAM
Cross-
license
GE 

Lumination
Cree
Chip supply 
from Cree
Nichia
Cross-

license
Cross-license
Strategic 

alliance
Cross-

license
Seoul Semi-

conductor
Cross-license
Cross-

license
Lawsuits
Epistar
Dispute
Dispute 

(resolved)
Toyoda Gosei
Cross-

license
Settlement
Strategic 

partnership
Citizen
Dispute 

(resolved)
White LED 

license
ROHM
White LED 

license
License
Lite-On
White LED 

license
License
Kingbright
Lawsuit
License
Others
White LED 

licenses; 

cross-license; 

dispute
aLicenses; 

lawsuit
bInvestment
cNOTES: Cross-licenses are agreements to share rights to large numbers of LED patents. A ﬁlicenseﬂ 

indicates that a ˜rm acquired the right to use a patent owned by a ˜rm at the top of the table. White 

LED licenses pertain speci˜cally to patents for white-light-producing LEDs. A ﬁdisputeﬂ indicates a 

patent lawsuit brought by a ˜rm at the top of the table against another ˜rm. The ﬁsettlementﬂ between 

Nichia and Toyoda Gosei involves patent infringement lawsuits that had been brought by each ˜rm 

against the other. Strategic alliances and strategic partnerships are joint LED technology development 

efforts involving the two companies indicated.
 aOSRAM has white LED patents licensed to Harvatek, Vishay, Samsung SEM, Everlight, Ya Hsin, 
Lednium (Optek); a cross-license with Avago; and a resolved dispute against Dominant.
 bCree has LED patents licensed to Cotco, and Stanley and a lawsuit against BridgeLux.
 cNichia has an investment in and chip-license agreement with Opto Tech.
SOURCE: Ledsmagazine.com (2007).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 193
1970s research program (Macher et al., 2000). There appears to be a correla
-tion between countries™ national research programs for LEDs and innovative 
activity in those countries. Key LED programs exist in the United States, Japan, 

Taiwan, and South Korea, precisely those countries that dominate LED patent
-ing. China recently announced programs targeted toward LED innovation and 

high-technology industries in general. Judging by the impact of similar research 

programs in other nations and import of U.S. and Taiwanese talent, China may 

become an additional key player in the LED industry.
While national programs collaborate extensively with universities and re
-search labs, such institutions account for only about 4 percent of all LED patents, 

re˚ecting the limited funding available for commercializing their basic research. 

Nonetheless, university spin-offs have often created major companies such as 

Cree (with a market capitalization of $1.69 billion and revenue of $385 mil
-lion in 2005). Universities and research institutions appear most innovative in 

Taiwan and Korea, accounting for about one-half and one-˜fth, respectively, of 

all LED patents ˜led by universities and research institutions.
38
 The remainder 
is split fairly evenly among the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and 

Belgium. Interestingly, China also features, ˜ling 9 percent of all LED patents 

by universities and research institutions. With the exception of Belgium, each of 

these countries has a national program dedicated to development of LED light
-ing, with goals to improve energy ef˜ciency and gain market share in general 

illumination, as outlined in Table 6.
Often the dedicated lighting program bene˜ts from other supporting legisla
-tion or programs. For example, the U.S. initiative to develop LEDs may be partly 

driven by programs such as Vision 2020, an industry-led program to develop a 

technology roadmap for lighting, initiated by the U.S. Department of Energy. The 

program™s goals are to develop standards for lighting quality; increase demand 

for high-quality lighting solutions; strengthen education and credentials of light
-ing professionals; provide R&D incentives to accelerate market penetration of 

advanced lighting sources and ballast technologies for superior quality, ef˜ciency, 

and cost-effectiveness; and develop intelligent lighting controls and ˚exible lu
-minaries/system delivery platforms (DOE, 2000). Apart from aims to establish 

integrated energy-ef˜cient lighting systems, the program has also launched the 

Energy Star voluntary labeling program designed by the Environmental Protec
-tion Agency (EPA) and the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act that 

bans low-ef˜ciency magnetic ballasts. Grants awarded by the DOE in 2006 

totaled nearly $60 million, with a further $12 million provided by contractors 
38
 Research output at universities has often been measured by journal publication rather than patents, 
but it would be dif˜cult to use a publication-based measure here without possible language-related 
biases (non-English speakers frequently publish in non-English journals not catalogued in available 

publications databases). Our measure of patents rather than publications may be more pertinent to 

applied than to basic research. The numbers are based on all patents (including national patents) 

during the period 2000-2003.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194
 TABLE 6
 Major National Research Programs Pertaining to LEDs
Country, Funds
aProgram
Phase & Objectives
Funding
Organizations
USA
bestimated $42.1 mil/year 
(2003-2013); includes 

anticipated extension of 

funding
Energy Act of 2005: 

Next Generation Lighting 

Initiative (NGLI)
Ł 
 2007-2009: support research, 
development, demonstration, and 
commercial applications
$50 mil/year 

authorized from 2007 

to 2009
Partnership DOE, industry, 

universities & laboratories
Ł 
 2010-2013 extension
Extended authorization 
to allocate $50 mil/

year from 2010-2013
SSL Project Portfolio 

(current projects in NGLI)
Ł 
 Completed projects 2003-2005: 
six key research areas: quantum 
ef˜ciency, longevity, stability and 

control, packaging, infrastructure, 

and cost reduction
Ł 
 Current projects through 2008: LED 
and OLED
Total: $70.9 mil
Partnership DOE, industry, 
universities & laboratories
Japan

estimated $7.5 mil/year 

(1998-2008)
Light for the 21st century, 

New Energy and Industrial 

Technology Development 

Organization (NEDO)
Ł 
 1998-2002 (˜rst phase): develop 
GaN-based LED technology for 
lighting applications 
Yen 6 bil ($52 mil)
Japan R&D Center of Metals 

(JRCM)
Ł 
 Develop 13% market penetration by 
2010 (over 477 new patents already 
˜led in one year)
13 companies and 

universities
Ł 
 Produce 120 lm/W and 80% 
ef˜ciency by 2010
Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Science & 

Technology
Ł 
 Financial year 2004: develop 
medical equipment and therapeutic 
techniques based on LEDs
Yen 500 mil ($4.6 mil)
Several universities, more 

than 20 companies
Ł 
 Similar amounts of funding expected 
next 4 years (2005-2008): establish 
the Yamaguchi-Ube Medical 

Innovation Centre (YUMIC)
$4.6 mil/year 

2005-2008
Ł 
 White HB-LEDs
South 
Korea
cestimated $59.4 mil/year 
(2001-2008); excludes 

equipment value, and 

half of LED Valley as 

ﬁ˜ber-to-homeﬂ
Semiconductor Lighting 

National Program & 

KOPTI (Korea Photonics 

Technology Institute)
Ł 
 1993-1996 (R&D by LG, Samsung, 
universities, and Korea Research 
Institute): reduce use of glass, 

phosphors, heavy metals
KOPTI receives $20 

mil/year in funding
KOPTI™s costs covered 

73.1% by government, 

16.5% by Gwanju ﬁCity of 

Light,ﬂ 10.4% by industry
Ł 
 1999-2000 (business phase, JVs, 
production runs): meet environmental 
regulations July 2006
KOPTI equipment 

value: $65 mil
Ł 
 Save $20 bil on energy
Ł 
 
2001 (activation phase, growth to 
more than 340 companies): produce 
80 lm/W white LED by 2008
LED Valley Project
Ł 
 2005-2008: develop HB-LED
$100 mil (˜rst phase)
Gwanju ﬁCity of Light,ﬂ 
mix of national and local 

government and private-

sector investment
Ł 
 2005-2008: second phase of a 
photonics industry project for 
HB-LEDs
$430 mil (second 

phase HB LED & 

˜ber-to-home)
Ł 
 Deploy ˜ber-to-the-home networks 
Taiwan
estimated $4.0 mil/year 

(2002-2005)
Next Generation Lighting 

Project
Ł 
 2004-2005 (40 lm/W): improve 
performance of white LEDs
2004-2005: NT$383 
mil ($11.5 mil)
Consortium of 11 companies
Ł 
 Second phase (60 lm/W): 100 lm/W 
output in labs
National Science Council
Ł 
 
Circa 2002-2004: producing highly 
ef˜cient LEDs
NT$12 mil ($0.4 mil)
NSC department of science 
& engineering
Ł 
 Led to 14 new patents and 20 new 
manufacturing process technologies
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 195
TABLE 6
 Major National Research Programs Pertaining to LEDs
Country, Funds
aProgram
Phase & Objectives
Funding
Organizations
USA
bestimated $42.1 mil/year 
(2003-2013); includes 

anticipated extension of 

funding
Energy Act of 2005: 

Next Generation Lighting 

Initiative (NGLI)
Ł 
 2007-2009: support research, 
development, demonstration, and 
commercial applications
$50 mil/year 

authorized from 2007 

to 2009
Partnership DOE, industry, 

universities & laboratories
Ł 
 2010-2013 extension
Extended authorization 
to allocate $50 mil/

year from 2010-2013
SSL Project Portfolio 

(current projects in NGLI)
Ł 
 Completed projects 2003-2005: 
six key research areas: quantum 
ef˜ciency, longevity, stability and 

control, packaging, infrastructure, 

and cost reduction
Ł 
 Current projects through 2008: LED 
and OLED
Total: $70.9 mil
Partnership DOE, industry, 
universities & laboratories
Japan

estimated $7.5 mil/year 

(1998-2008)
Light for the 21st century, 

New Energy and Industrial 

Technology Development 

Organization (NEDO)
Ł 
 1998-2002 (˜rst phase): develop 
GaN-based LED technology for 
lighting applications 
Yen 6 bil ($52 mil)
Japan R&D Center of Metals 

(JRCM)
Ł 
 Develop 13% market penetration by 
2010 (over 477 new patents already 
˜led in one year)
13 companies and 

universities
Ł 
 Produce 120 lm/W and 80% 
ef˜ciency by 2010
Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Science & 

Technology
Ł 
 Financial year 2004: develop 
medical equipment and therapeutic 
techniques based on LEDs
Yen 500 mil ($4.6 mil)
Several universities, more 

than 20 companies
Ł 
 Similar amounts of funding expected 
next 4 years (2005-2008): establish 
the Yamaguchi-Ube Medical 

Innovation Centre (YUMIC)
$4.6 mil/year 

2005-2008
Ł 
 White HB-LEDs
South 
Korea
cestimated $59.4 mil/year 
(2001-2008); excludes 

equipment value, and 

half of LED Valley as 

ﬁ˜ber-to-homeﬂ
Semiconductor Lighting 

National Program & 

KOPTI (Korea Photonics 

Technology Institute)
Ł 
 1993-1996 (R&D by LG, Samsung, 
universities, and Korea Research 
Institute): reduce use of glass, 

phosphors, heavy metals
KOPTI receives $20 

mil/year in funding
KOPTI™s costs covered 

73.1% by government, 

16.5% by Gwanju ﬁCity of 

Light,ﬂ 10.4% by industry
Ł 
 1999-2000 (business phase, JVs, 
production runs): meet environmental 
regulations July 2006
KOPTI equipment 

value: $65 mil
Ł 
 Save $20 bil on energy
Ł 
 
2001 (activation phase, growth to 
more than 340 companies): produce 
80 lm/W white LED by 2008
LED Valley Project
Ł 
 2005-2008: develop HB-LED
$100 mil (˜rst phase)
Gwanju ﬁCity of Light,ﬂ 
mix of national and local 

government and private-

sector investment
Ł 
 2005-2008: second phase of a 
photonics industry project for 
HB-LEDs
$430 mil (second 

phase HB LED & 

˜ber-to-home)
Ł 
 Deploy ˜ber-to-the-home networks 
Taiwan
estimated $4.0 mil/year 

(2002-2005)
Next Generation Lighting 

Project
Ł 
 2004-2005 (40 lm/W): improve 
performance of white LEDs
2004-2005: NT$383 
mil ($11.5 mil)
Consortium of 11 companies
Ł 
 Second phase (60 lm/W): 100 lm/W 
output in labs
National Science Council
Ł 
 
Circa 2002-2004: producing highly 
ef˜cient LEDs
NT$12 mil ($0.4 mil)
NSC department of science 
& engineering
Ł 
 Led to 14 new patents and 20 new 
manufacturing process technologies
continued
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196
 Country, Funds
aProgram
Phase & Objectives
Funding
Organizations
China
destimated $248.8 mil/year 
(2005-2010); only 

includes initial investment 

for ˜ve parks and the 

5-year plan; not directly 

comparable to other 

nations™ ˜gures as this 

includes manufacturing 

site investments
Semiconductor Lighting 

Project
Ł 
 Five parks established in Shanghai, 
Xiamen, Dalian, Nanchang, 
Shenzhen: establish industrial parks 

with up-, mid-, and down-stream 

products; ˜rst phase likely to be 

2005-2010: collaboration with 

Taiwan and specialists from Taiwan 

and U.S.; anticipate $19 bil LED 

industry by 2010
Total investment: 

Yuan 10 bil ($1.2 bil), 

allocated as follows: 

Xiamen: $1.9 mil 
(with focus on opto
-electronics), Dalian: 

$150 mil, Shenzhen: 

initial investment 3 

bil Yuan ($375 mil); 

total 20 bil Yuan ($2.5 

bil) over 3-5 years 

(2005-2010)
Xiamen: three companies and 

government & cooperation 

with Taiwan; Dalian: JV 

between companies and 

science & technology group; 

Shenzen: university, local 

city government support & 

200 companies
National Solid State Lighting 

project as part of 11th 5-Year 

Plan
Ł 
 2015 goals: savings from large-scale 
conversion to LED; 100 bil kW/h 
annually by 2015
2006-2010: $44 mil
15 research institutions & 

2,500 companies
Ł 
 150 lm/W LED and capture 40% of 
incandescent market
Ł 
 
Reduce environmental pollution
Ł 
 
Develop strong industrial base 
Ł 
 
International cooperation if necessary
E.U.
estimated $16.3-32.5 

mil/year (2002-2006) 

est. assuming 5-10% 

dedicated toward LED
Sixth Framework program
Ł 
 Strengthen science & 
technology base for international 
competitiveness
$1.3 bil earmarked for 
nan
otechnology (with 
IST section)
 aThe yearly fund ˚ow was estimated as an annual mean of all funding programs over the entire time range of the programs. All ˜gures in US$.
 bPresidential budget for ˜scal year 2006 includes request of $11 mil for SSL.
 cKorea also has a national program for LCD and displays, from 2004-2008. Key players are LG and Samsung. No funding information.
 dChina™s ﬁ863 Program,ﬂ or National High Technology Research & Development Program, includes development of OLEDs as a focus.
SOURCES (in order of table): DOE (2005, 2006), Japan Research and Development Center of Metals™ National Project (2000), Stevenson (2005), Compound 

Semiconductor (2004), Chiu (2004), Yahoo! News Australia & NZ (2004), Tang (2006), Ledsmagazine.com (2005c, 2005a), Steele (2006), European Com
-mission Community Research (2002).
TABLE 6
 Continued
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 197
(DOE, 2006). Some 65 percent of the DOE grants were awarded to ˜rms, with the 
remainder split about equally between research laboratories and universities.
Similarly, Japan has an LED association that promotes R&D and standard
-ization in the LED industry. As well as aiming for energy-ef˜cient lamps, the as
-sociation has established a medical innovation center that conducts R&D on LED 

use in medical equipment and therapeutics. A 1979 Energy Conservation Law in 

Japan, updated in 1999, has been a key driver of energy conservation in factories, 

buildings, machinery, and equipment. Japan is the second-largest government 

supporter of R&D in general, after the United States, investing $90.3 billion in 

1997. Of this budget, $6.8 billion was allocated toward national energy-related 

R&DŠ64 percent public sector and 36 percent private sector (Dooley, 1999).
South Korea™s lighting program is supported by a government-backed orga
-nization, Korea Photonics Technology Institute, which aims to produce 80 lm/W 

white LEDs by 2008 and invests $20 million per year. Funding stems mainly 

from the government (73.1 percent), but also from industry (10.4 percent) and the 

ﬁCity of Light,ﬂ Gwanju (16.5 percent). Gwanju is the center of the LED Valley 

project in Korea, aimed at penetrating LEDs into television backlighting by 2006, 

car lighting by 2008, and domestic lighting by 2010. Investment is signi˜cant 

at $100 million for the development of HB LEDs (plus $430 million partly for 

˜ber-to-the-home) from 2005 through 2008. In addition, the Korean private sec
-tor, namely Samsung and LG, are investing in LCDs and OLEDs, using Korea™s 

LED infrastructure as a platform. 
Chaebols
 such as Samsung and LG are doing 
so through their business units and research labs, as well as a partial spin-off in 

the case of LG, in which it still has a 60 percent equity stake. But there have also 

been new startups for epiwafer foundries, substrates/GaAs ICs, and ˜ber optic 

componentsŠmany set up by researchers from Samsung and LG or by university 

professors (Whitaker and Adams, 2002).
Taiwan has had support from the National Science Council for LED research. 
Together with a consortium of 11 companies, Taiwan invested $11.5 million in 

LED research and development during the period 2003-2005. The second phase, 

to produce high-ef˜ciency LEDs, is expected to receive $0.4 million in funding. 

The goal is to produce 100 lm/W output ef˜ciency of LED bulbs in laboratories. 

In addition, Taiwan has a 6-year national initiative on nanotechnology worth $700 

million, some of which is dedicated toward LEDs (Liu, 2003).
China has budgeted $44 million to address solid-state lighting R&D needs as 
part of its 11th Five Year plan. The program will include 15 research institutions 

and university labs, and more than 2,500 companies involved in LED wafers, 

chips, packaging, and applications (Steele, 2006). The country expects to be 

the largest market for LEDs in the world, although it acknowledges a 6- to 20-

year lag behind Japan, Europe, and the United States in LED device technology 

(Steele, 2006). The key driver behind the lighting project is energy savings. The 

goal is to penetrate 40 percent of the Chinese incandescent lighting market with 

150 lm/W LEDs. The program was responsible for the establishment of ˜ve in
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
dustrial parks in China during 2004 and 2005, backed by government, company, 
and university investment. The objective of the program is to save 30 percent of 
energy spent on lighting, the same as generated by the Three Gorges Project, in 

the next 15-20 years. An underlying national solid-state lighting project by the 

Ministry of Science and Technology aims to reduce environmental pollution and 

improve technology to develop a strong industrial base. Apart from its dedicated 

semiconductor lighting project, China is investing heavily in the semiconductor 

and advanced material industries in general. China is also focused on collaborat
-ing internationally to develop its semiconductor industry, recruiting talent par
-ticularly from Taiwan and the United States.
One aspect that stands out among national LED programs is that Europe ap
-pears to be lagging behind the United States and Asian countries. The European 

Union™s Fifth Framework Program funds ˜ve research areas: nanotechnology, 

genomics and biotechnology, information technology, aeronautics and space, 

and food safety and health risk. The funding for the period 2002-2006 is $17.5 

billion. Of this, $3.4 billion is assigned to the Information Society Technologies 

program, which includes research into semiconductor technologies and LEDs. 

The program funds research institutions, universities, and other organizations. 

The lack of speci˜c initiatives for LED innovation may explain European coun
-tries™ minor share of LED patents.
Some European countries have more speci˜c programs dedicated toward 
LEDs. In September 2006, for example, the German Ministry of Education and 

BASF inaugurated a new research lab, the Joint Innovation Lab (JIL) (BASF, 

2006). The JIL is a cooperative effort between 20 BASF experts and industrial 

and academic partners researching new materials in organic electronics, con
-centrated particularly on OLEDs for organic photovoltaics and appliances in 

the lighting market (OPAL). The German Ministry of Education and Research 

intends to invest around $800 million in the OPAL project. In addition, BASF 

spends over $1 billion on R&D each year. It is hoped that the projects will 

strengthen Germany™s position in the emerging market of organic electronics 

and create the scienti˜c and technological basis for initiating the production of 

OLED-based lighting (
A to Z of Materials
, 2006).
In the newer technology of OLEDs, much of the work is concentrated in 
research institutions and academia, both domestically and abroad. To be com
-mercially viable, OLED research requires substantial infusion of capital. Foreign 

industry, heavily funded by their governments, could develop an insurmountable 

lead in the technology, making it very dif˜cult for U.S. manufacturers to com
-pete, if the U.S. government does not provide comparable support. With appropri
-ate support from government and industry, commercialization could occur in as 

little as 5 to 8 years (Tsao, 2002).
A push is also being made to pursue good white LEDs, the ﬁholy grailﬂ of 
LED lighting. Analysis of PIDA data compiled by DigiTimes shows that each 

of the aforementioned countries is investing in white LEDs. The United States 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 199
is investing $50 million over 10 years, Korea $23.4 million over 5 years, Japan 
$10.7 million over 5 years, Taiwan $4.6 million over 3 years, China $3.3 million 
over 3 years, and Europe $1.0 million over 4 years (Wang and Shen, 2005).
Demand Drivers
To spur innovation indirectly, regulations and incentives for energy-saving 
technologies can enhance demand for new lighting technologies. In a study com
-paring U.S. and Japanese lighting industry conservation measures, Akashi et al. 

(2003) found that conservation can be encouraged by regulation, incentives, and 

awareness campaigns. The U.S. Energy Policy Act of 1992 prohibited manufac
-turing and import of lamps that do not meet ef˜ciency standards and mandated 

that lamp lumen output, ef˜ciency, and life be printed on packaging, making it 

easier for consumers to compare and select more energy-ef˜cient products. Nev
-ertheless, consumers still experience considerable confusion in choosing lighting, 

particularly for residential settings. In new construction, builders have generally 

installed basic lighting packages that lack energy ef˜ciency and other quality 

improvements in favor of lower capital costs (rather than lower operating costs). 

Bridging the gap between available lighting technology and consumer knowledge 

is a signi˜cant challenge and one that in Japan is met jointly by government and 

industry initiatives.
Future diffusion of LED lighting may re˚ect patterns now apparent for 
CFLs, which, although more ef˜cient than incandescent and halogen lamps, have 

achieved low penetration in the U.S. market. Only about 2 percent of sockets 

nationwide, and 4 percent in California, now use CFLs. Flicker, color, upfront 

cost, and other drawbacks have contributed to their slow adoption, so that greater 

energy ef˜ciency alone seems insuf˜cient to penetrate much of the market, 

although the efforts of Wal-Mart to promote CFLs may result in a signi˜cant 

change in consumer behavior.
IMPLICATIONS AND POLIC
Y RECOMMENDATIONS
This chapter has documented a shift taking place in the lighting industry. 
Traditional lamps are being replaced with CFLs. While the early traditional 

lighting industry was dominated by three big companiesŠGE, Philips, and OS
-RAMŠas production of lamps became commoditized competitive pressures in 

lighting increased. Lower prices and margins shifted production of traditional 

lamps to Asia, especially China, the largest source of lamp imports in the United 

States. Improvements in lamp ef˜ciency led to the development of ˚uorescents 

and other types of lamps, which successfully penetrated commercial and indus
-trial markets and are poised to enter U.S. residential markets after years of delay 

among consumers who lacked awareness and were unwilling to spend money up 

front for savings later on.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
A new lighting technology, LEDs, is leading to a shift in how we view 
lighting. LEDs have already penetrated end-use markets for automobile brake 
lights, signs and displays, backlighting, and traf˜c signals. Investments in the 

development of white LEDs are setting the stage for the use of LEDs as general 

illumination and threaten the traditional lighting industry and its three big players. 

LEDs are a disruptive technology that has allowed many new players to enter the 

lighting market. While Japan and the United States dominate the LED market in 

terms of R&D and revenue, their market share is being eroded by fast-growing 

entrants, especially from Taiwan. Taiwan leads global production of blue (GaN) 

LEDs (Wang and Shen, 2005), had the second- or third-largest amount of LED 

patents by our counts in 2000-2003, and has two ˜rms high on our LED patent 

ranking tables.
Philips, OSRAM, and GE were not involved in the early stages of LED tech
-nology development. It was only in 1999 that the big three decided to enter the 

LED market through a series of joint ventures that the companies later acquired. 

These ˜rms may further build their strengths in this technology through acquisi
-tion. In mid-June 2007, Philips acquired Color Kinetics for approximately $791 

million.
39
 These big three ˜rms appear to have established dominant positions 
in LED technology, judging from our patent analyses. However, it remains to 

be seen whether the big three will replicate the tight oligopoly they held in the 

traditional lighting industry in most of the 20th century. Partly this is because the 

semiconductor supply chain is fragmented as ˜rms in this sector are typically not 

vertically integrated; by specializing, companies are able to keep costs down. Our 

analysis indicates that LED producers likewise operate at various stages of the 

supply chain and do not integrate vertically. This means that the LED market has 

witnessed many new entrants and has also created opportunities for new ventures 

in areas such as system controls and integration.
Although LEDs have some clear advantages over traditional lamps, such 
as added ˚exibility, integration with digital systems, and higher energy savings, 

they are also still costly to produce. The question remains when (indeed whether) 

white LEDs will successfully displace traditional general illumination technolo
-gies, especially among residential buyers. Evidence from CFL, HID, and other 

ef˜cient traditional technologies shows low penetration rates among consumers. 

To aid success of LED lighting, therefore, governments might not only fund 

basic R&D but also promote awareness among consumers so that LED lighting 

products diffuse in the residential market. Governments worldwide are making 

signi˜cant investments into LED R&D and promotion of the technology. Govern
-ment programs, such as the one in the United States, have allowed small startups 
39
 At the time of the announcement Color Kinetics had 71 patents granted and over 15,000 instal
-lations. The merged entity will operate under the name Philips Solid-State Lighting Solutions, with 
intelligent and premium LED product lines ultimately co-branded Philips/Color Kinetics (Color 

Kinetics, 2007).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 20
1and university research labs to make progress on LED R&D and gain a foothold 
in this new market.
U.S. and Asian government programs, in particular, have made the largest 
investments. China, which is still at the early stages of ramping up capacity and 
technology to produce LEDs and therefore lagging behind other countries, is 

addressing R&D in solid-state lighting as part of its 11th Five Year Plan and is 
setting up ˜ve business parks dedicated to these new lighting technologies. China 
has a strong interest to meet its own energy-ef˜ciency needs. Already, there is a 

trade imbalance between China and the United States for semiconductors gener
-ally. In 2002, the United States imported $6.4 billion worth of semiconductor 

products from China, while exporting only $2.2 billion worth (Holtz-Eakin, 

2005). Given its investments in R&D, China might become an important player 

in the global LED market.
Analysis of these trends indicates that Asian countries such as Japan and Tai
-wan, and possibly China and Korea, are poised to take an increased role in R&D, 

production, and diffusion of LED technology. Evidence provided by the patent 

analysis suggests a potential shift toward these Asian nations. Extensive public 

and private investment will help if the United States is to keep up with the op
-portunities presented by these new technologies. Moreover, efforts to encourage 

consumers to use solid-state lighting as it becomes ef˜cacious in new applications 

may help domestic markets to grow and support the commercialization of these 

important energy-saving technologies.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
Partial funding is gratefully acknowledged from the Alfred P. Sloan Founda
-tion and from the Center for Future Energy Systems at Rensselaer Polytechnic 

Institute. Insightful comments on an earlier draft were kindly provided by Kevin 

Dowling, Jeffrey Macher, Bill McNeill, Klaus Minich, David Mowery, and David 

Simons. We also thank our discussants and anonymous referees at each stage of 

development of this work.
REFERENCES
Akashi, Y., L. Russell, M. Novello, and Y. Nakamura. (2003). Comparing Lighting Energy Con
-servation Measures in the United States and Japan. Working Paper, Lighting Research Center, 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Arensman, R. (2005). LED market lights up. 
Electronic Business
 31(4):24.
Arthur, A. (2006). A unique history of the light bulb. Available at http://www.contentmart.com/
ContentMart/content.asp?LinkID=19298&CatID=328&content=1. Accessed December 2006.
Ashdown, B. J., D. J. Bjornstad, G. Boudreau, M. V. Lapsa, B. Shumpert, and F. Southworth. (2004). 
Assessing Consumer Values and Supply-Chain Relationships for Solid-State Lighting Tech
-nologies. Report ORNL/TM-2004/80, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
A to Z of Materials. 
(2006). BASF Open Organic Electronics Research Laboratory, 11 September. 
Available at http://www.azom.com/details.asp?newsID=6627. Accessed September 22, 2006.
Barbaro, M. (2007). Power-sipping bulbs get backing from Wal-Mart. 
New York Times
, January 2.
BASF. (2006). Joint Innovation LabŒOrganic Electronics: Research with customers and academic 
partners. Press release, September 11.
Bellis, M. (2006a). The history of ˚uorescent lights. Available at http://inventors.about.com/library/
inventors/bl_˚uorescent.htm. Accessed December 2006.
Bellis, M. (2006b). Timeline of electrical lighting. Available at http://inventors.about.com/od/
lstartinventions/a/lighting_2.htm. Accessed December 2006.
Bellis, M. (2006c). The history of the incandescent lightbulb. Available at http://inventors.about.
com/library/inventors/bllight2.htm. Accessed December 2006.
Bishop, A. L., R. Worrall, L. J. Spohr, H. J. McKenzie, and I. M. Barchia. (2004). Response of 
Culicoides
 spp. (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) to light-emitting diodes. 
Australian Journal of 
Entomology
 43(2):184-188.
Bowers, B. (1982). 
A History of Electric Light & Power.
 Peter Pergrinus.
Bright, J. R. (1958). 
Automation and Management.
 Boston, MA: Harvard University.
Burgess, D. S. (2006). Ef˜cient white OLED employs down-conversion. LED Focus, May 2006. 
Available at http://www.photonics.com/content/spectra/2006/May/LED/82586.aspx. Accessed 
December 2006.
Business Wire.
 (2006). Avago Technologies introduces new high performance extra bright oval LEDs 
for outdoor electronic sign and signal applications. September 19.
Calwell, C., C. Granda, L. Gordon, and M. Ton. (1999). Lighting the Way to Energy Savings: How 
Can We Transform Residential Lighting Markets? Volume 1: Strategies and Recommenda
-tions. Prepared by Ecos Consulting for the Natural Resources Defense Council, San Francisco, 

Calif.
Chinesewings. (2005). Philips Celebrate the Shanghai Innovation and Technology Park Lighting 
Project. August 1.
Chiu, Y. T. (2004). Optical devices to replace toxic lighting mechanisms. 
Taipei Times.
 April 16.
Color Kinetics. (2007). Color Kinetics Announces Acquisition by Philips. Press release, June 19.

Compound Semiconductor. (March 2004). Taiwanese suppliers target white LED improvements. 
Compound Semiconductor.
Compoundsemiconductor.net. (2004). Japanese LED project targets medical uses. Available at http://
compoundsemiconductor.net/articles/news/8/7/26/1.
Cox, J. B. (2003). Semiconductor-maker Cree gets boost from Taiwan court ruling on patents. 
Knight 
Ridder Tribune Business News.
 September 26, p. 2.
DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). (1993). Housing Characteristics 1993. Energy Information Ad
-ministration, Of˜ce of Energy Markets and End Use, Report DOE/EIA-457.
DOE. (1995). Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey. Energy Information Administra
-tion, Of˜ce of Energy Markets and End Use, Report DOE/EIA-871.
DOE. (1997). Commercial Buildings Characteristics 1995. Energy Information Administration, Of˜ce 
of Energy Markets and End Use, Report DOE/EIS-E-0109.
DOE. (2000). Vision 2020, The Lighting Technology Roadmap. A 20-Year Industry Plan for Lighting 
Technology. Of˜ce of Building Technology, State and Community Programs, Energy Ef˜ciency 

and Renewable Energy.
DOE. (2005). Energy Act Authorizes Next Generation Lighting Initiative. Available at http://www.
netl.doe.gov/ssl/083105.html. Accessed December, 2006.
DOE. (2006). 2006 Project Portfolio: Solid State Lighting. D&R International Ltd. for Building 
Technologies Program, Lighting Research and Development, Of˜ce of Energy Ef˜ciency and 

Renewable Energy.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 20
3Dooley, J. J. (1999). Energy R&D in Japan. Prepared for U.S. Department of Energy, contract DE-
AC06-76RLO 1830. Paci˜c Northwest Laboratory, Battelle Memorial Institute. Document no. 
PNNL-12214.
Economist.
 (2007a). An environmentally friendly bulb that may never need changing. 
The Economist
 June 19.
Economist.
 (2007b). Everlasting light. 
The Economist
, Technology Quarterly insert, September 6.
Eisenberg, A. (2007). The television screen, sliced ever thinner. 
New York Times.
 December 23.
European Commission Community Research. (December 2002). The Sixth Framework Programme in 
Brief. Brochure available at http://ec.europa.eu/research/fp6/pdf/fp6-in-brief_en.pdf. Accessed 

December 2006.
Gartner. (2007). Gartner™s Final Semiconductor Market Share Results Show Industry Grew 10 Percent 
in 2006. Available at 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=50322
1. Accessed January 2008.
General Electric. (2006). Lighting: The last 125 years. Available at http://www.gelighting.com/na/
business_lighting/education_resources/learn_about_light/history_of_light/last_years.htm. Ac
-cessed December 2006.
General Electric. (2007). Consumer & Industrial Announces Intention to Restructure Its Lighting 
Business to Capture Another Century of Growth and Leadership. Press release, October 4. 

Available at http://www.genewscenter.com/Content/Detail.asp?ReleaseID=2704&NewsAreaI

D=2. Accessed November 1, 2007.
Genlyte Thomas. (2005). Annual Report, 2005.

Gizmodo. (2008). Samsung™s 31-inch OLED is biggest, thinnest yet. Available at http://gizmodo.
com/342912/samsungs-31+inch-oled-is-biggest-thinnest-yet. Accessed February 20, 2008.
Grif˜ths, T. (2006). Solid state lighting success is niche to niche. 
LIGHTTimes Online
, December 
11, p. 1.
Hadley, S. W., J. M. MacDonald, M. Alley, J. Tomlinson, M. Simpson, and W. Miller. (2004). 
Emerging Energy-Ef˜cient Technology in Buildings: Technology Characterizations for Energy 

Modelling. Prepared for the National Commission on Energy Policy. Oak Ridge National Labo
-ratory, U.S. Department of Energy.
Herkelrath, M., A. Laksberg, and L. Woods. (2005). A Brighter Future: Advances in LED Energy 
Ef˜cient Lighting Technology. Manuscript, University of Washington.
Holtz-Eakin, D. (2005). Economic Relationships Between the United States and China. Congressional 
Budget Of˜ce Testimony, Statement before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House 

of Representatives, April 14.
Hong, E., L. A. Conroy, and M. J. Scholand. (2005). U.S. Lighting Market Characterization, Vol
-ume II: Energy Ef˜cient Lighting Technology Options. Technical report prepared for Building 

Technologies Program, Of˜ce of Energy Ef˜ciency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department 

of Energy by Navigant Consulting.
Howard, W. E. (2004). Better displays with organic ˜lms. 
Scienti˚c American
 290(2):76-81.
Inquirer.
 (2004). Inventor of LED honoured in his own day, strike a light. April 27.
Japan Research and Development Center of Metals™ National Project. (2000). Light for the 21st 
Century: The Development of Compound Semiconductors for High Ef˜ciency Optoelectronic 

Conversion, Year 2000 Report of Results. (English translation, 2002).
Ledsmagazine.com. (2005a). China promotes bene˜ts of solid-state lighting. Available at http://leds
-magazine.com/features/2/2/5/1. Accessed June 2005.
Ledsmagazine.com. (2005b). LED industry in Taiwan set to grow by 16 percent. Available at http://
ledsmagazine.com/news/2/3/36/1. Accessed April 2007.
Ledsmagazine.com. (2005c). Shenzhen starts to build LED manufacturing base. Available at http://
ledsmagazine.com/news/2/6/22/1. Accessed April 2007.
Ledsmagazine.com. (2006). OLED focus for Osram Opto, ef˜cacy reaches 64 lm/W. Available at 
http://www.ledsmagazine.com/news/3/8/8. Accessed February 2008.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
4 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Ledsmagazine.com. (2007). Seoul and Osram sign LED patent cross-license deal with Osram Opto 
Semiconductors. Available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/4/8/33. Accessed October 2007.
Leonard, R. S. (1992). Lighting the path to pro˜t: GE™s control of the electric lamp industry, 1892-
1941. 
Business History Review
 66(2):305-335.
LIGHTimes. (2006). Wal-Mart sees cold cash in LED holiday lighting and LED lighting for refrigera
-tor cases. November 21, p.1.
LIGHTimes. (2007). Quiet big news announces cross licensing of all Osram and Philips inorganic 
and organic LEDs. Available at http://www.solidstatelighting.net/lightimes/?date=2007-02-02. 
Accessed February 2, 2007.
Lightsearch Directory. www.lightsearch.com. Accessed June 2006.

Liu, Y. S. (2003). III-V Compound Semiconductor Industry and Technology Development in Tai
-wan. International Conference on Compound Semiconductor Manufacturing. GaAsMANTECH, 

Inc.
Maccagno, P. (2002). Overview of the high brightness LED market. In 
Light Emitting Diodes 2002: 
The Strategic Summit for LEDs in Illumination
, conference proceedings, San Diego, Calif., 
October.
Macher, J. T., D. C. Mowery, and D. A. Hodges. (2000). Semiconductors. Pp. 245-285 in 
U.S. 
Industry in 2000: Studies in Competitive Performance
, D. C. Mowery, ed. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press.
Mintel. 2003. LightbulbsŠU.S.ŠMay 2003. Mintel International Group.

Monopolies Commission. (1968). 
Second Report on the Supply of Electric Lamps.
 London: Her 
Majesty™s Stationery Of˜ce.
Navigant Consulting. (2003a). Energy Savings Potential of Solid State Lighting in General Illumi
-nation Applications. Technical report prepared for Building Technologies Program, Of˜ce of 

Energy Ef˜ciency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy.
Navigant Consulting. (2003b). Energy Savings Estimates of Light Emitting Diodes in Niche Lighting 
Applications. Technical report prepared for Building Technologies Program, Of˜ce of Energy 

Ef˜ciency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy.
OLLA Project Report. (2006a). Demonstrate a white p-i-n type OLED. High brightness OLEDs for 
ICT & next generation lighting applications funded under the IST priority (contract nr 4607) of 

the European 6th Framework Programme. February 2006.
OLLA Project Report. (2006b). White pin-OLED with improved polymer injection layer and ef˜
-ciency above 10 lm/W. High brightness OLEDs for ICT & next generation lighting applications 

funded under the IST priority (contract nr 4607) of the European 6th Framework Programme. 

August 2006.
OSRAM. (2006). Highlights from 100 years of the OSRAM brand. Available at http://www.osram.
com/cgi-bin/press/archiv.pl?id=450. Accessed December 2006.
OSRAM China Lighting Ltd. Available at http://www.osram.com.cn/aboutus/index.jsp (in Chinese). 
Accessed December 2006.
Philips. (2006). Annual Report 2005.

Philips. (2006). A history of Philips and Lighting. A century of innovation at Philips Lighting. Avail
-able at http://www.lighting.philips.com/gb_en/about/sub_feature_4. php?main=gb_en&parent
 =1&id=gb_en_about&lang=en. Accessed December 2006.
Physorg.com. (2005). Universal Display First to Achieve 30 Lumens Per Watt White OLED. Au
-gust 5.
RPI (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute). (2006). Rensselaer Researchers Aim to Close ﬁGreen Gapﬂ 
in LED Technology. Press release, August 23.
Sandahl, L. J., T. L. Gilbride, M. R. Ledbetter, H. E. Steward, and C. Calwell. (2006). Compact 
Fluorescent Lighting in America: Lessons Learned on the Way to Market. Research Report 

Prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-76RLO 1830. Paci˜c 

Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Wash.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIGHTING
 20
5Siemens. (2006). Lighting. Available at http://w4.siemens.de/archiv/en/innovationen/licht.html. Ac
-cessed December 2006.
Solidstatelighting.net. (2006). Directories. Available at http://www.sslighting.net/cts/. Accessed June 
2006.
Steele, B. (2006). China pours millions into solid-state lighting program. Ledsmagazine.com, July 25. 
Available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/3/7/21/1. Accessed December 2006.
Stevenson, R. (2005). Oil-free Korea prioritizes solid-state lighting project. Available at http://
compoundsemiconductor.net/articles/magazine/11/4/4/1. Accessed December 2006.
Taiwan Economic News. (2004a). Taiwan poised to retain no. 2 place in world LED production. 
March 24.
Taiwan Economic News. (2004b). Taiwanese led suppliers threatened by Japanese rivals™ bold ex
-pansion plans. April 29.
Tang, Y. K. (2006). Lighten up: China™s resolve to embrace energy-ef˜cient lighting unleashes a 
powerful market potential. 
Beijing Review
, March 2, updated December 13, 2006. Available at 
http://www.bjreview.com.cn/science/txt/2006-12/13/content_50654_2.htm.
Toniolo, T. (2006a). Shining a light on quality. 
Product Design & Development
 61(11):14-15.
Toniolo, T. (2006b). What determines an LED™s quality? 
Electronic Products
 (June).
Toshiba. (2006). The History of Toshiba lighting. Available at http://www.tlt.co.jp/tlt/english/com
-pany/company.htm and http://www.toshiba.co.jp/worldwide/about/ history.html#1875. Ac
-cessed December 2006.
Tsao, J. Y., ed. (2002). 
Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) for General Illumination: An OIDA Technology 
Roadmap Update 2002.
 Optoelectronics Industry Development Association.
Walker, R. C. (2004). Cutting through the buzz production of HB-LEDs in Taiwan, South Korea and 
China. CompoundSemiNews. Available at: http://www.compoundsemi.com/documnts/article/
news/3850.html. Accessed May 2006.
Wang, M., and J. Shen. (2005). LEDs lighting the future: Q&A with Biing-jye Lee, president of 
Epistar. Ledsmagazine.com, November.
Whitaker, T., and B. Adams. (2002). Korea is the new compound semiconductor boom region. Com
-poundsemiconductor.net, April.
Wikipedia. (2006). Light-emitting diode. Available at http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/LED. Accessed 
August 30, 2006.
Williams, B. (2005). A history of light and lighting. Edition: 2.3. Available at http://www.mts.
net/~william5/history/hol.htm. Accessed December 2006.
Yahoo! News Australia and New Zealand. (2004). China launches 50 semiconductor lighting proj
-ects. Available at http://au.news.yahoo.com/040722/3/q08l.html, July 22. Accessed December 

2006.
Zou, H. (2002). Envoy of brightness. 
Shanghai Star.
 January 24.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
7 6  Pharmaceuticals
IAIN
 M. C
OCKBURN
Boston University and National Bureau of Economic Research
INTRODUCTION
Pharmaceuticals is a highly globalized industry, dominated by multinational 
companies that engage in signi˜cant business activity in many countries and 
whose products are distributed and marketed worldwide. Historically, the indus
-try has been dominated by vertically integrated ˜rms performing almost all of the 

activities in the value chain, from basic research through to sales and marketing. 

But it is far from clear that these activities should necessarily be geographically 

co-located; these ˜rms have generally operated globally, with many aspects of 

their operations spanning several countries. In recent decades the industry has 

undergone dramatic structural changes, with the rise of the biotechnology sector, 

substantial growth in demand driven by demographics and substitution away 

from other therapeutic modalities such as surgery, and increased competition 

from globally active generic manufacturers. These changes have led to some 

degree of dis-integration and geographic dispersion, but innovative activity is 

nonetheless highly geographically concentrated, re˚ecting the economic sig
-ni˜cance of factors such as localized knowledge spillovers and the strength of 

patent protection, as well as the in˚uence of government policies such as price 

regulation, state procurement of drugs, and health and safety regulation. Rising 

research and development (R&D) expenditures in the face of health care cost 

containment pressures and apparently slowing research productivity give pharma
-ceutical companies a powerful incentive to seek out cost savings and new models 

for innovation, and to the extent that ﬁoffshoringﬂ can raise research productivity 

it will generate substantial bene˜ts to U.S. consumers and taxpayers. However, 

although we see some evidence of cost-driven geographic redistribution of R&D 

into new low-cost locations, this process has thus far been limited.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20
8 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Global Distribution of Activity
Many, though not all, new pharmaceutical products are marketed world
-wide. ﬁBlockbusterﬂ productsŠthe relatively small fraction of drugs that realize 
global sales in the range of billions of dollars per yearŠare normally sold in 

most middle- and high-income countries. Patients in Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries ultimately have access to 80-
90 percent of these products, albeit with longer delays in countries with more 

stringent price controls or weaker intellectual property (IP) protection. ﬁMinorﬂ 

productsŠthose products with global sales below $1 billion per yearŠare typi
-cally launched in fewer countries; patients in the average country ultimately gain 

access to well under half of the total number of drugs introduced worldwide 

within 10 years of their ˜rst sale. New drugs are signi˜cantly less likely to be 

launched in poorer countries and, even if they do ultimately become available, it 

can take many years. Some countries are noticeably different in these respects; 

for example, Japan and Italy have much higher frequencies of single-country 

products.
1 Country-speci˜c regulatory requirements and differences in health 
care delivery systems may require drug companies to make signi˜cant invest
-ments in local capacity in regulatory affairs and sales and marketing, even where 

promotion of pharmaceutical products is highly restricted.
Drug manufacture is also a multinational phenomenon, with an active global 
trade in intermediates (specialty chemicals), active pharmaceutical ingredients, 

and ˜nished products. Stringent regulatory requirements for manufacturing im
-posed by government agencies in major markets such as the United States have 

extended quality standards worldwide, and several countries have become major 

loci of manufacturing activity that supplies global markets, notably Ireland and 

Puerto Rico, as well Israel and India for generic products.
R&D, by contrast, is much more geographically concentrated; the bulk of all 
R&D expenditure occurs in the United States, a handful of European countries, 

and Japan. Table 1 provides one measure of the global allocation of aggregate 

industrial pharmaceutical R&D expenditures. Unfortunately, reliable nationally 

comparable statistics on R&D spending in pharmaceuticals are dif˜cult to ob
-tain. National trade associations for the industry often report global rather than 

national spending by their members, and use varying de˜nitions of R&D. For 

smaller countries, particularly emerging economies, data are simply unavailable, 

intermittently available, or of very questionable quality. With these caveats, ag
-gregate statistics based on government censuses may nonetheless be informative, 

and they suggest a relatively stable share of the allocation of total industry R&D 

expenditure among developed countries, though even these numbers are dif˜cult 

to compare due to differences in industry de˜nitions, reporting standards, and 

data collection methods as well as exchange rate issues.
1 
See Lanjouw (2005), Kyle (2006, 2007), and Danzon et al. (2003).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 20
9TABLE 1
 Business Expenditure on Pharmaceutical R&D by Country
1990
1995
2000
2004
Total BERD at PPP (current million $), of which:
16,853
24,587
33,781
46,216USA
37.3%
41.5%
38.3%
36.5%
EU15
39.8%
36.3%
40.4%
39.0%
 UK
12.1%
11.8%
13.3%
11.1%
 France
6.4%
8.5%
7.8%
7.6%
 Germany
8.1%
5.0%
6.7%
7.5%
 Italy
5.5%
2.5%
1.9%
1.5%
 Sweden
2.1%
2.7%
3.7%
3.6%
Japan
16.2%
14.9%
14.3%
14.8%
Other developed countries
a6.7%
6.3%
5.8%
8.0%
ﬁNew Europeﬂ
bŠ.
0.8%
0.9%
1.2%
Other emerging economies
cŠ.
0.1%
0.4%
0.6%
NOTES: In 2004, data for Australia, France, Greece, Japan, Mexico, Sweden, and Turkey are inferred 
from 2003 values and the average annual growth rate (AAGR) of BERD over the past 5 years in 

that country. In 2003 data for Austria, Denmark, Greece, and Iceland are inferred from adjacent year 

values and the 5-year AAGR of BERD in that country. The same applies to Austria in 1990 and 1995, 

and Belgium in 1990. Data for Switzerland may not be consistent over time.
 aAustralia, Canada, Iceland, Korea, Norway, Singapore, and Switzerland.
 bCzech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia.
 cTaiwan, Mexico, and Turkey.
SOURCES: OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators Vol. 2006 release 02, and UK Pharma
-ceutical Industry Competitiveness Task Force: Competitiveness and Performance Indicators 2005.
Data published by OECD on business expenditure on R&D in pharmaceuti
-cals are one basis for examining the global distribution of research effort in the 
industry. These data are converted to U.S. dollars using purchasing power parity 

(PPP) exchange rates and are based on the geographical location of spending 

rather than the ﬁnationalityﬂ of the parent corporation. As shown in Table 1, 

there was almost a threefold increase in total nominal R&D between 1990 and 

2004. However, shares by country or region were relatively constant, with both 

the United States and the European Union (EU) countries accounting for about 

40 percent each of ﬁworldﬂ R&D expenditure, Japan about 15 percent, and other 

developed countries (principally Switzerland) about 7 percent. The emerging 

economies and former Soviet Bloc countries present in this database have a 

small but increasing share of this total. It is important to note, however, that there 

is some R&D activity in countries that are not included here. India and China 

may account for as much an additional $1.5 billion or more of R&D spending 

in 2004,
2 and other indicators suggest small, though rapidly growing, levels of 
2 
OECD reports over $1 billion in pharmaceutical R&D in China in 2000 but other sources suggest 
much lower ˜gures. The 
China Statistics Yearbook on High Technology Industry 200
6 published 
by China National Bureau of Statistics, National Committee of Development and Reform, Ministry 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
activity in the Russian Federation and other Eastern European countries such as 
Romania and the Slovak Republic, in some parts of Latin America, as well as 
countries in Southeast Asia.
Note that Table 1 excludes contributions to the development of new drugs 
from publicly ˜nanced R&D and research supported by private nonpro˜t orga
-nizations. Noncommercial R&D is critically important to the industry and is a 

major source of ﬁupstreamﬂ technology in the form of knowledge externalities 

from basic research, or spin-off products and entrepreneurial companies. Inter
-nationally comparable data on these forms of R&D expenditure are not available 

for many countries; however, data collected by the OECD suggest that medical 

sciences account for 20 to 30 percent of academic R&D expenditure in most de
-veloped countries. Given that the United States accounts for at least one-third of 

global public-sector research, it seems clear that the U.S. share of the total global 

research expenditure in pharmaceuticals from all sources would be signi˜cantly 

higher.
3Focusing on U.S. pharmaceutical companies, self-reported data compiled 
by PhRMA, the U.S. trade association, indicates that a signi˜cant share of R&D 

spending by U.S.-based companies was incurred outside the United States. 

(PhRMA members are largely though not exclusively U.S.-headquartered com
-panies.) In 2005, these companies spent just under $9 billion outside the United 

States (21.5 percent of their total R&D spending), almost all of which was in 

Western Europe and Scandinavia. Table 2 summarizes these data.
4Interestingly, the ex-U.S. share of total R&D spending has been quite stable: 
while total non-U.S. R&D spending reported by these companies increased by 

633 percent in real terms between 1980 and 2005, over this period the ﬁabroadﬂ 

share ˚uctuated between 17 and 22 percent, with no obvious trend over time.
Innovation in the Pharmaceutical 
Value Chain
The pharmaceutical value chain encompasses many activities, ranging from 
basic scienti˜c research to marketing and distribution. Innovation in the industry 

is tightly linked to basic biomedical science, and many companies participate 

actively in basic scienti˜c research that generates new fundamental knowledge, 

data, and methods. R&D activity is conventionally divided into two phases: 
of Science and Technology, for example, reports just under 1.4 billion yuan of intramural R&D in 
pharmaceuticals in 2000Šabout $700 million at PPP. (However, more than 20 percent of this was 

for ﬁprocessing of traditional Chinese herbal medicine.ﬂ) The same source gives total pharmaceutical 

R&D in 2005 at just under 4 billion yuan, a remarkable increase.
3 
In 2004, for example, U.S. expenditure on academic R&D was more than $42 billion out of a total 
for OECD member countries of $125 billion. In addition, the United States has one of the highest 

shares of medical sciences in total academic R&D. SOURCE: OECD Main Science and Technology 

Indicators database.
4 
Comparable data are not available for non-U.S.-based companies.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 211
TABLE 2
 Ex-U.S. R&D Spending by PhRMA Members, 2005
Area
$ Million
Share (%)
Africa
28.0
0.3
Canada
479.3
5.4
Latin America and Caribbean
174.9
2.0
Asia-Paci˜c (except Japan)
117.5
1.3
India and Pakistan
10.9
0.1
Japan
1,025.4
11.5
Australia and New Zealand
144.6
1.6
Europe
6,524.7
73.4
Central and Eastern European nations, including Russia
244.6
2.8
Middle East
37.7
0.4
Uncategorized
101.3
1.1
Total
8,888.9
100.0
SOURCE: PhRMA Pro˜le 2007, Table 6.
discovery and development. Drug discovery includes basic science and research 
on disease physiology, identi˜cation and validation of ﬁdruggable targetsﬂ in the 

body where therapeutic molecules may affect disease processes, identi˜cation 

and optimization of drug candidates, and preclinical testing. The development 

phase of research focuses on testing in humans, from the ˜rst small-scale trials 

directed at establishing basic physiological data in healthy volunteers through to 

large-scale trials on patients with the disease, which are designed to provide data 

on safety and ef˜cacy to support applications for regulatory approval of the drug. 

Following marketing approval, research often continues to develop improved 

formulations of the product and to establish safety and ef˜cacy in treatment of 

additional diseases or patient populations. Re˚ecting extraordinary advances in 

biology since the 1970s, the industry has become progressively more science-

intensive, relying closely on fundamental advances in physiology, biochemis
-try, and molecular biology rather than ﬁbrute forceﬂ application of large-scale 

resources. If anything, this process has accelerated over the past decade as the 

industry has focused on complex and systemic diseases such as cancer, autoim
-mune diseases, and psychiatric conditions. Particularly in drug discovery, indus
-trial and publicly funded research efforts are deeply intertwined.
5Though the bulk of innovative activity is concentrated in drug discovery 
and development, some R&D is also directed at manufacturing technologies and 

process improvement. However, stringent regulation of manufacturing processes 

inhibits experimentation and innovation, and for many drugs manufacturing costs 

are a small fraction of sales. This limits returns to investing in process innovation 
5 
See Gambardella (1995) and Cockburn and Henderson (1998). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
as opposed to investing in developing new products. In some cases advances in 
manufacturing technology can be important to allow use of advanced delivery 
systems or new formulations, but for many products innovation in manufacturing 

and production processes is largely con˜ned to generic producers who compete 

fundamentally on costs.
6 By contrast, for other drugs, particularly the ﬁlarge-
moleculeﬂ therapeutic proteins based on biotechnology, manufacturing costs are 

substantial and production processes are more tightly linked to research activity 

(Grabowski et al., Forthcoming).
While the industry continues to be dominated by large integrated ˜rms that 
conduct much of this innovative activity in-house, recent decades have seen 

signi˜cant vertical restructuring of the industry and these ˜rms increasingly rely 

on externally sourced R&D in both the discovery and the development phases of 

research. In drug discovery, an active entrepreneurial sector that bridges academic 

and publicly funded research and industrial science has become a very important 

supplier of drug candidates and tools for performing R&D. In the development 

phase, specialist ˜rms (contract research organizations) now play a signi˜cant 

role in conducting clinical trials on behalf of the sponsor of a drug. The causes 

of this restructuring of R&D activity are complex, ranging from changes in patent 

law and practice that have extended exclusionary IP rights into ﬁupstreamﬂ sci
-ence, ˜nancial market innovations that have eased access to capital for early-stage 

companies, and the development of institutions that have encouraged universities 

and public laboratories to actively promote commercialization.
7One consequence of these changes is that pharmaceutical innovation now 
relies heavily on a complex web of contractual agreements linking a variety of 

actors at various stages of the drug development process. Danzon et al. (2003) 

found that over one-third of new drugs approved between 1963 and 1999 origi
-nated in alliances between industry participants. Data on strategic technology al
-liances show an explosion of collaborative activity in the biomedical sector since 

the early 1990s. While the total number of new industrial technology alliances 

captured per year in the CATI-MERIT database grew by 76 percent between 1990 

and 2003, the number of new alliances per year in ﬁbiotechnologyﬂŠwhich likely 

captures much of the external sourcing of drug discovery by pharmaceutical com
-paniesŠincreased by 818 percent.
8 Furthermore, many of these alliances spanned 
national boundaries: between 1990 and 2003, 45 percent of the alliances in this 

database in which U.S.-headquartered companies participated were ﬁU.S.-onlyﬂ 
6 
This is not to say that process innovation cannot generate large aggregate savings for the industry. 
Macher and Nickerson™s (2006) benchmarking study of pharmaceutical manufacturing suggests that 
adoption of process-analytical technologies, greater use of IT, and complementary work practices 

could generate cost savings of up to $50 billion per year.
7 
For a lengthier discussion, see Cockburn (2004).
8 
See National Science Foundation Science Indicators 2006, Table AT04-37. Note that many of 
these alliances may be relatively short-lived, and the ﬁcoverageﬂ of alliance formation in this database 

is dif˜cult to assess.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 213
(i.e., all participants had U.S. headquarters), 23 percent of the alliances in which 
European-headquartered companies participated were Europe-only, and only 8 
percent of the participated alliances in which Japan headquartered companies 

were ﬁdomestic.ﬂ
9FORCES
 D
RI
VING
 L
OCATION
 OF
 I
NNO
VATI
VE A
CTI
VIT
YPharmaceutical companies have always been able to operate R&D facilities 
largely independently from other activities: though a typical large pharmaceuti
-cal ˜rm operates as an integrated economic entity, it normally conducts R&D 

in multiple locations around the world. The nature of the product development 

process, along with historically strong IP rights, and relatively straightforward 

licensing practices, has allowed pharmaceutical companies to ﬁdecoupleﬂ manu
-facturing and marketing from R&D. This has been the case for many decades, 

but increased vertical dis-integration in R&D activities since the mid-1980s has 

further relaxed organizational constraints on the location of research activity, 

permitting extensive geographic reorganization of R&D across countries and 

regions as well as vertical reorganization within ˜rms. In the United States, for 

example, ﬁupstreamﬂ ˜rms specializing in new technologies for drug discovery 

are now often located in different locations (such as Boston and the San Francisco 

Bay area) than those historically used by the ﬁbig pharmaﬂ ˜rms concentrated in 

Philadelphia, New Jersey, Connecticut, and the Midwest.
10
Many factors drive these R&D location decisions, and the observed geo
-graphical distribution of research re˚ects complex trade-offs among them. One 

the one hand, economies of scale and scope in performing R&D, the presence 

of internal knowledge spillovers, and costs of coordinating activity across dis
-persed units suggest that, all else equal, ˜rms should limit geographic dispersion 

of R&D. Furthermore, some locations may be more intrinsically economically 

attractive because of lower costs, access to government subsidies, or favorable 

tax treatment of R&D. Proximity to centers of academic excellence and other 

forms of noncommercial research also appears to convey bene˜ts such as raised 

research productivity (see Furman et al., Forthcoming). On the other hand, these 

economic factors, which tend to concentrate R&D, are offset by political consid
-erations. In some countries, pharmaceutical companies face strong political pres
-sure to maintain domestic R&D. Some countries, such as the United Kingdom, 

have explicitly linked the stringency of price regulation to local R&D spending 
9 
These marked differences in alliance activity are presumably driven by the relative concentration 
of potential partners (i.e., biotech companies in the United States).
10
 It is unclear whether the extent of vertical specialization and accompanying geographic realloca
-tion of effort are more or less pronounced in the United States than elsewhere. The United States has 
attracted the lion™s share of investment in new enterprises in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, but 

there is no evidence that U.S.-headquartered ˜rms rely more or less heavily on external R&D than, 

say, those headquartered in Europe.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
levels; in other cases, such as in Canada, local R&D spending re˚ects a political 
bargain to avoid compulsory licensing.
Historically, the United States has been perceived by the industry as a very 
attractive location for pharmaceutical R&D because of its very limited use of 
price regulation and government purchasing, and its strong patent rights.
11
 In 
contrast, in the late 1990s, EU governments became very concerned that overly 

aggressive price controls and hard bargaining by state purchasers were driving 

away investment in pharmaceutical R&D and adversely affecting the competi
-tiveness of EU-based companies, though there is little evidence (see Table 1) of 

any major shift in R&D spending away from Europe. Episodes such as Canada™s 

experience with compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals in the 1970s and 1980s, 

or more recent examples such as the periodic heated disputes between OECD-

based companies and governments of developing countries over pricing of an
-tiretroviral drugs, suggest that R&D location decisions can be quite sensitive to 

government policies directed at lowering the cost of acquiring pharmaceuticals. 

Notwithstanding its long tradition of excellence in medical and pharmaceutical 

research, and substantial historical investments by multinational drug companies, 

Canada experienced a steep decline in domestic R&D activity in pharmaceuti
-cals when it introduced its compulsory licensing regime. Only when full patent 

rights were restored, and a relatively loose drug price regulation scheme was 

instituted, did commercial R&D spending return to previous levels. Countries 

such as Australia, which have relatively stringent drug price controls, continue to 

face major challenges in attracting signi˜cant R&D investment by multinational 

drug companies, in spite of strong academic research capabilities, an attractive 

business environment, and substantial public support of commercial biomedical 

research.
Beyond these ﬁpriceﬂ drivers, several other factors have been identi˜ed as 
in˚uencing R&D location decisions. These often work through indirect, or un
-priced, effects such as knowledge spillovers that are conveyed by ﬁopenﬂ publi
-cations, geographic proximity, or communication through informal professional 

networks rather through economic transactions. For example, drug discovery labs 

sites tend to specialize in therapeutic areas or scienti˜c disciplines
12
 and, since 
11
 The Hatch-Waxman Act lowers the costs of generic entry and provides incentives to challenge 
pharmaceutical patents, but it also provides certain protections to patent holders. The United States 
also has provisions that extend the duration of pharmaceutical patents to offset time lost waiting for 

regulatory approval.
12
 For example, in 2000 Hoffman La Roche operated six major drug discovery facilities: Kamakura, 
Japan; Penzberg, Germany; Basel, Switzerland; Welwyn Garden City, United Kingdom; Nutley, New 

Jersey; and Palo Alto, California. A research center in Basel focused on basic research in genom
-ics, proteomics, and bioinformatics, while the Kamakura, Penzberg, and Nutley labs specialized in 

oncology, Basel and Nutley in metabolic disorders and vascular diseases, Basel and Palo Alto in 

central nervous system disorders, Welwyn Garden City in virology, and Palo Alto in in˚ammation 

and genitourinary diseases. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 215
proximity to publicly funded science appears to be an important determinant of 
research productivity, these often re˚ect local academic centers of excellence in 
particular ˜elds. Furman et al. (Forthcoming) show that patenting by pharma
-ceutical companies is positively correlated with the volume of academic publica
-tions by ﬁlocalﬂ public-sector scientists.
13
 The very substantial levels of publicly 
funded biomedical research in the United States, the United Kingdom, and some 

other countries has therefore played an important role in sustaining similarly high 

levels of commercial investment in drug discovery in these countries.
More generally, like other knowledge-intensive activities, discovery research 
appears to display substantial agglomeration externalities. Drug discovery activ
-ity tends to ﬁclusterﬂ in a small number of locations around the world: many ma
-jor discovery labs are located in the New York/New Jersey/Connecticut standard 

metropolitan statistical area, Boston, the San Francisco Bay area, the suburbs of 

Philadelphia, Research Triangle in North Carolina, the Rhine Valley, the suburbs 

of London, Stockholm, and Tokyo/Kansei. These are conspicuously not low-cost 

locations, so this clustering suggests substantial offsetting economic bene˜ts 

derived from being co-located with other ˜rms. Beyond the role of localized 

knowledge spillovers, bene˜ts from co-location with other pharmaceutical ˜rms 

include access to skilled labor and ﬁinfrastructureﬂ in the form of specialized 

services and suppliers, and ef˜cient interaction with collaboration partners.
14
A ˜nal factor that may affect R&D location decisions is the strength of IP 
protection. Though there is no obvious connection between the degree of patent 

protection in the local product market and the productivity of R&D conducted 

in any given country, the nature of a country™s IP regime appears to affect mul
-tinationals™ willingness to conduct R&D activities there. This may be because 

weak patent protection for products often correlates with weak legal protection 

of other forms of IP such as trade secrets and associated contractual agreements 

with employees and suppliers, and limited avenues to enforce these rights. Both 

patent and nonpatent protection of IP play an important role in maintaining 

exclusive access to, and control over, proprietary knowledge, and in countries 

with weak IP companies may have well-founded concerns about ﬁleakageﬂ of 

valuable information to local competitors. Zhao (Forthcoming) argues that weak 
13
 To some degree, drug discovery labs operated by different ˜rms within the same region appear 
to specialize in particular therapeutic classes or scienti˜c disciplines. Cockburn et al. (2002) report, 
for example, that for their sample of ˜rms commercial R&D in New Jersey was primarily, though not 

exclusively, focused on cardiovascular therapies, whereas that conducted in the suburbs of London 

was primarily in antipsychotics. 
14
 Returning to the example of Hoffman La Roche in 2000, of nine important collaborators identi
-˜ed by the company, Tularik, Affymetrix, Clontech, and Incyte (plus its majority-owned subsidiary 

Genentech) were geographically proximate to its Palo Alto lab, CuraGen and Progenics were close to 

its Nutley lab, and Vernalis, Imperial College, and Oxford University were close to Welwyn Garden 

City. In a study of cross-regional collaborations by a broad set of biomedical technologies, Zhao and 

Islam (2007) document increasing geographic dispersion of R&D activities of large ˜rms, but also 

increased internalization of knowledge spillovers within these ˜rms. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
IP regimes need not deter R&D investment by multinationals: absent strong IP 
rights, companies can nonetheless develop alternative mechanisms for realizing 
returns on innovation and IP. These mechanisms include rapid ﬁinternalizationﬂ 

of knowledge through ef˜cient internal organizational processes and control of 

complementary assets and may make it possible to pro˜tably exploit low prices 

of R&D inputs and underutilized domestic innovation capabilities. However, this 

argument is most appealing for technologies that have a substantial tacit compo
-nent, are strongly complementary to other protected assets held by the ˜rm, and 

have rapid development cycles. This is not the case for pharmaceutical R&D, 

where results from R&D are often easy to ﬁexternalizeﬂ and imitate, and product 

life cycles are measured in decades.
Not surprisingly, therefore, R&D activity in pharmaceuticals has histori
-cally been concentrated in countries with strong and enforceable IP and has 

only just begun to grow in countries that have recently adopted OECD-style 

patent systems under the provisions of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellec
-tual Propoerty Rights (TRIPS) agreement. Compliance with TRIPS requires all 

World Trade Organization (WTO) members to (ultimately) adopt key features 

of the patent systems of wealthy industrialized countries, such as a 20-year term, 

nondiscrimination across ˜elds of technology and nationality of applicants, and 

effective enforcement procedures. Strong patent protection for pharmaceuticals is 

controversial in many of these countries (see discussion of India which follows), 

and the degree to which domestic political pressures will limit the enforceability 

of patents, or push the limits of the TRIPS agreement by, for example, institut
-ing compulsory licensing of drugs, remains to be seen. Patent rights obtained 

by multinationals in countries such as India give these companies the ability to 

exclude generics and to set prices above marginal cost. But patents also provide 

protection for domestic ˜rms conducting R&D, and political choices to weaken 

or limit patent protection on the products of multinationals may have serious 

consequences for nascent research sectors in these economies.
Impact of Industry Restructuring on Innovation
Structural change in the pharmaceutical industry has given pharmaceutical 
companies more opportunities and much greater ˚exibility to improve R&D per
-formance by reallocating R&D effort between internal and external projects, and 

across different locations both within countries and around the world. Whether 

greater globalization of R&D has been caused by this vertical disaggregation of 

the industryŠor vice versaŠis an open question. Clearly the two phenomena are 

closely linked and, beyond the industry-speci˜c factors that have driven vertical 

disaggregation discussed earlier, more general phenomena affecting many indus
-tries (such as improvements in communication technologies, greater international 

mobility of labor and capital, innovation in capital markets, and international 

harmonization of IP rules following the TRIPS agreement) have also played a 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 217
role in creating new opportunities for collaborative R&D and specialist providers 
of R&D inputs.
There are many reasons to believe that industry restructuring and globaliza
-tion may generate substantial gains in R&D performance. R&D outcomes depend 
critically on resource allocation (which projects to pursue, how much to spend, 

which to shut down), which at one time was done almost entirely through internal 

decisions of large vertically integrated ˜rms. In today™s industry, market transac
-tions and the price mechanism play a much greater role in resource allocation, 

with specialization and competition in the supply of research inputs and services. 

Capital markets play an important role in pricing risk and provide high-powered 

incentives to entrepreneurial ˜rms, and strong IP rights support a global ﬁmarket 

for technology.ﬂ These powerful economic forces may well result in signi˜cantly 

faster/better/cheaper drug development.
On the other hand, industry restructuring and globalization may be respon
-sible for some inef˜ciencies that limit any gains in R&D performance. There 

is no guarantee that the market for technology (i.e., licensing and collabora
-tion deals) creates reliable price signals, and market-driven resource allocation 

may therefore generate worse results than those obtained by the internal capital 

markets of large ˜rms.
15
 The struggle between entrants and incumbents in the 
industry may also be wasting signi˜cant resources in bargaining costs; payments 

to intermediaries such as lawyers and bankers; extra organizational overhead 

dedicated to seeking out, structuring, and operating collaborative ventures; or in 

defensive investments to improve bargaining and so forth.
16
While the ultimate impact of restructuring and globalization on R&D per
-formance will surely take decades to become apparent, it is clear that this more 

open competitive environment presents severe challenges. Heightened competi
-tive pressure, greater cost transparency, and global competition have contributed 

to an extraordinarily high failure rate among would-be entrants to the industry. 

Of the many thousands of well-˜nanced entrants with strong patent portfolios 

and exciting science that have attempted to gain a foothold in the industry as a 

supplier of technology or competitor to the established multinational incumbent 

˜rms, only a few hundred have survived. The prospects for new players in the 

industry based in emerging countries are therefore mixed. Success in the global 

pharmaceutical industry requires (among other things) substantial and sustained 

investments in R&D capacity, IP portfolios, and access to leading-edge science. 

It will likely take many years before new competitors appear on the world stage 

to present a serious head-to-head challenge to existing OECD-based ˜rms.
15
 Markets for ﬁknowledge goodsﬂ have long been understood to be subject to numerous forms of 
market failure such as imperfect and asymmetric information, nonexcludability, limited numbers of 
buyers and sellers, exernalities, and so forth. 
16
 See Cockburn (2004, 2007) for further discussion.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Evidence on Offshoring of Pharmaceutical R&D
Rapid growth in technological capabilities in low-cost emerging economies 
is presenting new opportunities and challenges for pharmaceutical companies. 
Some geographic redistribution of R&D activity does appear to be taking place. 

On the one hand, companies located in countries such as India and China are 

performing more in-house R&D oriented toward developing new drugs, rather 

than reverse-engineering existing products or improving production ef˜ciency. 

On the other hand, re˚ecting the general trend in the industry toward greater 

specialization and external sourcing of R&D services, OECD-based companies 

are beginning to look to low-cost countries as suppliers of contract research ser
-vices, and growing numbers of clinical trials are being conducted in emerging 

economies. India and China are the two countries most frequently mentioned in 

this regard; however, by some indicators signi˜cant growth in activity also ap
-pears to be taking place in some Eastern European countries, Argentina, Brazil, 

Taiwan, South Africa, and Israel.
Data on this activity are limited. As discussed earlier, internationally and in
-tertemporally consistent aggregate statistics on R&D expenditure in this industry 

are often not available for low-cost locations, and their reliability is dif˜cult to 

assess. The experience of speci˜c countries may nonetheless be informative, and 

the case of India is presented in the next section.
Case Study: India™s Pharmaceutical Industry
Indian pharmaceutical companies have attracted much attention. Chaudhuri 
(2005) discusses the development of the Indian pharmaceutical industry in detail, 
charting the rise of companies such as Ranbaxy and Dr. Reddy to their current po
-sition as signi˜cant global players in generic drug manufacturing. Many of these 

companies have developed advanced capabilities in low-cost manufacturing, re
-˚ecting local expertise in chemical engineering and a historically process-oriented 

patent regime. (The success of these companies also re˚ects their mastery of the 

regulatory approval process for generic drugs, and associated litigation, in for
-eign markets.) Sustained pro˜tability, together with the introduction of domestic 

product patents for pharmaceuticals in 2005 as part of the TRIPS agreement,
17
 has prompted some of these companies to increase R&D spending and take on 

drug development projects. Chatterjee (2007) analyzes ˜nancial statements of 

Indian pharmaceutical manufacturers and ˜nds very high growth rates of R&D 

spending for the 40-50 ˜rms that have obtained U.S. patents and/or Food and 

Drug Administration (FDA) approval of manufacturing processes, and attract the 
17
 The TRIPS agreement was reached as part of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotia
-tions in the mid-1990s. India and other countries with weak or nonexistent IP regimes agreed to put 
in place OECD-style patent protection by 2005 as a condition of retaining full participation in the 

WTO.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 219
attention of domestic stock analysts. These ˜rms increased their R&D-to-sales 
ratio by a factor of 10 to 20 between 1990 and 2000, and doubled it again between 
2000 and 2005 to reach respectable average levels of 5-6 percent of sales. Among 

these, a handful of ﬁeliteﬂ ˜rms have raised R&D spending to 10 percent per year 

or more in 2005, with compound average growth rates of R&D spending over the 

past decade of 30-50 percent per year.
18
Some of these ˜rms have made signi˜cant investments in product-oriented 
research since the mid-1990s, with some proportion of increased R&D expendi
-ture directed toward generating novel compounds to be tested as drug candidates 

(often referred to as New Chemical Entities [NCEs]). As of early 2006, more 

than 60 molecules developed by Indian companies were reported to be in late 

stages of preclinical research, and 16 had reached the clinical trials stage, though 

none have yet completed Phase III or been approved by the FDA.
19
 Indian ˜rms 
have also entered into a small number of highly publicized product development 

partnerships with multinational R&D-oriented ˜rms: examples include Dr. Red
-dy™s outlicensing of diabetes candidates to Novo Nordisk and Novartis in 1997, 

Glenmark™s 2004 outlicensing agreement with Forest Labs to develop a candidate 

drug for asthma, and Nicholas Piramal™s 2007 agreement with Eli Lilly to conduct 

clinical trials and regional marketing for various candidates for treatment of meta
-bolic diseases. As with such deals in OECD countries, many of these agreements 

have been terminated or otherwise failed to generate signi˜cant licensing revenue 

for the Indian partner (Frontline, 2002). Note also that all of these NCEs appear 

to be ﬁsmall-moleculeﬂ chemistry-based drug candidates rather than the ﬁlarge-

moleculeﬂ products characteristic of leading-edge biotechnology research.
Indian pharmaceutical companies are also reported to be playing a grow
-ing role as contract research providers to research-based multinationals. Indian 

companies have strong capabilities in medicinal and analytical chemistry, process 

engineering, and organic synthesis developed originally to support generic manu
-facturing. Though the nature of the R&D activities covered by these contract 

research agreements are unclear, expertise in chemistry-driven R&D activities 

positions these companies well to support the sourcing company™s core product 

innovations by developing ef˜cient manufacturing processes, ﬁtweakingﬂ candi
-date molecules for better bioavailability, or developing formulations optimized 

for speci˜c marketing purposes. Indian companies are also developing expertise 

in toxicology and animal studies to support preclinical research, and total expen
-diture on clinical research in India has been estimated as $100 million per year for 

2005. Small but signi˜cant investments are being made by OECD-based compa
-18
 Some caution may be warranted in assessing these data. Accounting standards for de˜ning R&D 
may vary over time, some of the growth in expenditure may re˚ect cost in˚ation, and a certain 
amount may re˚ect ﬁwindow dressingﬂ to attract attention from outside investors or potential joint 

venture partners.
19
 ﬁPharmaceuticalsﬂ Report by Ernst & Young for the India Brand Equity Foundation, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
nies in captive research facilities located in India and in long-term collaborative 
discovery partnerships with Indian companies.
But though these ventures may signal a new phase in the development of 
India™s pharmaceutical industry, with an increasingly signi˜cant role in global 
innovation, it is important to note that the scale of this activity is currently very 

small. To put India™s current scale of activity in drug discovery and development 

(at most 100 early-stage candidates since 2000
20
) in perspective, it is worth noting 
that worldwide several thousand molecules enter preclinical research and Phase 

I trials every year. The total expenditure on pharmaceutical R&D in India from 

all sources is growing rapidly but is unlikely to exceed $500 million per year in 

the near future, which is less than 1 percent of expenditure in OECD countries. 

Notwithstanding substantially cheaper inputs to R&D in India (labor costs for 

skilled scientists are claimed to be as little as one-seventh of U.S. levels), the 

scale of India™s R&D effort is still very small.
Complying with the TRIPS Agreement, India has now implemented an 
OECD-style patent system. Effects on domestic prices are as yet unclear, but 

availability of product patents appears to be increasing the number of drugs 

available to Indian consumers and decreasing the amount of time elapsed be
-tween their ˜rst worldwide launch and availability in the Indian market.
21
 Patent 
protection may also be playing a role both in stimulating R&D by domestic ˜rms 

and in supporting multinational companies™ participation in contract research 

agreements and licensing deals. But drug patents are politically controversial in 

India, and it remains to be seen whether the operation of the Indian Patent Of
-˜ce and enforcement in domestic courts will provide adequate IP protection for 

product innovators.
22
Other Evidence on the Scope and 
Volume of Global R&D
Though comprehensive and reliable data on global R&D expenditure are not 
available, the location of discovery and development activity can be tracked using 

proxy indicators such as patent applications, academic publications, or databases 

that document clinical trial sites.
20
 HSBC Securities, cited in IBEF (2006).
21
 See Lanjouw (2007).
22
 Novartis is currently ˜ghting a closely watched legal battle to secure Indian patent rights on 
Gleevec, its breakthrough cancer drug. Novartis™ application for patent rights in India was rejected by 
the Indian Patent Of˜ce in 2006. ﬁThe patent of˜ce ruling in the Gleevec case has sent two far-reach
-ing signals on the new TRIPS-compliant law: First, that India will not grant product patent [sic] for 

any drug unless it was invented after January 1, 1995. Second, that the standards set by the Indian law 

for grant of product patent for drugs could be more exacting than even those of advanced countriesﬂ 

(Times of India
, February 24, 2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 22
1Discovery
Patent applications provide some information on the location of drug discov
-ery activity. Because the United States is largest single pharmaceutical market, 
U.S. patent protection is likely to be sought for most promising drug candidates. 

Therefore, both the location of the patent assignee and the address of the inven
-tors listed on U.S. patents are useful indicators of the location of drug discovery 

activity.
23
 Table 3 shows the geographic distribution over time of granted U.S. 
applications for pharmaceutical patents assigned to corporations. These data are 

not comprehensive, since they cover only a single class of patents (IPC A61K), 

and the sample excludes patents where the country of the assignee cannot be de
-termined. Data are tabulated by the date of application, which induces truncation 

of the sample in later years to due the application/grant lag.
Patenting in this sample is dominated by U.S. and European companies. 
Although the number of patents in this sample that are assigned to corporations 

based in India and China has grown quite rapidly, as the table shows this growth 

is from such a small base that the share of companies based in these countries 

remains very small.
Table 4 shows results from a slightly different exercise, breaking down the 
regional share of drug discovery activity based on the location of the inventors 

listed on drug patents. Again, although the volume of activity in India and China 

has grown very rapidly since 1990, it still represents a tiny share of total activity. 

In 1990, for example, France alone accounted for 661 instances of ﬁinventor
-ship,ﬂ whereas India had 20 and China had 22.
These indicators provide little evidence of substantial global relocation of 
activity in drug discovery. As more current data become available, we are likely 

to see substantially increased levels of activity in countries like India and China. 

But although activity in these countries is growing quite quickly, it will be many 

years before the share of the locations where drug discovery has traditionally 

been concentrated is materially affected.
Development
A somewhat different picture emerges, however, for clinical development. 
For this aspect of innovative activity in pharmaceuticals, the location of clinical 
trial sites provides some insight into the global distribution of activity. Berndt, 

Cockburn, and Thiers (2007) report results from tabulating the location of more 

than 65,000 trial sites participating in the clinical trials that have been registered 

on clinicaltrials.gov since 2001. Table 5 summarizes this measure of clinical 

development activity. Because registration is not compulsory for all trials, the 
23
 ﬁHome biasﬂ may in˚ate the U.S. share, and language barriers or lack of experience with the U.S. 
patent system may result in underrepresentation of some countries.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 3
 Location of Corporations Obtaining U.S. Pharmaceutical Patents
Application Year
1990
1995
2000
2002
Total number of patents in sample
3,414
9,277
7,073
3,257
Regional share of patents based on location of assignee (%)
 United States
55.1
63.3
58.3
57.2
 EU15
24.6
21.7
22.3
22.8
 Japan
15.3
7.5
9.0
9.5
 Other OECD
2.8
5.0
6.2
6.5
 India
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.3
 China
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
NOTES: Table entries based on the count of U.S. patents in IPC class A61K assigned to corpora
-tions whose country can be identi˜ed. SOURCE: Author™s calculations based on U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Of˜ce (USPTO) data.
TABLE 4
 Location of Inventors on U.S. Pharmaceutical Patents
Application Year
1990
1995
2000
Total pharmaceutical inventorships
aRegional share (%)
10,582
30,135
b23,923
 United States
42.8
56.7
54.4
 EU15
28.6
25.0
24.8
 Japan
21.2
10.4
10.7
 Other OECD
3.1
5.3
6.0
 India
0.2
0.2
1.1
 China
0.2
0.1
0.2
 Other
4.0
3.0
2.8
 aAn inventorship is an instance of an inventor being listed on a patent application; therefore, a 
single patent with three inventors will generate three observations.
 b1995 saw a surge of applications at the USPTO in order to secure various procedural advantages 
before the passage of patent reform legislation.

SOURCE: Author™s calculations based on USPTO data. Table entries are based on the number of 

instances of inventorship for patents falling in IPC class A61K, by country of the inventor and date 

of application for the patent.
TABLE 5
 Clinical Trial Sites by Region
Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Total sites
2,385
4,139
6,677
8,034
14,224
23,536
33,045
Share of (%)
 United States
51.4
48.8
50.9
49.1
54.6
49.5
45.2
 EU15
32.2
29.4
28.9
25.7
23.1
26.3
26.8
 Japan
0.0
0.0
1.6
2.1
2.0
2.5
2.7
 Other OECD
7.5
8.2
10.3
8.0
7.4
8.0
7.2
 India
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.8
0.7
0.9
1.0
 China
0.0
0.4
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.9
NOTES: Table entries are based on the number of sites participating in clinical trials registered on 

clinicaltrials.gov. The average number of sites per trial is 7.6.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 22
3extent to which these data are representative of all trials is unclear. (In 1997 the 
FDA began requiring ex ante registration of trials for life-threatening diseases, 
and community norms have encouraged participation in trial registries, but it was 

only when a consortium of editors of the major medical journals [ICMJE] agreed 

in 2004 to require ex ante registration of trials as a condition of publication that 

the volume of registrations appears to have begun to approach full coverage.) 
Growth in the total number of trials, particularly in the early years of this sample, 
largely re˚ects increases in the coverage rate rather than increases in the volume 

of activity. But provided nonregistration does not vary systematically across 

countries, shares of activity are nonetheless a reasonable metric for the extent of 

a country or region™s involvement in clinical research.
As Table 5 shows, the United States, the EU, and Japan continue to account 
for the bulk of clinical trial activity, but India and China had a signi˜cant and 

rapidly growing share of activity.
Overall, emerging economies and low-cost locations are a relatively small 
share of global activity, but this is changing rapidly. Table 6 shows the share of 

global trial sites by geopolitical region and by traditional versus emerging coun
-tries. In 2002, more than 90 percent of trial sites were located in ﬁtraditionalﬂ 

countries (North America, Western Europe, and Scandinavia), but this proportion 

has fallen rapidly in recent years, with the share of nontraditional countries in the 

total number of trial sites rising from 7 to 17 percent. Growth in this form of R&D 

activity has been particularly strong in Eastern Europe and Asia. Between 2003 

and 2006, for example, Malaysia, Philippines, Bulgaria, Chile, Turkey, Argen
-tina, the Russian Federation, Thailand, Mexico, and Latvia more than quadrupled 

their share of global trial sites, and India and China™s shares more than tripled.
In a regression analysis of factors driving the global allocation of clinical tri
-als, Berndt, Cockburn, and Thiers (2006) ˜nd that changes in countries™ share of 
TABLE 6
 Regional Share of Worldwide Clinical Trial Sites (%)
Year
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006North America
58.2
54.1
59.8
54.3
49.5
Western Europe
30.6
26.7
24.1
27.4
27.6
Oceania
3.3
4.0
3.2
4.5
4.6
Latin America
1.7
3.5
3.7
3.3
4.3
Eastern Europe
3.8
7.4
4.9
5.9
8.1
Asia
1.1
3.1
2.5
3.2
4.0
Middle East
0.3
0.3
0.7
0.7
0.6
Africa
1.0
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
ﬁTraditionalﬂ countries
92.4
85.0
87.4
86.4
82.0
ﬁEmergingﬂ countries
7.1
14.2
11.8
12.6
17.1
Others
0.5
0.9
0.9
1.0
0.9
SOURCE: clinicaltrials.gov.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
4 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
trial sites were negatively associated with a measure of cost per patient, but posi
-tively associated with changes in the strength of patent protection for biomedical 
inventions. Two- or fourfold differences in the cost per patient of conducting 

trials in emerging countries rather than in traditional countries thus appear to be 

driving a substantial expansion of activity in these locations. Interestingly the 

share of emerging countries in this activity is highest for large, con˜rmatory tri
-als (Phase III of the drug development process) and lowest for small, early-stage 

trials that are more closely connected with basic biomedical science, suggesting 

that some types of clinical research are much less strongly in˚uenced by the 

clustering and proximity to leading-edge academic research effects that drive the 

location of drug discovery. Turning to IP issues, the positive association found 

here between changes in patent protection of biomedical inventions and growth 

in share of global clinical trials may re˚ect concerns of both multinational and 

domestic R&D performers about imitation of their products and their ability to 

appropriate returns from innovation. Even though sales in these countries are 

only a very small share of the global pharmaceutical market, and their current 

pro˜tability is therefore unlikely to be a major driver of R&D decisions, it is 

clear that they have huge potential for future growth in sales. Changes in patent 

protection may therefore be important as a guarantee of future pro˜tability in 

much larger markets, attracting R&D, which will realize returns far in the future. 

One critical connection between local R&D and local future sales may be the 

role that late-stage trials can play in building future demandŠby familiarizing 

key opinion leaders in the local medical community with a product, the sponsor 

of the trial may realize higher volumes or better reimbursement prices once the 

product is launched.
One question of great interest is whether participation in global clinical 
trials has ﬁspilloverﬂ effects in the sense of building local capacity to conduct 

independent clinical research in support of domestic drug development programs. 

Clearly, sustained participation in this activity will allow clinical researchers to 

gain experience, credibility, and skills, and to promote development of support
-ing infrastructure and services. But it is likely to take considerable time before 

emerging countries are able to design and conduct complex trials on a routine ba
-sis and develop competitive capabilities in ﬁtranslational medicineﬂŠthe bench-

to-bedside combination of clinical investigation with basic research that plays a 

critical role in drug development. This type of R&D activity relies heavily on 

participation by skilled physicians, who are a very scarce resource in emerging 

countries relative to medical needs. Substantial expansion of clinical research will 

require these countries to make signi˜cant investments in medical schools and 

training programs in order to meet increased demand both for routine care for 

larger and wealthier populations and for an emerging clinical research sector. It 

is far from clear how fast or extensive this supply response will be, or what will 

be the impact of rapid economic growth and consequent expansion of health care 

on the market for physician services.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 22
5Manufacturing and Process Innovation
While product innovation remains the major focus of the industry, it is worth 
noting that process innovation capabilities may play an increasingly important 
role in the future. Generic products account for a very large proportion of drug 

consumption, and this will likely grow in the future as patents expire for the cur
-rent set of ﬁblockbusterﬂ products. Suppliers of these products compete on costs, 

and Indian manufacturers in particular appear to have acquired world-leading 

capabilities in developing low-cost manufacturing processes, which positions 

them to play a dominant role in supplying low-price products to both developed 

and developing countries. Looking further into the future, new generations of 

large-molecule biotech drugs will likely displace the current set of chemistry-

based products, particularly for diseases such as cancer. But these drugs are no
-toriously expensive and dif˜cult to produce, suggesting an important future role 

for manufacturing innovation that should bring costs down to the point at which 

these products can be pro˜tably supplied to large lower-income markets. Clusters 

of activity and development of these manufacturing innovation skills are already 

occurring in ﬁnewﬂ locations such as Singapore, which may become important 

locations for this type of manufacturing in the same way that they have for other 

technologies such as semiconductors.
DISCUSSION
 AND
 C
ONCLUSIONS
Globalization is not a new phenomenon in pharmaceuticals. At least since the 
1950s, innovation in this industry has been geographically dispersed, with phar
-maceutical companies conducting R&D in multiple locations around the world. 

Over the past 25 years, however, gains from specialization in different aspects of 

the drug discovery and development process, changes in IP rules, easy access to 

venture capital, and the re˜nement of collaborative business models have driven 

greater vertical disaggregation of the industry, along with greater geographic 

dispersion of R&D. Pharmaceutical companies now have more opportunities 

and much greater ˚exibility to reallocate R&D effort between internal and ex
-ternal projects and among different locations both within countries and around 

the world. While the industry continues to be dominated by vertically integrated 

multinational ˜rms whose activities span the entire chain of research, from basic 

science to postapproval epidemiology, these ˜rms compete, collaborate, and in
-teract with a wide variety of new actors.
This interaction is not con˜ned by national boundaries, and the development 
of high-quality, low-cost research capabilities outside the United States and Eu
-rope presents signi˜cant opportunities for multinational R&D-based pharmaceuti
-cal companies to outsource some aspects of the innovation process. The available 

evidence suggests that emerging countries are playing a rapidly growing role in 

the global research effort, albeit currently very small compared to the scale of 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
6 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
activity in the United States and Europe. In large part, this role has been enabled 
by structural change in the industry creating opportunities for collaboration and 
markets for specialized skills and services. But it has also been facilitated by the 

general trends in the world economy that are driving globalization of many in
-dustries, including factors such as improvements in communication technologies, 

greater international mobility of labor and capital, accumulation of human capital 

and business infrastructure in low-cost emerging economies, and harmonization 

of IP rules following the TRIPS agreement.
From a U.S. perspective, this ﬁoffshoringﬂ of pharmaceutical R&D has 
potential bene˜ts to be considered as well as the costs from any loss of the 

stable, high-wage employment characteristic of this industry. The pharmaceutical 

industry currently faces what some commentators have termed a ﬁproductivity 

crisis.ﬂ The number of new drugs approved each year appears to be stagnating, 

with limited progress made in recent decades in treating some major diseases, 

yet R&D expenditure has been growing very rapidly. One widely used indicator 

of research productivity is the cost per new drug approved, accounting for failed 

projects and the time value of money, which has been rising at an alarming rate. 

The most recent in a series of studies from the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug 

Development (Dimasi et al., 2003) estimates the present value of R&D expendi
-tures to bring a new drug to market to be $802 million per FDA-approved new 

drug. In constant year 2000 dollars, this $802 million is more than double the 

$318 million estimated in an earlier 1991 study, and almost six times larger than 

the $138 million ˜gure obtained in a 1979 analysis. Recent industry estimates are 

now well in excess of $1 billion per successful new drug.
There are good reasons to believe that this ﬁcrisisﬂ may not be as severe as 
some media accounts suggest. For example, simply counting the number of new 

drugs approved is not very helpful if the ﬁqualityﬂ of each new drug measured 

in terms of health impact is changing over time.
24
 Nonetheless, there are serious 
grounds for concern. To support these continued investments in R&D in the face 

of these rising costs, pharmaceutical companies need to realize very substantial 

sales revenues, which may be dif˜cult to sustain in the face of political pressure 

around the world to restrain increases in health care expenditure. To the extent 

that the drug development process can be made more ef˜cient through greater 

˚exibility in resource allocation, more experimentation in business models, and 

greater use of low-cost inputs, offshoring of some aspects of R&D has the wel
-come potential to reduce the cost of developing new drugs.
Furthermore, at least in the short term, there are limits to the types of activity 
that are likely to be relocated outside the industry™s traditional locations. Sub
-stantial offshoring of R&D activities is most likely to occur where the research 

activity is relatively routinized, uses large amounts of relatively low-skilled 

labor, and does not need to be tightly integrated or co-located with other R&D 
24
 See Cockburn (2007) for a fuller discussion.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 22
7activities. Large-scale, late-stage clinical trials with ﬁlow-techﬂ endpoints (such 
as measuring blood pressure) are examples of this kind of activity, and indeed 
the global allocation of research effort in these areas shows signs of a signi˜cant 

response to cost differences across countries. As suggested earlier, greater use 

of, for example, India™s chemistry-oriented R&D capacity presents a ﬁwin-winﬂ 

opportunity for U.S.-based companies to improve R&D ef˜ciency by contract
-ing out relatively routine work on process engineering, compound synthesis, and 

medicinal chemistry while focusing on other aspects of R&D.
These other aspects of the innovation processŠless routinized, more science-
intensiveŠare much less likely to relocate to low-cost locations. Decisions about 

where to locate science-intensive drug discovery appear to be much less sensi
-tive to labor costs and may be driven primarily by factors such as proximity to 

leading-edge academic research and ﬁclusterﬂ externalities. The bene˜ts of co-

locating R&D labs along with competitors in locations such as Baltimore/Wash
-ington, Boston, or the San Francisco Bay area, which feature agglomerations of 

commercial research, university science, and academic medical centers, coupled 

with ﬁthickﬂ local markets for specialized inputs and human capital, are very 

substantial. Any labor cost savings from relocating R&D labs to countries such 

as India and China are unlikely to compensate for the negative effect of losing 

access to these bene˜ts.
Substantial geographic redistribution of core R&D effort in this industry 
therefore seems likely to occur only if and when these offshore locations de
-velop their own critical mass of academic biomedical science and supporting 

complementary infrastructure. Some countries, such as Singapore and Taiwan, 

have put in place major programs to create research infrastructure and attract 

leading academic researchers, but this will take signi˜cant amounts of time and 

money. Emerging countries such as India and China, which have pockets of aca
-demic excellence in biomedicine but have had historically relatively low levels 

of public support for biomedical research, face an uphill struggle to develop this 

national capacity. The United States enjoys a dominant position in the world in 

publicly funded biomedical research. Provided U.S. taxpayers continue to fund 

this level of support, and public policy sustains the institutions of Open Science 

that support the productivity and vitality of academic science, the United States 

seems likely to remain the location of choice for science-intensive pharmaceuti
-cal R&D.
Open Science, with its curiosity-driven, investigator-initiated agenda and 
priority- and publication-based incentives, is a distinctive and vital component of 

the biomedical innovation system. But, particularly in the United States, science 

has become increasingly ﬁpropertizedﬂ by the extension of the patent system into 

basic research and the enthusiastic participation of universities and individual 

academics in patenting and entrepreneurial activity in life sciences. While this 

activity has clear bene˜ts in terms of facilitating technology transfer and attract
-ing venture-backed investment, it also carries with it less obvious costs in terms 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
8 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
of weakening the institutions of Open Science, limiting access to research tools 
and data, and forcing congruence between the agenda of academic research 
and commercially attractive areas of inquiry. The long-run competitiveness of 

the U.S. pharmaceutical industry may therefore require careful management by 

policy makers of con˚icts between exclusion-oriented IP rights and traditional 

academic norms.
Patent policy may play a somewhat different role in in˚uencing R&D lo
-cation decisions through its effect, in conjunction with price regulation and 

government purchasing, on domestic returns to pharmaceutical R&D. As dis
-cussed earlier, policy efforts to restrain pharmaceutical spending in the United 

StatesŠfor example, through changes to the Medicare drug bene˜t or reform of 

the Hatch-Waxman ActŠshould therefore carefully consider the impact of such 

measures on R&D location decisions. Of course, government actions elsewhere 

in the world directed at lowering drug prices may work in the opposite direction. 

ﬁUnenthusiasticﬂ implementation of the TRIPS patent provisions in emerging 

countries and unpredictable operation of these new patent systems in practice 

may cause multinationals to rethink decisions to expand R&D activity in these 

countries. The closely watched Gleevec case in India has major implications 

for the future of pharmaceutical R&D in that country, whether performed by 

domestic competitors on their own account or in partnership with multinationals. 

Similarly, current efforts by the government of Thailand to force one U.S.-based 

company (Abbott) to lower the price of some its drugs to Thai consumers are 

unlikely to encourage multinational companies to engage in R&D activities in 

Thailand in the future. Widespread actions of this kind may have a signi˜cant 

negative impact on offshoring trends.
Major changes in the existing international allocation of innovative effort in 
the pharmaceutical industry are unlikely, particularly in the short run. Compared 

to other technologies, this industry moves relatively slowly: very long product 

development cycles, and necessarily conservative organizational structures and 

processes imposed by health and safety regulation, make it dif˜cult for pharma
-ceutical companies to make large, transformative changes to their business as fast 

as some ˜rms can in other industries. Recent rapid expansion of research capacity 

in low-cost emerging countries will bene˜t U.S.-based multinationals (and U.S. 

consumers of pharmaceuticals) by lowering R&D costs in some activities, but 

this rapid expansion is highly unlikely to cause a ﬁtsunamiﬂ of professional job 

losses in pharmaceutical research. In the long run, emerging countries may suc
-ceed in developing a large enough base of local academic and publicly funded 

biomedical science to threaten the substantial competitive advantage that the 

United States currently enjoys in this area. Commercial R&D location decisions 

are tightly linked to publicly funded science; therefore, it will be necessary for 

public policy in the United States to play close attention to vitality and viability 

of academic- and government-supported biomedical science if the United States 

is to retain global leadership in the pharmaceutical industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHARMACEUTICALS
 22
9AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Ernst Berndt, Jeff Furman, Jeffrey Macher, and David Mowery for 
helpful discussions and suggestions.
REFERENCES
Berndt, E., I. Cockburn, and F. Thiers. (2006). Intellectual Property Rights and the Globalization of 
Clinical Trials for New Medicines. Seminar Presentation, RAND Institution, Santa Monica, 
November 2006.
Berndt, E., I. Cockburn, and F. Thiers. (2007). The Globalization of Clinical Trials for New 
Medicines into Emerging Economies: Where Are They Going and Why? Conference Paper, 

UNU-MERIT Conference on Micro Evidence on Innovation in Developing Countries, Maas
-tricht, May 31, 2007.
Chatterjee, C. (2007). Fundamental Patent Reform and the Private Returns to R&DŠThe Case of 
Indian Pharmaceuticals. Manuscript, Heinz School, Carnegie Mellon University.
Chaudhuri, S. (2005). 
The WTO and India™s Pharmaceuticals Industry: Patent Protection TRIPS and 
Developing Countries. 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Cockburn, I. M. (2004). The changing structure of the pharmaceutical industry. 
Health Affairs
 23(1):10-22.
Cockburn, I. M. (2006). Blurred boundaries: Tensions between open scienti˜c resources and com
-mercial exploitation of knowledge in biomedical research. Chapter in 
Advancing Knowledge 
and the Knowledge Economy
, B. Kahin and D. Foray, eds. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cockburn, I. M. (2007). Is the pharmaceutical industry in a productivity crisis? Chapter in 
Innovation 
Policy and the Economy
, Vol. 7, A. Jaffe, J. Lerner, and S. Stern, eds. Cambridge: MIT Press 
for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cockburn, I. M., and R. Henderson. (1998). Absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the orga
-nization of research in drug discovery. 
Journal of Industrial Economics
 46(2):157-182.
Cockburn, I. M., J. Furman, R. Henderson, and M. Kyle. (2002). Geographic Location and the Pro
-ductivity of Pharmaceutical Research. Conference paper, NBER Summer Institute, July 2002.
Danzon, P., Y. R. Wang, and L. L. Wang. (2003). The Impact of Price Regulation on the Launch 
Delay of New DrugsŠEvidence from Twenty-Five Major Markets in the 1990s. NBER Work
-ing Paper 9874.
Dimasi, J.R. Hansen, and H. Grabowski, 2003. The price of innovation: New estimates of drug de
-velopment cost. 
Journal of Health Economics
 22:151-185.
Drug trials and questions. (2002). 
Frontline
 19(19). September 14.
Furman, J., I. Cockburn, R. Henderson, and M. Kyle. (Forthcoming). Public & private spillovers, 
location, and the productivity of pharmaceutical research. 
Annales d™Economie et Statistique.
Gambardella, A. (1995). 
Science and Innovation
. Cambridge University Press.
Grabowski, H., D. Ridley, and K. Schulman. (Forthcoming). Entry and competition in generic bio
-logicals. Working Paper, Fuqua School of Business. 
Managerial and Decision Economics.
IBEF (India Brand Equity Foundation). (2006). Pharmaceuticals. Report by Ernst and Young for 
the India Brand Equity Foundation/Confederation of Indian Industry/Ministry of Commerce 

and Industry.
Kyle, M. (2006). The role of ˜rm characteristics in pharmaceutical product launches. 
RAND Journal 
of Economics
 37(3):602-618.
Kyle, M. (2007). Pharmaceutical price controls and entry strategies. 
Review of Economics and Sta
-tistics
 89(1):88-99.
Lanjouw, J. (2005). Patents, Price Controls, and Access to New Drugs: How Policy Affects Global 
Market Entry. NBER Working Paper 11321.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Lanjouw, J. (2007). Patents, Price Controls and the Arrival of New Drugs: How Policy Affects In
-ternational Launch Patterns. Paper presented at UC Berkeley Lanjouw Memorial Conference, 
March 2007.
Macher, J., and J. Nickerson. (2006). Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Research Project. Available at 
http://faculty.msb.edu/jtm4/PMRP%20results
/. Accessed December 12, 2006.
Zhao, M. (Forthcoming). Conducting R&D in countries with weak intellectual property rights protec
-tion. Manuscript, University of Minnesota. 
Management Science.
Zhao, M., and M. Islam. (2007). Cross-Regional Ties within Firms: Promoting Knowledge Flow or 
Discouraging Spillover? Working Paper, Stephen M. Ross School of Business.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.231
 7  Biotechnology
RAINE
 H
ERMANS
Northwestern University and ETLA Research Institute of the Finnish Economy
ALICIA
 LÖ
FFLER
Northwestern University
SCOTT
 S
TERN
Northwestern University
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, the biotechnology industry has been the focus of 
increasing academic and policy interest as a potential source of regional and 
national economic development (Cortright and Mayer, 2002; Feldman, 2003). 

Although the current size of the industry is quite small, particularly in terms of 

employment, both local and national policy makersŠin the United States and 

abroadŠhave proactively encouraged local and regional investment in the bio
-technology industry. In many cases, policy interest in biotechnology is grounded 

in the belief that, whereas traditional sectoral sources of jobs and investment are 

increasingly subject to erosion due to globalization, the biotechnology industry 

is associated with superior wages and a high level of economic prosperity and 

growth (Battelle and SSTI, 2006). The proliferation of biotechnology investment 

programsŠeven within regions that have little current activity in the industryŠ

raises concerns about the effectiveness of biotechnology as a driver of regional 

economic development. Moreover, these policy initiatives will have a long-lived 

impact on patterns of regional development and on the evolution and long-term 

structure of the industry.
The geography of this industry, and the impact of globalization on bio
-technology, will be shaped not only by policy initiatives but also, perhaps more 

important, by fundamental features of the economic, strategic, and institutional 

environment. This chapter provides an overview of the drivers, patterns, and 

consequences of the globalization of biotechnology and offers a preliminary as
-sessment of historical and contemporary patterns of the geographic dispersion of 

biotechnology innovation. Our analysis of the distinctive nature of the globaliza
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
tion of biotechnology motivates policy implications aimed at ensuring continued 
leadership and dynamism in the American biotechnology sector.
While there has been a great deal of academic and policy interest in the 
biotechnology industry, the scope and extent of the industry are loosely de˜ned, 
and measures of its scope, size, and patterns of geographic activity depend on the 

speci˜c de˜nitions that are used (Kenney, 1986; Orsenigo, 1989; Cockburn, et 
al., 1999; Cortright and Mayer, 2002; van Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006). At the 
broadest level, biotechnology is an industry that includes the commercialization 

of life science innovations in the health, agriculture, and industrial sectors, which 

are often referred to as the ﬁred,ﬂ ﬁgreen,ﬂ and ﬁwhiteﬂ biotechnology sectors, re
-spectively. While the international biotechnology industry incorporates activities 

in all three biotechnology spheres, the bulk of policy and academic analysis have 

focused on ﬁredﬂ (i.e., health-oriented) biotechnology. Furthermore, although the 

majority of privately and publicly funded biotechnology enterprises have been 

located in the United States, the pattern of regional and international development 

is quite distinct for the red, green, and white divisions. Despite ambiguities in the 

scope of the industry and variation across the three subsectors, ﬁcluster-drivenﬂ 

growth in biotechnology has emerged as a key economic development strategy for 

regions and nations at all levels of economic and technological prosperity (Cor
-tright and Mayer, 2002; Feldman, 2003). Beyond its importance for economic 

development policy, biotechnology is also the setting for a very active debate 

across several social sciences about the drivers of clustering and the impact of 

globalization on the importance of location in innovation.
In this chapter we examine trends related to the geographic distribution of 
industrial biotechnological activity, focusing on the following broad questions: 

What are the key drivers of innovation within biotechnology, and how do these 

drivers in˚uence patterns of regional development? What are the drivers of loca
-tion and clustering within the biotechnology industry, and how does globalization 

impact the geography of the biotechnology industry? What are the main locational 

patterns within the biotechnology industry, both in terms of employment and ˜rm 

formation and in terms of innovation and sales? What are the main strengths and 

limitations of publicly available data on the biotechnology industry? Finally, how 

does the current geography of the biotechnology industry impact contemporary 

debates over the potential for biotechnology to serve as a source of regional de
-velopment, innovation, and improvements in human welfare?
Overall, our analysis suggests that biotechnology remains a clustered eco
-nomic activity and relies strongly on interaction with science-based university 

research. However, the number of active clusters in biotechnology is increasing 

over time. An increasing number of distinct locations in the United States are 

home to a signi˜cant level of biotechnology activity, and an increasing number of 

countries around the world support modest to signi˜cant activity within the bio
-technology industry. More notably, while many countries around the world now 

ﬁhostﬂ a biotechnology industry of varying importance, the activity within most 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 233
countries is highly localized and often centered in a single city or metropolitan 
area. Although the data are inadequate to allow for a comprehensive analysis, 
qualitative and quantitative evidence suggests that the number of biotechnology 

clusters that host a signi˜cant number of viable private companies and serve as a 

recurrent source of innovation has increased; this increase in the number of clus
-ters with ﬁcritical massﬂ is re˚ected in the increased dispersion of biotechnology 

employment, entrepreneurship, and measured innovations.
This central insightŠan increase in the number of regional clusters, rather 
than a simple dispersion of biotechnology activityŠholds a number of implica
-tions. First, the impact of globalization on biotechnology seems to be distinct from 

the pattern observed in traditional manufacturing sectors. While the globalization 

of many industries seems to re˚ect the increasing availability of low-cost loca
-tions for performing low-margin activities that had previously been conducted in 

the United States or Europe, the globalization of biotechnology re˚ects a ﬁcatch
-ing upﬂ process. A few regions around the world have established infrastructure 

and conditions to attempt to compete ﬁhead-to-headﬂ with leading regions in 

the United States. Second, the analysis highlights the small absolute size of the 

biotechnology industry. Using a relatively inclusive de˜nition, total biotechnol
-ogy employment in the United States accounts for less than 200,000 full-time 

employees, which itself accounts for well over 50 percent of global employment 

(van Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006). In contrast, a single company in information 

technology (IT) such as Hewlett-Packard employs more than 150,000 workers 

(Hewlett-Packard, 2006). While globalization may affect the broader economy 

through its impact on sectors such as IT or traditional manufacturing, the small 

scale of the biotechnology industry precludes it from having a signi˜cant employ
-ment impact on the U.S. economy, at least at the present time. In other words, 

while an increasing number of policy initiatives focus on the role of biotechnol
-ogy in encouraging job creation and employment, the simple fact is that, if the 

biotechnology industry remains at roughly the same scale it has achieved after 

the past decade of rapid growth, it is unlikely to be a major driver of employment 

patterns and overall job growth, either in the United States or abroad.
Finally, the analysis raises several interesting questions for further study. 
The most important issue is one of data collection. While our understanding of 

the biotechnology industry is greatly facilitated by detailed public and private 

data-gathering efforts (including the extremely useful Organisation for Economic 

Co-operation and Development [OECD] Biotechnology Statistics program), there 

seems to be an important gap between qualitative evaluations focusing on the 

role of subnational clusters and the fact that most international statistics are 

measured only at the country level. While there have been several ambitious 

attempts to document the clustering of biotechnology activity among regions 

within the United States, there is no single source of data or unambiguous ap
-proach that allows for a comparison of biotechnology clusters on a global basis. 

Second, although most analyses of the industry focus on the red biotechnology 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
sector, patterns of locational advantage and the impact of globalization are quite 
distinct for the green and white sectors. For example, countries such as Japan and 
Denmark hold leading positions in the industrial applications of biotechnology. 

Moreover, in contrast to the high level of academic entrepreneurship that char
-acterizes the red sector, the green sector is largely dominated by a small number 

of large ˜rms such as Monsanto and DuPont. These alternative patterns make it 

problematic to extrapolate from detailed studies of the health-oriented sector in 

analyzing the growth and geographic evolution of the industrial and agricultural 

sectors of the industry.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. The second section 
provides a concise introduction to the biotechnology industry and the key drivers 

of innovation in this industry. Among other issues, we highlight the importance 

of proximity to the creation of knowledge in fostering agglomeration. We then 

turn to an explicit discussion of the drivers of location and clustering in the 

industry, extending the ﬁdiamondﬂ framework (Porter, 1990, 1998). In adapt
-ing that framework to the biotechnology industry, we highlight the potential for 

catch-up by lagging regions, the potential for disagglomeration as the industry 

or segments of it mature, and the potential for a leading region to establish itself 

as a global ﬁhubﬂ for biotechnology research and innovation going forward. In 

the fourth section, we consider broad patterns and data regarding ˜rm location, 

employment, and sales in the biotechnology industry. As discussed earlier, the 

data illustrate the small size of the industry overall and the dominance of the 

United States within the industry. We then turn in the ˜fth section to an empirical 

assessment of the geography of innovation, in terms of both patenting behavior 

and commercial sales. A concluding section discusses the key ˜ndings and im
-plications for policy.
THE DRI
VERS OF INNO
VATION IN THE 
BIOTECHNOLOG
Y INDUSTR
YThe Origins and Scope of the Biotechnology Industry
Biotechnology is a relatively young and still emerging sector of the economy 
that is focused on the application of cellular and biomolecular processes to de
-velop or make useful products (Biotechnology Industry Organization, 2006).
1 1 
There is no single de˜nition of the industry, and different criteria are often used to de˜ne the 
scope of the biotechnology industry in different countries. For example, the OECD employs both a 
functional de˜nitionŠﬁthe application of science and technology to living organisms, as well as parts, 

products and models thereof, to alter living or nonliving materials for the production of knowledge, 

goods and servicesﬂŠand list-based de˜nitions in which ˜rms or workers are included in biotechnol
-ogy if their activities fall within the scope of a set of listed categories (van Beuzekom and Arundel, 

2006). To the extent possible, we are careful to de˜ne the de˜nition and sample by which international 

or intranational comparisons are made.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 235
The origins of the biotechnology industry can be traced back to a con˚uence of 
technological, economic, and institutional shifts during the late 1970s and early 
1980s: the development of recombinant DNA technology and other fundamental 

advances in life sciences research during the 1970s; a signi˜cant increase in 

funding and resources for life sciences research (both public and private, in the 

U.S. and abroad); and a set of policy decisions, such as the 1980 Diamond vs. 

Chakrabarty Supreme Court decision and the Bayh-Dole Act, that allowed the 

assertion of intellectual property rights over innovations based on genetic engi
-neering, even those funded by the public sector.
The conceptual ideas underlying biotechnology date back almost 12,000 
years with the domestication of plants and animals through selective breeding. 

However, it was not until 1973, when Stanley Cohen, Stanford University, and 

Herbert Boyer, University of California San Francisco, demonstrated the ability 

to manipulate genetic material in a practical way, that the potential for commer
-cial applications from the science of molecular biology became apparent. Indeed, 

Herbert Boyer himself was one of the founders of one of the ˜rst and among the 

most successful biotechnology companies, Genentech. While the discoveries of 

the 1970s represented fundamental scienti˜c breakthroughs and offered isolated 

commercial applications, such as the development of synthetic insulin and human 

growth hormone (McKelvey, 1996; Stern, 1995), the growth of the biotechnol
-ogy industry has relied on a series of complementary technological and scienti˜c 

breakthroughs of similar magnitude. These include but are not limited to the 

development of rapid genetic sequencing methods such as the polymerase chain 

reaction in the 1980s to the use of increasingly advanced IT in bioinformatics 

in the 1990s and the ability to integrate genomic information through initiatives 

such as the Human Genome Project. Biotechnology represents the con˚uence of 

many emerging disciplines and relies on discoveries from academic and govern
-ment laboratories as well as commercial institutions. While the precise boundar
-ies of the industry are admittedly fuzzy, it is useful to consider three related but 

distinct spheres: health-oriented, agricultural, and industry biotechnology, which 

are referred to as red, green, and white biotechnology, respectively.
Health-Oriented Biotechnology (ﬁRed Biotechﬂ)
Private investment in health-oriented biotechnology has been concentrated in 
a small number of regional clusters, which are also home to leading universities 
and other research institutions. On the one hand, publicly funded life sciences re
-search serves as an extremely important source of discoveries for health-oriented 

biotechnology and is dispersed broadly across universities and research institutes 

in the United States and abroad. However, private-sector investment in the health-

oriented biotechnology industry is much more regionally concentrated. In the 

United States, a small number of regional clusters in areas such as San Francisco, 

Boston, and San Diego have served as the origin for a large share of all biotech
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
nology innovative investment and activity (Cortright and Mayer, 2002). Although 
the health-oriented biotechnology sector is concentrated largely in regional clus
-ters in the United States, there are a signi˜cant number of small- to medium-sized 
clusters outside of the United States, including concentrations around Cambridge 

(UK), the Medicon Valley (Sweden/Denmark), Singapore, Sydney, and Mel
-bourne, among other locations. More generally, although the commercialization 

of health-oriented biotechnology innovation has largely involved cooperation 

with more established ˜rms (many of which are pharmaceutical ˜rms located 

outside of the regional clusters), health-oriented biotechnology has been closely 

associated with academic entrepreneurship, whereby leading university research 

faculty are associated with the creation of new biotechnology ˜rms.
Agricultural Biotechnology (ﬁGreen Biotechﬂ)
The second major application segment in biotechnology is associated with 
the development and commercialization of ﬁgreen,ﬂ or agriculture-focused, bio
-technology products, particularly the development of new seed traits for staples 
and specialized agricultural products, from corn to papayas. While cluster-driven 

entrepreneurship has also played a role in this sector, the bulk of investment and 

commercialization has been centered around a small number of large, established 

players, including companies such as Monsanto and DuPont. Relative to health-

oriented applications, the earliest commercial applications for agricultural bio
-technology were not brought to market until the mid-1990s. While diffusion of 

products such as pest-resistant corn and soybeans was rapid in the United Sates, 

there was signi˜cant opposition to the adoption of these technologies in inter
-national markets, particularly in Europe, which enacted a ban on most products 

until 2004. In other words, both development and initial use of agricultural bio
-technology have been centered in the United States, and companies and farmers 

who invested in these technologies at an early stage have bene˜ted as markets for 

genetically modi˜ed organisms have globalized over the past several years.
Industrial Biotechnology (ﬁWhite Biotechﬂ)
Industrial biotechnology is the application of biotechnology for industrial 
purposes, ranging from more effective enzymes in the chemical and textile 
sectors to biofuels to bioremediation (i.e., environmental applications). By and 

large, industrial biotechnology has served as a useful source of process innova
-tion in established industrial settings. For example, in the chemical sector, bio
-engineered enzymes signi˜cantly enhance yields in chemical manufacturing by 

lowering costs and raising productivity. Relative to the other two spheres, white 

(i.e., industrial) biotechnology applications appear to be far more geographi
-cally dispersed than those of red biotechnology. For example, while industrial 

biotechnology applications are found in the United States, leading users of these 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 237
technologies are also located in Denmark, Japan, and Finland. Over the past few 
years, increased interest in biofuels and biotechnology solutions for the energy 
industry has greatly increased the level of policy interest in this third sphere of 

the biotechnology industry.
In the remainder of this section, we emphasize some of the distinctive fea
-tures of the industry, each of which will in˚uence the ultimate geographic disper
-sion of activity within the industry.
The Nature of Biotechnology Research
One of the most distinctive and pervasive characteristics of innovation in 
biotechnology is 
duality
. Duality arises when biotechnology research makes a 
simultaneous contribution to both basic research and applied innovation (Rosen
-berg, 1974; Stokes, 1997). For example, the developments in recombinant tech
-nology and cloning in the 1970s and genomics in the 1990s allowed scientists to 

understand the fundamental mechanisms of gene expression and also served as 

the foundation for novel therapies, diagnostics, transgenic crops, biofuels, and 

so on. The impact of duality is extensive and undermines some of the implica
-tions of the traditional linear framework for science, technology, and innovation.
2 While the linear framework allows for a concise formulation of the relationship 

between the nature of knowledge and the incentives provided for its production 

and distribution, it fails when knowledge has both basic and applied value. Stokes 

(1997) reformulated the traditional linear distinction between basic and applied 

research by highlighting the duality of research; a discovery could simultane
-ously have both applied and basic characteristics (Figure 1). Stokes identi˜ed 

the importance of research in ﬁPasteur™s Quadrantﬂ: Louis Pasteur™s research on 

fermentation simultaneously offered fundamental insights that led to the germ 

theory of disease and was of immediate practical signi˜cance for the French beer 

and wine industry. Stokes argues that, rather than placing research on a single 

linear dimension ranging from basic to applied, it is more useful to consider two 

dimensions: in terms of whether research is dependent on ﬁconsiderations of useﬂ 

or, separately, on a ﬁquest for fundamental understanding.ﬂ Most biotechnology 

research takes place in Pasteur™s QuadrantŠindividual discoveries both rely on 

and have in˚uence on science and commercialization.
The production of ﬁdual-purposeﬂ knowledge, particularly in the disciplines 
2 
In the traditional ﬁlinearﬂ model, the norms and institutions supporting the production and use of 
basic versus applied research are separable and distinct. Under this model, applied research 
exploits
 publicly available basic research as an input, transforming that knowledge into innovations with valu
-able application. Although the linear model has been sharply criticized (Klein and Rosenberg, 1986), 
most formal theoretical and empirical economic research remains premised on the linear model, from 

assessment of the impact of university research (Jensen and Thursby, 2001; Mowery et al., 2001; 

Narin and Olivastro, 1992; Zucker et al., 1998a,b) to the impact of science and basic research on 

economic growth (Adams, 1990; Romer, 1990).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
biotech-1.eps
changed type in dark blue boxes to white for legibility
Use-Inspired 
Basic 
Research
(Pasteur)
Pure Basic 
Research
(Bohr)
YES
Pure 
Applied 
Research
(Edison)
NO
YES
NO
Consideration of 
Use?
Quest for Fundamental 
understanding?
Use-Inspired 
Basic 
Research
(Pasteur)
YES
NO
YES
NO
Consideration of 
Use?
Quest for Fundamental 
understanding?
that underpin modern biotechnology, raises important new challenges for policy 
makers. For example, the past decade has seen a signi˜cant rise in the use of 
intellectual property rights (IPRs) over research that had traditionally been dis
-closed only through scienti˜c publication. The increased role of IPR has sparked 

a vigorous academic and policy debate over the ﬁanticommons effect.ﬂ On the one 

hand, some argue that such expansions of IPRs (in the form of patents or copy
-rights) ﬁprivatizesﬂ the scienti˜c commons, reducing the bene˜ts from scienti˜c 

progress (Argyres and Liebskind, 1998; David, 2004; Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; 

Murray and Stern, 2007). On the other hand, a signi˜cant amount of research sug
-gests that IPRs may also facilitate the creation of a market for ideas, encourage 

further investment in ideas with commercial potential, and mitigate disincentives 

to disclose and exchange knowledge that might otherwise remain secret (Arora 

et al., 2001; Gans and Stern, 2000; Merges and Nelson, 1990, 1994; Lerner and 

Merges, 1998). While there are many questions surrounding the use and misuse 

of IPRs, particularly at the interface between university and industry research, 

its availability may allow startup biotechnology ˜rms to focus on the early-stage 

research and contract with pharmaceutical, agricultural, and chemical companies 

for downstream activities, including manufacturing, marketing, and distribution 

(Arora et al., 2001; Gans and Stern, 2003).
The Biotechnology Value Proposition and the Structure of the Value Chain
While the size of the biotechnology industry is still quite modestŠrela
-tive to, say, employment or revenue in the automobile industryŠthe potential 
FIGURE 1
 Pasteur™s Quadrant. The traditional ﬁlinearﬂ framework fails when knowledge 
has both basic and applied value. Since its inception, biotechnology research has been at 
the center of Pasteur™s Quadrant, and so individual discoveries rely on and in˚uence both 
science and commercialization. SOURCE: Adapted from Stokes (1997).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 239
global demand for biotechnology products is large, mostly driven by the needs 
of a growing and aging world population. The promise of biotechnology to ˜nd 
solutions to some of the critical problems arising from population growth and 

demographic change, from new medical treatments to improving agricultural 

output and developing new sources of energy, creates a favorable environment 

for this sector. The world™s population is not only growing, but is, in aggregate, 
growing older.
3 As life expectancy increases, a need to ˜nd new approaches to 
treat chronic diseases that affect a more elderly population will increase. At the 
same time, rising global trade and travel, highly porous international borders, 

increased urbanization, and an uneven distribution of wealth are creating optimal 

conditions for outbreaks of new infectious diseases with no available treatments. 

Similarly, the need to increase the productivity and ef˜ciency of agricultural 

products to feed the rising population is becoming a critical global issue for 

which biotechnology may offer important solutions. The pressing need for new 

treatments is creating a great demand for biotechnology innovations. Likewise, 

global climate change, caused in part by economic development and population 

growth, has intensi˜ed the need for ˜nding solutions for alternative sources of 

energy. Industrial biotechnology could provide some means of producing envi
-ronmentally friendly biofuels.
Despite these promising opportunities, the industry faces a series of dis
-tinctive challenges in translating innovations into commercialized products and 

services for global markets; at least in part, these challenges are a consequence 

of duality. On the one hand, close interinstitutional collaborations in biotechnol
-ogy contribute to the need for geographic proximity around centers of research 

excellence. Moreover, one manifestation of the complex networked relationship 

between biotechnology ˜rms and other institutions is that many researchers in 

biotechnology work not only at the convergence of multiple scienti˜c ˜elds but 

also at the boundaries of multiple institutions. While these overlapping institu
-tional af˜liations are most apparent in the area of health-oriented biotechnology 

(Zucker et al., 1998b), agricultural and industrial biotechnology innovation also 
3 
Demographic projections estimate world population gains from 6.5 billion in 2005 to 7.9 billion in 
2025 (United Nations, 2004). The greatest growth in total population is projected in the rising nations 
of China and India, whose populations are expected to bene˜t from improved socioeconomic condi
-tions and should drive increased needs for biotechnology innovations. The global population is also 

growing older. Individuals over age 60 represented 10.4 percent of the world™s population in 2005; by 

2050 this segment is expected to grow by 1 billion, with a total number representing 21.7 percent of 

a much larger total population. This trend will undoubtedly spur greater demand for new biomedical 

innovations and treatments worldwide. Today, the U.S. population over age 65 consumes 40 percent 

of the nation™s biomedical output products and it is reasonable to expect similar trends worldwide. 

Persons aged 60 and over comprised 10.4 percent of the global population in 2005; by 2050 this 

component will amount to 21.7 percent of a much larger total population. By midcentury, the number 

of persons aged 60 and older will grow by 1 billion. The greatest advance is expected in the rising 

nations of China and India, whose populations will come to bene˜t from drug treatments and medical 

devices formerly available mainly to consumers in the United States and Europe (Magee, 2005).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
takes place at the university-industry interface (Graff et al., 2003). Biotechnolo
-gists often need to have both scienti˜c and commercialization acumen; they work 
for and with multiple organizations and institutions.
At the same time, while proximity to scienti˜c and commercial knowledge 
led to the rise of concentrated geographic clusters for biotechnology innovations, 

the jobs created by the products of these innovations are far more dispersed. In 

each of the three areas of biotechnology, the value chain is highly fragmented 

and requires signi˜cant capital expenditures, meaning that an entrepreneurial 

innovator can rarely afford or ˜nd it worthwhile to commercialize an innova
-tion independently all the way to market. As a result, the downstream users of 

biotechnology (e.g., physicians, farmers, or industrial managers) may have only 

limited if any interactions with the initial innovators or research teams. As a con
-sequence, in each of the three segments of biotechnology, the location of innova
-tion may be very different from the location of application and greatest use.
This pattern is most apparent in red biotechnology (Figure 2). Close con
-nections with university and public researchers, as well as more geographically 

dispersed relationships with those that commercialize innovation, have contrib
-uted to a highly entrepreneurial structure in red biotechnology. This structure, 

combined with the presence of multiple revolutions in science and technology, 

has kept the industry in a state of ﬁperpetual immaturity.ﬂ The continuous ˚ow of 

scienti˜c innovations and the fragmentation of the value chain encourage the bio
-technology sector to create new companies continuously. Since its inception and 

looking across all three industry segments, the biotechnology sector had around 

1,300 companies in the United States and around 5,000 worldwide (Burrill & 

Company, 2004). Although successful individual biotechnology companies in the 

health-oriented sector have grown from startups to large ˜rmsŠGenentech and 

Amgen being the prime examples, each with a market cap in excess of $50 bil
-lionŠthe sector as a whole is a study in dynamism, with new entrants appearing 

on the scene every year, attracting capital from both public and private sources. 

Once companies in the red biotechnology sector establish a proven commercial 

path, they often consolidate or partner with established companies for develop
-ment and distribution. Consolidation, however, does not result in a gradual win
-nowing of companies. This trend is offset by the continuous rate of company 

formation that keeps the sector fragmented, particularly in health-oriented appli
-cations. The biotechnology supply chain is ˜lled with specialized players. Firms 

often do not integrate vertically but instead continue to play within speci˜c and 

limited stages of the value chain.
Though not as extreme as red biotechnology, green and white biotech
-nologies are also characterized by a reliance on the combination of university 

research, startup innovators, and established ˜rms. For example, Monsanto, the 

leading agricultural biotechnology ˜rm, initiated its efforts to diversify from its 

agrochemicals business through the establishment of research partnerships with 

leading universities such as Washington University in St. Louis (Culliton, 1990; 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 241
biotech-2.eps
Discovery
Proof of
Concept
Market
Laboratory
Validation
Real World
Validation
Product
Designed
Product
Validated
Scale-up
Concept
Basic Science Labs
Manufacturing / 
Regulatory
Preclinical
Phase I
Phase II/III
Universities
Large Corporations
Start-ups
InnovationFIGURE 2
 Typical value chain for a biotechnology product. Commercialization takes 
many steps, and, while there is geographic con˚uence between universites and startups, 
the value chain is both complex and fragmented. Biotechnological product development 
in biotechnology is a long and fragmented process. For example, it is estimated that an 
agricultural biotechnology product might take 10 years to bring to the market and an 

investment of $50 million to $200 million (McElroy, 2004). Similarly, a drug might take 

about 12 years and around $800 million (DiMasi et al., 2003). Rarely the innovator has 
the resources to bring the product to the market and outlicense or sell their technology to 
a large pharmaceutical company, which can more feasibly undertake the most expensive 

development (i.e., approval) phases. The value chain is fragmented with smaller companies 

specializing at the innovation and discovery stages and larger companies specializing in 

the development and distribution stages.
Nelkin et al., 1987). Since that time, Monsanto has developed signi˜cant in-house 
research and commercialization capabilities in agricultural biotechnology and 

relies on an extensive network of strategic partnerships and licensing relation
-ships. In other words, although large established companies such as Monsanto 

and DuPont are ultimately responsible for the commercialization of agricultural 

biotechnology innovations, the origins of those innovations are divided among 

university research projects, startup innovators, and internal development (Pierre-

Benoit, 1999). A similar pattern, but one that is less documented in the academic 

and business literature, is the case for industrial biotechnology, although there 

seems to be a smaller role for the university sector. For example, Hermans, Kul
-vik, and Tahvanainen (2006) document the licensing and alliance relationships 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
between startup innovators and more established users of industrial biotechnol
-ogy products in the Finnish context.
Overall, across the three distinct segments, the industry exhibits a highly 
dynamic structure. The dynamism of the biotechnology industry is based on its 
foundations in rapidly emerging scienti˜c disciplines; its potential to address 

important social needs while creating signi˜cant commercial value in health, ag
-riculture, and industry; and its orientation in terms of the commercial application 

of knowledge that is simultaneously of independent scienti˜c interest.
THE DRI
VERS OF LOCATION AND CLUSTERING 
OF BIOTECHNOLOG
Y INNO
VATION
As mentioned earlier, the drivers of the geography of biotechnology industry 
and innovation are complex and changing over time. On the one hand, the geog
-raphy of biotechnology re˚ects broad factors relating to the overall orientation 

of an economy to support innovative activity. The geography of innovation of 

the biotechnology industry is consistent with the role of location and institutions 

emphasized in the national innovation systems literature (Lundvall, 1992; Mow
-ery and Nelson, 1999; Nelson, 1993). This national innovation systems literature 

focuses on the role that national policies and local institutions play in shaping 

the location and effectiveness of innovative productivity and emphasizes the 

important preconditions that must exist for innovative investment to be effective. 

Such policies and institutions include an effective intellectual property system, 

the availability of high-quality human resources and risk capital, and institutions 

(and public-private partnerships) that encourage investment and innovation in 

particular regions.
While the aggregate national innovation system sets the basic conditions for 
innovation, the development and commercialization of new technologies take 

place, disproportionately, in clustersŠgeographic concentrations of intercon
-nected companies and institutions in a particular ˜eld. Over the past two decades, 

there has been an explosion of research concerning the structure and dynamics 

of industrial clusters and the role of location in industrial activity and innovation 

(see, among others, Breschi and Malerba, 2005; Krugman, 1991; Porter, 1990, 

1998; Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Saxenian, 1994).
The biotechnology industry has been of particular interest to research on 
industrial clusters, for several reasons.
4 First, 
within 
the United States, biotech
-nology companies and investment are clustered in a small number of regions, 

such as San Diego, Boston, and San Francisco (see Figure 3). Moreover, the 

activities and investments by companies in biotechnology clusters are focused on 
4 
The case study and empirical literature on the regional clustering of innovation activities in bio
-technology is quite large and cannot be adequately reviewed here. For a very useful recent review, 
see Cooke (2002).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 243
biotech-3.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 3
 Biotech clusters in the United States. The colored states indicate where 
there are both large and specialized ˜rms in two of the three biotechnology subsectors 
(pharmaceuticals, research and testing, and medical devices). SOURCES: The Brookings 
Institution; Cortright and Mayer (2002).
research and innovation (Audretsch and Stephan, 1996). Internationally oriented 
case studies have also documented that, within individual countries, biotechnol
-ogy innovation tends to be regionally clustered in other countries (Cooke, 2002; 

Hermans and Tahvanainen, 2006; Swann et al., 1998). Regional clustering of 

innovation-oriented activity in biotechnology is particularly striking since compa
-nies do not rely on hard-to-access natural resources, and the sciences underlying 

biotechnology are dispersed at universities and research institutions across the 

United States and abroad (Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Feldman and Francis, 

2003). A rich and nuanced literature has developed emphasizing some of the key 

patterns and dynamics associated with biotechnology clusters in the United States 

and abroad, with an emphasis on the importance of collaboration and networks 

among universities, startup innovators, and established ˜rms (Koput et al., 1996; 

Powell et al., 2005), and the crucial role played by scientists who bridge the 

university-industry divide (Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Zucker et al., 1998a,b). 

As well, there has been signi˜cant interest in the science policy community in the 

distribution of research in biotechnology, often focusing on clustering in speci˜c 

locations around the world (Hoffman, 2008).
To organize our discussion of the clustering of biotechnology activity and 
integrate the insights of these studies of clustering in biotechnology, we build on 

Porter™s seminal work on clusters (Porter, 1990, 1998). In Porter™s ﬁdiamondﬂ 

framework (Figure 4), four attributes of the microeconomic and strategic envi
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
biotech-4.eps
Climate for 
Innovation-
Based Local 
Rivalry
Climate for 
Innovation-
Based Local 
Rivalry
Clusters of 
Related and 
Supporting 
Industries
Clusters of 
Related and 
Supporting 
Industries
Factor 
(Input)
Conditions
Factor 
(Input)
Conditions
Demand 
Conditions
Demand 
Conditions
Climate for 
Innovation-
Based Local 
Rivalry
Climate for 
Innovation-
Based Local 
Rivalry
Clusters of 
Related and 
Supporting 
Industries
Clusters of 
Related and 
Supporting 
Industries
Factor 
(Input)
Conditions
Factor 
(Input)
Conditions
Demand 
Conditions
Demand 
Conditions
FIGURE 4
 The ﬁdiamondﬂ framework adapted from Porter (1990).
ronment surrounding a cluster support its overall competitiveness and innovative 
vitality: (1) the presence of high-quality and specialized inputs, (2) a local con
-text that encourages innovative investment and intense rivalry, (3) pressure and 

insight emerging from sophisticated local demand, and (4) the local presence of 

high-quality related and supporting industries. The four elements of the diamond 

framework highlight the key resources and dynamics associated with the emer
-gence and sustainability of leading clusters in all segments of the biotechnology 

industry. First, as mentioned earlier, the development of biotechnology innova
-tion requires access to specialized inputs, including researchers, risk capital, 

biological materials, and even intellectual property. By and large, accessing 

these resources is most easily accomplished within a regional context, rather 

than across long distances or political boundaries. For example, the development 

of the agricultural biotechnology cluster surrounding St. Louis depended on the 

ability of companies such as Monsanto to draw upon and reinforce the signi˜cant 

expertise and research capabilities of Washington University in St. Louis.
Second, a key driver of effective clustering in the biotechnology sector seems 
to be competition among locally based biotechnology companies. These compa
-nies compete on the basis of attracting talent, publishing high-quality scienti˜c 

research, and attracting investment and interest from venture capitalists and 

downstream commercial partners, many of whom are located outside the cluster. 

This is perhaps most apparent in some of the clusters associated with health-
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 245
oriented biotechnology; for example, the Massachusetts biotechnology cluster 
includes more than 400 different ˜rms, 235 of which are developing therapeutic 
drugs (Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, 2007).
Third, most leading biotechnology clusters are located not only near sources 
of high-quality basic research but also around areas with signi˜cant capacity in 

clinical innovation. For example, the pressures on the Massachusetts biotech
-nology cluster arise as much from the presence of demanding clinicians in the 

leading hospitals as from that of specialized genetics researchers. Similarly, the 

medical device cluster in Minneapolis is pushed by demanding consumers at the 

Mayo Clinic and related institutions, and industrial biotechnology innovation in 

Scandanavia depends in part on demanding customers in the chemical industry 

(Hermans et al., 2006).
Finally, the biotechnology cluster depends on the presence of related and 
supporting industries, most notably an active venture capital industry to supply 

managerial expertise, risk capital, and relationship experience with downstream 

partners as well as key pieces of infrastructure (e.g., biological resource centers, 

specialized seed banks and agricultural research stations, specialized equipment 

and tools). Each of these factors encourages the investment of sunken assets and 

the development of specialized capabilities that reinforce the strength and ulti
-mately the international competitiveness of that cluster environment.
When these factors are present, geographic clustering promotes important 
externalities in innovation that are relevant to biotechnology. Thus, while loca
-tion within a cluster enhances a ˜rm™s ability to identify opportunities for inno
-vation, it also promotes the ˜rm™s ˚exibility and capacity to bring new ideas to 

market. Within a cluster, a company can more rapidly assemble the components, 

machinery, and services necessary for commercialization. Suppliers of essential 

inputs and ﬁleadﬂ buyers become crucial partners in the innovation process, and 

the relationships necessary for effective and ef˜cient innovation are more eas
-ily forged among proximate ˜rms. Reinforcing these advantages for innovation 

within clusters are competitive, peer, and customer pressures associated with the 

proximity of other, often directly competing, biotechnology ˜rms. Clustering 

enables easy comparisons of performance.
As would be expected, the innovation environment of a cluster is funda
-mental to its competitiveness. For example, the biotechnology sector serving the 

needs of the Scandinavian pulp-and-paper cluster bene˜ts from the advantages 

of pressures from demanding domestic consumers, intense rivalry among local 

competitors, and the presence of Swedish process-equipment manufacturers that 

are global leaders (e.g., Kamyr and Sunds, for the commercialization of innova
-tive bleaching equipment). The Finnish pulp-and-paper industry utilizes speci˜c 

biotechnological techniques in its production processes, which has also partially 

motivated industrial enzyme providers to construct production plants in Finland. 

As a consequence, enzyme applications form the largest sales within the small- 

and medium-sized biotechnology industry in Finland (Hermans et al., 2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Similar examples of cluster vitality in innovation may be observed in many 
˜elds, from pharmaceuticals in the United States to semiconductor manufacturing 
in Taiwan. Cluster vitality is derived from industries and resources as diverse as 

the ˜elds they support. The pharmaceutical industry, of course, provides a strong 

source of support for biopharmaceutical innovative activity. In particular, though 

the natural resource requirements of the pharmaceutical industry are limited, the 

industry has been geographically concentrated in a small number of regional loca
-tions, including New Jersey and Switzerland, partially as a result of competition 

for pharmaceutical demand.
Porter™s cluster framework is useful for identifying some of the key drivers of 
international competitiveness for an innovation-oriented biotechnology cluster at 

a point in time. However, the durability of cluster-driven competitiveness depends 

on the dynamics and evolution in the scope of clusters over time. While there is 

less research that focuses speci˜cally on biotechnology clusters in this regard, 

recent research on clusters and in economic geography emphasizes the key factors 
that shape
 the persistence of location and the dynamics of the geography of inno
-vation-oriented industries (e.g., Krugman, 1991; Krugman and Venables, 1995).
The Convergence Effect
Though leading clusters may stay at the forefront of innovation and activity 
for long periods of time, the advantages of cluster leadership are balanced against 

the possibility of relatively low-cost, high-growth entry by other regions (Barro 

and Sala-i-Martin, 1992; Dumais et al., 2002; Henderson et al., 1995). Although 

the effect of convergence declines as the emerging regions develop in terms of 

size and sophistication, the convergence effect is an important consideration when 

examining changing patterns of geographical investment, employment, and in
-novation in the biotechnology industry.
Maturity and the Dynamics of Geographic Dispersion
As industries mature and products and processes are standardized and decom
-posed, the bene˜t of localized innovation may be outweighed by cost advantages 

in lower-wage locations (Brezis and Krugman, 1997; Duranton and Puga, 2001). 

In other words, one of the key signs of industry maturity and commoditization 

is a signi˜cant increase in the geographic dispersion of industrial activity. For 

example, in recent years the 
diffusion
 of agricultural biotechnology products has 
had the consequence that the industrial activities of agricultural biotechnology 

are more geographically dispersed than the industry was at an earlier stage. While 

the development of new products continues to be centered in a small number of 

locations, investments in improvements in how to 
use 
the new seed traits and 
how to adapt farming practices to incorporate the new products are much more 

geographically dispersed.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 247
National 
Versus Regional Clusters
For medium and large economies, the presence of a cluster will likely be 
most apparent at the subnational and even local levels (e.g., Martin and Rogers, 
1995; Monfort and Nicolini, 2000). This is particularly true in the biotechnol
-ogy industry, where total global employment is quite modest, and the industry is 

located in proximity to leading university research areas. While data limitations 

will often force us to examine dispersion at the national level, it is important to 

keep in mind that much of the clustering in the biotechnology industry takes place 

at the regional or even municipal level.
The Emergence of International Hubs
Finally, as mentioned earlier, the basic research upon which the biotech
-nology industry is built is widely dispersed across thousands of universities on 

a global basis. As a result, one of the more subtle dynamics of clustersŠhub
-bingŠmay be particularly important in this context. Speci˜cally, it is possible 

that a location with a strong cluster environment will not only bene˜t from the 

dynamics arising from local relationships but will become a ﬁmagnetﬂ for those 

who are located in less-favorable cluster environments (Krugman and Venables, 

1995; Venables, 1996). For example, a researcher at Johns Hopkins University 

might maintain a relationship with a company in Boston or Silicon Valley to take 

advantage of the potential for commercialization in a strong cluster environment. 

Going forward, there will be tension between the continuing importance of forces 

that have given rise to agglomeration and clustering and the increasing salience of 

activities aimed at bridging across clusters and even across national boundaries.
THE GEOGRAPH
Y OF THE BIOTECHNOLOG
Y INDUSTR
YWe build on these insights into the geography of the biotechnology indus
-try by undertaking a short description of the global distribution of innovation-

oriented activities within the biotechnology industry. As described earlier, the 

industry grew out of a series of fundamental scienti˜c breakthroughs in the 1970s 

and was initially concentrated among a small number of entrepreneurial ˜rms, 

mostly in the Bay Area in California and around Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Despite interest in the 
future 
of biotechnology, relatively little attention has been 
paid to the current state of the biotechnology industry in terms of regional pat
-terns of employment, investment, and ˜rm creation.
Employment
In Table 1 and Figure 5, we describe the international distribution of em
-ployment as of 2005. Drawn from Van Beuzekom and Arundel (2006), Figure 5 

reports the total employment of individuals in private biotechnology ˜rms (i.e., 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 1
 Biotechnology R&D Employees by Country
Biotechnology R&D Employees (Headcounts, 2003)
aTotal
Per Firm
United States
b 73,520
33.5
United Kingdom
b9,644
Germany (2004)
8,024
13.2
Korea (2004)
6,554
10.2
Canada
c6,441
13.1
Denmark
d4,781
17.9
France
b4,193
5.6
Switzerland (2004)
b4,143
26.4
Spain (2004)
2,884
10.4
Sweden
b2,359
10.9
Belgium
1,984
27.2
Israel (2002)
1,596
10.8
China (Shanghai)
d1,447
9.2
Finland
b1,146
9.3
Ireland
b1,053
25.7
Iceland
458
19.9
Norway
b283
8.8
Poland (2004)
109
8.4
 aR&D employment: includes scientists and support staff such as technicians.
 bData from Critical I Report to the UK DTI (2005), based on all R&D employees in core biotech
-nology ˜rms.
 cExcludes ˜rms with less than ˜ve employees or less than PPP $80,000 in R&D.
 dFull-time equivalents (FTEs).
SOURCE: OECD (2006).
outside of universities and the public sector). While the de˜nition of which 
˜rms are included in the ﬁbiotechnologyﬂ industry varies across countries (e.g., 

the United Kingdom reports only companies from ﬁcoreﬂ biotechnology ˜rms, 

whereas Germany reports employment for any worker with biotech-related re
-sponsibilities), the most striking fact about these statistics is the small absolute 

size of the biotechnology industry. Using statistics collected in 2006, the global 

biotechnology industry directly employs less than 500,000 workers in the private 

sector.
5 While the industry may also support employment in related industries 
(e.g., pharmaceuticals, agriculture, or industrial engineering), there are no sys
-tematic survey data about the global distribution of these employment spillovers, 

and so we restrict our attention to the biotechnology industry per se. To put these 

numbers in context, the global automobile industry employs more than 8.4 mil
-lion workers (International Organization of Automobile Manufacturers, 2007).
5 
The OECD statistics do not list aggregate employment from Japan, but, based on other (though not 
strictly comparable) ˜gures, Japanese employment is likely less than that of the EU, which registered 
at 73,189 as of 2005.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 249
biotech-5.eps
172,391
73,189
24,131
22,405
12,138
11,863
8,922
8,819
4,261
3,892
3,716
2,940
2,394
1,789
1,532
1,020
970
969
946
918
153
1001,00010,000100,0001,000,000
United States (1)
EU (4)
Germany (2,3)
United Kingdom (1)
Korea (2004) (3)
Canada (2,3)
France (1)
Switzerland (2004) (1)
Belgium (2,3)
Israel (2002) (3)
Sweden (1)
Ireland
Finland (1)
Austria (1)
Italy (1)
South Africa (2002) (2,3)
Norway (1)
Iceland (3)
Poland (2004) (2,3)
New Zealand (2005) (3)
Portugal (1)
Biotech Workforce
FIGURE 5
 International labor distributions: (1) Data from Critical I report to the UK 
DTI, 2005, based on total employment in core biotechnology ˜rms. (2) Limited to employ
-ees with biotech-related responsibilities. (3) Includes employment in both core and non
-core ˜rms active in biotechnology. (4) EU11 countries presented in this ˜gure. SOURCE: 
OECD Biotechnology Statistics (Van Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Figure 5 offers several striking patterns about the global distribution of 
biotechnology activity. First, the United States supports by far the single largest 
biotechnology industry. Even though the European Union (EU) has a larger total 

population than the United States, overall biotechnology employment is less than 

50 percent that of the United States. Moreover, within the EU, the distribution 

of employment is highly uneven, with Germany and the United Kingdom ac
-counting for two-thirds of total EU employment. Finally, it is useful to note that 

a number of small countries support signi˜cant biotechnology employment, with 

an employment intensity exceeding even that of the United States. For example, 

although Iceland has a population of only 300,000, the biotechnology industry 

accounts for nearly 1,000 jobs.
Table 1 provides a complementary perspective and reports biotechnology 
research and development (R&D) employment by country (and the number of 

R&D employees per ˜rm, which we return to later). Two points are of speci˜c in
-terest. First, the ratio of R&D employment to total employment is extremely high; 

for most countries, the ratio is approximately 0.3-0.5; in other words, more than 

one of out every three biotechnology employees is a biotechnology researcher. 

This contrasts with an overall R&D employment intensity of less than 3 percent 

across all industries in the United States (National Science Board, 2006). With 

that said, it is once again important to emphasize the small absolute size of the 

biotechnology research workforce. Excluding the United States, no country main
-tains a biotechnology R&D workforce in excess of 10,000 researchers. In other 

words, while the absolute size of the biotechnology workforce is comparatively 

small, Table 1 and Figure 5 suggest that the international distribution of overall 

employment captures signi˜cant international differences in the distribution of 

labor-intensive innovation activities.
Enterprises
Figure 6 extends the analysis to the global distribution of 
companies
. While 
the United States remains the largest single national home for biotechnology 

activity, it is useful to note that the EU actually accounts for a greater number of 

companies than the United States. Along with the earlier employment statistics, 

this suggests that individual EU biotechnology companies have fewer employees 

(on average) than their U.S. counterparts. Simply put, the scale of operations for 

a typical EU biotechnology ˜rm is smaller than that of a biotechnology ˜rm in 

the United States. This point is illustrated in the second column of Table 1, which 

records the number of R&D employees per ˜rm by country. While the United 

States employs more than 33 scientists per ˜rm on average, most EU countries 

employ from 5 to 15 researchers. The smaller scale of ˜rms extends to countries 

in other parts of the world as well: Israel, South Korea, and China employ from 

9 to 11 scientists per ˜rm.
While some of these differences arise from the fact that the United States 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 251
biotech-6.eps
3,154
2,196
804
755
640
607
490
455
304
278
267
216
172
158
157
148
123
119
116
106
73
41
39
32
23
17
13
10
100
1,000
10,000
European Union
United States
Japan (3,4)
France
Korea(2004)
Germany
Canada
United Kingdom
Australia
Spain (2004)
Denmark
Sweden
Italy (2004)
China
Switzerland
Israel (2002)
Finland (4)
Netherlands (5)
New Zealand
South Africa
Belgium (4)
Ireland (5)
Austria (5)
Norway (5)
Iceland
Portugal (5)
Poland (2004)
Biotech Workforce
FIGURE 6
 Number of biotechnology companies in distinct geographic areas (Van 
Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006; OECD Biotechnology Statistics).
maintains a few 
very
 large biotechnology companies (e.g., Amgen, Genentech), 
these differences in average ˜rm size seem to re˚ect differences in the origin and 
maturity of these companies. For example, according to Europe™s Biotechnol
-ogy Industry Association, EuropaBio, Europe has a higher number of younger 

companies but fewer mature companies than the United States (Critical, 2006). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Furthermore, the European biotechnology companies seem to grow more slowly 
than their U.S. counterparts. By and large, young European ˜rms are often 
overtaken by international competitors and even some of the oldest European 

biotechnology companies have been acquired by U.S. companies that have bet
-ter access to ˜nancial and commercialization resources (Critical, 2006). As in 

the employment statistics, this concentration of small companies seems to re˚ect 

the international distribution of employment activities. Most companies report
-ing that consider themselves to be part of the biotechnology industry focus on 

innovation-oriented activities, and Figure 6 highlights the role of entrepreneurial 

˜rms in this industry.
R&D Expenditures
Finally, we examine the global distribution of R&D expenditures in Figures 
7 and 8. Perhaps even more so than with the employment and enterprise activ
-ity statistics, these statistics are only partially informative data since they only 

measure biotechnology-related expenditures for a subset of ˜rms that are focused 

in biotechnology (i.e., de˜ned as a ﬁcoreﬂ biotechnology ˜rm for many of the 

countries), and the data seem to primarily cover ˜rms specialized in health-

oriented biotechnology. While these data are ˚awed and should not be taken 

to offer a precise measure of the level of expenditures, they are still useful for 

highlighting broad contrasts across different countries and regions. In particular, 

as with the employment statistics, investment expenditures are concentrated in 

the United States (see Figure 7); in 2003, the U.S. investment pace is an order of 

magnitude higher than for any other individual country. Interestingly, there are 

some important differences in the investment levels of countries, relative to their 

employment levels. For example, while France registers a much lower level of 

biotechnology employment than Germany, the level of investment expenditures 

is similar between the two countries; moreover, this re˚ects real differences in 

investments because both countries share a common currency. As well, mod
-est but still signi˜cant employment statistics for several countries outside the 

United States and Europe are also re˚ected in R&D investment: New Zealand 

and Australia support a relatively high level of investment activity, as do Asian 

countries such as South Korea and China (although China obviously has a very 

small industry on a per capita basis).
This skewed pattern of global biotechnology investment is reinforced in 
Figure 8, which reports the distribution within the OECD of venture capital 

investments. If anything, the investment bias toward the United States is even 

more apparent (venture capital investments are more than 12 times as large in the 

United States than in the second-largest target country, Germany). To the extent 

that venture capital funding also offers a particularly effective model for fund
-ing innovation (Kortum and Lerner, 2001), this skewed distribution of ˜nancial 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 253
biotech-7.eps
14,232
1,347
1,342
1,194
727
699
469
251
236
205
201
199
95
88
84
67
29
51101001,00010,000100,000
United States
Germany (2004)
France
Canada
Denmark (1)
Korea (2004)
Switzerland (2004)
Israel (2002)
Italy (2004)
China (Shanghai)
Australia
Spain (2004)
New Zealand (2004)
Finland
South Africa (2002)
Iceland
Norway
Poland (2004)
$ Million PPP, 2003
FIGURE 7
 Total expenditures for biotechnology R&D by biotechnology-active ˜rms, 
OECD biotechnology statistics (Van Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006).
investment suggests that the United States may be extending its historical domi
-nance in the creation and evolution of biotechnology enterprises.
Overall these empirics highlight three very important ˜ndings about the 
geographic distribution of innovative activity in the biotechnology industry. First, 
this is an industry of relatively modest size by any measure. The absolute level 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
biotech-8.eps
9,526
769
721
502
323
303
159
127
124
98
74
29
23
14
6321110
100
1,000
10,000
USA
Germany (2004)
Canada
UK
Sweden
France
Denmark
Netherlands
Belgium
Switzerrland
Norway
Finland
Italy
Spain
Austria
Ireland
Iceland
Portugal
Venture Capital ($million) 2001-2003
Biotech Workforce
FIGURE 8
 Total venture capital investments in biotechnology, 2001 to 2003 combined, 
OECD biotechnology statistics (Van Beuzekom and Arundel, 2006).
of employment is relatively low, and the total expenditures (and even the number 
of entrepreneurial ˜rms) are relatively low in terms of absolute value. Second, 

relative to other industries, measures of employment and entrepreneurship activ
-ity are closely linked to innovative activity. More than one-third of all employees 

in the global industry are considered R&D employees (much higher than in most 

other industries) and most companies are focused on innovation-oriented strate
-gies and investments. Finally, although there is an increasingly dispersed global 

set of locations for biotechnology (e.g., United Kingdom and Germany, South 

Korea, Australia), the overall level of the United States in terms of total activity 

is much higher.
THE GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF INNO
VATI
VE OUTPUT IN BIOTECHNOLOG
YIn this section, we move beyond the general patterns of the geography of 
biotechnology to examine global patterns of innovative performance. Attempts 

to measure and benchmark innovative outputs have become common across 

advanced economies.
6 One approach to this activity (Furman et al., 2002; Porter 
and Stern, 1999) is based on a clear distinction between measures of the outputs 
6 
A review of this process is beyond this chapter™s scope. However, a good starting point is the 
benchmarking programs of the EU (http://trendchart.cordis.lu/). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 255
of technological innovation (for example, international patenting) and its driv
-ers: infrastructure, clusters, and linkages.
7 While one must be very careful in 
interpreting patterns based on patent data, patenting trends across countries and 
over time are highly likely to re˚ect actual changes in innovative outputs rather 

than spurious in˚uences, especially in measuring innovation at the global level. 

Also, international patenting captures the degree to which a national economy 

develops and commercializes internationally important new technologiesŠa pre
-requisite for building international competitiveness on a platform of quality and 

innovation. In short, international patenting is ﬁthe only observable manifestation 

of inventive activity with a well-grounded claim for universalityﬂ (Trajtenberg, 

1990).
8 With that said, our analysis of international patenting in biotechnology 
comes with several important caveats. In particular, the standard for patentability 

for many biotechnology-related innovations differs across countries (and across 

time within countries). To cite one example, as of 2006, the United States had
-granted more than 40 human embryonic stem cell patents, whereas the European 

Patent Of˜ce (EPO) had granted none due to an EU directive to reject human 

embryonic stem cells patents on ﬁmoralﬂ grounds (Porter et al., 2006). While 

U.S. patent of˜ce practice has tended to allow patents that are relatively close to 

the arena of pure scienti˜c ﬁdiscoveries,ﬂ EPO practice has tended to only allow 

patents when a speci˜c industrial application has been identi˜ed. More gener
-ally, the use of patent data to identify the geography of innovation is of course 

limited by the fact that many innovations (even important innovations) are not 

patented or patentable; although this critique is particularly important in the 

context of a broad cross-industry study, biotechnology is an arena with a close 

connection between innovation and patenting (Cohen et al., 2000). With these 

caveats in mind, we now turn to a detailed discussion of international patterns of 

biotechnology patenting.
Global Biotechnology Patenting
We use several different measures re˚ecting the number of international 
biotechnology patents. In particular, we focus on the number of patents granted 
7 
In addition to patent counts, there are some alternative measures to illustrate the distribution of 
biotechnology innovations. For instance, other forms of intellectual capital could also be useful to 
measure. On the one hand, some forms of human capital are often held as critical success factors in 

the science-driven business, such as outcomes of scienti˜c research and a level of education and busi
-ness experience of employees. On the other hand, the measures related to relational capital, such as 
collaboration networks, would be useful in assessing the signi˜cance of location of the biotechnology 

industry (Edvinsson and Malone, 1997).
8 
Trajtenberg (1990) provides a thorough discussion of the role of patents in understanding innova
-tive activity, referring to their early use by Schmookler (1966) and noting their increasing use by 

scholars (e.g., Griliches, 1984, 1990, 1994). Our use of international patents also has often been used 

as a precedent in prior work comparing inventive activity across countries (see Dosi et al., 1990; 

Eaton and Kortum, 1996). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
to inventors from a given country by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce 
(USPTO), the EPO, and the Japanese Patent Of˜ce (JPO). We then combine these 
measures in our analysis by examining the number of triadic patent families (i.e., 

patents granted in each of the three major patent jurisdictions).
Figure 9 graphs the number of biotechnology patents issued by the USPTO 
and EPO, by the region of origin of the inventor.
9 Several striking patterns stand 
out. First, the United States is the dominant country of origin for biotechnology 

innovations, even those that are patented in Europe (i.e., where the ﬁhome biasﬂ 

would favor the European inventors). Second, there was a sharp increase in U.S. 

biotechnology patenting by U.S. inventors during the late 1990s, a trend that is 

partially re˚ected in the EPO data and partially ameliorates from 2000 onward. 

USPTO patents with European inventors are associated with a much more gradual 

rise and achieved a 20 percent share of USPTO biotechnology patents by 2003.
Clearly, the regional patenting patterns re˚ected in the USPTO and EPO 
˜gures re˚ect a ﬁhome biasﬂ; inventors tend to prefer domestic patent of˜ces to 

foreign ones (as documented and discussed in detail by Criscuolo [2006]). This 

suggests at least in part that domestic biotechnology companies tend to apply 

for patents ˜rst in their domestic patent of˜ce and only seek foreign patents 

for their most signi˜cant and valuable products and processes. We attempt to 

address the home-bias problem by moving toward triadic patent family counts 

to perform more strict comparisons among biotechnology patents ˜led in the 

USPTO, the EPO, and the JPO.
10
 Triadic patent families provide a more valid 
proxy for the economic value of patents. Patent application processes differ by 

country; most companies or individuals will undertake the costly process of ˜l
-ing a patent abroad only if the invention or process in question has signi˜cant 

earnings prospects.
When we turn to triadic patent families in Figure 10, a similar set of pat
-terns emerges. The United States continues to have a dominant share, on both 

an absolute and a per capita basis. Furthermore, when we calculate patent per 

capita estimates, Japan™s innovative productivity appears to be at the same level 

or higher than that of the EU. It is useful to note that, on a per capita basis, the 
9 
Unfortunately, we are unable to obtain disaggregated data on assignee location using the Derwent 
database. The location of the inventors is often distinct from the location of the assignee of the pat
-ent. This distinction may confound an analysis of global sourcing of R&D activity. The decrease in 
the share of U.S. inventors described earlier does not necessarily imply a decrease in U.S. patent 
ownership. Therefore, we cannot rule out a geographical shift in R&D activity by U.S.-based ˜rms. 

However, given the strong entrepreneurial element of the biotech industry and the ˜ndings of the 

OECD 2007 Compendium of Patent Statistics, biotechnology R&D work does not seem to be heavily 

outsourced from the United States at this point. However, constructing a database of triadic biotech
-nology patents by assignee country is a strong priority for future research in this area. 
10
 Eurostat de˜nes triadic patent families as follows: ﬁA patent family is a set of patents taken in 
various countries for protecting a single invention. . . . Patent is a member of a triadic patent family 

if and only if it is ˜led at the European Patent Of˜ce (EPO), the Japanese Patent Of˜ce (JPO) and is 

granted by the US Patent & Trademark Of˜ce (USPTO).ﬂ 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 257
biotech-9.eps
Number of Patents
USPTO Biotechnology Patents 
01 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
5 000
6 000
7 000
1994199519961997199819992000200120022003
Year
USA
EU
Japan
EPO Biotechnology Patents 
0500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
199419951996199719981999200020012002
Year
Number of Patents
USA
EU-25
Japan
FIGURE 9
 Biotechnology patent counts in USPTO and EPO by inventor™s country of 
origin. SOURCE: OECD.
United States has only about two times the innovative capacity of Japan and the 
EU. Perhaps more important, these patterns provide some interesting insights into 

the evolution of the global biotechnology industry over the past decade or so. In 

particular, despite the fact that countries outside the United States started from 

a very low level of activity (and may bene˜t from the ﬁconvergence effectﬂ), the 

gap between the United States and the rest of the world has persisted. While there 

has been a very slight convergence in the last years of our data (i.e., applications 

from 2000 onward), these broad patterns are consistent with the hypothesis that 

regional agglomeration remains an important driver of the geography of the bio
-technology industry.
There are several potential explanations for this continued persistence. First, 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
biotech-10.eps
Triadic biotechnology patent families (est.)
0200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
199419951996199719981999200020012002
Year
Number of Patents
Triadic biotechnology patent families per capita (est.)
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
199419951996199719981999200020012002
Year
Number of Patents per 1 mill Inhabitants
USA
EU-25
Japan
USA
EU-25
Japan
FIGURE 10
 Triadic biotechnology patent counts and per capita measures by inventor™s 
country of origin. SOURCE: OECD and authors™ calculations.
and perhaps most important, the extremely rapid advances in the scienti˜c and 
technological frontier in biotechnology likely reinforce the strengths of preex
-isting clusters, such as San Diego and Massachusetts. In contrast to environ
-ments where a single ﬁmacro innovationﬂ diffuses ˜rst locally and then globally 

(resulting in convergence in incremental innovation over time), biotechnology 

innovation remains ﬁperpetually immature.ﬂ Second, the scale of private and 

public research funding in the United States continues to be very large rela
-tive to any other individual country or region. The National Institutes of Health 

has experienced rapid increases in its funding, and this seems to have been a 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 259
complement, rather than a substitute, for venture capital and private investment. 
Finally, even though there are an increasing number of biotechnology innova
-tion clusters around the world that are operating at least at ﬁminimum scale,ﬂ the 
United States has bene˜ted from an environment that by and large encourages 

the commercialization of new biotechnology products. This is perhaps most ap
-parent in the agricultural sector, where the strength of clusters is probably less 

salient than in health-oriented biotechnology, but resistance to development and 

commercialization efforts in Europe have allowed the United States to establish 

and maintain a dominant position.
11
 Together, while future U.S. leadership will 
depend on the continued vitality of cluster environment, these patterns suggest 

that the United States has by and large provided a favorable environment for 

biotechnology innovation.
Global Biotechnology Patenting by Application Segments
We now provide a more detailed analysis of innovative output as measured 
by patent counts based on inventor location, which are divided into 12 patent 

subcategories by the same regions considered earlier. Our analysis utilizes Der
-went biotechnology abstracts, the most widely utilized classi˜cation system for 

biotechnology patent analyses (Dalpé, 2003). Table 2 presents biotechnology 

patent counts and regional shares from 2000 to 2003. Note that we are no longer 

looking only at patent triads.
While the overall results re˚ect our more aggregate ˜ndings (i.e., the United 
States as a dominant player), Table 2 also reveals some striking differences across 

industrial applications. U.S. leadership in biotechnology is centered on the patent 

classes most closely related to red biotechnology. More than 75 percent of all 

U.S. patents are in the categories genetic engineering and fermentation, pharma
-ceuticals, and cell culture. While these classes are also active in the portfolio of 

the EU and Japan, an important share of patenting activity by the EU and Japan 

is in classes associated with green and white biotechnology. These patterns of 

comparative advantage can be seen most clearly when we calculate the share of 

patenting recorded by each region within each industrial application. We de˜ne 

comparative advantage as those patent classes with a higher share of domestic 

patenting than the country™s share of the total number of biotechnology patents.
12
 For example, the United States has a comparative advantage (as indicated by 

the boldface entries) in the classes for which it holds over 55.4 percent of all 
11
 This pattern may be reversed in the case of stem cells, where restrictions on U.S. federal funding 
of early-stage embryonic stem cell research have spurred numerous international initiatives to attract 
key scientists and create a favorable cluster environment for stem cell commercialization efforts.
12
 The formal condition for ˚agging a quotient is 
PPPPij
jitotal
, where 
P is the number of patents, 
i denotes the country, 
j indicates the application area, and 
total
 stands for the entire number of biotech-
nology patents within the period 2000-2003 in Derwent Biotechnology Resource.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 2
 Patent Counts and Share of Patents in Biotechnology Patent 
Classes, 2000-2003
Code
Patent Class
U.S.
EU15
JP
Total
AGenetic engineering and fermentation
7,125
2,671
1,655
12,138
58.7%
22.0%
13.6%
BEngineering, biochemical engineering
196
166
103
479
40.9%
34.7%
21.5%
CSensors and analysis
124
77
55
245
50.6%
31.4%
22.4%
DPharmaceuticals
5,564
1,978
1,110
9,250
60.2%
21.4%
12.0%
60.2%
EAgriculture
1,249
391
236
2,010
62.1%
19.5%
11.7%
FFood and food additives
260
286
186
712
12.1%
7.6%
9.0%
GFuels, mining, and metal recovery
44
66
45
171
25.7%
38.6%
26.3%
HOther chemicals
  
160
204
176
504
31.7%
40.5%
34.9%
JCell culture
 1,058
423
249
1,779
59.5%
23.8%
14.0%
KBiocatalysis
   
593
  
548
  
492
 1,604
37.0%
34.2%
30.7%
LPuri˜cation, downstream processing
   
54
   
52
   
16
   
127
42.5%
40.9%
12.6%
MWaste disposal and the environment
  
122
  
185
  
232
   
563
21.7%
32.9%
41.2%
Total
16,375
6,815
4,433
29,582
granted patents. Consider, then, the areas of relative strength for the EU, such 
as fuels, mining, and metal recovery; other chemicals; puri˜cation, downstream 

processing; and waste disposal and the environment. These patterns seem to 

re˚ect historical strength by the EU in the chemical industry and related indus
-trial applications of biotechnology. Similarly, the relative strength of Japanese 

inventors is apparent in areas such as waste disposal and the environment and 

other chemicals. Indeed, it is useful to note that the EU and Japan 
both
 register a 
higher number of patents on an absolute basis in several application categories: 

fuels, mining, and metal recovery; other chemicals; and waste disposal and the 

environment. Finally, while the bulk of U.S. patents are in classes related to red 

biotechnology, the United States also exhibits advantage on a relative basis in 

green biotechnology (the agriculture sector), re˚ecting in part the leading global 

position of Monsanto and DuPont in this application segment. Overall, these 

patenting patterns suggest that U.S. leadership in biotechnology is by no means 

monolithic. While the United States does tend to have a dominant position in red 

and green biotechnology, the EU and Japan exhibit innovation leadership in areas 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 261
related to white biotechnology. This is consistent with qualitative assessments 
that speci˜c areas of biotechnology tend to be organized around clusters, with a 
small number of global innovation hubs.
From Innovation Activity to Sales
Of course, our analysis so far provides a limited perspective on the intensity 
of biotechnology activity across different regions: while evaluations of R&D 

employment and investment capture the intensity of R&D inputs, and patenting 

provides an imperfect measure of early-stage research outcomes, the impact of 

biotechnology ultimately depends on the ability to commercialize new technolo
-gies in the marketplace.
As such, Table 3 provides a brief examination of the relative intensity of in
-puts and outputs of the biotechnology industry. Biotechnology R&D expenditure, 

patent counts, and sales are divided by the total population within each distinctive 

geographic area to calculate per capita measures for each category, which are 

then indexed to the U.S. level (U.S. = 1.0). Both R&D investment and patenting 

in the EU are approximately 40 percent of the U.S. level on a per capita basis, 

yet sales per capita are nearly one-third lower, at 28 percent of the U.S. level. As 

mentioned earlier, this may re˚ect the earlier stage of development of many Eu
-ropean biotechnology ˜rms or the fact that European ˜rms are more specialized 

in areas such as industrial applications, which may be associated with a lower 

level of sales for a given level of innovative investment (and patenting output). 

In contrast, although Japan is also concentrated in white biotechnology, Japanese 

companies exhibit a slightly higher level of patent per capita than Europe (0.46) 

and a much higher level of sales per capita (0.45).
Country-Speci˜c Innovation Performance
Finally, Table 4 presents the distribution of biotechnology patent counts 
across a range of countries from 2000 to 2003, divided by individual application 

areas. These data are not strictly comparable to the of˜cial OECD triadic patent 
TABLE 3
 From R&D Activity to Patenting and Sales of the Biotechnology 
Industry
R&D Per Capita Index
Patents Per Capita Index
Sales Per Capita Index
USA
1.00
1.00
1.00
EU
0.37
0.41
0.28
Japan
n/a
0.46
0.45
SOURCE: OECD biotechnology patents and authors™ calculations (OECD, 2006, author™s 
calculations).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 4
 Biotechnology Patenting from 2000 to 2003 by Country
A. Genetic 
Engineering and 

Fermentation
B. 

Biochemical 

Engineering
C. Sensors 

and 

Analysis
D. 

Pharmaceuticals
E. 

Agriculture
F. Food 
and Food 
Additives
G. Fuels, 

Mining 

and Metal 

Recovery
H. Other 

Chemicals 
J. Cell 

CultureK. 

Biocatalysis
L. Puri˜cation- 

Downstream 

Processing
M. Waste 

Disposal 

and the 

Environment 
WPO/IB
7,979
213
139
6,488
1352
61
197
1,190
765
71
113
USA
7,125
196
124
5,564
1,249
260
44
160
1,058
593
54
122
Canada
111
690
36
3221
10
29Mexico
43211Cuba
11Argentina
53Brazil
1EPO
797
44
24
587
110
102
14
87
112
160
11
32
UK
653
21
16
520
93
22
615
99
67
923
Ireland
3131122Germany
712
73
27
496
104
92
24
70
128
179
19
81
France
258
16
6192
46
39
10
11
47
43
728
Netherlands
21
2113
71251515Belgium
4311121Switzerland
10
722411Austria
17
3114
4223595Denmark
86
246
46712
55
Sweden
44
246
419612Finland
19
1955163Norway
10
512Italy
31
428
72147732Spain
21
19
5227Portugal
4111Greece
1111Hungary
4311Czech Republic
2111Slovakia
111111Poland 
11Serbia and 
Montenegro 
1Republic of 

Macedonia
11Russia
33
128
1623411Turkey
1Israel
51
2239
9943Japan
1,655
103
55
1,110
236
186
45
176
249
492
16
232
Republic of Korea
67
2152
10
719917
5China 
465
21416
37
12
11
233
212
Taiwan
11India
64411Singapore
6241Malaysia
11Australia
146
82111
42
65222
25New Zealand
23
14
12211South Africa
8744Total 
12,138
479
245
9,250
2,010
712
171
504
1,779
1,604
127
563
SOURCE: Derwent Biotechnology Resource (2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 263
TABLE 4
 Biotechnology Patenting from 2000 to 2003 by Country
A. Genetic 
Engineering and 

Fermentation
B. 

Biochemical 

Engineering
C. Sensors 

and 

Analysis
D. 

Pharmaceuticals
E. 

Agriculture
F. Food 

and Food 

Additives
G. Fuels, 

Mining 

and Metal 

Recovery
H. Other 

Chemicals 
J. Cell 

CultureK. 

Biocatalysis
L. Puri˜cation- 

Downstream 

Processing
M. Waste 

Disposal 

and the 

Environment 
WPO/IB
7,979
213
139
6,488
1352
61
197
1,190
765
71
113
USA
7,125
196
124
5,564
1,249
260
44
160
1,058
593
54
122
Canada
111
690
36
3221
10
29Mexico
43211Cuba
11Argentina
53Brazil
1EPO
797
44
24
587
110
102
14
87
112
160
11
32
UK
653
21
16
520
93
22
615
99
67
923
Ireland
3131122Germany
712
73
27
496
104
92
24
70
128
179
19
81
France
258
16
6192
46
39
10
11
47
43
728
Netherlands
21
2113
71251515Belgium
4311121Switzerland
10
722411Austria
17
3114
4223595Denmark
86
246
46712
55
Sweden
44
246
419612Finland
19
1955163Norway
10
512Italy
31
428
72147732Spain
21
19
5227Portugal
4111Greece
1111Hungary
4311Czech Republic
2111Slovakia
111111Poland 
11Serbia and 
Montenegro 
1Republic of 

Macedonia
11Russia
33
128
1623411Turkey
1Israel
51
2239
9943Japan
1,655
103
55
1,110
236
186
45
176
249
492
16
232
Republic of Korea
67
2152
10
719917
5China 
465
21416
37
12
11
233
212
Taiwan
11India
64411Singapore
6241Malaysia
11Australia
146
82111
42
65222
25New Zealand
23
14
12211South Africa
8744Total 
12,138
479
245
9,250
2,010
712
171
504
1,779
1,604
127
563
SOURCE: Derwent Biotechnology Resource (2006).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
counts presented earlier. Instead, Derwent Biotechnology Resources relies on an 
idiosyncratic algorithm for assigning patents (e.g., fractional patent shares) to dif
-ferent countries, by the country of origin of the inventors (Derwent Biotechnol
-ogy Resource, 2006). With that caveat, the results are intriguing, as they deepen 
the broad patterns observed in our earlier U.S.-EU-Japan comparisons.
In particular, while we do not engage in a detailed application-speci˜c 
examination of individual countries, there seem to be several distinct ﬁtiersﬂ of 

global activity within the biotechnology industry. First, there are several countries 

that exhibit a high level of overall activity, realized across several different ap
-plication areas with a high number of patents in each area. These multifunctional 

biotechnology centers include the United States, Japan, Germany, the United 

Kingdom, and Australia. The presence of Australia in this category is signi˜
-cant; it has a strong history of basic research in the life sciences and has made 

signi˜cant investments in nurturing biotechnology companies and applications. 

Second, there is a grouping of countries that either have a broad base with only a 

few patents in each category (e.g., the Netherlands) or have intensive activity in a 

few categories (e.g., Israel). Finally, a large number of countries have only a small 

number of patents in biotechnology, often exhibiting only one or two patents in 

total. These include several European countries (e.g., Portugal, Greece), most of 

the Latin American and former Eastern European countries, and several of the 

less developed Asian economies (India, Malaysia, etc.).
Overall, these country-speci˜c patterns reinforce several of the themes al
-ready mentioned. First, the United States exhibits persistent innovation leadership 

in biotechnology by a wide margin. Second, an increasing number of countries 

around the world seem to be displaying signi˜cant activity within biotechnology, 

and there is signi˜cant heterogeneity among countries in their biotechnology in
-novation intensity. For example, although Belgium has an advanced economy, 

it is a clear laggard in biotechnology innovation. Finally, as the biotechnology 

industry begins to spread from its origins in the life sciences sector, it will be 

increasingly important to distinguish the geography of innovation by individual 

applications; while the United States exhibits leadership in life sciences and agri
-culture, Denmark and Japan seem to have established leadership positions within 

industrial biotechnology applications.
KEY FINDINGS AND POLIC
Y CONCLUSIONS
Key Findings
Overall our analysis suggests that both the biotechnology industry and bio
-technology innovation in biotechnology remain clustered economic activities, 

with a strong reliance on and interaction with science-based university research. 

However, the number of active clusters in biotechnology is increasing over time, 

both in terms of the number of distinct locations in the United States that serve as 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 265
the host for activity in the industry and in terms of a globalizing activity. While 
many countries around the world now host a biotechnology industry of varying 
importance, the activity within most countries seems to be highly localized. 

In other words, the data, though clearly inadequate to provide a complete pic
-ture, suggest that the number of biotechnology clusters that achieved ﬁminimum 

scaleﬂ has increased, which is re˚ected in an increased dispersion in terms of 

employment, measures of biotechnology entrepreneurship, and measures of the 

geographic origins of biotechnology innovation.
This central insightŠan increase in the number of regional innovation clus
-ters, rather than a simple dispersion of biotechnology activityŠholds several 

important implications for (1) evaluating the global biotechnology industry going 

forward and (2) developing effective policy to ensure continued U.S. leadership 

in this area.
First, our analysis suggests that the impact of globalization on biotechnology 
innovation seems to be different than that of traditional manufacturing sectors, 

such as the automobile industry or the IT sector. Speci˜cally, the globalization 

of other industries re˚ects the increasing availability of low-cost locations to 

conduct activities that previously had been done in the United States. In contrast, 

the globalization of biotechnology re˚ects a ﬁcatching upﬂ process by a small 

number of regions around the world that seek to compete head-to-head with lead
-ing regions in the United States.
Second, it is important to account for the range of activities now included 
within the biotechnology industry, including diverse applications in the life 

sciences, agriculture, and industry. Although most discussion focuses on life 

sciencesŠwhich remains the largest single segment of biotechnology in terms 

of employment, enterprises, investment, and patentingŠthe globalization of 

biotechnology is occurring most rapidly in industrial applications. Moreover, 

although the United States continues its historical advantage in agricultural ap
-plications, this may be due to political resistance in Europe and other regions 

rather than the presence of strong agglomeration economies within the United 

States. For example, the presence of extremely strong clusters with a high level 

of entrepreneurship that characterizes life sciences biotechnology seems to be a 

bit less salient for agricultural applications. The presence of multiple industrial 

segmentsŠeach of which is associated with distinct locational dynamicsŠraises 

the possibility that, even as individual clusters become more important within 

each application area, the total number of global clusters may increase with the 

range of applications.
Third, at least in terms of the available data, the United States maintains a 
very strong, even dominant, position within biotechnology. While some concep
-tual frameworks (e.g., the convergence effect) would suggest that early leadership 

by the United States would have been followed by a more even global distribution 

of biotechnology innovation, the ﬁgapﬂ between the United States and the rest of 

the world has remained relatively constant over the past decade or so. Indeed, it 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
is likely that the United States has a historic opportunity to establish a long-term 
position as a global hub for biotechnology innovation, particularly in the life sci
-ences and agricultural areas. In contrast to traditional debates about outsourcing, 
it is possible that increased global activity in biotechnology can complement 

rather than substitute for U.S. investment, employment, and innovation.
Finally, our analysis highlights the small size (in terms of absolute levels 
of employment) of the biotechnology industry. While industries such as IT may 

plausibly be associated with a large impact on the total workforces of individual 

states and regions, total employment in biotechnology is very small, although 

associated with very high average wages. The simple fact is that, if the biotech
-nology industry remains at roughly the same scale that it has achieved over the 

past decade or so, it is unlikely to be a major driver of employment patterns and 

overall job growth, either in the United States or abroad.
Policy Conclusions
The analysis holds a number of important policy implications. First, and 
perhaps most important, effective innovation policy concerning biotechnology 

must account for the broad differences between biotechnology and other sectors 

of the economy. The globalization of innovation in biotechnology is occurring 

in a much different way and for different reasons than the globalization of in
-novative activity in other manufacturing sectors, such as automobiles or IT. 

Consequently, policies that may be bene˜cial for these more traditional sectors 

(e.g., domestic R&D tax credits) may have little impact in biotechnology, where 

the vast majority of ˜rms do not report positive accounting pro˜ts subject to 

signi˜cant taxation.
Second, there are policies that are likely to be particularly important in 
biotechnology, even though they may do little to stem the broader pattern of the 

globalization of innovation. Speci˜cally, the biotechnology industry is extremely 

reliant on effective intellectual property institutions, most notably patents. U.S. 

leadership in biotechnology has bene˜ted historically from a strong intellectual 

property environment, in many cases protecting innovations that received limited 

protection in other jurisdictions (e.g., transgenic mammals). Similarly, innova
-tion in biotechnology bene˜ts from the promotion of early-stage venture capital, 

including seed investments, and an effective system for technology transfer from 

university to industry (Mowery, 2004). While such considerations may be of 

modest importance for many of the sectors currently undergoing globalization, 

policies ensuring effective operation of the patent system, providing favorable 

treatment of early-stage venture capital investment, and enhancing the effec
-tiveness of technology transfer are likely to enhance the strength of the U.S. 

biotechnology sector.
Recent patent reform proposals illustrate the challenge of ensuring continued 
U.S. leadership in biotechnology in a changing policy environment. Spurred in 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 267
part by key studies emphasizing signi˜cant inef˜ciencies in the patent system 
(Cohen and Merrill [2003]; Jaffe and Lerner [2004]), numerous patent reform 
proposals have been advanced in the last few years, including legislation and 

administrative reviews. While some of these proposals seek to limit the strength 

of patents in areas such as business methods, biotechnology will be impacted by 

these reforms. Continued dynamism in the U.S. biotechnology sector requires 

strong and enforceable intellectual property protection, and would bene˜t from 

signi˜cant improvements in the operation of the patent system, such as reduced 

administrative delay and a higher level of consistency in patent grant decisio mak
-ing. The danger is that reforms targeting sectors very distant from biotechnology 

will undermine the ability for biotechnology innovators to effectively commer
-cialize their discoveries.
Third, the distinctive nature of biotechnology innovation suggests that the 
globalization of biotechnology innovation need not detract from U.S. strength 

in this area. Both the underlying science and the industry are still at a relatively 

early stage, and long-term American prosperity will bene˜t from establishing 

the United States as a global hub for biotechnology innovation. This can be ac
-complished in several ways, most notably through investments in education and 

immigration policy. International leadership by American universities in the life 

sciences is a fundamental precondition for continued American leadership in 

biotechnology innovation. The biotechnology sector will bene˜t from policies 

that encourage the ﬁbest and brightestﬂ on a global scale to study and potentially 

work in the United States. Signi˜cant restrictions on the ability of researchers liv
-ing abroad to travel and collaborate with researchers in the United States in both 

public and private sectors or signi˜cant restrictions on the free ˚ow of capital in
-vestments undermines the likelihood of translating current U.S. cluster leadership 

into a position of durable centrality as a global biotechnology innovation hub.
Finally, an increasing number of 
state 
policy initiatives are focused on 
biotechnology in terms of encouraging job creation and employment. While 

providing a favorable local environment for biotechnology innovation and en
-trepreneurship is important, policy makers should be careful to avoid focusing 

too heavily on attracting 
external 
investments in biotechnology. As emphasized 
by Feldman and Francis (2004), effective local economic development in bio
-technology focuses on encouraging entrepreneurship and an effective interface 

with preexisting scienti˜c institutions, rather than focusing on attracting a single 

large company. While there are of course cases where the ﬁmatchﬂ between an 

individual company and region are particularly favorable, most qualitative and 

quantitative evidence about the growth of biotechnology clusters emphasizes 

the centrality of indigenous entrepreneurship and the key role played by local 

university research. In addition, local policy makers must avoid excessive opti
-mism about the promise of biotechnology for short-term economic development. 

Relative to the size and scope of other industries undergoing globalization, the 

absolute size of the biotechnology industry is quite modest and is likely to have 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
only a small effect on regional employment and economic growth for the fore
-seeable future.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Jeff Furman, Fiona Murray, Jeffrey T. Macher, David 
C. Mowery, and Stephen A. Merrill for extremely thoughtful suggestions and 
comments.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. D. (1990). Fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth. 
Journal of Political 
Economy
 98(4):673-702.
Argyres, N., and J. Liebeskind. (1998). Privatizing the intellectual commons: Universities and the 
commercialization of biotechnology. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
 35(4):
 427-454.
Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella. (2001). 
Markets for Technology: Economics of Innovation 
and Corporate Strategy.
 Cambridge: MIT Press.
Audretsch, D. B., and M. P. Feldman. (1996). R&D Spillovers and the geography of innovation and 
production. 
American Economic Review
 86(3):630-640.
Audretsch, D. B., and P. E. Stephan. (1996). Company-scientist locational links: The case of biotech
-nology. 
American Economic Review
 86(3):641-652.
Barro, R.J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1992. Converage. 
Journal of Political Economy
, 100(2): 
223-251.
Battelle Technology Partnership Practice, SSTI. (2006). 
Growing the Nation™s Bioscience Sector: 
State Bioscience Initiatives.
Biotechnology Industry Organization. (2006). 
Milestones 200
6-200
7.Breschi, S., and F. Malerba. (2005). 
Clusters, Networks, and Innovation.
 New York: Oxford Uni
-versity Press.
Brezis, E., and P. Krugman. (1997). Technology and the life cycle of cities. 
Journal of Economic 
Growth
 2(4):369-383.
Burrill & Company. (2004). Biotech 2004. Available at 
http://www.burrillandco.com/bio/biotech_
boo
k. Accessed August 3, 2007.
Cockburn, I., R. Henderson, L. Orsenigo, and G. P. Pisano. (1999). Pharmaceuticals and biotechnol
-ogy. Pp. 363-398 in 
U.S. Industry in 2000: Studies in Competitive Performance
, D. Mowery, 
ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Cohen, W., and S. Merrill. (2003). 
Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy
. National Research 
Council (U.S.). Committee on Intellectual Property Rights in the Knowledge-Based Economy. 
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Cohen, W., R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh. (2000). Protecting their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability 
Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or not). National Bureau of Economic 

Research Working Paper 7552.
Cooke, P. (2002). Biotechnology clusters as regional, sectoral innovation systems. 
International 
Regional Science Review
 25(1):8-37.
Cortright, J., and H. Mayer. (2002). 
Signs of Life: The Growth of Biotechnology Centers in the U.S.
 Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Criscuolo, P. (2006). The ﬁhome advantageﬂ effect and patent families. A comparison of OECD 
triadic patents, the USPTO and the EPO. 
Scientometrics
 66:23-41.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 269
Critical, I. (2006). 
Biotechnology in Europe: 200
6 Comparative Study.
 EuropaBio, The European 
Association for Bioindustries.
Culliton, B. (1990). What is good for Monsanto is good for Washington University. 
Science
 247:
 1027.
Dalpé, R. (2002). Bibliometric analysis of biotechnology. 
Scientometrics
 55:189-213.
David, P. (2004). Can ﬁopen scienceﬂ be protected from the evolving regime of IPR protections? 
Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
 160(1):9-34.
Derwent Biotechnology Resource. (2006). Thomson, Inc Available at 
http://www.thomson.com/
 content/scienti˜c/brand_overviews/biotech_resourc
e.DiMasi, J. A., R. W. Hansen, and H. G. Grabowski. (2003). The price of innovation: New estimates 
of drug development costs. 
Journal of Health Economics
 22:151-185.
Dosi, G., K. Pavitt, and L. Soete. (1990). 
The Economics of Technical Change and International 
Trade.
 New York: Columbia University Press.
Dumais, G., G. Ellison, and E. L. Glaeser. (2002). Geographic concentration as a dynamic process. 
Review of Economics and Statistics
 84(2):193-204.
Duranton, G., and D. Puga. (2001). Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and the life 
cycle of products. 
American Economic Review
 91(5):1454-1478.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum. (1996). Trade in ideas: Patenting & productivity in the OECD. 
Journal of 
International Economics
 40(3-4):251-278.
Edvinsson, L., and M. Malone. (1997). 
Intellectual Capital. 
New York: Harper Business.
Feldman, M. (2003). The locational dynamics of the US biotech industry: Knowledge externalities 
and the anchor hypothesis. 
Industry and Innovation
 10(3):311-328.
Feldman, M., and J. Francis. (2003). Fortune favours the prepared region: The case of entrepreneur
-ship and the capitol region biotechnology cluster. 
European Planning Studies
 11(7):765-788.
Feldman, M., and J. Francis. (2004). Homegrown solutions: Fostering cluster formation. 
Economic 
Development Quarterly
 18(2):127-137.
Furman, J. L., M. E. Porter, and S. Stern. (2002). The determinants of national innovative capacity. 
Research Policy
 31:899-933.
Gans, J., and S. Stern. (2000). Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the gale of creative de
-struction. 
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
 9(4):489-511.
Gans, J., and S. Stern. (2003). The product market and the market for ﬁideasﬂ: Commercialization 
strategies for technology entrepreneurs. 
Research Policy
 32(2):333-350.
Graff, G., S. Cullen, K. Bradford, and D. Zilberman. (2003) The public-private structure of intellec
-tual property ownership in agricultural biotechnology. 
Nature Biotechnology
 21(9):989-995.
Griliches, Z., ed. (1984). 
R&D, Patents and Productivity.
 Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. 
Journal of Economic Litera
-ture
 92:630-653.
Griliches, Z. (1994). Productivity, R&D, and the data constraint. 
American Economic Review
 84:
 1-23.
Heller, M., and R. Eisenberg. (1998). Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in biomedical 
research. 
Science
 280:698-701.
Henderson, J. V., A. Kuncoro, and M. Turner. (1995). Industrial development in cities. 
Journal of 
Political Economy
 103:1067-1090.
Hermans, R., and A.-J. Tahvanainen. (2006). Regional differences in patterns of collaboration, spe
-cialisation and performance. In 
Sustainable Biotechnology Development
, R. Hermans and M. 
Kulvik, eds. ETLA, The Research Institute of the Finnish Economy, Series B 217.
Hermans, R., M. Kulvik, and A.-J. Tahvanainen. (2006). The biotechnology industry in Finland. 
In 
Sustainable Biotechnology DevelopmentŠNew Insights into Finland
, R. Hermans and M. 
Kulvik, eds. ETLA, The Research Institute of the Finnish Economy, Series B 217.
Hewlett-Packard. (2006). Annual Report, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Hoffman, William (2008). MBBNet, 
http://www.mbbnet.umn.edu/scmap/biotechmap.htm
l, Univer
-sity of Minnesota, MN.
International Organization of Automobile Manufacturers. (2007). Available at 
http://www.oica.net/
htdocs
/Main.ht
m. Accessed August 1, 2007.
Jaffe, A., and J. Lerner. (2004). 
Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System 
Is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Jensen, R., and M. Thursby. (2001). Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing of university inven
-tions. 
American Economic Review
 91(1):240-259.
Kenney, M. (1986). 
Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex.
 New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Klein, S., and N. Rosenberg. (1986). An overview of innovation. In 
The Positive Sum Strategy: 
Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth
, R. Landau and N. Rosenberg, eds. Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press.
Koput, K. W., W. W. Powell, and L. Smith-Doerr. (1996). Interorganizational collaboration and the 
locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 41.
Kortum, S., and J. Lerner. (2001). Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation. 
RAND 
Journal of Economics
 31(4):674-692.
Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing returns and economic geography. 
Journal of Political Economy
 99(3):483-499.
Krugman, P., and A. J. Venables. (1995). Globalization and the inequality of nations. 
Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 
110(4):857-881.
Lerner, J., and R. P. Merges. (1998). The control of technology alliances: An empirical analysis of 
the biotechnology industry. 
Journal of Industrial Economics
 46(2):125-156.
Lundvall, B. (1992). 
National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive 
Learning.
 London, UK: St. Martin™s Press.
Magee, M. (2005). 
Health Politics.
 Spencer Books.
Martin, P., and C. Rogers. (1995). Industrial location and public infrastructure. 
Journal of Interna
-tional Economics
 39:335-351.
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council. (2007). Massachusetts Biotechnology Company Directory. 
Available at 
http://massbio.org/directory/statistics/stats_comp_yrfound.htm
l. Accessed Decem
-ber 19, 2007.
McElroy, D. (2004). Valuing product development cycle in agricultural biotechnology. What is in a 
name? 
Nature Biotechnology
 23:817-822.
McKelvey, M. D. (1996). Discontinuities in genetic engineering for pharmaceuticals? Firms jumps and 
lock-in in systems of innovation. 
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management
 8(2):107-116.
Merges, R. P., and R. R. Nelson (1990). The complex economics of patent scope. 
Columbia Law 
Review
 90(4): 839-916.
Merges, R. P., and R. R. Nelson. (1994). On limiting or encouraging rivalry in technical progress: The 
effect of patent scope decisions. 
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
 25(1):1-24.
Monfort, P., and R. Nicolini. (2000). Regional convergence and international integration. 
Journal of 
Urban Economics 
48:286-306.
Mowery, D. (2004). 
Ivory Tower and Industrial Innovation: University-Industry Technology Trans
-fer Before and After the Bayh-Dole Act in the United States.
 Stanford, CA: Stanford Business 
Books.
Mowery, D., and R. Nelson. (1999). 
Sources of Industrial Leadership: Studies of Seven Industries 
(1999
).
 Cambridge, UK, and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D., R. Nelson, B. Sampat, and A. Ziedonis. (2001). The growth of patenting and licensing 
by U.S. universities: An assessment of the effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. 
Research 
Policy
 30:99-119.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIOTECHNOLOGY
 271
Murray, F., and S. Stern. (2007). Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free ˚ow of sci
-enti˜c knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis. 
Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organization
 63(4):648-687.
Narin, F., and D. Olivastro. (1992). Status report: Linkage between technology and science. 
Research 
Policy
 21(3):237-249.
National Science Board. 2006. 
Science and Engineering Indicators 200
6. 
Two volumes. Arlington, 
VA: National Science Foundation (volume 1, NSB 06-01; volume 2, NSB 06-01A).
Nelkin, D., R. Nelson, and C. Kiernan. (1987). University-industry alliances. 
Science, Technology, 
& Human Values
 12(1):65-74.
Nelson, R. (1993). 
National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis. 
New York: Oxford Uni
-versity Press.
OECD. (2006). Statistical De˜nition of Biotechnology. Available at 
http://www.oecd.org/document/
42/0,2340,en_2649_37437_1933994_1_1_1_37437,00.htm
l. Accessed March 1, 2008.
Orsenigo, L. (1989). 
Emergence of Biotechnology: Institutions and Markets in Industrial Innovation.
 Pinter Publishers, 230 pp.
Pierre-Benoit, J. (1999). Innovating through networks: A case study in plant biotechnology. 
Interna
-tional Journal of Biotechnology
 1(1):67-81.
Porter, G., C. Denning, A. Plomer, J. Sinden, and P. Torremans. (2006). The patentability of human 
embryonic stem cells in Europe. 
Nature Biotechnology
 24:653-655.
Porter, M. (1990). 
The Competitive Advantage of Nations.
 New York: Free Press.
Porter, M. (1998). Clusters and the new economics of competition. 
Harvard Business Review
 76(6):
 77-90.
Porter, M., and S. Stern. (1999). 
The New Challenge to America™s Prosperity: Findings from the In
-novation Index.
 Washington, D.C.: Council on Competitiveness.
Powell, W. W., D. R. White, K. W. Koput, and J. Owen-Smith. (2005). Network dynamics and ˜eld 
evolution: The growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences. 
American Jour
-nal of Sociology
 110:1132-1205.
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. 
Journal of Political Economy
 98(5):
 71-102.
Rosenberg, N. (1974). Science, invention and economic growth. 
Economic Journal
 84(333):90-108.
Saxenian, A. (1994). 
Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 
128. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schmookler, J. (1966). 
Invention and Economic Growth.
 Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press.
Stern, S. (1995). Incentives and focus in university and industrial research: The case of synthetic insu
-lin. In 
The University-Industry Interface and Medical Innovation
, A. Geligns and N. Rosenberg, 
eds. Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.
Stokes, D. (1997). 
Paster™s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation. 
Washington, 
D.C.: Brookings Institute Press.
Swann, G. M., M. Prevezer, and D. K. Stout. (1998). 
The Dynamics of Industrial Clustering: Inter
-national Comparisons in Computing and Biotechnology. 
Oxford University Press.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). 
Patents as Indicators of Innovation, Economic Analysis of Product Innova
-tion. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Van Beuzekom, B., and A. Arundel. (2006). 
OECD Biotechnology StatisticsŠ200
6. OECD, Paris, 
France.
Venables, A. (1996). Equilibrium locations of vertically linked industries. 
International Economic 
Review
 37:341-359.
Zucker, L., M. R. Darby, and J. Armstrong. (1998a). Geographically localized knowledge: Spillovers 
or markets? 
Economic Inquiry
 36(1):65-86.
Zucker, L., M. R. Darby, and M. B. Brewer. (1998b). Intellectual human capital and the birth of U.S. 
biotechnology enterprises. 
American Economic Review
 88(1):290-306.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.273
 8  Logistics
ANURADHA
 N
AGARAJAN
University of Michigan
CHELSEA
 C. W
HITE
 III
Georgia Institute of Technology
INTRODUCTION
ﬁAlexander™s army was able to achieve its brilliant successes because it man
-aged its supply chain so wellﬂ says Michael Hugos (2006), drawing on published 
literature on the history of the successful campaigns of Alexander the Great. One 

of the critical differences between Alexander™s army and the ones he defeated 

was the fact that his army was the fastest, lightest, and most mobile army of its 

time. While other armies were constrained by carts and pack animals carrying 

the supplies, Alexander™s soldiers were trained to carry their own equipment and 

provisions and to live off the land as needed. Competitive advantage provided 

by logistics and the supply chain persists 2000 years later. In the battle˜eld 

of modern industry, globalization, demanding consumers, and ef˜cient capital, 

markets have combined to create an environment that punishes mediocrity and 

incompetence. Firms are looking to the logistics industry to provide competitive 

advantage as goods and services move seamlessly worldwide. In a recent speech 

on global economic integration, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said, 

ﬁTechnological advances continue to play an important role in facilitating global 

integration. For example, dramatic improvements in supply-chain management, 

made possible by advances in communication and computer technologies, have 

signi˜cantly reduced the costs of coordinating production among globally dis
-tributed suppliersﬂ (Bernanke, 2006). Economic integration brought about by 

vanishing global trade barriers has enabled ˜rms to creatively manage their value 

chain, identifying sources of competitive advantage in the world stage to provide 

the best value for customers worldwide.
A consequence of the global dispersion of economic activity has been the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
increased complexity of the supply chain. When national boundaries were imper
-meable due to geographical, technological, logistical, and political constraints, 
˜rms could control the movement of goods through the value chain with more 

certainty. Consider the movement of goods in and out of the United States. In 

2004, nearly $1.5 trillion worth of goods were imported to the United States, and 

$0.8 trillion of U.S. goods were exported to other countries. Nearly 16 million 
20-foot equivalent units (equivalent to shipping containers that are 20 feet long, 
8 feet wide, and 8 feet tall) arrive each year at U.S. ports. Roughly one-quarter 

of U.S. imports and one-sixth of its exportsŠor about $423 billion and $139 bil
-lion worth of goods, respectively, in 2004Šarrive or depart on container ships. 

Containerized imports include both ˜nished goods and intermediate inputs, some 

of which are critical to maintaining U.S. manufacturers™ ﬁjust-in-timeﬂ supply 

chains. Supply-chain disruptions can leave manufacturers vulnerable if a neces
-sary part does not reach an assembly plant in time. The lack of key parts could 

reduce output, employment, and income for individual companies and entire 

economic regions by amounts larger than the value of the delayed partŠand 

in areas and businesses far removed from the port where a disruption occurred. 

Although concerns about disruptions in the ˚ow of freight focus on terrorist at
-tacks, similar economic losses could result from extreme weather, the high cost 

of fuel or fuel unavailability, or labor disputes that affect freight operations or 

from disruptions elsewhere in the supply chain.
1 The increasing complexity of 
the global supply chain has compelled ˜rms to look carefully at managing three 

primary challenges in logistics: (1) managing visibility of information and prod
-uct movement as it relates to the ability to track orders, inventory, and shipments 

in real time; (2) managing costs; and (3) securing reliable service. Innovation 

in the logistics industry has played a major role in helping businesses manage 

these challenges. According to the U.S. State of Logistics report, although ab
-solute logistics costs rose substantially in the United States in 2004, because of 

the growing economy, the costs of logistics remained at 8.6 percent of the gross 

domestic product (GDP). In fact, logistics costs have generally been declining 

annually since 1995.
As shown in Figure 1, logistics costs were 10.4 percent of GDP in 1995 but 
they have declined year after year annually, except for a slight increase in 2000, 

reaching its lowest level of 8.6 percent in 2003 (Wilson, 2005). Innovation in lo
-gistics has been critical to offering better products and services at lower costs.
We begin this chapter with a brief de˜nition of the logistics industry and its 
role in the economy. We classify the ˜rms involved in the industry into four cat
-egories and examine innovation practices in each of these categories in order to 

understand where innovation occurs and how the locus of innovation has changed 

over time among the various participants in the logistics network. We present the 

results of our semistructured interviews with 20 respondents consisting of execu
-1 
See 
http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/71xx/doc7106/03-29-container_shipments.pd
f, p. 7.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 275
logistics-1.eps
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
YEAR
Percent of GDP
LOGISTICS % OF GDP
FIGURE 1
 Logistics as a percentage of GDP. SOURCE: Wilson (2005).
tives from the logistics industry and industry experts. We then focus speci˜cally 
on the locus of innovation, as indicated by the home country of the ˜rst inventor 

listed on logistics-related patents in the database of World Intellectual Property 

Organization (WIPO) patents we have collected, and we examine the changes in 

the location of innovation worldwide in the logistics industry. Our conclusions 

on the current state of innovation are derived from our observations from the two 

sources mentioned earlier: patent data and semistructured interviews with top 

industry executives and experts. We conclude with policy implications and our 

expectations for the future of innovation in the logistics industry.
INDUSTR
Y DEFINITION AND DESCRIPTION
Logistics management is that part of supply-chain management that plans, 
implements, and controls the ef˜cient, effective, forward and reverse ˚ow and 

storage of goods, services, and related information between the point of origin 

and the point of consumption in order to meet customers™ requirements. Logistics 

management activities typically include inbound and outbound transportation 

management, ˚eet management, warehousing, materials handling, order ful˜ll
-ment, logistics network design, inventory management, supply/demand plan
-ning, and management of third-party logistics services providers. To varying 

degrees, the logistics function also includes sourcing and procurement, produc
-tion planning and scheduling, packaging and assembly, and customer service. It 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
is involved in all levels of planning and executionŠstrategic, operational, and 
tactical. Logistics management is an integrating function that coordinates and 
optimizes all logistics activities, as well as integrating logistics activities with 

other functions, including marketing, sales manufacturing, ˜nance, and infor
-mation technology (Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals, n.d.). 

The logistics industry consists of ˜rms offering a variety of services, including 

transportation and warehousing. As globalization has extended and expanded 

the supply chain, logistics ˜rms have added order ful˜llment, logistics network 

design, inventory management, and supply/demand planning to their portfolio 

of products.
In terms of tons transported, domestic freight transportation in the United 
States grew by about 20 percent annually from 1993 to 2002. In the same period 

inventory carrying costs as a percentage of GDP have decreased from 8.3 percent 

in 1981 to 2.8 percent in 2002 as shown in Figure 2. ﬁThis reduction can be at
-logistics-2.eps
01234567891981
1983
1985
1987
1989

1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
Year
Percent of GDP
Year
% of GDP
FIGURE 2
 Inventory carrying costs as a percent of GDP. SOURCE: FHWA Freight 
Management and Operations; see 
http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/freight_analysis/
econ_methods/lcdp_rep/index.ht
m.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 277
tributed to timely, reliable delivery, ef˜ciency, and visibility in the supply chain 
system. These reductions are especially evident in industries such as automotive 
and computer hardware manufacturers
2.ﬂ Firms use logistics not only to man
-age cost, as Dell did in their assembly and distribution of desktops, but also to 

be ˜nely tuned to customer needs, as Zara has done in fashion retailing. Dell™s 

personal computer supply chain creates positive cash ˚ow for the ˜rm because it 

receives payment from its customers before it has to pay its suppliers by manag
-ing its supply chain ef˜ciently.
3 Zara™s supply chain allows the ˜rm to closely 
observe the market™s changing tastes and to respond quickly, keeping the ˜rm in 

the forefront of fashion while minimizing inventory markdowns.
4 In each case, 
these supply chains are well-coordinated, complex global networks, and in each 

case the ˜rms have focused on innovation in their supply chain in order to achieve 

competitive advantage (
Economist
, 2006).
Three trends have spurred innovation in logistics (Smith, 2006). The ˜rst 
trend is the increase in demand for high-tech goods.
5 According to the Global 
Insight World Industry Service database, which provides production data for 70 

countries that account for more than 97 percent of global economic activity, the 

global market for high-technology goods is growing at a faster rate than that for 

other manufactured goods, and high-technology industries are driving economic 

growth around the world. During the 22-year period examined (1980-2001), 

high-technology production grew at an in˚ation-adjusted average annual rate 

of nearly 6.5 percent compared with 2.4 percent for other manufactured goods. 

Between 1996 and 2001, high-technology industry output grew at 8.9 percent per 

year, more than double the rate of growth for all other manufacturing industries. 

Output by the ˜ve high-technology industries represented 7.7 percent of global 

production of all manufactured goods in 1980; by 2001, this output had doubled 
2 
Ginter, J. L. and La Londe, B. J. 2001. An Historical Analysis of Inventory levels: An Explor
-atory Study. Ohio State Working Paper and Fein, A. J. 2004. The Myth of Decline: Assessing 
Time Trends in US Inventory to Sales Ratios. CES 04-18. See http://www.ces.census.gov/index.

php/ces/1.00/cespapers?down_key=101710#search=%22Ginter%20and%20La%20Londe%22 
3 
Dell pioneered build-to-order supply-chain management in the 1990s to support its desktop busi
-ness. Instead of building computers to forecasts and letting retailers sell them, Dell sells directly 

from its own website and call centers and then builds to order. Dell cuts retailers and distributors 

out of its supply chain but also gets paid up front, often before they have to pay for components. 

However, Dell has found it dif˜cult to duplicate its supply-chain success in its laptop and consumer 

electronics businesses.
4 
Zara, a part of Spain™s Inditex Group, is in the fashion apparel business. Fashion retailing is highly 
perishable, in˚uenced quickly by changes in consumer and celebrity tastes. In contrast to a typical 

clothing company, where outsourcing manufacturing to Asia could take about 6 months to get a new 

design to shops, Zara completes the process in 5 weeks. Zara accomplishes this speed to market pri
-marily by buying some garments and materials partly ˜nished and by avoiding mass production.
5 
The ˜ve industries considered high technology by Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Deveopment (OECD) based on their R&D intensity are aerospace, pharmaceuticals, computers 

and of˜ce machinery, communication equipment, and scienti˜c (medical, precision, and optical) 

instruments.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
to 15.8 percent.
6 High-tech products typically have short product life cycles and 
complex value chains with design, manufacture, sales, and distribution located in 
different parts of the world. The role of innovation and execution of the supply 

chain has become paramount in this context.
The second trend in˚uencing the logistics industry is globalizationŠthe 
integration of many microeconomies into one worldwide, interdependent econ
-omy. Companies have the ability to source and sell globally and have begun to 

streamline their supply chains and open new markets. According to World Trade 

Organization statistics, world merchandise trade has grown by 70 percent since 

2001.
7 According to Global Insight, trade exports are going to increase signi˜
-cantly in all regions of the world, with the largest increases coming from exports 

from China to Europe and intra-Asia trade (
Economist, 2006, p. 5). Table 1 shows 
the top 25 ˜rms in the logistics industry as identi˜ed by the Hoovers Database.
8 These companies, headquartered all over the world, are not only moving logistics 

services worldwide but are also creating innovation centers close to the new cen
-ters of trade. For example, Saint Gobain, a glass manufacturer headquartered in 

France, has a ﬁTechnology Centerﬂ for conducting multidisciplinary research and 

development (R&D) in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, to support its U.S. glass manu
-facturing and logistics operations. It has also opened a new materials research and 

logistics support center in Shanghai, China, to cater to all its business divisions 

in Asia in 2006. In 2005, Hitachi invested in an information system company 

in China to help its third-party logistics (3PL) operations there.
9 According to 
industry experts, including the council of supply-chain professionals, reliable, 

timely accurate data is the keystone of the new global supply chain (Bowman, 

n.d.; Wilson, 2004). Information is needed from each market and manufacturing 

outpost for planning, to enable ˚exibility, and to ensure security. Software and 

hardware innovations that enable greater visibility of product movement to ship
-pers and carriers have become critical to success in the industry.
Innovation in the industry has also been spurred by the growth of the Inter
-net and e-commerce. Business-to-business commerce on the Internet has been 

increasing. According to 
Industry Week
™s 2005 Value Chain survey, worldwide, 
in the 2 years between 2003 and 2005, business purchases made online increased 
6 
U.S. Technology Marketplace. See http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind04/c6/c6s1.htm#c6s1l1p2. 
Accessed October 23, 2006.
7 
See 
http://stat.wto.org/Home/WSDBHome.asp
x. Accessed August 15, 2006
8 
Logistics services
 is described in Hoover™s as companies that engage in the process of planning, 
implementing, and controlling the movement and storage of raw materials, in-process inventory, 
˜nished goods, and related information from the point of origin to the point of consumption. We 
selected ˜rms in the industry category that had logistics as one of their primary businesses. The ˜rms 

are ranked by sales, not necessarily by logistics.
9 
By de˜nition, a 3PL becomes a third party to the traditional two-party (shipper/carrier) contract 
for transportation. A 3PL ˜rm is, therefore, an outsourced provider that manages all or a signi˜cant 

part of an organization™s logistics requirements and performs transportation, locating, and sometimes 

product consolidation activities.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 279
TABLE 1
 Top Logistics Companies Worldwide
No.
Company Name
Location
Year Started
Sales ($ million)
Employees
Comments (source of information)
1Hitachi, Ltd.
Tokyo, 
Japan
1920
2,524.80
323, 072 (Hitachi 

Ltd.); 7505 

(Hitachi Transport 

System Ltd.)
Company website, Annual Report 2005, One 

Source Global Business Browser, Hoovers 

Online
2Deutsche Post AG
Bonn, 

Germany
1949
MAIL: 16,486.42; 

EXPRESS: 23,393.09; 

LOGISTICS: 

10,176.31
MAIL: 125,282; 

EXPRESS: 

131,927; 

LOGISTIC: 

148,095
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Hoovers Online, Annual Report 2005, Equinet 

Analyst ReportŠFebruary 2005
3United Parcel 

Service, Inc.
Atlanta, US
1907
42,581.00 (total); 

5,994 (supply chain 

and freight operations)
407,000
One Source Global Business Browser, Annual 

Report 2005, Factiva
4Compaigne de 

Saint-Gobain
Courbevoie, 

France
1665
45,058 (total 

revenues); 19,808.18 

(building distribution)
199,630
One Source Global Business Browser, Annual 

Report 2005, Factiva
5Deutsche Bahn 

Aktiengesellschaft
Berlin, 

Germany
1994
35,314
233,657
Hoovers Online, Company website
6DHL Worldwide 

Network
Diegem, 

Belgium
1969
33,524.4
171,980
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Hoovers Online, Annual Report 2005
7FedEx 

Corporation
Memphis, 

US
1971
32,294.0
184,953
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Factiva, Hoovers Online
8A.P. MollerŒ

Maersk A/S
Copenhagen, 
Denmark
1904
34,809
76,000
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Hoovers Online
continued
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280 TABLE 1
 Continued
No.
Company Name
Location
Year Started
Sales ($ million)
Employees
Comments (source of information)
9McLane 
Company, Inc.
Temple, US
1894
23,373.00
14,300
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Hoovers Online, Factiva
10
Supervalu Inc.
Eden Prairie, 

US
1926
19,863.6 (total); 

9,228.6 (food 

distribution)
52,400
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
11
TNT N.V.
Hoofddorp, 

Holland
1946 (TNT 

originally founded)
12,621.12 (total); 

991.30 (logistics)
128,671
One Source Global Business Browser, Factiva, 

Hoovers Online, company website
12
Schenker AG
Essen, 

Germany
1872
10,912
39,000
Hoovers Online, One Source Global Business 

Browser, Factiva, Company website
13
Mitsui O.S.K. 

Lines, Ltd.
Tokyo, 

Japan
1964
10,920.2 (Total); 

553.4 (logistics)
7,385
Annual Report 2006, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Hoovers Online, Company 

website
14
KBR, Inc.
Houston, US
The parent 

company, 

Halliburton, was 

founded in 1919
10,138
62,500
Factiva, Hoovers Online
15
YRC Worldwide 

Inc.
Overland 

Park, US
1924
8,741.6 (total); 447.6 

(Meridian IQ)
68,000
Factiva, Hoovers Online, Annual Report 2005, 

Company website
16
CSX Corporation
Jacksonville, 

US
1980
8,618
35,000
Hoovers Online, One Source Global Business 

Browser
17
Norfolk Southern 

Corporation
Norfolk, US
1894
8,527
30,294
Annual Report 2005, Hoovers Online, One 

Source Global Business Browser, Company 

Web site
18
R.R. Donnelley & 

Sons Company
Chicago, US
1864
8,430.2
50,000
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
19
Kuehne + Nagel 

International AG
Schindellegi, 

Switzerland
1890
11,276.6 (total); 

1,681.2 (railroad 

logistics); 1,071.1 

(contract logistics)
23,000
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Annual Report 2005
20
Bollore 

Investissement
Puteaux, 

France
1955
7,648.7
32,808
Company Website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
21
Hanjin Shipping 

Co., Ltd.
Seoul, South 

Korea
1988
5,921.1
1,641
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Supplychainbrain.com
22
Ryder System, 

Inc.
Miami, US
1934
5,740.8 (total); 

1,637.8 (supply chain 

solutions)
27,800
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Annual Report 2005, The 

South Florida Business JournalŠsouth˚orida.

bizjournals.com
23
C.H. Robinson 

Worldwide, Inc.
Eden Prairie, 

US
1905
5,688.9
5,776
World Trade Magazine (worldtrademag.

com), company website, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Hoovers Online
24
Canada Post 

Corporation
Ottawa, 

Canada
1867
5,520.3
72,874
Factiva, Company Website, One Source 

Global Business Browser
25
Panalpina 

World Transport 

(Holding) Ltd.
Basel, 

Switzerland
1890
5,290.6
13,583
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 281
No.
Company Name
Location
Year Started
Sales ($ million)
Employees
Comments (source of information)
9McLane 
Company, Inc.
Temple, US
1894
23,373.00
14,300
One Source Global Business Browser, 

Hoovers Online, Factiva
10
Supervalu Inc.
Eden Prairie, 

US
1926
19,863.6 (total); 

9,228.6 (food 

distribution)
52,400
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
11
TNT N.V.
Hoofddorp, 

Holland
1946 (TNT 

originally founded)
12,621.12 (total); 

991.30 (logistics)
128,671
One Source Global Business Browser, Factiva, 

Hoovers Online, company website
12
Schenker AG
Essen, 

Germany
1872
10,912
39,000
Hoovers Online, One Source Global Business 

Browser, Factiva, Company website
13
Mitsui O.S.K. 

Lines, Ltd.
Tokyo, 

Japan
1964
10,920.2 (Total); 

553.4 (logistics)
7,385
Annual Report 2006, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Hoovers Online, Company 

website
14
KBR, Inc.
Houston, US
The parent 

company, 

Halliburton, was 

founded in 1919
10,138
62,500
Factiva, Hoovers Online
15
YRC Worldwide 

Inc.
Overland 

Park, US
1924
8,741.6 (total); 447.6 

(Meridian IQ)
68,000
Factiva, Hoovers Online, Annual Report 2005, 

Company website
16
CSX Corporation
Jacksonville, 

US
1980
8,618
35,000
Hoovers Online, One Source Global Business 

Browser
17
Norfolk Southern 

Corporation
Norfolk, US
1894
8,527
30,294
Annual Report 2005, Hoovers Online, One 

Source Global Business Browser, Company 

Web site
18
R.R. Donnelley & 

Sons Company
Chicago, US
1864
8,430.2
50,000
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
19
Kuehne + Nagel 

International AG
Schindellegi, 

Switzerland
1890
11,276.6 (total); 

1,681.2 (railroad 

logistics); 1,071.1 

(contract logistics)
23,000
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Annual Report 2005
20
Bollore 

Investissement
Puteaux, 

France
1955
7,648.7
32,808
Company Website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
21
Hanjin Shipping 

Co., Ltd.
Seoul, South 

Korea
1988
5,921.1
1,641
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Supplychainbrain.com
22
Ryder System, 

Inc.
Miami, US
1934
5,740.8 (total); 

1,637.8 (supply chain 

solutions)
27,800
Company website, Factiva, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Annual Report 2005, The 

South Florida Business JournalŠsouth˚orida.

bizjournals.com
23
C.H. Robinson 

Worldwide, Inc.
Eden Prairie, 

US
1905
5,688.9
5,776
World Trade Magazine (worldtrademag.

com), company website, One Source Global 

Business Browser, Hoovers Online
24
Canada Post 

Corporation
Ottawa, 

Canada
1867
5,520.3
72,874
Factiva, Company Website, One Source 

Global Business Browser
25
Panalpina 

World Transport 

(Holding) Ltd.
Basel, 

Switzerland
1890
5,290.6
13,583
Company website, Factiva, One Source 

Global Business Browser
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
from 15 to 20 percent (Vinas, 2005). In addition, according to Forrester Research, 
of the 80 million U.S. online households, three-fourths have purchased products 
online (Mulpuru, 2006). Acquiring and retaining customers online necessitates 

providing complete satisfaction from the ˜rst click on the company™s website to 

delivery to the door. The product has to be delivered when, where, and how the 

customer wants it delivered (Bhise et al., 2000). In contrast to the bricks-and-

mortar economy, delivery of the product on a timely basis has become a critical 

part of the overall customer™s purchasing experience. The Internet and computing 

technologies have increased the amount of information available to the buyer 

and manufacturer about the product and the ful˜llment process. Consequently 

expectations relating to timely and accurate ful˜llment are rising. Data from the 

American Customer Satisfaction Index Annual E-Commerce Report in 2005 
showed a slump in scores after 2 years of progressive increases (Smith, 2005). 
Auction leader eBay had a 4.8 percent reduction, and Amazon.com dropped 4.5 

percent in their customer satisfaction scores. Firms such as Amazon and eBay 

depend on the logistics function to improve and complete their customer™s pur
-chasing experience. Innovation along the supply chain, especially warehouse 

management software and tracking products, support ˜rms™ efforts to cope with 

the demands of the Internet environment.
In summary, the modern logistics industry is a complex network of ˜rms 
involved in the ˚ow and transformation of goods from the raw materials stage 

to the end user. Innovation in the industry has been spurred by increases in the 

demand for high technology products, globalization in all aspects of the value 

chain, and the advent of ecommerce.
PATTERNS OF INNO
VATION IN THE LOGISTICS INDUSTR
YOne of the most challenging aspects of understanding innovation in logistics 
management lies in the accepted wisdom that every product has its own unique 

value chain. Thus, innovation is primarily a pull phenomenon
10
 for ˜rms in the 
logistics industry, with new products and services being developed in response 

to speci˜c customer needs. The competing pressures of managing global supply 

chains cost-effectively while increasing visibility, which allow a ˜rm to monitor 

events and exceptions in real time, have created an environment ripe with oppor
-tunity for innovation. We adopt a broad de˜nition of innovation that is not limited 
10
 John Seely Brown and John Hagel III de˜ne pull and push systems in the context of innovation 
as follows: ﬁPush systems contrast starkly with pull ones, particularly in their view of demand: the 
former treat it as foreseeable, the latter as highly uncertain. This difference in a basic premise leads 

to fundamentally different design principles. For instance, instead of dealing with uncertainty by 

tightening controls, as push systems would, pull models address immediate needs by expanding op
-portunities for local participantsŠemployees and customers alikeŠto use their creativity. To exploit 

the opportunities that uncertainty presents, pull models help people come together and innovate by 

drawing on a growing array of specialized and distributed resourcesﬂ (Brown and Hagel, 2005).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 283
to technological breakthroughs or new products. As Rogers notes, ﬁInnovation is 
an idea, practice, or object that is perceived as new by an individual or other unit 
of adoptionﬂ (Rogers, 1995). Consequently logistics innovation could improve 

internal ef˜ciency within a logistics ˜rm or could help serve shippers better. For 

the purposes of this study, logistics innovations could be new to the world or new 

to the particular context of the ˜rm and its stakeholders.
To understand the locus of innovation in the logistics industry, we begin with 
a classi˜cation of ˜rms in the industry. Our analysis of innovation patterns in 

the industry is presented in the context of this taxonomy. We present the results 

of our semistructured interviews with top management personnel and experts in 

the industry on innovation practices of prominent ˜rms in the industry. These 

semistructured interviews, though few in number, allow us a ˜ne-grained look at 

innovation practices in the industry. Then we present an analysis of patent data 

from the WIPO to provide further insight into the innovation practices in the 

logistics industry and how they have changed over time.
Classi˜cation of Firms
To identify meaningful patterns in innovation behavior, we needed to clas
-sify ˜rms according to the role they play in the industry before we discuss the 

interview data and patent data. Figure 3 depicts our classi˜cation of ˜rms into 
logistics-3.eps
Suppliers
Inbound 
logistics
Manufacturers
Outbound 

logistics
Customers
Warehousing and 
distribution
Retailers
Outbound 
logistics
Reverse 
logistics
Logistics Service Users (LSU)
Product Solutions Providers
Logistics Service Providers (LSP)
Logistics service integrators
FIGURE 3
 Classi˜cation of ˜rms in the logistics industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
four categories based on a simple logistics value chain.
11
 They are logistics ser
-vices users, logistics service providers, logistics service integrators, and product 
solution providers. In this section, we focus on describing the classi˜cation since 

our subsequent sections discuss innovative activity along the categories detailed 

in the following paragraphs.
Logistics service users (LSUs)
 are shippers, such as Dell and General Mo
-tors (GM), who manufacture products and use logistic services. There are many 

variations among the ˜rms in this category. Some LSU ˜rms manage important 

parts of the logistics function while outsourcing parts of the supply chain such 

as transportation planning, execution, and warehousing to logistics service pro
-viders and logistics integrators. In other ˜rms, the purchasing and transportation 

departments have combined to form supply chain departments. Beginning in the 

mid- to late 1990s these departments were given the responsibility for logistics 

management as de˜ned earlier. As LSU ˜rms began to focus more on core op
-erations in the late 1990s, they began outsourcing many aspects of the supply 

chain, giving rise to 3PL providers and fourth-party logistics (4PL) providers. 

3PL and 4PL providers enable logistics outsourcing and provide logistics value-

added services.
12
 A recent survey of 381 LSUs revealed that 69 percent of them 
outsourced their logistics operations to 3PLs (Stoffel, 2006). However, as innova
-tion in the supply chain becomes critical for business success and the competitive 

advantage it confers becomes more evident, there has been a move to bring parts 

of the activity within the organization again. For example, Vector SCM was a 

joint venture created in December 2000 by Con-way and GM to manage GM™s 

global supply chain. However, in June 2006, GM declared its intent to enter 

into negotiations to purchase Vector from Con-way. GM noted that, by integrat
-ing Vector into the ˜rm, it had made a strategic decision to resume more direct 

control over its logistics functions.
13
 Most LSUs are not interested in acquiring 
the physical assets involved in the physical transportation of their goods. Rather, 

they look to increase their capability in supply-chain management to effectively 

partner with 3PLs and 4PLs to leverage their combined capabilities. According 

to Razat Gaurav, vice president of global transportation and distribution for i2, 

companies ﬁwant to let 3PLs execute against their plans and then rely on their 

specialized local knowledge. If you are highly reliant on international sources of 

supply, you also need some internal competenceﬂ (Bartels, 2006).
Specialized industry and ˜rm-speci˜c supply-chain challenges are best un
-derstood by LSUs. These ˜rms use their specialized knowledge to innovate 

products and processes as solutions to solve their particular business challenges. 

A survey of LSUs by McKinsey and the Institute for Supply Chain Management 
11
 We thank Tushar Dave of Satyam for helping us develop these categories.
12
 Please see section on Logistics Service Providers for 3PL and 4PL de˜nitions; see also footnote 9.
13
 http://www.menloworldwide.com/mww/en/newsroom/prarchives/29_Jun_2006.shtm
l. Accessed 
July 20, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 285
at the University of Munster found that the best supply-chain performers cre
-ate innovations to increase ef˜ciency in logistics by borrowing from ef˜ciency 
programs in other parts of their business process, such as lean manufacturing 

(Grosspietsch and Kupper, 2004). Consequently, LSUs generate ef˜ciency-based 

supply-chain innovations that draw on business practices outside the supply-chain 

function. The United States, with more than one-fourth of the world™s GDP, de
-pends heavily on logistics for movement of goods within the country and across 

its borders. It provides a fertile environment for innovation among LSU ˜rms 

with U.S. operations regardless of where it is headquartered.
Logistics service providers (LSPs)
 are ˜rms, such as Fedex, UPS, Con-way, 
and Ryder, that offer partial or complete logistics solutions. These ˜rms could 

be 3PL or 4PL providers. The difference between 3PL and 4PL, to be explained 

in more detail later, lies primarily in the value provided to customers and the 

basis of ˜rms™ competence, although the boundary de˜ning the scope of activity 

is hazy.
3PLs are ˜rms that enable logistics outsourcing. Drawing on their core 
business, whether it be forwarding, trucking, or warehousing, they have moved 

into providing other services for customers. 3PLs, in general, are commodity 

transportation service providers who have moved into higher-margin, bundled 

services such as warehousing and inventory management. Exel Plc and Penske 

Logistics are among leading 3PL ˜rms headquartered in the United States with 

expanding international operations.
In the past decade, competitive pressures have created more complex supply 
chains as LSUs deal with multiple customers, suppliers, transportation providers, 

and government organizations worldwide. 4PLs, such as UPS Supply Chain Solu
-tions, emerged in the late 1990s in order to manage the ˚ow of information and 

to coordinate the movement of goods. The 4PL ˜rm wants to position itself as 

an extension and part of its customer™s business environment. For example, UPS 

operates a computer repair service center in Louisville, Kentucky. The Digital 

Products Division of Toshiba America Information Systems, Irvine, California, 

has used the UPS repair service since 2004 for repair of it laptop computers. UPS 

has decreased the turnaround time by two and a half days since they took over re
-pairs for Toshiba (Violini, 2006). A key differentiator between 3PLs and 4PLs is 

that while many 3PLs focus on providing value-added services to their customer 

with a view to maximizing the utilization of the assets of the parent LSP, 4PLs 

develop solutions tailored to meet the unique and special needs of each customer, 

without regard to a parent company™s service offerings and operations. The 4PL™s 

parent™s assets are given due consideration; however, the overarching goal of the 

4PL is to serve the customer™s speci˜c needs and provide visibility and ef˜ciency 

to the logistics process (Craig, 2003).
3PLs and 4PLs are the backbone of the logistics system. In the past the 
primary task of an LSP was to transport goods from one location to another. To
-day, as we have noted earlier, all the ˜rms along the supply chain have to work 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
in concert in order to achieve cost-effective and ˚exible solutions. LSPs turn to 
innovation to improve supply-chain ef˜ciency as demanded by LSUs, their cus
-tomers. Innovation among the LSPs has focused on creating new supply-chain 
solutions such as ﬁdock-to-stockﬂ delivery systems,
14
 increased information vis
-ibility through implementation of innovative information software and hardware 

systems, and better asset utilization through load-and-back haul management.
LSPs, working closely with their customers, have expanded their operations 
as their customers have globalized. As the locus of operations expand, so too has 

the locus of innovation for these ˜rms. Innovation among LSP ˜rms draws on 

local environments, and solutions created depend on local challenges.
Logistics service integrators (LSIs) 
such as Accenture, IBM, and Satyam 
are ˜rms that are platform-neutral
15
 and non-asset-based in that they do not own 
means of cargo transportation such as trucks, ships, or planes. The key differ
-ence, as per our de˜nition, between 4PLs and LSIs is asset ownership. The value 

proposition that LSIs bring to their customers is knowledge of speci˜c business 

processes going beyond a ˜rm™s logistics needs. LSIs work with a variety of 

product solution providers, including vendors of products based on radiofre
-quency identi˜cation technologies (RFIDs), enterprise resource planning (ERP) 

software vendors, software developers, and transportation providers to provide 

customized solutions for their customers, the LSUs. In the past decade, ˜rms 

that have traditionally focused on strategy consulting have set up supply-chain 

divisions to exploit the need for unbiased and process-capable integrators. On 

the other end of the spectrum, ˜rms specializing in the provision of informa
-tion technology services have recognized the vital role that information plays 

in supply-chain management and have created divisions specializing in supply-

chain services. LSIs recognize that innovation in the supply chain lies in the 

management of shipment visibility and requires analysis of critical supply-chain 

information (Pande et al., 2006).
Innovation among LSI ˜rms is often collaborative in nature. These ˜rms 
work closely with LSUs and LSPs to enhance supply-chain operations. LSI in
-novation often arises in the United States, where many management consulting 

˜rms have begun to offer supply-chain integration services. Their innovative 

efforts are likely to draw upon their knowledge of products, processes, and 

practices in contexts outside the supply chain. Supply-chain innovation among 

LSIs may be expected to increase their innovation efforts, especially in business 

processes and in information integration.
Product solution providers (PSPs)
 such as SAP, Oracle, Manugistics, i2, 
14
 Robert Hand˜eld and Ernest Nichols (2002) de˜ne ﬁdock-to-stockﬂ delivery as those supplier 
deliveries of component parts that are made directly to the plant ˚oor and end up in ˜nished goods 
by the end of the same day. 
15
 LSIs are platform-neutral in this context in the sense that they do not work necessarily with one 
brand of hardware or software. They examine the business process to determine the best solution.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 287
and SAVI Technologies are ˜rms that create products that are used in logistics 
management. They often work with ˜rms in each of the other three categories 
to enable ef˜ciency, visibility, and integration.
16
 Some examples of products 
developed by these ˜rms include asset tracking technologies such as RFID 

hardware and software, ERP systems, and warehouse management software. 

Figure 4 shows how different asset tracking technologies are deployed from the 

truck level to the product level. Organizationally, these ˜rms begin as vendors of 

a speci˜c product that ful˜lls a speci˜c niche in the supply chain. In time, they 

grow to offer deeper and broader product and service solutions but are generally 

not complete LSPs with transportation assets.
PSPs are the most proli˜c innovators in the logistics industry, consistent 
with the ﬁpullﬂ characteristic of the logistics industry. They are specialists and 

create new products and solutions that address speci˜c challenges in parts of the 

logistics network. For example, RFID manufacturers offer innovative passive 

RFID products that help LSUs track inventory at the product level. The same 

manufacturer may offer innovative active RFID products that assist 3PL ˜rms 

with ˚eet monitoring. As the demands on the supply-chain network increase, 

PSPs can be expected to continue to offer innovations to enable LSUs and LSPs 

to manage the supply chain more effectively.
Innovation among PSPs, unlike ˜rms in the categories discussed earlier, 
draws upon basic and applied research and development. According to National 

Science Foundation (NSF) reports, the United States ranked sixth among coun
-tries with reported R&D-to-GDP ratios with a ratio of 2.9 percent in 2003. The 

business sector performed nearly 70 percent of the U.S. R&D in 2004. Besides 

performing the majority of U.S. R&D, the business sector was also the largest 

source of R&D funding in the United States, providing 64 percent ($199 billion) 

of total R&D funding in 2004.
17
 U.S.-based PSP ˜rms draw on this rich tradition 
of R&D to provide most of the innovation in the logistics industry.
The preceding taxonomy has been developed so that data gathered through 
interviews and patent analysis may shed light on where, when, and why innova
-tion is occurring in the logistics industry. Depending on their primary business, 

˜rms are classi˜ed as LSU, LSP, LSI, or PSP. In the sections that follow, we ex
-16
 Ef˜ciency in supply-chain management often relates to minimizing the time that elapses between 
procurement of raw material and the delivery of an order to a customer while minimizing the total 
cost of procurement, transportation, inventory management, and warehousing and reducing variability 

in execution. Visibility in the supply chain relates to the ability to track orders, inventory, and ship
-ments in real time. Visibility allows a ˜rm to monitor events and exceptions in real time so that it may 

proactively manage supply-chain activities. Supply-chain integration involves sharing and combining 

information ˚ows relating to critical business processes including customer service management, 

procurement, product development and commercialization, manufacturing ˚ow management and 

support, physical distribution, outsourcing and partnerships, and performance measurement. 
17
 US R&D continues to rebound in 2004; see http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf06306/. 
Accessed December 22, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Part
Ł Bar code and 2D
Ł Inscribed part

Ł Passive RF tags
Multipac

Ł Bar code and 2D
Ł Optical cards, tags
Ł Passive RF tags
Pallet

Ł Bar code and 2D

Ł Optical cards, tags
Ł Active or passive RF tags
Container
Ł Bar code and 2D

Ł Active or passive RF tags
Ł Untethered mobile communications and GPS
Conveyance
Ł Bar Code and 2D

Ł Active or passive RF
Ł Mobile communications and GPS
FIGURE 4
 Asset tracking technologies. SOURCE: Available at http://www.ops.fhwa.
dot.gov/freight/intermodal/freight_tech_story/freight_tech_story.htm#toc1. Accessed July 
27, 2006.
plore patterns of change in innovative activity by examining interview and patent 
data for the industry as a whole and for each category separately. We begin by 

presenting the results of our interviews with executives in the industry.
Semistructured Interviews with Executives in 
the Industry and Industry Experts
To delve into the innovation process of the logistics industry, we conducted 
semistructured interviews with top executives in the industry and with industry 

experts. A copy of the questionnaire used for discussions with industry executives 

is available from the authors on request. We interviewed a total of 16 ˜rms and 

4 industry experts who were faculty at leading universities and representatives 

of industry associations. The ˜rms include 4 LSUs (2 non-U.S.), 2 LSIs (1 non-

U.S.), 4 LSPs (2 non-U.S.), and 6 PSPs (all U.S.). Since the respondent pool is 

small, there was concern raised by many respondents about the nature of informa
-tion revealed. In order to obtain the most comprehensive information, we agreed 

that all information would be kept anonymous and that the names of responding 

˜rms would not be revealed.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 289
The four ˜rms classi˜ed as logistics users are large multinational ˜rms 
with global operations in different manufacturing industries. Two of them are 
headquartered in the United States, one is in Europe, and one is in Asia. The 

two LSIs are among the world™s largest consulting organizations. One of these 

˜rms is headquartered in the United States and one is in Asia; however, both 

have operations worldwide. One of the four LSPs is a 3PL organization located 

in Asia while three of them provide the complete range of logistics services as 

4PLs. Two of the three 4PL ˜rms are headquartered in the United States and one 

of them is headquartered in Europe. All three of the 4PL ˜rms have worldwide 

operations and are among the largest providers of logistics services in the world. 

The six PSPs represent a range of products and provide hardware, software, or 

both for speci˜c use in logistics. These ˜rms are among the global leaders in their 

product categories, are headquartered in the United States, and have worldwide 

operations. Two of these PSPs have their primary supply-chain business functions 

in Europe, and we conducted our interview with their supply-chain personnel in 

Europe. Finally, we talked to two industry experts in the United States and two 

in Asia.
During the course of our conversations with the two LSI ˜rms, we realized 
that, although they ˜ll an important role in the industry, these two ˜rms did not 

actually create new products or services. Rather, they reduce the friction in the 

supply-chain system, using products and services developed by the other three 

categories. Since our interest is focused on the changing locus of innovation in 

the industry, we have classi˜ed the responses of the LSI ˜rms along with the 

responses provided by the industry experts for this section since LSI ˜rms are 

prominent players in the industry and have valuable insight into the innovation 

activity in the industry as a whole.
The respondents were asked about the evolution of the supply-chain organi
-zation within their own ˜rm. The mid-1990s appear to have been watershed years 

for supply-chain services for logistics users and providers. The user organizations 

we talked to began their logistics and supply-chain division, usually combining 

their purchasing and transportation departments of the past, around 1995. In sub
-sequent periods, our LSU respondents noted that there has been partial outsourc
-ing of parts of the logistics process such as transportation of raw materials and 

˜nished goods, inventory management, and warehousing. Some of them reversed 

their decision to outsource some logistics services but LSU ˜rms differed in 

terms of logistics activities conducted within the ˜rm and activities outsourced. 

Around the same time, the 3PL and 4PL ˜rms we interviewed began offering 

more value-added services by adding warehousing and inventory management to 

providing transportation. Separate divisions offering supply-chain services such 

as transportation, warehousing, cross-docking, inventory management, packag
-ing, and freight forwarding began in the 3PL and 4PL companies between 1995 

and 1997. These divisions worked closely with customers to provide complete 

transportation solutions and used the parent company™s ˚eet only if it was the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
best solution for the customer. The supply-chain services organizations among 
the users and the transportation providers of our respondents are usually headed 
up by a vice president who reports directly to the CEO or COO. This organiza
-tional arrangement shows the importance placed on the supply-chain activity by 

the LSU and LSP ˜rms. The PSP companies in our sample were usually started 

when the innovator applied technology solutions to the logistics domain. All the 

PSP ˜rms we talked to were created during or after 1990. Once again, most of 

their activity picked up around 1997. It is clear that the Internet, computing, and 

communications technologies created the right environment for ˜rms to develop 

new products and services for the logistics industry just as the LSUs and LSPs 

were recognizing the need to effectively manage supply chains as the cornerstone 

to success in a global context of competition.
All respondents to the survey identi˜ed globalizationŠde˜ned in the survey 
instrument as the increased mobility of goods, services, labor, technology, and 

capital throughout the worldŠas the primary driver of innovation in the industry. 

They noted the consequences of globalization for their business. First, globaliza
-tion has increased competition in the LSU home countries. Consequently, ˜rms 

can no longer trade cost for quality of product or service. Rather, they need to 

offer cost-competitive products of high quality to increasingly demanding con
-sumers. LSUs are responding by looking to supply-chain solutions within their 

own ˜rms and to partnering with LSPs and LSIs to create maximum visibility of 

information relating to the ˚ow of product and money through the value chain. 

According to our respondents, globalization has also led LSUs to locate various 

value chain activities, such as product development and manufacturing, in differ
-ent parts of the world. LSUs look for logistics partners who can provide global 

logistics solutions as they expand their supplier base and their markets. As LSUs 

and LSPs extend their product development, manufacturing, marketing, sales, 

and service activities around the world, they are confronted with unique country-

speci˜c challenges. For example, while labor costs in the emerging economies 

are attractive, the infrastructure for transportation and the regulations of local, 

regional, and national authorities create barriers to effective transportation solu
-tions. LSUs and LSPs, sometimes with the help of local LSIs, have developed 

unique solutions in response to these challenges using their local subsidiaries 

and partners.
All the respondents concurred that most often users drove innovation in the 
logistics industry. An innovation typically began by identi˜cation of a business 

problem by the LSU. Sometimes, LSUs with their own supply-chain organiza
-tions developed unique solutions based on their particular needs. The LSUs we 

interviewed estimated that about one-fourth of the innovations they implemented 

in the past decade came from within their ˜rms. Firms in the industry also worked 

collaboratively with subsidiaries and suppliers to innovate. For example, a global 

glass manufacturer we interviewed developed and deployed a simple supply-

chain solution from within its own local operations in India, created a solution in 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 291
partnership with another division within the same company in South Korea, and 
worked with an LSP to deploy a supply-chain innovation. The glass manufacturer 
looked ˜rst to internal R&D capabilities before seeking help from outside the 

˜rm. In general, industry-speci˜c solutions were more likely to be created with 

internal R&D resources. In other situations, the LSUs communicate the supply-

chain challenge to LSPs, and these ˜rms then create innovative solutions, often 

working closely with LSUs.
According to our respondents, innovation at a PSP begins by working with a 
customer on a solution to a speci˜c business problem. A leading RFID innovator 

and manufacturer mentioned that the ˜rm also looks for feedback on its products 

from industry analysts, academia, and other external stakeholders. Internally, 

the customer service division, along with the sales, research and development, 

and professional services divisions, looks for new ways to enhance the customer 

experience. Our PSP respondents noted that they share the cost of development 

with the LSU when the solution is customized and later scale the product for 

wider market adoption. One of the PSPs we interviewed, a leading software ˜rm, 

acquires smaller ˜rms with the requisite innovation. Sometimes it just acquires 

the rights to the technology, leaving the smaller ˜rm alone to continue its in
-novative trajectory. At other times, the entire ˜rm is acquired. After acquisition, 

the ˜rm may be completely integrated into the larger PSP business or may be 

left alone for product-development purposes while the customer interface func
-tionsŠmarketing, sales, and serviceŠare handled by the larger ˜rm. The same 

software ˜rm noted that incremental innovations arise by continuously tracking 

customer complaints and wish lists. The next new release of the product addresses 

the issues most often raised by customers. PSPs and LSPs that have operations 

in many countries release products on a global basis but permit the local entities 

to have great freedom to adapt the product to local conditions. According to our 

U.S.-based respondents, products are released ˜rst in the United States and are 

subsequently scaled for global release.
We asked our respondents about their R&D process. The LSU and LSP 
respondents commented that, over the past decade, innovation has become more 

dispersed, both organizationally and geographically, and solutions involve mul
-tiple ˜rms in locations all over the world. In the past, many supply-chain solutions 

were developed in-house. Today™s best in class order management, warehouse/in
-ventory management, and transportation management systems from PSPs provide 

the majority of functionality necessary to support new product development. 

Economies of specialization encourage PSPs to innovate, as can be expected 

from the ﬁpullﬂ system of innovation prevalent in the logistics industry where 

˜rms address immediate needs by expanding opportunities for local participants 

to use their creativity and innovate by drawing on a growing array of specialized 

and distributed resources. According to our LSU and LSP respondents, the ac
-tive participation of PSPs in supply-chain innovation began about a decade ago 

as globalization combined with advances in communication and information 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
technologies. The PSP respondents supported this view, stating that they focused 
on specialized niches and worked with LSPs and LSUs to customize products 
if necessary. The respondents felt that the consequence of the modular R&D 

process increased innovative output and allowed for greater specialization in all 

parts of the logistics network. Interestingly, LSIs have arisen as a response to the 

challenge of integrating modular inputs from the PSPs. LSUs in particular noted 

that LSI ˜rms ˜ll an important role in encouraging innovation among PSPs, since 

they facilitate the widespread adoption of innovative products with their integra
-tion expertise.
We then asked the respondents about the organizational structure of the 
supply-chain-related R&D activity. Among the LSUs and LSPs, there are signi˜
-cant structural differences in the way innovation is managed within the organiza
-tion, with the trend shifting from large unwieldy product development groups to 

more focused, small development teams. For example, one ˜rm we interviewed 

uses a dedicated core team, leveraging Six Sigma methodology
18
 to drive product 
development; another ˜rm, using techniques based on the systems development 

life cycle (SDLC) process,
19
 uses a champion along with three leads (business, IT, 
and customer organization) to design, develop, and deploy the new products. The 

PSPs have a more traditional approach to R&D and have separate R&D depart
-ments to focus on both basic and applied research. For example, one of the PSPs 

we interviewed had a separate division focusing on RFID and related technolo
-gies. They worked closely with universities to improve electronic circuitry in tags 

or communication between tags and readers. A separate division worked with the 

customer service department to monitor and understand customer requests and 

complaints and then worked on creating customer- or industry-speci˜c solutions. 

In general, PSP respondents noted that they detected the need in recent years to 

work more closely with their customers while developing new products.
18
 Six Sigma (6
) is a business-driven, multifaceted approach to process improvement, reduced 
costs, and increased pro˜ts. With a fundamental principle to improve customer satisfaction by re
-ducing defects, its ultimate performance target is virtually defect-free processes and products (3.4 
or fewer defective parts per million [ppm]). The Six Sigma methodology, consisting of the steps 

ﬁDe˜ne, Measure, Analyze, Improve, Control,ﬂ is the roadmap to achieving this goal. Within this 

improvement framework, it is the responsibility of the improvement team to identify the process, the 

de˜nition of the defect, and the corresponding measurements. The primary goal of Six Sigma is to 

improve customer satisfaction, and thereby pro˜tability, by reducing and eliminating defects. Defects 

may be related to any aspect of customer satisfaction including high product quality, schedule adher
-ence, and cost minimization. 
19
 SDLC is a systematic approach to problem solving and is composed of several phases, each 
comprised of multiple steps including the software concept stage, which identi˜es and de˜nes a need 

for the new system; the requirements analysis phase de˜ning the information needs of the end users; 

the architectural design step, which creates a blueprint for the design with the necessary speci˜cations 

for the hardware, software, people, and data resources; the coding and debugging phase to create and 

to program the ˜nal system; and ˜nally the system testing phase, which evaluates the system™s actual 

functionality in relation to expected or intended functionality.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 293
Another interesting phenomenon we observed from our respondents is a shift 
in the geographic locus of innovation. Our respondents felt, based on the number 
of new products and services introduced, that the United States has historically 

been the hub of innovation for logistics for LSPs, PSPs, and LSUs headquartered 

there. According to our respondents, most of the innovation activity for these 

˜rmsŠidea generation, product development, and deploymentŠwas conducted 

in the United States between 1995 and 2005. More than half of our U.S. respon
-dents noted that the United States continues to be the primary source of innova
-tion; however, about one-third of our respondents noted that innovation activities 

have shifted either to multiple locations around the world or to speci˜c research 

centers in Europe and or Asia. These companies cited the need to increase op
-erational ef˜ciency, and for better information and shipment visibility in import 

and regulatory operations as reasons for geographic dispersion of innovation. 

However, one of our LSPs noted that it is in the process of creating regional 

centers of innovation to identify and develop products and services relevant to its 

geographic areas. The regions assigned to the centers were broadly continental in 

scope, de˜ned as Asia-Paci˜c (including Australia and New Zealand), Europe, the 

Middle East, Africa, and the Americas. Larger ˜rms are able to leverage global re
-sources to develop ef˜cient solutions on a cost-effective and industry-wide basis. 

However, local conditions may not permit these solutions due to regulations and 

lack of appropriate infrastructure. Understanding and adapting to local conditions 

is critical to successful innovation for ˜rms in the industry. According to one of 

our respondents, the creation of regional innovation centers is expected to confer 

a competitive advantage. The ˜rm believed that innovative output for the ˜rm as 

a whole would be enhanced by the decentralization of innovation resources.
In dollar terms, the shift is still quite insigni˜cant; less than 10 percent of 
total logistics-related development dollars are spent outside the United States, 

according to our U.S. respondents. For ˜rms headquartered in Europe and Asia, 

a similar pattern has been observed by our respondents: more ˜rms are going 

beyond country borders to develop innovations in response to customer needs. 

According to one of our respondents, ﬁthe move is not for cost reasons but for 

logistics reasons,ﬂ meaning that increases in trade among the nations of the Asia-

Paci˜c region and Europe and the Americas increase the need to be sensitive to 

local conditions and to develop country-speci˜c solutions where necessary. These 

strategies are consistent with two of the ˜ve motives put forth by Gerybadze and 

Reger (1999) through their survey of 21 ˜rms on the R&D internationalization 

process. In the logistics industry, based on the information provided by our re
-spondents as to their reasons for creating R&D facilities in markets outside their 

home country, we ˜nd that ˜rms tend to locate R&D centers in markets close to 

their lead customers. In addition, they exploit unique logistics-related capabilities 

available in developed and emerging economies to which their lead customers 

have expanded.
Zander (1999) offers a taxonomy of international innovation networks based 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
on the extent of international duplication of technological capabilities and in
-ternational diversi˜cation of technological capabilities. Early evidence on the 
capabilities of the innovation networks being developed in the logistics industry 

indicates that these networks belong to the dispersed category, in that capabilities 

at each of the centers combines core logistics R&D capabilities and diversi˜ed 

capabilities developed with local know-how and expertise in response to local 

lead customers.
20
 R&D centers located outside the home country have been cre
-ated by the LSUs and LSPs with a mandate to use and develop local expertise to 

create new products in developed and emerging-economy markets.
Respondents noted that increased collaboration among LSUs and LSPs is a 
signi˜cant shift in innovative patterns, especially in the past 5 years. LSU respon
-dents indicated that they work closely with LSPs to develop custom solutions for 

their business needs. According to one LSU respondent, collaboration is necessi
-tated, especially in a global context; this respondent provided an illustration based 

on the ˜rm™s experience in China. He noted that unique solutions are required in 

each market due to differences in infrastructure and resource availability. Varia
-tions in the physical network in each market can be expected because physical 

infrastructure in many emerging economies is inadequate and communication 

infrastructure is insuf˜cient. However, the LSU respondent could ill afford to 

decrease information visibility for any reason and expected continuous monitor
-ing and timely shipment delivery. The ˜rm worked closely with a U.S.-based 

LSP™s division in Hong Kong to ensure that the communications infrastructure 

was suf˜ciently robust and seamlessly integrated with the LSP™s ˚eet and package 

tracking system, with the LSU™s ERP systems in the United States, and with the 

supplier™s ERP system in China. Similar incidents were shared with us by other 

respondents. The respondents acknowledged that close collaboration among the 

˜rms in the logistics network is necessary in order to create innovation that is 

effective system-wide.
Comparing responses between ˜rms headquartered inside and those head
-quartered outside the United States, we found that U.S. ˜rms had a global view 

of innovation. Innovative activity for these ˜rms was more decentralized, both 

organizationally and geographically. In contrast, innovation occurred primarily 

in the home country for respondents from Europe and Asia. Although all the re
-spondents stressed the importance of collaborative innovation, LSUs and LSPs in 

the United States have been more active in collaborative innovation. The global 

market was the focus of innovation of U.S.-based respondents, whereas respon
-dents in Asia were focused on innovations for the local markets.
20
 Zander (1999) differentiates between international duplication and international diversi˜cation 
of technological capabilities. According to Zander, ˜rms belonging to the 
internationally duplicated
 category include those where foreign units are typically involved in the same kind of technologies 
that are represented at home. Firms in the 
dispersed 
category have signi˜cant duplication or overlap 
of technologies across locations but also harness a number of technologies for which units in foreign 

locations have developed world product mandates.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 295
Looking to the future, respondents believed that there would be greater 
emphasis on the intercontinental supply chain due to increased product ˚ows 
between Asian countries and the United States and Europe. In addition there 

was expectation among the LSP respondents that there would be more mergers 

and acquisitions by LSPs leading to consolidation in that category. This activ
-ity will be driven by increased competition for larger shippers and the need for 

an increased global footprint. These trends will spur greater development of 

logistics R&D centers in the lead markets, especially in Asia. The PSPs in our 

survey primarily had marketing outposts in markets outside the United States. 

We expect that they will join the LSUs and LSPs to extend their R&D presence 

in their international markets.
In summary, our interviews with executives in the logistics industry revealed 
interesting insights into the innovation process. The dynamic management of the 

supply-chain processŠgoing beyond transportationŠas a distinct value-enhanc
-ing activity began in most organizations in the mid-1990s. Innovation is driven 

primarily by user needs and ˜rms collaborate closely to develop solutions. Logis
-tics innovation follows the global dispersion of markets and production capacity 

in most industries, although the extent of offshore migration of innovation-related 

activities in logistics remains modest. Our respondents noted that they are just 

beginning to create R&D centers in countries other than their home country, often 

to remain close to lead markets and to respond quickly to changing user needs. 

Increasing global trade has accentuated the need for LSUs and LSPs to create 

local solutions that take into account differences in physical infrastructure, avail
-ability of reliable transportation providers, and government and export rules and 

regulations. However, the PSPs™ innovation-related activities appear to remain 

more ﬁhomeboundﬂ in the United States. Innovation has necessitated increased 

and closer ties among the LSUs, LSPs, and sometimes PSPs in the last 5 years in 

order to create products and services that are creative, ef˜cient, and cost-effective 

throughout the supply chain.
Analysis of Patent Data
There are many organizations that collect and organize patent data, includ
-ing country patent of˜ces and proprietary databases such as those created by 

Thomson™s Delpion. Each database has valuable information. We used the patent 

database created by the WIPO, a specialized agency of the United Nations. The 

WIPO website (
http://www.wipo.in
t) has a patent search option for all patents 
˜led worldwide. This option was used to do a search on patent ˜ling data. The 

patent search uses a Boolean search option and hence enabled us to restrict pat
-ents to only those related to innovation in the logistics industry. The search was 

restricted to following four phrases in the description of the patent: supply chain, 

logistics, inventory, and freight. For the period between January 1990 and Decem
-ber 2004, we identi˜ed 2,268 unique successful patents ˜led worldwide that were 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
relevant to the logistics industry after checking for incomplete data and multiple 
patents issued for the same innovation in different jurisdictions. We acknowledge 
that the cutoff year of 2004 may create some data truncation problems and so we 

interpret the data for the year with caution. Additionally, patenting may not be 

the best measure of innovation in an industry that is primarily focused on service 

to its customers. The logistics industry is quite unlike industries such as pharma
-ceuticals and biotechnology, where patenting is ubiquitous. However, the data on 

patenting reveal important patterns and trends that allow us to cautiously interpret 

the changing locus of innovation in the industry. A database was developed with 

the following ˜elds from the WIPO database augmented by ˜rm-level informa
-tion from company websites: the patent name; date of ˜ling; date of publication; 

international classi˜cation; application number; country and continent in which 

the patent was ˜rst ˜led; the inventor™s name, home country, and home continent; 

and the name, home country, and home continent of the assignee. Each assignee 

was further designated as an LSU, LSP, LSI, or PSP using the description of the 

company™s business from the company website and other published sources.
Figure 5 shows patent ˜ling by continent of the ˜rst inventor between 1990 
and 2004. The ˜gure indicates that worldwide patent ˜ling for supply-chain 

products climbed very slowly between 1990 and 1996, increasing from 17 in 

1990 to 27 in 1996. The number of patents ˜led almost doubled in 1997 and then 

climbed dramatically until 2001. The economic downturn caused by the crash of 

Internet stocks and the 9/11 terrorist attacks may be reason for the slight decrease 

in patents ˜led between 2001 and 2004. While the patent ˜ling levels have not yet 

reached the peak of 480 patents ˜led worldwide in 2001, the trend appears to be 

increasing. The number of patents ˜led in North America are nearly double the 

number ˜led in any other continent in any year and contributed about 60 percent 

of the patents ˜led each year between 1990 and 2004. The number of patents ˜led 

in Asia and Europe is steadily increasing: Europe™s share of total patents hovered 

between 20 and 30 percent of total patents ˜led between 2000 and 2004 and 

Asia contributed around 7 percent in the same time frame. Patents ˜led in Aus
-tralia
21
 have shown an impressive increase, moving from 1 patent ˜led in 1996 
to between 14 and 17 each year between 2001 and 2004. Logistics innovation is 

beginning to occur in Africa, where 11 patents were ˜led between 2001 and 2004. 

There were only 3 patents ˜led from inventors in South America during the entire 

period from 1990 to 2004. Australia, Africa, and South America together have 

contributed less than 1 percent of the total patents ˜led in any year.
Figure 6 shows the patents ˜led between 1990 and 2004 as indicated by the 
country of the ˜rst inventor for the top ˜ve countries with patents. Consistent with 

the perspective of the survey respondents discussed earlier, most of the innova
-tion has taken place in the United States in this period. U.S.-based ˜rst inventors 

˜led 1,340 patents. The number of patents ˜led by the U.S.-based inventors 
21
 We included New Zealand in the numbers for the continent of Australia.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 297
logistics-5.eps
0100
200
300
400
500
600
199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004
South America
North America
Europe
Australia
Asia
Africa
FIGURE 5
 Patents ˜led by continent of ˜rst inventor between 1990 and 2004.
almost doubled from 49 patents in 1998 to 81 in 1999, doubled to 167 in 2000, 
and almost doubled again in 2001 to 308. The number declined to 214 in 2002 

and even further to 169 in 2003 but shows signs of increasing again in 2004. In a 

distant second place is Germany, with 250 patents ˜led between 1990 and 2004. 

The number of patents ˜led by Germany-based inventors increased dramatically 

from 3 in 1997 to 19 in 1998 and then nearly tripled to 55 in 1999 and remained 

between 25 and 37 between 2000 and 2004. Following Germany, in third place, 

is the United Kingdom with 150 patents ˜led between 1990 and 2004. Japan 

and Australia ˜led 63 and 62 patents, respectively, in the same period, round
-ing out the top ˜ve countries when considering patents ˜led by country of ˜rst 

innovator.
Considering the locus of innovation over time, inventors from nearly 40 
countries have been involved in innovation in the logistics industry since 1990, 

although Figure 6 shows only the top ˜ve countries. The increase in the number 

of inventor countries from 6 in 1990 to 26, 26, 25, and 27 in 2001, 2002, 2003, 

and 2004, respectively, is an indication of the increasing dispersion of innovative 

activity. Another indication of dispersion of innovative activity is the fact that 

˜ve countries that ˜led in 2002 did not have an inventor ˜le a patent in 2003 and 

four countries that ˜led in 2003 did not have a patent originate in their country 

in 2002. Eleven countries ˜led over 20 patents between 1990 and 2004 including 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
logistics-6.eps
050
100
150
200
250
300
350
199
019
92
19
94
19
9619
98
20
0020
02
20
04Year
Patents
United States of
America
Germany
United Kingdom
Japan
Australia
FIGURE 6
 Patents by country of ˜rst inventor between 1990 and 2004 for the top ˜ve 
countries.
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Japan, the Netherlands, Singapore, 
and Sweden since 2000. It appears that China, India, Israel, and Korea are just 

beginning to become involved in logistics innovation.
A total of 149 patents had at least one inventor from a country different from 
the ˜rst inventor.
22
 We examine those patents to understand patterns of cross-
country collaboration. There is one instance of inventors from multiple countries 

in 1990 and then one in 1996 with no patent activity between 1991 and 1995 with 

inventors from multiple countries. After climbing to 29 instances of collabora
-22
 There were four patents that had inventors from three countries. They were not separated since 
they all involve the United States as the ˜rst inventor and a clear second inventor. Therefore, we 
counted each patent only once whether they had inventors from two countries or three focusing on the 

second inventor. We do provide details about the instances where inventors from the United States 

collaborated with inventors from two other countries in the discussion below and in Figure 8.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 299
tion among inventors from different countries in 2001 and 2002, there is a sharp 
drop in collaborative activity to 20 instances in 2003, which may be an artifact of 
the beginning of the war in Iraq. These data indicate that cooperation in innova
-tion in the logistics industry began only in the late 1990s and con˜rms the data 

provided by our survey respondents. Although U.S. inventors have more patents 

that involve inventors from other countries, the share of U.S. patents with a U.S. 

inventor as the ˜rst inventor and one or more foreign inventors (60 out of 1340, 

or 4.5 percent) is in fact somewhat smaller than the share of patents with German 

˜rst inventors and foreign co-inventors (23 out of 250, or 9.2 percent), or logistics 

patents with British ˜rst inventors (16 out of 250, or 10.7 percent).
In 1999, inventors from the United States collaborated with inventors from 
China and Great Britain. In 2000, inventors from the United States collaborated 

with inventors from the Netherlands and Italy in one of the two instances of col
-laboration with the Netherlands. In 2001, inventors from the United States col
-laborated with inventors from Canada and the United Kingdom in one of three 

instances of collaboration with Canada and inventors from the United States 

partnered with inventors from the United Kingdom and Germany in one of four 

instances of collaboration with United Kingdom. AU, Australia; BE, Belgium; 

BM, Bermuda; BR, Brazil; CA, Canada; CN, China; DE, Germany; FR, France; 

GB, United Kingdom; IE, Ireland; IL, Israel; IN, India; JP, Japan; MX, Mexico; 

NL, Netherlands; SG, Singapore; TW, Taiwan.
Table 2 shows the countries with whom ˜rst inventors from the United States 
have partnered over time. Inventors from the United States have partnered with 

inventors in over 17 countries between 1990 and 2004 for a total of 60 patents. 
TABLE 2
 Patents with Inventors from Multiple Countries with United States 
as First Inventor
US
Grand Total
AU
BE
BM
BR
CA
CN
DE
FR
GB
IE
IL
IN
JP
MX
NL
SG
TW
1997
1121998
111999
11*
242000
1112*
52001
23*
114*
112
2002
112361115
2003
12111172004
21411112114
Grand 

Total
34117212
313
1221142160
NOTES: There are four instances when there were inventors from three countries and these are noted 

with an asterisk. We have counted these instances against the second inventor country.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
While inventors in the United States partnered with inventors from only three 
countries in 1999, they partnered with inventors from nine countries in 2004, 
indicating an increasing scope of cooperation. U.S. inventors partnered with 

inventors from the United Kingdom and Germany most often during this period. 

However, 2004 data indicate that inventors from the United States have one 

patent with an inventor in India, one with an inventor in Taiwan, and two with 

inventors in Singapore, showing an increasing trend of cooperation of U.S. ˜rms 

with the Asia-Paci˜c region. The share of all U.S. logistics patents accounted for 

by patents with inventors from multiple countries for which U.S. inventors appear 

as ˜rst inventors varies from a low of 2 percent in 1998 to a high of 7 percent in 

2002. After a drop to 4.1 percent in 2003, in 2004 the number of U.S. co-invented 

patents rose to 6.2 percent of total U.S. logistics patents.
Table 3 provides the details about the 37 patents between 1990 and 2004 
by ˜rst inventor™s country, where the second inventor is from the United States. 

Once again, the collaboration shows a sharp increase in 2000 and is ˚at after that 

point. In 2003 and 2004 the inventors from the United States supported inventors 

in ˜ve other countriesŠthe most in the 15 years studied. Most of the collabora
-tion, where the second inventor is from the United States, was with Germany and 

the United Kingdom, which is similar to the pattern when the inventor from the 

United States is the ˜rst inventor. These data must be interpreted with caution, 

however, since instances of collaboration account for a small share of overall 

logistics patents. For instance, the share of all German logistics patents with U.S. 

inventors in second position fell from 6 percent in 2003 to 3 percent in 2004; the 

share of all British logistics patents similarly classi˜ed was 8 percent in 2004 and 

5 percent in 2005. Data in Tables 2 and 3 combine to show that U.S. inventors 

in the logistics industry are increasingly collaborating with inventors worldwide. 

However, given the growth in patents over the period studied, the proportion 
TABLE 3
 Patents with First Inventors from Different Countries and with 
Second Inventor from the United States
1990
1997
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Grand Total
Belgium
11Canada
54110
Germany
24219Denmark
11Spain
11France
112United 

Kingdom
11112219Israel
11Japan
1113Grand Total
1117877537
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 301of co-inventions in logistics with U.S. inventors listed as the ˜rst inventors or 
second or lower appears to be limited.
Figures 7 through 10 examine patterns in assignee patent data. While as
-signee data are not meaningful when considering geographic location of innova
-tive activity, they do indicate the kinds of ˜rms that own the patents. Figure 7 
compares patents ˜led by category of assignee over time. Only those countries 
that had more than 50 patents between 1990 and 2004 are shown in Figure 10. A 
brief discussion on assignee data provides some insight into patterns relating to 

resource allocation. Examination of patents ˜led in the past 15 years indicates that 

PSPs have been the dominant assignee worldwide with 1,095 patents, followed 

by 678 for the LSUs. Of the 302 patents that have been assigned to individuals 

designated as experts in our study, 13 patents were assigned to universities and 36 

patents were assigned to individuals associated with universities. The number of 

patents ˜led by PSPs worldwide shows a steady increase from 1997 through 2001 

in absolute terms. The share of logistics patents assigned to PSP almost doubled 

from 30.8 percent in 1997 to 60.4 percent in 1998. After climbing to nearly 68 
logistics-7.eps
0100
200
300
400
500
600
199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004
PSP
LSU
LSP
LSI
Expert
FIGURE 7
 Comparison of patents ˜led by category of assignee between 1990 and 
2004.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
logistics-8.eps
050
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
19
90
1992
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
0020
02
20
04
YEAR
PATENTS
United States of
America
United Kingdom
Switzerland
Netherlands
Japan
Germany
Australia
FIGURE 8
 Patents by country of assignee between 1990 and 2004 for the top seven 
countries.
percent of total patents in 2000, the PSP share of overall logistics patents declined 
to 41 percent in 2004. The patents assigned to LSPs doubled between 1999 and 

2000 and doubled again in 2001. Additionally, and consistent with our earlier dis
-cussion on the recent participation of LSIs in the logistics network, a few patents 

have been assigned to LSIs since 1997. Our discussions with LSIs and industry 

experts indicate that the role of the LSI in the industry is often focused more on 

process improvement and less on patentable innovation. A large number of pat
-ents have also been assigned to LSUs, suggesting that user ˜rms are investing in 

developing logistics capabilities as a critical business advantage. In 2004, more 

patents were assigned to LSUs than to PSPs, with the LSU share of total patents 

rising from 15.7 percent in 2000 to 44.1 percent in 2004.
Figure 8 shows the distribution of patents by assignee home country or coun
-try where the assignee is headquartered. It is worth noting from the ˜gure that, 

although the ˜rms headquartered in the United States have nearly seven times as 

many patents as the next countryŠGermanyŠthe countries of Switzerland and 

the Netherlands have 129 and 53 patents assigned to them. Further analysis shows 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 303logistics-9.eps
0200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
AfricaAsiaAustraliaEuropeNorth
America
South
America
PSP
LSU
LSP
LSI
Expert
FIGURE 9
 Patents by category of assignee by continent.
that the individuals listed as ˜rst inventor for the patents assigned to Dutch and 
Swiss ˜rms were mostly from Germany, the United States, or Belgium.
In the geographic distribution of patents shown in Figure 9, ˜rms assigned 
the most patents were from the two developed-economy regions represented 

broadly by North America and Europe followed by the emerging economies of 

the Asia-Paci˜c region. Three times as many patents were generally assigned 

to ˜rms in North America as were assigned to ˜rms in Europe, and the order of 

magnitude was even larger when compared to the Asia-Paci˜c region. A closer 

examination of the data reveals that PSPs in the United States were assigned 

the most patents between 1990 and 2004, with more patents than all the patents 

worldwide for experts, LSIs, and LSPs combined and almost as many patents 

as patents assigned to LSUs worldwide. In contrast to the proli˜c innovation of 

PSPs in the United States, LSUs were assigned the most patents in most of the 

European countries, with the exception of Germany and Sweden. Among the 

countries in Asia no particular pattern could be discerned. Experts were assigned 

the most patents in China, LSUs in Japan, and PSPs in India and Singapore.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
logistics-10.eps
0510
15
20
25
30
35
1990199619971998199920002001200220032004
PSP
LSU
LSP
Expert
FIGURE 10
 Patents ˜led by category of assignee between 1990 and 2004 when inventors 
are from different countries.
Figure 10 presents the number of patents with inventors from different 
countries for each assignee category over time. Although more than one-half of 
co-invented logistics patents were assigned to PSPs (80 out of 149), in fact the 

share of PSP-assigned patents that were co-invented (7.3 percent) is similar to 

the share of co-invented LSU patents (7.7 percent) or co-invented LSP patents 

(6.3 percent). After peaking in 2002 at 10.7 percent, collaborative PSP patents 

decreased to 9.3 percent in 2003 and 7.1 percent in 2004. One explanation for 

this trend may be that ˜rms are creating local R&D centers to create innovative 

products and solutions for local consumption.
Our study of patent data indicates that logistics innovation gained impor
-tance in the mid- to late 1990s. In addition, we found that most of the innovation 

activity remains in the United States. However, logistics innovation has become 

increasingly dispersed. For each of the past 5 years, inventors from more than 20 

countries had ˜led logistics-related patents with nearly 60 percent of the patents 

coming from inventors based in the United States. More patents have been as
-signed to PSPsŠ˜rms who provide software and hardware to enhance communi
-cations, tracking, and visibility along the supply chainŠthan to users of logistics 

services and providers of logistics services until 2004, when users were assigned 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 305nearly 44.1 percent of all patents. Since 1996, the number of patents with inven
-tors from different countries has increased but the trend has been ˚at since 2000. 
Inventors from Germany have the highest proportion of collaborative patents, av
-eraging more than 13 percent since 2000, and 11 percent of the United Kingdom™s 

logistics patents during the same period re˚ect collaborative invention. Inventors 

in the United States have partnered with inventors in over 17 countries, primarily 

in Europe. However, when considering the share of patents created through col
-laboration (with the ˜rst inventor located in the United States), only about 5 per
-cent of the patents were co-invented between 2000 and 2004. There is evidence 

of recent partnerships with inventors in the Asia-Paci˜c region.
DISCUSSION
An analysis of innovation in the logistics industry is handicapped by the 
lack of readily available data. Most of the innovation activity is con˜dential 

information, and the level of investment in logistics innovation is hard to track 

speci˜cally. Financial and operational data about this aspect of their business is 

not publicly disclosed. To the extent possible we have relied on public sources 

of data to augment our understanding of the phenomena learned through private 

conversations. Where public data are lacking, we have relied heavily on the in
-formation obtained from our interviews, although our conclusions are not based 

on any single source of information.
Our study examined multiple aspects of innovation in the logistics industry 
through interviews with industry insiders and experts and through a study of pat
-ent data. While the logistics industry™s innovation may not be perfectly re˚ected 

in patent data, we believe that, with cautious interpretation, they provide valuable 

information about important trends in innovation in logistics.
In addition we also examined the innovation activity of the top logistics 
˜rms, as listed in the Hoovers database, in order to understand innovation in 

logistics. For each of the top ˜rms we looked at company websites, articles 

in industry periodicals, and databases such as Factiva and One Source Global 

Business.
As noted earlier, we ˜nd that innovation is gaining importance in the lo
-gistics industry. The advent of new technologies and globalization has inspired 

˜rms to look for new solutions for the challenge of business in today™s competi
-tive landscape. Innovation is also becoming more global than it has been in the 

past, although the United States continues to lead the innovative effort in the 

industry. Inventors in the United States have been the most productive throughout 

the past 15 years and we do not observe any threat to this dominance. Inventors 

from Japan and Australia have become more productive in the past 5 years, and 

many European countries have become more active in logistics innovation as 

trade increases within the European Union. Since 2000, there has been increased 

collaboration in the industry. Inventors from different countries collaborated on 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
about 6 percent of the patents ˜led, 88 percent of which were ˜led after 2000. 
Nearly half of the intercountry collaboration involved a U.S. ˜rst inventor but 
these patents were a very small proportion of the total U.S. patents. U.S inventors 

collaborated with inventors in 17 other countries when they were listed as the 

˜rst inventor, and inventors from 9 countries when they were the second inven
-tor. PSPs were the most frequent collaborators but more recently LSUs and LSPs 

have been more actively collaborating for innovation.
Our data lead us to the conclusion that logistics innovation is most often a 
pull phenomenon. The users of logistics services identify a business challenge. As 

the supply-chain process has increased in complexity due to the increasing scope 

of business activity, solutions to these challenges require specialized and often 

distributed resources. The LSU ﬁpullsﬂ the innovation from the PSPs and LSPs 

with requisite specialized capabilities. More recently, LSI ˜rms have entered the 

logistics value space. They are software and hardware platform- and product-

neutral and focus on providing the best solution to the customer. We tracked few 

innovations from these ˜rms. However, if their role increases in the logistics 

landscape, we may see an increase in innovative activity among the integrators.
Product innovations, especially those related to new technologies, are en
-abled through collaboration. For example, DHL Worldwide, an LSP, has recently 

unveiled its RFID pilot project, which it is developing in partnership with IBM, 

an LSI. Savi Technologies, a PSP and recently acquired by Lockheed Martin, 

leverages its leading position in RFID solutions through alliances with lead
-ing ˜rms in data collection, services, software, and solutions for the logistics 

industry.
23
We see a growing trend of innovation in different parts of the world as the 
outcome of globalization. We have noted that a few LSUs and LSPs are beginning 

to locate logistics R&D centers in different parts of the world in order to be close 

to the customer in lead markets. We believe that these centers are used to cre
-ate capabilities that allow greatest responsiveness to local customer needs while 

exploiting local expertise and relationships. Nearly two-thirds of the executives 

responding to a survey by 
The McKinsey Quarterly
 in September 2006 stated that 
they are concerned with increasing risks from disruptions to their supply chain. 

The environment is ripe for ˜rms in the logistics industry to continue to innovate 

and address users™ concerns about their supply chain.
POLIC
Y IMPLICATIONS
Archibugi and Iammarino (1999) offer a taxonomy of globalization of in
-novation with a view to understanding the implications for national policy. Based 

on the locus of innovation and the nature of exploitation, the three categories they 

suggest are the international exploitation of nationally produced innovations, the 
23
 See 
http://www.savi.com/partners/program.shtm
l.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 307global generation of innovation, and global techno-scienti˜c collaborations. Our 
study of the logistics industry indicates that innovation in the logistics industry 
has mostly belonged to the ˜rst categoryŠinternational exploitation of nation
-ally produced innovations. Logistics innovations have generally been developed 

for the home market, predominantly the United States, and then scaled for the 

international market. However, the U.S. logistics industry is slowly moving to
-ward the second and third categoriesŠglobal generation of innovation and global 

techno-scienti˜c collaborations. Accordingly, one of the most relevant policy is
-sues for the logistics industry is the role of governments in creating and enforcing 

patent law. Patent law enforcement is disparate and unequal in many parts of the 

world. Our study shows that U.S. logistics ˜rms have been proli˜c in innovation 

compared to their peers in other parts of the world. With the globalization of 

logistics users and suppliers, innovations developed in the United States should 

be adopted in every country without concern for misappropriation of intellectual 

property (IP). Inadequate IP protection is a concern for many industries, and the 

logistics industry is no exception. As seen from the data, innovation in logistics 

is in the early stages of its life cycle. While there is no evidence that IP protection 

is hindering innovation now, the role of formal IP protection is likely to assume 

greater importance as innovation increases in the industry.
Reducing trade barriers and standardizing import rules would also help inno
-vation in the U.S. logistics industry. Market liberalization in many of the world™s 

fastest-growing economies would increase opportunities for U.S. logistics ˜rms. 

Data indicate that the U.S. logistics industry is the most innovative and the most 

advanced in the world. Liberalization would provide the opportunity to extend 

the market reach of U.S. logistics ˜rms and add to their capabilities by being ex
-posed to different contexts and conditions. For example, Brunei, Singapore, and 

Thailand have recently signed the Multilateral Agreement on the Full Liberaliza
-tion of All-Cargo Services. This agreement allows airlines to operate unlimited 

cargo on any route within the three countries (Bower, n.d.). This type of agree
-ment enables logistics ˜rms to create innovative solutions to better respond to 

customer needs since they have fewer constraints imposed on the ˚ow of goods, 

information, and funds.
A skilled workforce is an essential component for successful innovation in 
any context. However, as discussed earlier in this chapter, the logistics industry 

has become a high-tech complex network with information ˚ow becoming the 

critical source of competitive advantage. Graduate enrollments in science and 

engineering ˜elds in U.S. universities reached a record high of 566,800 in the 

fall of 2003, according to data collected by NSF through 2003.
24
 Encouraging 
higher education, especially in the ˜elds of mathematics, computer science, and 
24
 S&E Indicators 2006 Available at 
http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind06/c2/c2h.ht
m. Accessed 
January 22, 2007.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
engineering, is essential so that the requisite skilled workforce is available for the 
United States to continue its dominance in logistics innovation.
Since the events of September 11, 2001, supply-chain security has been 
receiving much publicity. According to a recent report by the Council of Supply 
Chain Management Professionals, none of the programs instituted by the U.S. 

government have been successful in eliminating or signi˜cantly reducing sup
-ply-chain vulnerability (Wilson, 2005b). While most of the attention and funding 

has been directed toward enhancing airport and passenger security, little attention 

has been paid to the rest of the transportation system. The shipment of containers 

represents one of the greatest risks in the cargo supply chain. In 2004, over 10 

million loaded cargo containers were imported into the United States, represent
-ing about $1.43 billion of containerized goods moving through U.S. ports each 

day.
25
 Despite the security programs enacted by Congress, such as the Maritime 
Transportation Security Act and the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Ter
-rorism, experts agree that security along the supply chain remains woefully 

inadequate (Wilson, 2005b). It is critical that the U.S. government devote greater 

resources to address this security risk by increasing funds and manpower for 

adequate implementation of security programs. There is no evidence to suggest 

that ˜rms in the U.S. logistics industry have received federal funding for security-

related innovation. The innovative power of the U.S. logistics industry could be 

harnessed for creating new products for increasing supply-chain security. The 

logistics industry has been up to the challenge when faced with many changes 

in the environment; with the right incentives from the government, the industry 

could become a partner in creating a safer, more secure, supply chain through 

innovation.
CONCLUSION
The Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals has been publish
-ing an annual report on the state of the logistics industry for the past 17 years. 

According to the latest report, after declining for most of the last 7 years, logistics 

costs as a percentage of the nation™s GDP are pushing upward. After hovering 

around 10 percent of GDP during the 1990s, logistics costs as a percent of GDP 

decreased as interest rates declined and business cost pressures mounted. How
-ever, the most recent estimate is for 2005, when logistics costs were about 9.5 

percent of GDP, as shown in Figure 1. Estimated logistics costs in 2005 totaled 

$1.183 trillionŠan increase of $156 billion over 2004 and the largest year-on-

year change in the 17-year history of the report. Shippers are feeling pressure 

from two directions. One factor is the steady climb in interest rates, which has 

pushed up inventory-carrying costs. But the biggest cost driver has been rising 
25
 Liner Shipping Facts and Figures. World Shipping Council. Available at 
http://www.
worldshipping
.org/liner_shipping-facts&˜gures.pd
f. Accessed December 26, 2007.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 309transportation expenses, which reached $744 billion in 2005, up from $636 bil
-lion in 2004. Soaring fuel prices, a driver shortage in segments of the trucking 
industry, and diminished competition have all come together to raise rates across 

all modes, and for trucking in particular. Figure 11 shows the breakdown of the 

costs in 2005.
26
Managing these increasing costs is going to become even more critical in 
the future. Domestic freight transport is expected to increase by another 65 to 

70 percent by 2020. International shipments are expected to increase even more 
26
 See http://www.logisticsmgmt.com/article/CA6352889.html. Accessed August 28, 2006.
logistics-11.eps
CarryingCostsTransportation
CostsMotorCarriersOtherCarriersShipper-Related CostsLogisticsAdministrationTotal
Logistics CostsŁ Interest 58Ł Taxes, Obsolescence, Depreciation, Insurance 
245Ł Warehousing 
90Ł Truck Œ Intercity 
394Ł Truck Œ Local 
189Ł Railroads 49Ł Water (International 
29, Domestic 5) 34Ł Oil Pipelines 9Ł Air (International 15, Domestic 25) 40Ł Forwarders 22($ billions)1,183153846583744393FIGURE 11
 Costs in the logistics market, 2005. SOURCE: 
http://www.logisticsmgmt.
com/article/CA6352889.htm
l. Accessed August 28, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
over this period (by about 85 percent).
27
 As the need for logistics management 
grows, businesses will need to be adaptable and ˚exible to changing environmen
-tal conditions. In a world of synchronized trade, collaboration among all parts 
of the logistics network becomes critical. Innovation in logistics is essential for 

the ˚ow of goods, information, and funds to be seamlessly choreographed. Some 

factors such as interest rates and fuel prices are beyond the control of the ˜rm, 

but investment in innovation, especially that directed at reducing variability in 

quality of service and uncertainty in the supply chain, shows the greatest promise 

for the future of the industry.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for generous support of this 
research.
REFERENCES
Archibugi, D., and S. Iammarino. (1999). The policy implication of the globalization of innovation. 
Research Policy
 28(2,3):317-336.
Bartels, N. (2006). 21st century logistics. 
Manufacturing Business Technology.
 March.
Bernanke, B. (2006). Global economic integration: What™s new and what™s not? Available at 
http://
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060825/default.ht
m. Accessed August 28, 
2006.
Bhise, H., D. Farrell, H. Miller, A. Vanier, and A. Zainulbhai. (2000). The duel for the doorstep. 
The 
McKinsey Quarterly
 2:32-41.
Bower, E. Z. (n.d.). Off shoring operations by United States ˜rms in logistics and distribution 
services: Implication for ASEAN. Available at 
http://www.us-asean.org/ASEAN/Svcs_FDI_
Comp_Paper.do
c. Accessed August 15, 2006.
Bowman, R. J. (n.d.) Supply chain management: The perils of going global. Available at 
www.
supplychainbrain
.co
m, category SCM Technology. Accessed August 15, 2006.
Brown, J. S., and J. Hagel III. (2005). From push to pull: The next frontier of innovation. 
McKinsey 
Quarterly
 3. See www.Mckinseyquarterly.com Accessed July 26, 2006.
Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals. (n.d.). Supply chain management/logistics man
-agement de˜nitions. Available at 
http://www.cscmp.org/Website/AboutCSCMP/
De˜nitions
/De˜nitions.as
p. Accessed July 26, 2006.
Craig, T. (2003). 4PL versus 3PLŠA business process outsourcing option for international sup
-ply chain management. 
World Wide Shipping. 
December/January. See http://www.ltdmgmt.
com/mag/4pl.htm.
Economist. 
(2006). The physical Internet: A survey of logistics. June 17.
Gerybadze, A., and G. Reger. 1999. Globalization of R&D: Recent changes in the management of 
innovation in transnational corporations. 
Research Policy
 28(2,3): 251-275.
Grosspietsch, J., and J. Kupper. (2004). Supply chain champs. 
The McKinsey Quarterly
 1:2-4.
Hand˜eld, R., and E. Nichols. (2002). 
Supply Chain Redesign.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall: 
p. 13.
27
 See 
http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/freight_analysis/nat_freight_stats/docs/05facts˜gures/
table2_1.ht
m. Accessed August 27, 2006.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOGISTICS
 311
Hugos, M. (2006). 
Essentials of Supply Chain Management.
 Hoboken, NJ: Wiley and Sons. 2nd 
edition, pages 7-9.
McKinsey Quarterly. 
(2006). Understanding supply chain risk: A McKinsey Global Survey. 
September.
Mulpuru, S. (2006). US eCommerce: Five year forecast and data overview. October 12. Available at 
www.Forrester.co
m. Accessed November 8, 2006.
Pande, A., R. Raman, and V. Srivatsan. (2006). Recapturing supply chain data. 
McKinsey on IT.
 Spring 
2006, pages 16-21.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). 
Diffusion of Innovations.
 4th Ed. New York: Free Press, p. 11.
Singh, M. (2004). A review of leading opinions on the future of supply chains. Supply Chain 2020. 
Working paper. Available at 
http://ctl.mit.edu/public/opinions_future_supply_chains.pdf. Ac
-cessed July 2
6, 2006.
Smith, B. (2005). Customer satisfaction is the wrong measure. 
Gallup Management Journal. 
April 
14. Available at 
http://gmj.gallup.com/content/15850/Customer-Satisfaction-Is-the-Wrong-
Measure
.asp
x. Accessed December 22, 2006.
Smith, F. (2006). Going with the Flow: How to Succeed in a Macro-trend Environment. Speech given 
at George Washington University, February 8, 2006. See 
http://www.fedex.com/us/about/news/
speeches/gwu.html?link=
4. Accessed July 26, 2006.
Stoffel, B. (2006, July). Navigating the world of outsourcing. 
LQ Magazine
 12(3).
Vinas, T. (2005). IW value-chain survey: A map of the world. 
Industry Week.
 September 1. Avail
-able at 
http://www.industryweek.com/ReadArticle.aspx?ArticleID=1062
9. Accessed August 
9, 2006.
Violini, B. (2006). What can logistics do for you. 
Global Services. 
June. Available at 
www.globalser
-vicesmedia.co
m. Accessed July 15, 2006.
Wilson, R. (2004). 15th Annual State of Logistics Report. Presented at the National Press Club, 
Washington, D.C., June 7.
Wilson, R. (2005a). U.S. state of logistics. Available at 
http://www.logistics.or.jp/member/pdf(maza
zineinformation)/20050809.pd
f. Accessed August 26, 2006.
Wilson, R. (2005b). 16th Annual State of Logistics Report. Presented at the Ronald Reagan Building 
and International Trade Center, Washington, D.C., June 27.
Zander, I. (1999). How do you mean ﬁglobalﬂ? An empirical investigation of innovation networks in 
the multinational corporation. 
Research Policy
 28(2,3):195-213.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.313
 9  Venture Capital
MARTIN
 K
ENNEY
University of California, Davis
MARTIN
 H
AEMMIG
UniBW Munich, Germany and Leiden University, Netherlands
W. R
ICHARD
 G
OE
Kansas State University
INTRODUCTION
In 1946, the ˜rst venture capital (VC) ˜rms were established in the United 
States with the objective of providing ˜nancial backing and business assistance 
to entrepreneurs in exchange for repayment in capital gains. These pioneering 

VC ˜rms soon discovered that technology-based innovations most consistently 

yielded the greatest returns. Today, the ideal/typical VC ˜rm is the U.S.-style 

limited partnership that is embedded in a local entrepreneurial ecosystem and 

invests in technology-related deals. The pioneering VC ˜rms were also motivated 

to diffuse venture capitalism nationally and internationally. In retrospect, it would 

appear that they were successful. In the past two decades venture capitalism has 

spread globally. There are now domestically owned VC ˜rms operating in at least 

40 nations. Also, there is an increasing number of VC ˜rms that have established 

of˜ces or begun investing in multiple nations, or both (i.e., VC ˜rms operating 

across national borders). The international diffusion of VC investing suggests that 

there are entrepreneurial ventures that merit funding in many nations.
In 2006, there can be little doubt that VC ˜nancing of entrepreneurial high-
technology ventures plays a signi˜cant role in the U.S. national innovation sys
-tem. Venture capitalists have backed nearly all of the signi˜cant U.S. information 

technology (IT) ˜rms established during the past four decades. These include 

3Com, AMD, Apple, Applied Materials, Cadence, Cisco, Google, Intel, Oracle, 

Netscape, Seagate, Silicon Graphics, Solectron, Sun Microsystems, Yahoo!, and 

many others. In biotechnology, the VC-˜nanced ˜rms include Amgen, Biogen, 

Cetus, Centocor, Chiron, Genentech, and many others. In the nontechnology 

˜elds, important VC-funded ˜rms include Federal Express, jetBlue, eBay, Home 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Depot, and Of˜ce Depot. A number of these ˜rms have changed the way hu
-man beings work and interact or, to borrow a phrase from Steven Jobs, ﬁthey 
have changed the world.ﬂ Recently, new VC-˜nanced ˜rms, such as Facetime, 

MySpace, and YouTube, are driving yet further change.
If one agrees that the VC-˜nanced ˜rms are critical to the U.S. position in 
the global technology economy, then the globalization of the VC industry is 
an important topic. The VC industry is not signi˜cant in terms of either direct 
employment or the total capital under management. Rather its signi˜cance lies 

in the role of venture capitalists in ˜nding, funding, and assisting entrepreneurs 

whose ˜rms will be instruments of Schumpeter™s (1939) ﬁcreative destructionﬂ or 

successful in creating ﬁnew economic spaces.ﬂ Previous studies have attempted 

to measure the employment contribution of ˜rms funded by VC and found it to 

be extensive (see, e.g., Global Insight, 2004).
Our examination of the globalization of the VC industry proceeds as follows. 
The ˜rst section introduces VC as an organizational form. The second section 

examines the academic research on international VC investing. The following 

section describes the history of international VC investing, which began in the 

1960s and has since grown enormously. The fourth section examines the reasons 

for the globalization of the VC industry and is followed by a quantitative section 

describing the international ˚ows of VC. In the sixth section the growth of the VC 

investment in China is discussed. The concluding section discusses the implica
-tions of the ˜ndings for our understanding of the globalization of VC. We ˜nd 

that there is little evidence at this time to indicate that the globalization of VC 

is having a negative effect on the U.S. innovation system. The existing evidence 

does suggest that U.S. VC ˜rms are ˜nding viable investments in other nations 

and foreign VC ˜rms continue to ˜nd viable investments in the United States.
VENTURE CAPITAL AS AN ORGANIZATIONAL FORM
Professional VC ˜rms are the subject of this chapter and, as far as is prac
-ticable, buyout (BO) and angel investors are omitted from our analysis. Private 

equity (PE) ˜rms are organizations that invest in ˜rms with the aim of later sell
-ing this equity at a higher price to capture the capital gains. VC is a subset of PE 

˜rms. We do not include BO ˜rms because they acquire existing ˜rms and thus 

are involved not in supporting emerging ˜rms but rather in acquiring and reorga
-nizing existing ˜rms. Angel investing refers to equity investment in young ˜rms 

by individuals or groups of individuals using their own funds and is a practice that 

is hundreds of years old. The difference between angels and venture capitalists 

is that the venture capitalists are professionals operating an organization that has 

raised institutional money.
This chapter treats private VC as the ideal type and does not examine corpo
-rate VC. The reasons for omitting corporate VC are threefold: First, as a whole, 

corporate VC is much less important than private VC. Second, many corporate 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 315
VC operations have very different organizational structures, degrees of indepen
-dence, compensation, and reporting relationships to the parent corporation than 
do the private VC ˜rms. Finally, most corporate venture capitalists do not perform 

the lead-investor role, preferring instead to invest after, or in conjunction with, 

the private VC ˜rms.
The narrow de˜nitions of VC are slippery in the real world. For example, 
ﬁventure capitalﬂ investing in Japan and Korea traditionally has been in the form 

of loans (Clark, 1987; Kenney et al., 2004; Kuemmerle, 2001). The data collected 

on ﬁventureﬂ investment often commingles VC and BOŠand even angel invest
-ments if they are suf˜ciently large.
1 In Europe, the acronym EVCA stands for the 
European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, and BO continues to 

be the dominant investment pattern in Europe (Gompers and Lerner, 2001), al
-though the relative shares may be changing. Despite the disparate de˜nitions, the 

term ﬁventure capitalﬂ in this chapter refers to equity investors in young ˜rms.
The VC ˜rm is a small ˜nancial services professional organization (usually 
employing a total of less than 30 persons) that functions primarily to (1) assess 

business opportunities; (2) provide capital; and (3) actively engage, monitor, 

advise, and assist the ˜rms in its portfolio (i.e., those ˜rms in which VC has 

been invested). By investing, the venture capitalist accepts a substantial tranche 

of illiquid equity that converts its status to something like a ﬁpartnerﬂ to the en
-trepreneur. The goal of the venture capitalist is not only to increase the value of 

that equity, but to eventually monetize the investment through a liquidity event 

such as an initial public stock offering or sale to another investor so it can reap 

the results of its investment. The ˜nal way of ﬁreaping the rewardﬂ is ˜rm failure 

and bankruptcy. In all of these scenarios, the venture capitalist ﬁexitsﬂ the invest
-ment (i.e., ends its ownership role in the ˜rm). This is necessary to complete the 

process because the VC ˜rm™s investors must be paid by liquidating the holdings. 

In environments in which exit is impossible, venture capitalists cannot invest.
The economics of VC are characterized by high risk and high returns. Invest
-ing in young ˜rms is riskyŠmany fail and become total losses. The compensation 

for the failures comes from investments that yield 10, 20, or even 100 times the 

initial capital invested by the venture capitalists. This asymmetric return pro˜le 

means that venture capitalists only invest in ˜rms offering the opportunity for ex
-tremely large returns. To be clear, venture capitalists are industry-sector agnostic, 

but as a generalization, during the past ˜ve decades, the sectors that most often 

generate such opportunities are the information and communication technolo
-gies. The biomedical ˜elds are the only other ones with a long history of good 

returns. Of course, many other investment ˜elds, such as energy in the 1970s, 

superconductivity, and now, possibly, nanotechnology, have come and gone with 

minimal returns.
Operationally, venture capitalists invest only after rigorous reference check
-1 
All statistics used in this chapter are for VC only unless otherwise noted.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
ing (due diligence) and, in return for capital, the venture capitalist receives equity 
and a seat on the board of directors from which to actively monitor and assist 
the ˜rm™s growth. After investment, the ideal-typical VC ˜rm provides assistance 

ranging from practical needs such as providing advice on issues that a ˚edgling 

˜rm might encounter, introducing contacts, and assisting in securing necessary 

executive talent, to more abstract needs such as providing ﬁlegitimacyﬂ (Al
-drich and Fiol, 1994) to help overcome ﬁliabilities of newnessﬂ (Stinchecombe, 

1965).
PRE
VIOUS RESEARCH ON 
VENTURE CAPITAL GLOBALIZATION
In many respects, the globalization of VC ˜rms is puzzling. The academic 
literature suggests that VC investing is strongly localized (Sorenson and Stuart, 

2001), although Florida and Kenney (1988) found that venture capitalists in ˜nan
-cial centers such as New York and Chicago exported capital to technology centers 

such as Silicon Valley, where the entrepreneurs and deals were clustered. More 

recently, Kogut et al. (2007) showed that even the early U.S. VC ˜rms co-invested 

with distant ˜rms. Also, by the mid-1980s, many East Coast VC ˜rms established 

branch of˜ces in other regions, particularly in Silicon Valley (Kenney and Florida, 

2000). Perhaps this indicates that the emergence of the global VC ˜rm should 

have been expected given the increasing globalization affecting nearly every 

industry, particularly those industries funded by venture capitalists.
The international dimensions of VC are receiving increased attention from 
scholars (Gompers and Lerner, 2001).
2 In the 1980s and 1990s, studies exam
-ined the establishment of VC ˜rms in other countries (Clark, 1987; Green, 1991; 

Kuemmerle, 2001; Manigart, 1994). There also have been a number of cross-

country comparative studies, both at the institutional level (Kenney et al., 2004; 

Manigart et al., 1996) and in comparisons of practice (Pruthi et al., 2003).
The literature offers three explanations for the uncanny success of VC as an 
institution in the United States and its relative slow diffusion to most other na
-tions. The ˜rst explanation is inspired by the work by La Porta et al. (1998), which 

suggests that English common law-based nations have had the most successful 

VC industries. This success is ascribed to the proposition that non-common law 

legal regimes offer less protection to the owners of capital (Bottazzi et al., 2005; 

Hege et al., 2004; Lerner and Schoar, 2005). The legal/governance explanations 

may explain part of the cross-national variation, but these studies do not control 

for technological capability or entrepreneurial environment, which the extant lit
-erature suggests is important for understanding the subnational regional success 

in VC investing.
The second explanation is a variant on the governance explanation that fo
-cuses on the nexus between ownership and control. Here, the existence of a local 
2 
See Zalan (2004) and Wright et al. (2005) for comprehensive reviews of the academic literature 
on VC globalization.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 317
stock market as the main source of capital for growing ˜rms is singled out as a 
critical variable for vibrant VC industry growth. For example, Black and Gilson 
(1998) argue that economies with stock market-based ˜nancial systems have 

stronger VC industries than economies with bank-based systems, presumably 

because new ˜rms can raise capital in these markets. In a cross-national compari
-son, Jeng and Wells (2000) found that the numbers of inital public stock offerings 

(IPOs) in the domestic market were the strongest driver of VC investing.
Since IPOs are highly visible markers of wealth creation, one would expect 
that they would have a demonstration effect. However, Stuart and Sorenson™s 

(2003) research suggests that in the United States this effect is very local. The 

stock market-based explanation has a powerful appeal because it resonates with 

the obvious need for there to be exits for the reproduction of VC.
 This conclu
-sion is drawn from the success of VC ˜rms in the United States and the United 

Kingdom (unfortunately, the European data used for empirical studies during this 

period came from the EVCA and do not distinguish between BO and VC). More 

recently, this perspective has been brought into question because IPOs on foreign 

markets have been the exit strategy of choice for Israeli and Chinese ˜rms (Rock, 

2001; Zero2IPO.com, 2005).
These corporate governance/˜nancial system arguments have been ques
-tioned. For example, a study by Kaplan et al. (2003) of funding agreements from 

23 nations (not including the United States) found that U.S.-style contracts could 

be written in a wide range of legal regimes and were used by more experienced 

venture capitalists. The implication is that legal systems might not be as signi˜
-cant an obstacle as some believe. In a study to be discussed further later in the 

section, Guler and Guillen (2005, p. 31) found that legal effects vanished after 

controlling for national strength in science and technology. Using national-level 

variables, Allen and Song (2005) con˜rmed the dubiousness of the ﬁrule-of-lawﬂ 

position. They found that law and order were negatively related to VC investing. 

These studies suggest that governance and ˜nancial system explanations for the 

success of VC may be overemphasized. Given that venture capitalists have experi
-enced some recent success investing in China, it may be that an English common 

law-based legal system may not be required.
There is other evidence to con˜rm that the traditional arguments about legal 
environments may not be as important as previously thought. Through an analy
-sis of contracts written by U.S. venture capitalists in foreign markets, Kaplan 

et al. (2003) conclude that in nearly any environment it should be possible for 

VC ˜rms to write contracts or develop various mechanisms to ameliorate legal, 

regulatory, ˜scal, and structural obstacles to investment and exit, although the 

contracts may initially appear cumbersome.
3 We would extend this to suggest 
that if successful exits (through either acquisition or a public offering) occur 
3 
Lerner and Schoar (2005), studying private equity, come to different conclusions. However, this 
may be due to the difference in operation of PE and VC ˜rms. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
in these environments, then the contracts and other organizational features can 
coalesce into understood routines and be taken for granted. After routinization, 
the contracts would appear to the participants as unproblematic (e.g., offshore 

investment vehicles in China).
The ˜nance literature research on the global diffusion of venture capitalism 
is remarkable because it ignores the fact that the predominant deal ˚ow for ven
-ture capitalists has come from the information and communication technology 

(IT) ˜eld and the biomedical ˜eld. For example, in the United States from 2002 

to 2005, investments in IT as a share of total VC investments ranged between 

58 and 60 percent. Between 18 and 23 percent of total investments were in the 

life sciences, while the remainder were scattered across other industries. In 

Europe between 51 and 57 percent of the total investment was in IT, while the 

life sciences received a further 21 to 28 percent. In Israel, IT has been far more 

dominant, receiving 70-76 percent of total VC investments. In contrast, the life 

sciences received 16-19 percent (original data from VentureOne, Ernst & Young, 

and Martin Haemmig, 2006). These data indicate that, in each major Western 

VC market, more than 80 percent of all VC investments have been in the IT 

and biomedical ˜elds. In the hotbeds of investment activity (e.g., Silicon Valley, 

Boston, Israel, Stockholm, Cambridge [England], Austin), the percentages of VC 

invested in these technology areas are likely to be even greater. This strongly sug
-gests that VC investments in any nation cannot be explained without considering 

the nation™s technological base in general, and its IT and biomedical innovatory 

capabilities in particular.
Few studies of VC globalization have controlled for the VC recipient nation™s 
technological base. Using a sample of Organisation for Economic Co-operation 

and Development (OECD) nations, Astrid Romain and Bruno van Pottlesber
-ghe (2004) found that measures of technological strength such as patenting 

and research and development (R&D) investment were signi˜cant predictors of 

an increase in VC investment in that nation. In examining the overseas invest
-ments by U.S. venture capitalists, Guler and Guillen (2005, p. 30) found that a 

one-standard-deviation increase in a nation™s U.S. patents led to a 77.5 percent 

increase in the number of ventures receiving investment from U.S. VC ˜rms. 

Further, a one-standard-deviation increase in scienti˜c publications led to a 113.4 

percent increase in the number of ventures receiving investment from U.S. VC 

˜rms. No other measures, including stock market capitalization, political con
-straints, or number of students studying in the United States, were as important.
Although Guler and Guillen (2005) do not address the success of domestic 
VC ˜rms, their study does provide evidence that suggests support for Romain 

and van Pottlesberghe™s (2004) conclusion that technological capabilities are 

necessary to attract VC investment. As Avnimelech et al. (2005) argue, the VC 

industry in the United States and other nations has co-evolved with the technol
-ogy industries that venture capitalists fund. In short, scienti˜c and technological 

advance are the fuel for creating ˜rms capable of generating the returns necessary 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 319
to support a VC industry. This would suggest that models purporting to explain 
national experience in attracting VC investment (from either national or exter
-nal sources) that do not control for technological capability are fundamentally 
misspeci˜ed.
4With a few exceptions, previous studies have examined national VC indus
-tries and thus measure the diffusion of VC as a social function. The phenomenon 

of interest in this chapter is the globalization of VC (i.e., VC ˜rms operating 

across national boundaries). In a recent study of global VC investment patterns, 

Megginson (2004, p. 25) found that there was some evidence of ﬁsigni˜cant 

[international] convergence in funding levels, investment patterns, and real
-ized return.ﬂ And yet, he concluded that, because national capital markets have 

remained relatively segregated and legal systems remain different, ﬁit appears 

that no truly integrated global VC market will likely emerge in the foreseeable 

future.ﬂ There is evidence to qualify this conclusion.
Today, an increasing number of venture capitalists are investing successfully 
across borders. One important method of investing internationally is syndication. 

Recently, there have been a number of academic studies on the international 

syndication of VC investments. For example, Mäkelä and Maula (2006) found 

that the presence of foreign venture capitalists and top managers with foreign 

experience increases the probability that a portfolio ˜rm will list on foreign 

markets. Pagano et al. (2002) found that R&D-intensive ˜rms were more likely 

to undertake a foreign IPO, and this was supported by Hursti and Maula (2007). 

The apparent growing tendency for international syndication is creating a global 

network of VC ˜rms. This has occurred in conjunction with the increasing num
-ber of foreign listings on stock exchanges such as the NASDAQ and the London 

AIM. With these changes, the grounds for Megginson™s (2004) conclusion may 

be weakening.
THE HISTOR
Y OF 
VC GLOBALIZATION
During the past half-century, venture capitalism has diffused internationally 
in the sense that numerous nations have indigenous VC industries and increasing 

numbers of venture capitalists are investing across national borders. Although 

this chapter is most concerned with cross-national VC investing, the presence of 

local venture capitalists is often important because they are usually more tightly 

linked to local entrepreneurs and can function as intermediaries for larger foreign 

VC ˜rms. Additionally, when foreign VC ˜rms decide to enter a new market, 
4 
Perversely, the omission of technology variables in academic research is mirrored in ﬁVCﬂ invest
-ing in certain nations. For example, in a survey of British venture capitalists, Murray and Lott (1995) 
found that ﬁtechnology projects had to meet more rigorous selection criteria than non-technology 

projectsﬂ and ﬁinvestors imposed higher investment return ‚hurdle rates™ at each stage of investment 

other than seed capital.ﬂ Though it is dif˜cult to establish the direction of causality, this resonates 

with the perception that the U.K. VC industry is, in large measure, a PE industry.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
they will often form a partnership or even acquire a local VC ˜rm. This suggests 
that the growth of local venture capitalists and the entry of foreign venture capi
-talists into a market are intimately related.
A rough way of tracking the diffusion of indigenous VC activity is through 
counting the number of national VC organizations. In 1973, the National Ven
-ture Capital Association was established in the United States as the ˜rst national 
VC organization. Since then, at least, VC associations in 36 other nations have 

been formed. In addition to the United States, other early VC associations were 

established in Canada. These were followed by the establishment of a number 

of different national associations in Europe (largely contemporaneously) in the 

early 1980s. VC associations gradually spread to southern Europe and then later 

to eastern Europe. Because of the small size of the local VC industry in many 

of these nations, they had very few members. Over time, venture capitalists in 

Asia formed associations. The most recent major nation to form an association is 

China. Brazil has the only VC association in Latin America while South Africa 

has the only one in Africa.
More recently, regional VC/PE organizations have been formed. For ex
-ample, the EVCA was formed in 1983 and is the best organized of the regional 

VC associations. In 2001 the Asia Paci˜c Venture Capital Alliance was formed 

by the national organizations of Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and 

Taiwan. This was followed in 2002 by the formation of an organization called the 

Emerging Market Private Equity Association. This suggests that supranational 

structures are emerging, possibly leading to a global umbrella organization in 

the future.
The fact that a nation has an association does not prove, in and of itself, that 
it contains a vibrant VC industry. The existence of an association does provide 

a certain visibility, and the association can lobby the government to improve 

the environment for both VC and entrepreneurship. In the United States, Israel, 

and Taiwan, the national associations have had policy impacts. The EVCA has 

played an important role in lobbying the European Union (EU). At a minimum, 

the existence of national and regional VC associations demonstrates the broad 

diffusion of VC investing.
Cross-national VC investing has evolved gradually. The ˜rst important pe
-riod was in the 1970s when a number of European ˜nancial institutions estab
-lished U.S. subsidiaries or invested in U.S. VC ˜rms. Corresponding roughly 

to the 1980s, a second period occurred when U.S. East Coast VC ˜rms opened 

of˜ces in Europe (especially in London) in search of European investments. 

In the mid-1980s, several U.S. West Coast VC ˜rms were formed to invest in 

Taiwan and other parts of Sinophone Asia. Contemporaneously, a few Japanese 

VC ˜rms began investing abroad. At the end of the decade, Taiwanese VC ˜rms 

began investing in the United States. In addition, there was also an effort to es
-tablish VC ˜rms in various developing nations during the 1980s. A third period 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 321of international VC development occurred in the 1990s and is discussed in the 
next section on current cross-national linkages.
Pioneering venture capitalists were convinced of the importance of VC 
and the bene˜ts it could provide to society. Early VC ˜rms tended to invest 
locally (Hsu and Kenney, 2005). However, Kogut et al. (2006) showed that 

cross-regional co-investment occurred very early in the development of the U.S. 

VC industry. The initial efforts to globalize the VC model were missionary-like 

initiatives by the U.S. pioneers. The ˜rst effort was in 1960 when the Rockefeller 

VC operation opened an of˜ce in Brussels. Unfortunately, it had few successes 

and soon was abandoned (Wilson, 1985, p. 220). In 1962, American Research 

and Development (ARD) helped organize the Canadian Enterprise Development 

Corporation and European Enterprise Development Corporation. None of these 

initial efforts were sustainable and they were eventually discontinued.
Several U.S. technology startups that were backed by U.S. VC ˜rms began 
to provide large capital gains in the late 1960s. For example, ARD™s $70,000 

investment in DEC in 1957 appreciated to more than $350 million in 1969. This 

provided incentives for both foreign and domestic investors to invest in VC 

funds. Because of the informal nature of the VC industry during this early period, 

little is known about its global interconnections. In the early 1970s, pioneering 

VC ˜rms were established in the United Kingdom and then in the Netherlands 

and France (Manigart, 1994, p. 535). These marked the acceptance of the VC 

concept in Europe. Despite these new ˜rms in Europe, there were only a few new 

entrants per year and very few investment opportunities.
The ˜rst sustained global operations were by European ˜nancial institutions 
that either invested in U.S. partnerships or established VC investment operations 

in the United States. For example, in 1970, New Court Securities, which was an 

arm of the European Rothschild family, opened in New York City. Also, both 

the large French bank Indo-Suez and Guardian Ventures Limited of Canada es
-tablished U.S. VC branches. Contemporaneously, Genstar Corporation of Canada 

became the sole investor in Sutter Hill Ventures in the San Francisco Bay Area. 

These pioneers invested in the United States, not in their home nation.
Peter Brooke, the founder of TA Associates and one of the leading U.S. VCs, 
played a pivotal role in early international diffusion efforts. In 1971, he was ap
-pointed as a founding director of So˜nnova, which was capitalized by various 

French banks with the mandate to invest in both France and the United States 

(Advent International Corporation, 1986). In 1974, So˜nnova opened an of˜ce 

in San Francisco and made a number of successful investments in the nascent 

˜eld of biotechnology. In 1975, the Dutch investment company Orange Nassau 

started a U.S. fund managed by TA Associates.
In the 1970s, some U.S. VCs believed Europe would provide signi˜cant 
investment opportunities. For example, in 1971, U.S. venture capitalist Philip 

Greer (1971) opined that Europe was attractive because the lack of competition 

meant that ˜rm valuations were lower. He recognized that exits would be dif˜
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
cult because the only stock market having the requisite liquidity was the London 
Stock Exchange.
For this reason the prime exit strategy would be selling portfolio ˜rms to 
U.S. corporations. Greer also identi˜ed a shortage of entrepreneurs in Europe. 
He stated, ﬁThe entrepreneur concept is typically American and such activi
-ties have been discouraged in Europe.ﬂ These obstacles were compounded by 

a paucity of well-rounded managers, longer investment periods, a shortage of 

second- and third-stage ˜nancial sources, a European ˜nancial community that 

did not welcome outsiders, and higher costs of operation. Although Greer was 

optimistic about Europe, the reasons he identi˜ed were exactly those that stymied 

the development of the European VC industry up until the 1990s (PE investing 

was more successful).
After a severe downturn in the mid-1970s, the U.S. industry reawakened and 
a few more U.S. VC ˜rms entered Europe. In 1980, Peter Brooke established an 

international VC ˜rm, Advent International, with a London of˜ce. From there, 

it soon expanded to Belgium in 1982 and Singapore and Malaysia (SEAVIC) 

in 1983. In addition to these of˜ces, TA/Advent established linkages with Four 

Seasons Venture Capital in Sweden in 1982, TVM Techno Venture Management 

in 1983 in Munich, Germany, Advent Techno-Venture in 1984 in Tokyo, Alpha 

Associes in 1985 in Paris, and Horizonte Ventures in 1985 in Austria. The Advent 

network was the ˜rst VC ˜rm with a global presence.
Another pioneer was Apax, which was the result of a merger of a boutique 
international investment banking ˜rm established in 1972 by Ronald Cohen in 

the United Kingdom, Maurice Tchénio in Paris, and Alan Patricof in the United 

States. In 1981, Cohen raised their ˜rst U.K. £10 million fund with the assistance 

of Patricof, who also invested in the fund. In 1983, Tchénio raised a fund in 

France in which Patricof also invested. From this union, Apax grew to be one of 

the leading international VC/PE ˜rms, with of˜ces in New York, Menlo Park, 

London, Paris, Milan, Munich, Madrid, Tel Aviv, Stockholm, and Zurich.
As U.S. ˜rms entered Europe, European ˜rms continued to enter the U.S. 
market. For example, in 1981, the British ˜rm 3i opened an of˜ce in the United 

States, although it withdrew in the early 1990s (Coopey and Clark, 1995, p. 179). 

Atlas Venture, a division of the Dutch ING Bank, opened an of˜ce in Boston in 

1986. In 1982, Vincent Worms and Thomas McKinley at Partech International 

launched a Global Venture Fund for Banque Paribas in San Francisco and later 

in Paris. Yet another ˜rm, Alta Berkeley, was formed in 1982 in London in coop
-eration with the U.S. ˜rm Burr, Egan, and Deleage. Thus a cadre of transatlantic 

VCs came into being.
Despite the growth in VC operations, there was a continuing lack of high-
quality deals in Europe (Murray and Lott, 1995). As the Chairman of Apax 

Partners, Ronald Cohen, put it: ﬁToward the middle of the decade (1980s) there 

was a general shift away from business risk. This was partly the result of burnt 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 323˜ngers from start-up investments in the early 1980s, but also because of a move 
towards the quicker returns to be made from backing MBOs and exiting in a 
rising marketﬂ (quoted in Coopey and Clarke, 1995, p. 171). The theme of low 

returns for VC investing in Europe has been a constant refrain (see, e.g., Murray 

and Marriott, 1998) and is substantiated in Table 1, which compares returns from 

different investment stages in Europe and the United States. These data demon
-strate that the long-run returns for early-stage investing in Europe have been far 

lower than in the United States. Even for the balanced funds category, U.S. funds 

outperformed European funds. It has only been since the stock market bubble™s 

collapse in 2000 that European VC funds have performed roughly as well as 

U.S. funds. The disappointing European VC returns contrast with the superior 

performance of European PE funds.
A full explanation for the low returns to VC investing in Europe is outside 
the scope of this paper. However, it is possible to list some of the salient ele
-ments of such an explanation. Important elements include the relative weakness 

of European universities, corporations, and nations in the information technolo
-gies, with the possible exception of a few large corporate laboratories and a few 

universities. A similar but not quite as powerful advantage would be true in the 

biomedical sciences. Also, the enormous and very discerning U.S. IT market was 

a signi˜cant advantage. This meant Europe had fewer entrepreneurs, smaller con
-centrations of entrepreneurs, and slower growth in its entrepreneurial ˜rms. As a 

result, a path-dependent logic was set in motion, building upon signi˜cant ˜rst-

mover advantage in the United States, particularly in Silicon Valley and Boston. 

These factors may partially explain why the United States developed both VC and 

BO investing, whereas European investors emphasized BO investing.
Asia
Japanese corporate venturers and large Japanese VC ˜rms, nearly all of 
which were subsidiaries of large Japanese ˜nancial institutions, began globalizing 

slightly later in time than the initial European VC ˜rms. In 1983 the largest Japa
-TABLE 1
 Net Returns in European and U.S. Venture Capital and Buyout 
Investments by Stages as of December 31, 2005
a1 yr 
EU
1 yr 

USA
3 yr 

EU
3 yr 

USA
5 yr 

EU
5 yr 
USA
10 yr 

EU
10 yr 

USA
Balanced
32.7
24.3
2.8
11.7
Œ2.7
Œ3.5
7.6
18.9
All VC
25.4
15.6
0.6
7.5
Œ4.0
Œ6.8
5.3
23.7
Buyouts
20.9
31.3
7.9
16.3
5.0
5.2
12.6
9.2
 aNet internal rates of returns to investors in EU funds formed during the period 1986-2005 and U.S. 
funds formed during the period 1986-2005. These rates were calculated from Thomson Financial, the 

National Venture Capital Association, and European Venture Capital Association data.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
nese VC ˜rm, JAFCO (a Nomura Securities af˜liate), established its international 
of˜ce in Hong Kong. In July 1984, it established a Menlo Park, California, of
-˜ce and, in 1986, opened a representative of˜ce in London (Kuemmerle, 2001). 
Facilitated by the easy money available during the Japanese economic bubble of 

the 1980s, other Japanese VC ˜rms and industrial corporations invested in Silicon 

Valley and other locations at extremely high valuations. Unfortunately, in too 

many cases, these investments failed. As a result, many but not all of these Japa
-nese venturers retreated from these global ventures. Some ˜rms (e.g., JAFCO) 

continued to invest globally. During the dot-com boom, Softbank (a Japanese 

technology conglomerate) began investing globally. These global investments 

included the purchase of a large stake in Yahoo!. Today, Softbank is an active 

investor in China.
From the 1980s onward, international development organizations, particu
-larly the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which is a member of the 

World Bank Group, made a concerted effort to implant venture investing in 

the developing nations of Latin America, East and Southeast Asia, and Africa 

(Aylward, 1998; Fox, 1996). For example, the IFC, in concert with the U.S. 

Agency for International Development, British development agencies, and other 

European aid organizations, provided the initial capital for the ˜rst VC funds 

in India, Korea, and Southeast Asia (Dossani and Kenney, 2002; Kenney et al., 

2004). The modus operandi differed by nation. In some cases (e.g., India), the 

funds were invested in domestic VC ˜rms. In other cases, the funds were invested 

in an international VC ˜rm willing to create a country fund. This is exempli˜ed 

by Southeast Asia Venture Inc. (SEAVI), which was operated by Advent Inter
-national and headquartered in Singapore. At this time, the ˜nancial returns were 

mixed, even in nations where VC ˜rms would later succeed. Despite the failures, 

these initiatives helped promote other bene˜ts such as the training of VC person
-nel, changes in the legal system, and an increasing awareness of entrepreneurship 

(Dossani and Kenney, 2002; Kenney et al., 2004). The Taiwanese VC industry 

started in 1982 and grew rapidly. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the largest 

Taiwanese VC ˜rms established Silicon Valley operations. In many developing 

nations, however, VC funds failed due to inadequate investment opportunities 

(Aylward, 1998; Fox, 1996).
More recently, India has been attracting attention from international VC 
˜rms. As was the case with many developing nations, India received a spate of 

investment from U.S. VC ˜rms during the Internet bubble that ended in 2000 

(Dossani and Kenney, 2002). The ensuing downturn dried up most of the VC 

investment in India. From 2003 onward, the growing practice of international 

outsourcing of business services encouraged some global VC ˜rms to invest in 

Indian service delivery ˜rms. Thus far, there have been only a few exits in the 

form of mergers (e.g., Daksh was purchased by IBM for $170 million in 2004, 

Spectramind was purchased by Wipro for a total of approximately $150 million 

in a process in 2003, and 52 percent of MphasiS was purchased by EDS in 2006 

for $380 million).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 325These were good exits, although they did not provide the high multiples that 
have recently been obtained from investments in particular Chinese ˜rms. In part, 
this is because the Indian market is not as large as the Chinese market. Further
-more, there are no legal or language barriers to foreign ˜rms, and Indian ˜rms 

do not yet have global-class technology. At this point, India is mainly con˜ned 

to labor arbitrage opportunities (Dossani and Kenney, 2007). Given the types of 

recent R&D investment by multinational corporations in India, the skilled mana
-gerial and technical personnel in the Indian labor force, and the growing expertise 

of Indian ˜rms in software and software services, it is not unreasonable to expect 

the emergence of technology-based Indian startups that are globally competitive 

within the next 3 years (Dossani and Kenney, 2007).
In the 1990s, the environment changed for VC investing, even for the elite 
Silicon Valley venture capitalists. Initially, the changes were subtle. Histori
-cally, it was necessary for VC ˜rms from other nations to quickly establish an 

international of˜ce in Silicon Valley if they wanted to be considered a global 

player and take advantage of the investment opportunities found there. In con
-trast, because of the lucrative deals available locally, U.S. VC ˜rms in Silicon 

Valley responded to global opportunities at a much more gradual pace. Their 

awareness of international investment opportunities was heightened by the fact 

that the business plans of an increasing number of the U.S. ˜rms in which they 

invested (e.g., fabless semiconductor ˜rms) were predicated upon using offshore 

assets, particularly for manufacturing. Furthermore, the startup teams for these 

˜rms frequently had at least one member born overseas (Wong, 2005). In addi
-tion, a steady ˚ow of successful IPOs in the United States by venture-backed 

Israeli ˜rms achieved suf˜ciently large returns to draw the attention of Silicon 

Valley VC ˜rms. Finally, it became apparent that in certain promising technolo
-gies (e.g., wireless and software security), the United States was not the clear 

technological or market leader. Taken together, the development of VC industries 

in new nations, the emergence of a greater number of international investment 

opportunities, and strategic issues, such as ensuring that the ˜rms in which they 

had invested were properly positioned in the correct markets, encouraged all VC 

˜rms, including the elite Silicon Valley ˜rms, to make international investments 

and develop global strategies.
VENTURE CAPITAL GLOBALIZATION PATTERNS
There are few empirical studies of the reasons for VC globalization (for 
exceptions, see Cumming, 2002; Haemmig, 2003). The reasons for establishing 

overseas operations differ by ˜rm and home market circumstances. First, until 

recently, only the largest national markets, such as the United States, offered a 

suf˜cient number of high-quality investments to support a large VC ˜rm.
5 VC 
˜rms established in smaller markets and seeking critical mass, such as Atlas 
5 
The EU is probably a suf˜ciently large market.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Ventures of Holland or So˜nnova and Partech of France, necessarily must invest 
internationally. In many cases, this occurs through co-investment with a local ˜rm 
(e.g., a Dutch VC ˜rm invests in a German deal or a German VC ˜rm invests in 

a U.K. deal). Often, the foreign ˜rm offers only ˜nancial support and is not an 

active investor providing other services to the portfolio ˜rm. The nonlocal VC 

˜rm is normally a passive investor.
A deeper commitment is to establish an of˜ce overseas. For example, 3i 
opened its U.S. operation because it was believed essential to be present in the 

most dynamic VC market (Coopey and Clarke, 1995, p. 357). The branch of˜ce 

can provide a variety of services to its headquarters. For example, if it is located 

in a leading entrepreneurial cluster it can provide market information to the home 

of˜ce to prevent it from investing in ﬁme-tooﬂ startups. Alternatively, in tech
-nologies where the skills may be available in multiple locations, the branch of˜ce 

may notice initiation of investment by leading venture capitalists in the United 

States and pass this information to its parent of˜ce so that it can fund domestic 

startupsŠreceiving such a signal early could prove a signi˜cant advantage. In 

this case, the foreign branch creates a window into market developments.
Foreign branch of˜ces can provide services to parent ˜rms, such as providing 
introductions to potential suppliers, customers, or strategic partners. Foreign of
-˜ces may begin as a listening post or contact point for later-stage investing while 

also serving as a marketing differentiator in the home market if domestic entre
-preneurs seek a VC ˜rm capable of providing introductions in the foreign market. 

For non-U.S. ˜rms, a U.S. of˜ce might be useful for their portfolio company in 

securing follow-on investments from U.S. VC ˜rms that can help ﬁcertifyﬂ the 

foreign ˜rm. This may increase the value of the non-U.S. ˜rm, particularly if 

it is to have a public offering on a U.S. stock exchange, or if the ˜rm is being 

considered as an acquisition target by a U.S. corporation.
Depending on subjective decisions about an entrepreneur™s trustworthiness 
and excellence, and facing a need to monitor the managers of ˜rms in which 

they invest, the international investments of VC ˜rms should pose considerably 

greater dif˜culties compared to their domestic investments. In one of the few 

studies of foreign VC investors operating in another country, Mäkelä (2004) 

found that foreign VC ˜rms in Finland tended to have lower commitment to the 

Finnish ˜rms in which they were invested compared to domestic investors. On 

the positive side, the foreign VC ˜rms provided an important legitimating func
-tion to the Finnish ˜rms in which they were invested. In comparing foreign and 

domestic VC ˜rms operating in India, Pruthi et al. (2003) found that domestic 

˜rms were more apt to provide advice and monitoring for their portfolio ˜rms 

while foreign ˜rms placed greater emphasis on strategic positioning. Despite 

these bene˜ts, Lara Baracel (2004) found that U.S. VC ˜rms have enjoyed sig
-ni˜cantly less success (measured by exits) with foreign investments compared 

to domestic investments.
The motivation for VC globalization differs by nation. In a survey of VC 
˜rms, Haemmig (2003) found signi˜cant differences by home region (see Ta
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 327ble 2).
6 The most striking aspect regarding motives was how different the U.S. 
˜rms were from those in Europe and Asia. U.S. ˜rms reported two primary mo
-tives: ˜rst, a desire to invest in technologies that were superior abroad or in indus
-trial sectors that had promising startups in other nations (e.g., mobile telephony 
and security software), and second, some believed that foreign deals were less 

expensive. In addition, some wanted to assist their portfolio ˜rms in globalizing 

their markets. U.S. VC ˜rms were not motivated to invest overseas by pressures 

or dif˜culties within the U.S. market. The reasons Asian ˜rms gave for globaliza
-tion were an insuf˜cient domestic deal ˚ow and the potential of higher returns 

from abroadŠnearly the polar opposite of the U.S. ˜rms. For the Asian ˜rms, 

the only other signi˜cant issue was a need to operate in larger markets. European 

VCs agreed with Asian ˜rms on the insuf˜cient domestic deal ˚ow, but they also 

felt a need to assist their portfolio ˜rms in globalizing. Higher potential returns 

and larger markets were also mentioned. The most remarkable difference between 

the Europeans and the Asians was that the Asian VCs did not believe that they 

needed to assist their domestic ˜rms in internationalizing their investments. In 

summary, U.S. VCs responded to business and technology opportunities abroad, 

while European and Asian VCs were reacting to dif˜culties in their domestic 

markets in terms of either deal ˚ow or returns.
In contrast to most academic work that models globalization as a con
-scious strategy from its inception (e.g., Guler and Guillen, 2005), two-thirds of 

Haemmig™s (2003) respondents answered that their ˜rst foreign investment was 

due to an opportunity presenting itself rather than a conscious strategy. At the 

time of the interview, 89.5 percent of the ˜rms claimed that they had developed 

a written strategy for their international activities after the fact to rationalize their 

globalization efforts. This suggests that the initial investments were suf˜ciently 

successful to encourage a greater commitment to overseas investing.
These results are reinforced by the responses to the question of whether their 
international investments and operations were ﬁadd-onﬂ businesses or were of 

strategic importance. Only 32 percent of the U.S. ˜rms saw their international 

investments as being of strategic importance. In contrast, 68 percent of the Euro
-pean ˜rms and 91 percent of the Asian ˜rms saw their international investments 

as strategic. These responses suggest that many U.S. ˜rms are motivated by an 

ﬁopportunity pull,ﬂ whereas Asian and European ˜rms are motivated by the push 

of being located in inadequate markets. In turn, U.S. ˜rms may be less than com
-mitted to their foreign operations due to the voluntary nature of their decision 

to globalize. Of course, the U.S. ˜rms are not monolithic. Some were founded 

with an international mandate and, thus, are entirely committed to international 

investing.
6 
These results are from Haemmig (2003), who in 2001 conducted interviews at 95 VC ˜rms in 12 
nations (25 in the United States, 38 in Europe, and 32 in Asia). The de˜nition of a globalized ˜rm 
in Table 5 was whether it invested more than 10 percent of its total capital outside its geographic 

region.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 2
 Reasons for International Investments by VC Firms (in percent)
aU.S.
(n = 28)
Europe

(n = 34)
Asia

(n = 33)
Insuf˜cient domestic deal ˚ow in sectors
024
34
Higher return potential outside home country
016
31
Need to bring portfolio ˜rms international
12
24
3No other choice but going to the main markets
016
16
Less competitive in foreign countries
24
30New emerging technology that is superior to the U.S.
28
00Industry sector is global (telecommunication/wireless, biotech, IT)
24
13
9Other
12
56 aMay not sum to 100 percent due to rounding error.
SOURCE: Haemmig (2003).
In summary, there does not appear to be a single evolutionary logic for 
globalization at the ˜rm level, despite the unmistakable tendency toward inter
-nationalization of investment at the industry level. Nevertheless, the relational 
aspects of VC investing and the concentration of good deals in relatively few 

locations mean that VC investing is not ﬁglobalﬂ in the sense that VC capital 

˚ows with equal ease to all parts of the world. The United States in general, and 

Silicon Valley in particular, continues to be the center of the global VC industry. 

This is predicated on a number of advantages: the most experienced VCs, the 

most venture capital, the most sophisticated markets, the most experienced pool 

of managers, the most sophisticated entrepreneurial support network, and, in most 

˜elds, the best technologists. These advantages will erode slowly if at all. Current 

globalization does not threaten the U.S. innovation system. One current hotbed of 

investmentŠTaiwanŠhas very few startups that compete with U.S. ˜rms. The 

other major hotbedŠIsraelŠdoes generate ˜rms that compete with U.S. ˜rms. 

However, Israel is so small that it poses little signi˜cant threat and, moreover, the 

amount of VC invested in Israel is growing only gradually. The current pattern of 

globalization seems to be reinforcing the centrality of the U.S. VC industry, even 

as other nations are experiencing a growth in VC investment.
A QUANTITATI
VE O
VER
VIEW OF THE GLOBAL 
VENTURE CAPITAL INDUSTR
YMultinational ˚ows of VC have become signi˜cant. Using data from the 
National Venture Capital Association, EVCA, Israeli Venture Capital Associa
-tion, and the Asian Venture Capital Journal (2001), we aggregated data on the 

investment ˚ows between and within four regionsŠthe United States, Europe, 

Asia, and Israel. These data indicate that cross-regional VC investing (i.e., a VC 

˜rm based in one region investing in a ˜rm in another region) is signi˜cant for 

all four regions. The data in Table 3 indicate that approximately 79 percent of the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 329total VC invested in 2005 came from U.S. VC ˜rms. In comparison, 15 percent 
came from European VC ˜rms, 4 percent came from Asian VC ˜rms, and 1 per
-cent came from Israeli VC ˜rms. These data indicate that the United States was 
closest to self-suf˜ciency in its VC investment ˚ows compared to the other three 

regions. Approximately 93 percent (21,914 of 23,447) of the total VC invested 

in U.S. companies in 2005 came from U.S. VC ˜rms. Furthermore, of the $24.9 

billion invested by U.S. VC ˜rms in 2005, approximately 88 percent (21,914 of 

24,925) was invested in U.S. companies.
The United States exported roughly $3 billion in VC. This is approximately 
twice the $1.5 billion it received from the other regions.
7 European ˜rms were the 
largest external investors in the United States, contributing $840 million in VC 

funds. Europe received $2 billion in in˚ows from other nations with the United 

States providing the preponderance ($1.8 billion). This represented 33 percent of 

the total VC investment in Europe. In Israel, U.S. VC ˜rms invested almost as 

much capital as did the Israelis ($158 million vs. $208 million). Israeli invest
-ments outside the country were insigni˜cant. In Asia, the United States was also 

the largest investor, providing $798 million in VC funds. This was a greater sum 

that the total intraregional investments by Asian VC ˜rms. European investments 

in Asia were only one-third that of U.S. ˜rms.
8 The bulk of the Asian outward 
investment was directed toward the United States (80 percent or $502 million). 

Asian investments in Israel or Europe were relatively negligible. In 2005, the total 

VC invested interregionally was approximately $5 billion, or 18 percent of the 

VC invested internationally. Of this, the United States provided nearly 60 per
-cent. These aggregate statistics con˜rm that the United States remains the global 

center for VC investing, both as an investor and recipient of investment.
Although Megginson (2004) may be correct that a global market for VC has 
not yet emerged, these data demonstrate that there are now large international 

˚ows of VC. These international ˚ows are even larger if one considers that intra-

European and intra-Asian ˚ows also involve investment across national boundar
-ies, albeit within each region. Although we do not present the data on the ˚ow 

of investments in VC funds, U.S. VC ˜rms invested a greater percentage abroad 

than U.S. investors provided to foreign-based VC ˜rms. This suggests that U.S. 

investors may have a bias toward U.S. ˜rms and, perhaps, trust them to make the 

investments abroad. In summary, the quantitative data strongly suggest that, with 

the possible exception of the United States, national VC markets are not autarchic 

and a global deal market is emerging.
7 
The $3 billion allocated to Europe by U.S. venture capitalists includes capital that was raised by 
U.S. venture capitalists for Europe in Europe (e.g., Accel Europe).
8 
The capital allocated to Asia by U.S. venture capitalists includes capital that was raised by U.S. 
venture capitalists for Asia in Asia (e.g., Walden International has many Asian investors, but it is 
based in San Francisco). 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 3
 Interregional Flows of Venture Capital Investment (in millions of 
U.S. dollars) by Location of Firm and Location of Investment, 2005
Location of VC Firm 
(origin of investor)
 2005 Location of Investments by VC Firms
North America 
($M)
Europe 

($M)
Israel 

($M)
Asia 

($M)
Rest of World 

($M)
Total 

($M)
North America
21,914
1,837
158
798
218
24,925
Europe
840
3,486
35
163
59
4,583
Israel
139
30
208
00377
Asia
502
118
4502
31,129
RoW
52
42
759
231
391
TOTAL ($M)
23,447
5,513
412
1,522
511
31,405
SOURCE: Compiled by Martin Haemmig, www.martinhaemmig.com, from data provided by Na
-tional Venture Capital Association/Venture Economics, European Venture Capital Association, Asian 

Venture Capital Journal, and Israeli Venture Capital Association.
THE CHINA S
YNDROME
In the past 5 years China has become a fertile environment for VC invest
-ing, despite the fact that it does not have an adequate legal or ˜nancial system. 
What China does have is a booming economy with large numbers of increasingly 

wealthy consumers and trained engineers. Also, it is experiencing rapidly increas
-ing R&D expenditures in both industry and government (Jefferson and Gian, 

2007). This vortex of opportunity has attracted business persons of all types and 

venture capitalists are no exception. Foreign venture capitalists have ˚ocked to 

invest in China in both technological and nontechnological ˜elds. Because of the 

topic of this chapter, this section is con˜ned to VC investing in China and does 

not examine the state of Chinese high technology, except in relationship to the 

˜rms that have funded by VC. With about $1.9 billion invested in 2006, China 

ranked second after the U.S. in total VC investment (Ernst & Young 2007). In 

2007, venture capitalists raised $5.8 billion in funds dedicated to investment in 

China, which was nearly 50 percent more than in 2006 (Zero-2-IPO, 2008).
9 This increase was, in large measure, motivated by the successful earlier exits by 

VC-backed Chinese ˜rms on international stock markets. The data in Table 4 

indicate that the most active VC ˜rms are foreign, particularly those from the 

United States. Firms from other nations, such as Softbank from Japan, also are 

present. However, from 2005 to 2006 more domestic Chinese VC ˜rms were 

entering the Top Twenty. Whether this is a trend or anomaly is not certain, but is 

an interesting phenomenon to watch.
There are currently four avenues for venture capitalists to exit their invest
-ments in Chinese ˜rms. The ˜rst avenue is acquisition by foreign multinationals. 
9 
Some or possibly a large portion of these funds may be used in PE transactions.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 331
TABLE 4
 Top Venture Capital Firms in China by US$ Invested, 2005 and 
2006
Rank
Firm Rank 2006
Nationality
Firm Rank 2005
Nationality
1IDG Technology Venture 
Investment
U.S. 
IDG Technology Ventures
U.S. 
2SAIF Partners (Softbank) 
Japan
SAIF Partners (Softbank)
Japan
3Sequoia Capital China
U.S.
Venture TDF
China 
4Legend Capital (corporate)
China
CDH Investments
Singapore/U.S.
5Granite Global Ventures 
U.S.
DFJ ePlanet
U.S.
6Softbank China VC
Japan
Softbank China VC
Japan
7Walden International
U.S. 
Granite Global Ventures
U.S.
8JAFCO Asia (corporate)
Japan
Intel Capital China
U.S. 

(corporate)
9Intel Capital (corporate)
U.S.
3i 
U.K.
10
CDH Ventures
Singapore/U.S.
NewMargin Ventures
China 
11
iD TechVentures Ltd.
China
Warburg Pincus Asia LLC
U.S.
12
WI Harper
U.S.
Doll Capital Management
U.S.
13
Doll Capital Management
U.S.
Actis China Limited
U.K.
14
Qiming Venture Partners
China
Sequoia Capital China
U.S.
15
DT Capital Partners
China
Shandong High 

Technology Investment
China 

(government)
16
Venture TDF China LP
China
Paci˜c Venture Partners
Taiwan
17
Capital Today Group
China
Shenzhen Capital Group
China 

(government)
18
Orchid Asia Group 
Hong Kong
Legend Capital
China 

(corporate)
19
CEYUAN Ventures
China
WI Harper Group
U.S. 
20
GSR Ventures
China
DragonTech Ventures
Hong Kong
SOURCE: Zero2IPO (various years).
There have been a number of successes, including Yahoo™s $1 billion purchase of 
40 percent of the Chinese e-commerce ˜rm Alibaba, the purchase of Longshine 

in 2005 for $30 million by the U.S. ˜rm Amdocs, and TDK™s purchase of ATL 

for $100 million in 2005. The second avenue is acquisition by Chinese ˜rms. A 

number of these have provided high returns to their investors.
The third exit window is listing on foreign markets, since Chinese ˜rms 
backed by foreign VC cannot list on Chinese markets. Foreign VC ˜rms play a 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
vital role in advising and preparing Chinese ˜rms for listing on the U.S. NAS
-DAQ. Listing in the United States is important, because it has the largest and 
most liquid markets. Conversely, Chinese listings are becoming important for 

U.S. exchanges. In 2004 there were 21 VC-backed IPOs of Chinese ˜rms, 10 

of which were in the United States. These constituted more than 10 percent of 

the 93 VC-backed IPOs in the United States that year. In 2005, 20 VC-backed 
Chinese ˜rms listed internationally. Of these, 8 exited in the United States. That 
year, there were only 57 VC-backed IPOs in the United States (Zero2IPO, 2005). 

Moreover, many Chinese listings performed well in the aftermarket. The ˜nal exit 

is in the increasingly active Chinese stock markets.
U.S. VC ˜rms have been intimately involved in the Chinese startups listing 
on U.S. markets. Using data from U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ˜l
-ings for IPOs, we extracted the names of the venture capitalists serving on these 

˜rms™ boards of directors. The preponderance of the ˜rms had foreign venture 

capitalists on their board of directors (this includes non-Hong Kong venture 

capitalists located in Hong Kong). The representation of Silicon Valley venture 

capitalists is particularly striking. This suggests that these individuals may be 

transferring Silicon Valley-like practices and routines for managing high-technol
-ogy startups to China.
Do these Chinese startups have unique or global-class technology that might 
threaten U.S. dominance? Table 5 lists Chinese ˜rms with IPO in the United 

States from 1999 to 2005. The activities of these ˜rms suggest that the Chinese 

startups exiting in the United States are ﬁme-tooﬂ emulators of overseas business 

models, semiconductor design ˜rms operating at the lower-technology end of the 

marketplace (e.g., Vimicro and Actions), semiconductor fabrication ˜rms that are 

direct competitors with Taiwanese ˜rms (e.g., SMIC), or ˜rms that are not based 

on technology but instead rely on business models that may not be adaptable 

outside of China. An example of such business models is Focus Media, which 

rents space in elevators on which it installs ˚at panel screens displaying adver
-tisements. In summary, nearly all of these ˜rms serve the rapidly growing and 

underserved Chinese consumer market or are part of a global division of labor 

that does not directly affect U.S. ˜rms.
This relatively negative assessment of the technology base of these VC-
backed Chinese ˜rms does not imply that China will not rapidly improve its 

technological capacity. Given the current trajectory, it is possible that some ˜rms 

with unique global or near-global class technology may appear within 3 to 5 

years. Certainly, the success of Huawei and ZTE,
10
 which were not VC ˜nanced, 
10
 Huawei and ZTE are the largest Chinese telecommunications equipment ˜rms and have become 
signi˜cant competitors in not only the Chinese market but also global markets. Examples of their 
developed nation competitors include Cisco, Lucent, Nortel, and Alcatel. In 2006, Huawei™s global 

sales were $8.2 billion, of which 58 percent were outside of China (Huawei, 2007). In 2005, ZTE™s 

global sales were $2.9 billion (
Byte and Switch
, 2006), and it competed particularly ˜ercely in the 
wireless infrastructure space.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 333
TABLE 5
 Chinese Entrepreneurial Ventures™ IPOs on the U.S. Markets, 
1999-2005
Firm Name
Year of 
IPO
Activity
Analogous 

Offshore Firms
AsiaInfo Holdings 
2000
Software and online services for China
Many ˜rms
Netease.com Inc
2000
Online games
Many ˜rms
Sohu.com Inc
2000
Web portal
Yahoo!
China Finance Online
2004
Chinese ˜nancial information
Hoovers
KongZhong Corp
2004
Wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)
Many ˜rms
Ninetowns Digital
2004
Software for import/export from China
Many ˜rms
Elong Inc
2004
Travel site
Expedia
TOM Online Inc
2004
Wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)
Many ˜rms
Baidu.com Inc
2005
Web search
Google
Hurray! Holding 
2005
Wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)
Many ˜rms
Vimicro International
2005
IC design
Many ˜rms
Watchdata Technologies
2005
Smart card operating system for China
Many ˜rms
China Medical Tech.
2005
Ultrasound cancer treatment equipment
Many ˜rms
China Techfaith Wireless
2005
Handset design
Many ˜rms
Ctrip.com International
2003
Travel site
Expedia
51job Inc
2004
Job website
Monster
Linktone Ltd
2004
Wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)
Many ˜rms
Semiconductor Mfg. Int.
2004
Semiconductor foundry
TSMC (Taiwan)
Shanda Interactive
2004
Multiplayer games
Many ˜rms
The9 Limited
2004
Multiplayer games
Many ˜rms
Focus Media Holding
2005
Advertising in elevators
Not technology
China.com Corp
1999
Wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)
Many ˜rms
Asiacontent.com 
2000
Internet solutions and online advertising
Many ˜rms
Sina.com
2000
Web portal
Yahoo!
Wherever.net
2000
Discounted mobile telephony (defunct)
Many ˜rms
Actions Semiconductor
2005
IC design
Many ˜rms
Suntech Power
2005
Photovoltaics
Many ˜rms
SOURCE: Compiled by authors.
suggests such an outcome. The enormous investments by the Chinese govern
-ment, the return of well-trained Chinese workers from overseas, and the growth 
of the Chinese economy make negative predictions about the level of Chinese 

technology and innovation unlikely to hold true in the long term.
The evidence suggests that international VCs are more active than domestic 
VCs in China. For example, approximately 75 percent of the VC funds invested in 

China recently have come from foreign sources (Zero2IPO, 2005). Although it is 

dif˜cult to be certain, there is evidence to suggest that clusters of entrepreneurial 

˜rms, VC ˜rms, and other startup service providers may be emerging in Beijing 

and Shanghai (Kenney et al., 2004). All Chinese ˜rms listed on the NASDAQ 

were focused on the Chinese internal market with the exception of the Semicon
-ductor Manufacturing International Corporation, which was a semiconductor 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.334
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
fabrication ˜rm competing directly with Taiwanese ˜rms. The two Chinese semi
-conductor design ˜rms listed on the NASDAQŠActions and VimicroŠappear to 
be focused on the domestic market. At this point, these ˜rms are not competing 

directly with U.S. design ˜rms, which focus on cutting-edge technologies.
The ˜rms that have listed thus far are not direct competition for U.S. high-
technology ˜rms. However, since U.S. VC ˜rms are employing Chinese profes
-sionals, there will be a transfer of skills from the United States to China in the 

craft of venture investing. Furthermore, the substantial numbers of startups that 

have grown and managed successful exits imply that a class of experienced en
-trepreneurs is emerging in China. Already, a number of these entrepreneurs are 

being employed by U.S. VC ˜rms or are establishing their own VC ˜rms with 

signi˜cant investment from U.S. VC ˜rms. The ˜nal missing ingredient is world-

class technology. Despite the fact that China does not appear to have global-class 

technological opportunities, the rapidly growing domestic market is creating 

numerous opportunities for substantial capital gains attracting venture capitalists 

from around the world.
DISCUSSION
One question motivating this book is the availability of reputable quantitative 
information on R&D globalization. Only 5 years ago, it was nearly impossible to 

measure VC industry globalization because of the lack of comparable statistics 

and collection standards. The globalization of the VC industry has increased the 

demand for standardized information on industry trends throughout the global 

economy. At the behest of the EVCA and National Venture Capital Associa
-tion, the comparability among North American, European, and Israeli data has 

improved. Thomson and Ernst & Young have initiated a global standardization 

initiative that is now being extended to Asia; this will further improve compara
-bility. Within 5 years, a robust global reporting system should be in place.
While the globalization of VC has diffused this institution to many other 
nations, Silicon Valley in the United States unambiguously continues to be the 

center of the VC industry. One issue of concern is whether investment in foreign 

companies by U.S. VC ˜rms contributes to eroding the competitiveness of the 

United States in high-technology industries. U.S. VC ˜rms have invested in Euro
-pean companies for at least two decades. They soon learned to invest primarily in 

BO deals because there were too few startup deals. Recently, there have been bet
-ter early-stage deals in Europe, which has attracted investment by U.S. VC ˜rms. 

For example, the recent acquisition of Skype by eBay for $4 billion is an exit that 

will likely attract more U.S. VC investments in European ˜rms. In addition, Israel 

continues to attract U.S. VC investment. An investigation of VC investments in 

Taiwanese companies found that Taiwanese startups do not appear to be in direct 

competition with U.S. startups, with the exception of the area of semiconductor 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 335
design (U.S. Government Accountability Of˜ce, 2006). In sum, at this juncture it 
would appear that the investments of U.S. VC ˜rms in Europe, Israel, and Taiwan 
have had a negligible effect on U.S. technological competitiveness.
The cross-national investments by U.S. VC ˜rms that have caused the great
-est concern are those in China. This is due to the belief that these investments 

are assisting in the development of foreign competition for the U.S. lead in high 

technology. This may be a valid concern for the future. Chinese ˜rms such as 

Huawei, ZTE, and Lenovo (none of which were VC-funded) are already serious 

competitors in certain markets. However, as we have discussed, Chinese ˜rms 

funded by VC do not yet appear to pose competition at a global level. The other 

chapters in this book will answer the question of whether global-class technology 

is currently being developed, either in Chinese ˜rms and universities, or in the 

R&D operations of multinational ˜rms in China. This chapter did not examine 

VC investing in India, which up until the last 18 months has been quite limited, 

but in 2007 began to grow rapidly.
There is little reason to believe that investment by foreign VC ˜rms in the 
United States has had a negative effect on U.S. technological competitiveness; 

European VC ˜rms have a long history of investing in the United States. It is 

more likely that the in˚ow of European VC has provided a net bene˜t to the U.S. 

economyŠEuropean governments believe this to be the case. One bene˜t for the 

United States is that, at a minimum, European VC ˜rms, as well as Israeli VC 

˜rms, nearly always pressure their portfolio ˜rms to open an of˜ce in the United 

States. Their objective has been to access U.S. knowledge and markets. In return, 

this validates and reinforces the United States as the center of global technology. 

It is dif˜cult to interpret this as negative.
There are recent developments in international stock markets that may have 
implications for U.S. technological competitiveness. A debate in the industry 

and exempli˜ed by a 2005 article in the 
Venture Capital Journal
 suggests that 
the willingness of ˜rms to list on U.S. markets may be decreasing due to the 

high cost of complying with Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) legislation (Sheahan, 2005). 

The argument is that U.S. markets may be losing their centrality in VC invest
-ing, particularly for smaller IPOs. For example, of a total of 78 IPOs in 2005 

by 30 top-quartile U.S. VC ˜rms, only 45 were listed in the United States. The 

remaining 33 were listed in non-U.S. markets including London (LSE and AIM), 

Taiwan, Hong Kong (main board and GEM), Japan (JASDAQ), Korea (Kosdaq), 

Singapore, and Malaysia. Whether this recent trend will endure is uncertain as it 

is also possible that these offshore IPOs involve lower-quality ˜rms. SOX may 

be shifting inferior listings to markets with looser disclosure and listing standards. 

Alternatively, shifting listings away from U.S. markets could impact the health 

of U.S. equity markets by encouraging listing abroad. Despite this shift in list
-ing, the larger exits for VC-˜nanced high-technology ˜rms continue to be on the 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.336
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
NASDAQ. So, the suspicion that SOX legislation is convincing ˜rms to list in 
other markets has not been de˜nitively proven.
11
CONCLUSION
The VC industry has experimented with globalization for the past 40 years. 
In the last 10 years, and particularly since the 2000 U.S. stock market meltdown, 
globalization has advanced rapidly as the largest VC ˜rms have established cross-

national partnerships and overseas of˜ces and have co-invested abroad. We ex
-pect this trend to continue to grow as other nations develop signi˜cant clusters of 

expertise and ˜rms worthy of VC investment, global corporations accelerate their 

practice of acquiring foreign startups, and exit markets are increasingly global.
The reasons for globalization vary not only by VC ˜rm, but also by nation. 
Until recently, U.S. VC ˜rms, particularly in Silicon Valley, experienced little 

pressure to globalize. For European and Asian ˜rms, better returns and more 

investment opportunities were prime motivators for investing and operating in 

the United States. For the European ˜rms, the ability to assist their portfolio 

˜rms abroad (in the U.S. market) was also an important globalization motivator. 

In contrast, Asian VC ˜rms did not attach as much importance to these reasons, 

suggesting that the Asian ˜rms in which they were investing had minimal global 

operational ambitions (e.g., nearly all of the Chinese ˜rms that went public on 

NASDAQ did not target external markets). Although U.S. VC ˜rms have been 

privileged by being located in the world™s largest and most lucrative investment 

environment, many major U.S. VC ˜rms are globalizing.
In 2007 the VC industry was well into the process of globalization. The IT 
industries have always been the core business ˜eld for VC investing and U.S. 

˜rms have dominated this ˜eld. At this time, there is no indication that any other 

business ˜eld, such as biotechnology, nanotechnology, superconductivity, or 

green energy technologies, will displace the IT sector in the near future in terms 

of the size and speed of capital gains generation. Should the U.S. ability to gen
-erate IT and biomedical innovations capable of being commercialized for large 

capital gains decline, VC ˜rms will shift their investment to more promising 

locations and technologies (if any emerge).
The continuing globalization of R&D described in the other chapters of this 
volume suggests that VC ˜rms will also continue to globalize as investment op
-portunities proliferate. At this point, VC industry globalization does not threaten 

U.S. leadership in technological innovation. Extrapolating from the historical 

record, what would be most likely to threaten innovation leadership would be 

U.S. decisions that weaken the ˚ow of innovative opportunities and the supply 

of technically pro˜cient, well-trained entrepreneurs (e.g., changes in immigra
-11
 Doidge et al. (2007) dispute the hypothesis that SOX has caused listings to be moved to London 
markets.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 337
tion policy, research funding policy, tax policies, or secrecy that sti˚es the free 
˚ow of engineers, scientists, and information). There is little evidence to suggest 
that innovation is a zero-sum game (i.e., if Country A innovates, then Country 

B cannot). Having said this, it is undeniable that technological expertise is not 

as concentrated in the United States as it was even one decade ago. Moreover, 

technological creativity is based on the talent of human beings, and they are more 

mobile than ever.
Venture capitalists are opportunistic and their ˜rms™ investments will ˚ow to 
opportunities wherever they are located. There can be little doubt that the addition 

of VC to a region that already has the technical capabilities and a ˚edgling en
-trepreneurial environment can accelerate and feed the development of a virtuous 

circle of further entrepreneurship and a concomitant increase in VC investment. 

A supply of VC without a large number of high-technology entrepreneurs will 

not ignite new ˜rm formation. The globalization of VC will not result in a lack of 

available capital in the United States. Policies that reduce the number of global-

class technologists and entrepreneurs in the United States will directly affect 

decisions by venture capitalists to invest in the United States.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
Martin Haemmig thanks Jesse Reyes (formerly Vice President at Venture 
Economics) and John Gabbert (until recently at VentureOne) for providing data. 

Martin Kenney thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for supporting his research 

on the globalization of the venture capital industry. The authors thank Ra˜q Dos
-sani and John Taylor of the National Venture Capital Association for comments. 

We owe a debt of gratitude to Jeffrey Macher, David Mowery, and two anony
-mous reviewers for their invaluable critiques and comments that sharpened our 

thinking and improved the chapter.
REFERENCES
Advent International Corporation. (1986). 
Advent International Corporation. 
Boston, MA.
Aldrich, H. E., and M. C. Fiol. (1994). Fools rush in? The institutional context of industry creation. 
Academy of Management Review
 19(4):645-670.
Allen, F., and W. Song. (2005). Venture Capital and Corporate Governance. Wharton Financial 
Center Working Paper 03-05.
Asian Venture Capital Journal. (2001). 
The 2000 Guide to Venture Capital in Asia, Volume 
1. Hong 
Kong: Asian Venture Capital Journal.
Avnimelech, G., M. Kenney, and M. Teubal. (2004). Building Venture Capital Industries: Under
-standing the U.S. and Israeli Experience. Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy, 
Working Paper 160.
Aylward, A. (1998). 
Trends in Venture Capital Finance in Developing Countries. 
International Fi
-nance Corporation Discussion Paper Number 36. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.338
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Baracel, A. L. (2004). Performance of Cross-Border Venture Capital Investment. Paper presented 
at the Financial Management Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans, La., October 7-10, 
2004.
Black, B., and R. Gilson. (1998). Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus 
stock markets. 
Journal of Financial Economics
 47(3):243-277.
Bottazzi, L., M. D. Rin, and T. Hellman. (2005). What Role of Legal Systems in Financial Intermedia
-tion? Theory and Evidence. University of Bocconi Working Paper 233.
Byte and Switch. 2006. ZTE Key Financials, 2002-2005. Available at http://www.byteandswitch.
com/document.asp?doc_id=99265&page_number=2&table_number=2. Accessed February 1, 

2007.
Clark, R. (1987). 
Venture Capital in Britain, America and Japan.
 London and Sydney: Croom 
Helm.
Coopey, R., and D. Clark. (1995). 
3i: Fifty Years Investing in Industry.
 Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Cumming, D. J. (2002). Contracts and Exits in Venture Capital Finance. Working Paper, University 
of Alberta School of Business.
Doidge, C. A., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz. (2007). Has New York Become Less Competitive 
in Global Markets? Evaluating Foreign Listing Choices over Time. Fisher College of Business 

Working Paper No. 2007-03-012. Available at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=98219
3. Accessed July 
2007.
Dossani, R., and M. Kenney. (2002). Creating an environment for venture capital in India. 
World 
Development
 30(2):227-253.
Dossani, R., and M. Kenney. (2007). The next wave of globalization: Relocating service provision 
to India. 
World Development.
Ernst & Young. 2007. Acceleration: Global Venture Capital Insights Report 2007. Available 
at http://www.ey.com/Global/assets.nsf/International/SGM_Global_VC_Insights_2007/$˜le/

Global_VC_Insight_Report_2007.pdf.
Florida, R. L., and M. Kenney. (1988). Venture capital, high technology and regional development. 
Regional Studies
 22:33-48.
Fox, J. W. (1996). The Venture Capital Mirage: An Assessment of USAID Experience with Equity 
Investment. Center for Development Information and Evaluation Working Paper, U.S. Agency 

for International Development, Washington, D.C.
Global Insight, Inc. 2004. Venture Impact 2004: Venture Capital Bene˜ts to the U.S. Econ
-omy. Available at http://www.nvca.org/pdf/VentureImpact2004.pdf#search=%22venture
 %20capital%20total%20employment%22.
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner. (2001). The venture capital revolution. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives
 15(2):145-168.
Green, M., ed. (1991). 
Venture Capital: International Comparisons. 
London and New York: 
Routledge.
Greer, P. (1971). Venturing in Europe. 
SBIC/Venture Capital
 (December):1-3.
Guler, I., and M. F. Guillen. (2005, November). Institutions, Networks, and Organizational Growth: 
The Internationalization of the U.S. Venture Capital Firms.
Haemmig, M. (2003). 
The Globalization of Venture Capital: A Management Study of International 
Venture Capital Firms. 
Zurich: Swiss Private Equity and Corporate Finance Association.
Hege, U., A. Schwienbacher, and F. Palomino. (2004, February). Determinants of Venture Capital 
Performance: Europe and the United States. RICAFE Working Paper 001. Available at http://

ssrn.com/abstract=482322.
Hsu, D., and M. Kenney. (2005). Organizing venture capital: The rise and demise of American 
Research & Development Corporation, 1946-1973. 
Industrial and Corporate Change
 14:
 579-616.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VENTURE CAPITAL
 339
Huawei. (2007). Financial Highlights. Available at http://www.huawei.com/about/info.do?cid=-1002
 &id=64. Accessed February 1, 2007.
Hursti, J., and M. V. J. Maula. (2007). Acquiring ˜nancial resources from foreign equity capital mar
-kets: An examination of factors in˚uencing foreign initial public offerings. 
Journal of Business 
Venturing
 22(6):833-851.
Jefferson, G. H., and G. Gian. (2007). Science and technology takeoff in China? Sources of rising 
R&D intensity. 
Asia Paci˚c Business Review
 13(3):357-371.
Jeng, L., and P. Wells. (2000). The determinants of venture capital funding: Evidence across coun
-tries. 
Journal of Corporate Finance
 6:241-289.
Kaplan, S. N., F. Martel, and P. Strömberg. (2003). How Do Legal Differences and Learning Affect 
Financial Contracts? NBER Working Paper 10097.
Kenney, M., and R. Florida. (2000). Venture capital in Silicon Valley: Fueling new ˜rm formation. 
In 
Understanding Silicon Valley: The Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region
, M. Kenney, ed. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kenney, M., K. Han, and S. Tanaka. (2004). Venture capital industries in East Asia. Pp. 391-427 in 
Global Change and East Asian Policy Initiatives
, S. Yusuf, M. Altaf, and K. Nabeshima, eds. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kogut, B., P. Urso, and G. Walker. (2007). The emergent properties of a new ˜nancial market: Ameri
-can venture capital syndication from 1960 to 2004. 
Management Science
 53(7):1181-1198.
Kuemmerle, W. (2001). Comparing catalysts of change: Evolution and institutional differences in the 
venture capital industries in the U.S., Japan and Germany. Pp. 227-261 in 
Comparative Studies 
of Technological Evolution, Research on Technological Innovation, Management and Policy
, R. A. Burgelman and H. Chesbrough, eds. Amsterdam and Oxford: Elsevier Science.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny. (1998). Law and ˜nance. 
Journal 
of Political Economy 
106:113-155.
Lerner, J., and A. Schoar. (2005). Does legal reinforcement affect ˜nancial transactions? The contrac
-tual channel in private equity. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 120(1):223-246.
Mäkelä, M. (2004). Essays on Crossborder Venture Capital: A Grounded Theory Approach. Helsinki 
University of Technology, Institute of Strategy and International Business Doctoral Dissertation 
Series 2004/1.
Mäkelä, M., and M. V. J. Maula. (2006). Cross-border venture capital and new venture internation
-alization: An isomorphism perspective. 
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepre
-neurial Finance
 7(3):227-257.
Manigart, S. (1994). The founding rates of venture capital ˜rms in three European countries. 
Journal 
of Business Venturing
 9(6):525-541.
Manigart S., H. J. Sapienza, and W. Vermeir. (1996). Venture capitalist governance and value-added 
in four countries. 
Journal of Business Venturing
 11(6):439-469.
Megginson, W. L. (2004). Toward a global model of venture capital. 
Journal of Applied Corporate 
Finance
 16(1):8-26.
Murray, G. C., and J. Lott. (1995). Do UK venture capitalists have a bias against investment in new 
technology-based ˜rms? 
Research Policy
 24(2):283-299.
Murray, G. C., and R. Marriott. (1998). Why has the investment performance of technology-specialist, 
European venture capital funds been so poor? 
Research Policy
 27:947-976.
Pagano, M., A. A. Roell, and J. Zechner. (2002). The geography of equity listing: Why do companies 
list abroad? 
Journal of Finance 
57(6):2651-2694.
Pruthi, S., M. Wright, and A. Lockett. (2003). Do foreign and domestic venture capital ˜rms differ in 
their monitoring of investees? 
Asia Paci˚c Journal of Management
 20:175-204.
Rock, E. B. (2001). Greenhorns, yankees and cosmopolitans: Venture capital, IPO™s, foreign ˜rms 
and the U.S. market. 
Theoretical Inquiries in Law
 2(2):1-35.
Romain, A., and B. van Pottlesberghe. (2004, April). The Determinants of Venture Capital: Panel 
Data Analysis of 16 OECD Countries. Unpublished Working Paper.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
Schumpeter, J. A. (1939). 
Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the 
Capitalist Process 
(abridged with an introduction by Rendigs Fels). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sheahan, M. (2005). Is SOX to blame for IPO decline? What™s next? 
Venture Capital Journal
 (No
-vember). Available at http://www.ventureeconomics.com/vcj/protected/1122124957218.html.
Sorenson, O., and T. E. Stuart. (2001). Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture 
capital investments. 
American Journal of Sociology
 106:1546-1588.
Stinchcombe, A. E. (1965). Social structure and organizations. Pp. 142-193 in 
Handbook of Organiza
-tions
, J. G. March, ed. Chicago, IL: Rand-McNally.
Stuart, T. E., and O. Sorenson. (2003). Liquidity events and the geographic distribution of entrepre
-neurial activity. 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 48:175-201.
U.S. Government Accountability Of˜ce. (2006, September). 
Offshoring U.S. Semiconductor and 
Software Industries Increasingly Produce in China and India.
 Publication GAO 06-423.
Wilson, J. W. (1985). 
The New Venturers: Inside the High-Stakes World of Venture Capital.
 Menlo 
Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Wong, P. K. (2005). Venture capital funding of Asian entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley: A longitudinal 
analysis. Paper presented at the Conference on Greater China Capital Market for Innovation & 
Entrepreneurship, Taipei, Taiwan, May 16-17.
Wright, M., S. Pruthi, and A. Lockett. (2005). International venture capital research: From cross-country 
comparisons to crossing borders. 
International Journal of Management Reviews
 7(Septe
mber):
 135-161.
Zalan, T. (2004). The secret multinationals of the new millennium: Internationalization of private 
equity ˜rms. 
Journal of International Business Studies Literature Review.
Zero2IPO Research Center. (2008). US$3.25B VC Investment Touches New High (January 23). 
http://www.zero2ipo.com.hk/china_this_week/detail.asp?id=5753
Zero2IPO Venture Capital Research Center. (2005). China Venture Firms Newly Raised US $4 Bil
-lion in 2005; Internet Sector Most Popular to VC Firms. (December 15).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.341
 10
  Financial Services
RAVI
 A
RON
University of Southern California
INTRODUCTION
The ˜nancial services industry is situated at the intersection of twin forces 
of disruption: technology and globalization. Financial services, perhaps more 
than any other industry, is buffeted by the forces of change that technology has 

unleashed and the intensity of competition that globalization has brought in its 

wake. The nature of work in ˜nancial services is such that the input, work in 

process, and output are all information. There are no heavy and unwieldy manu
-factured items that need to be carefully managed in transit, there is no need for 

the maturing of third-party logistics that will delay the entry of global players, 

there are no issues of establishing warehouse and distribution centers to handle 

inventory that will deter offshore competitors, and the traditional advantages of 

scale and incumbency that established players enjoy can be nulli˜ed by an intel
-ligent business model that takes no more than a few weeksŠif thatŠto become a 

business. While business experienceŠunderstanding of a market™s needs and its 

willingness to pay for servicesŠis an important prerequisite, the role of physical 

infrastructure as a barrier to competition is greatly lessened.
Consider the example of ING Direct to illustrate how easily incumbency, 
scale, and local presence can be neutralized by technology. The high-value-added 

business models of the full-service banks that dominated the retail ˜nancial ser
-vice industry in the United States should have remained inviolateŠafter all, they 

had local presence, scale of operations, and a formidable network of branches that 

straddled the retail markets from coast to coast. These banks were challenged in 

their backyards by a European bank, ING Inc., that decided to bypass the battle 

of the branches and reach out to retail market segments directly through nontradi
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
tional distribution channels. ING Direct is a straight-to-consumer banking service 
that has a very focused product line and one that operates at a signi˜cantly lower 
cost structure than competitors (traditional retail banks). ING Direct does not rely 

on the traditional channels of distributionŠphysical branches; instead it distrib
-utes its products using the Internet and call centers. As a recent Harvard Business 

School Case showed,
1 ﬁING Direct is able to offer depositors higher interest rates 
on its savings accounts, dispense with fees and service charges, and still make 

money by reinvesting depositors™ funds in longer term assetsﬂ (Gary, 2004). A 

research report showed that ING Direct was able to walk away with $17 billion 

in direct deposits without an extended banking network (Forrester, 2004). In this 

parable if the large incumbent retail banks were the Goliaths then technology was 

the sling that ING™s David used to take on the entrenched larger players.
Just as technology releases disruptive change in hitherto stable industries, 
globalization accelerates that speed of change and ampli˜es the gains and losses 

that result. Global free trade agreements and the integration of several regions 

into trading blocksŠsuch as the European Union (EU), ASEAN, and NAFTAŠ

have opened the ˜nancial services markets for several countries to foreign players 

even as the large established banks and insurance companies must face compe
-tition from Asian rivals such as HSBC. If necessity is the mother of invention 

then competition is the mother of innovation. And competition has unleashed in
-novations in the ˜nancial services industry in mature markets such as the United 

States and the EU.
A recent research report by the management consulting ˜rm of McKinsey 
& Company attributed the resurgence of European ˜nancial services ˜rms to 

innovation in a variety of sectors when faced with intense competition from lo
-cal and foreign players and deregulation (Gary, 2004). The report identi˜es two 

different kinds of innovation: the development of new products and services, 

and the design of innovative ways in which ˜rms produce and deliver these 

processes. Europe, according to McKinsey & Company, has led innovation in 

creating derivative products and has also innovated in other product classes 

such as cash securities. Leading product innovators include BNP Paribas and 

Société Générale in equity derivatives, and independent advisory houses such 

as Rothschild. A second kind of innovationŠproducing and delivering ˜nancial 

services in new waysŠincluding the use of technology in retail ˜nancial services 

and the adoption of global operating models has also resulted in European banks 

becoming centers of innovation. In other recent research reports, McKinsey & 

Company identi˜es that the drivers of success for offshore ˜rms in the Indian 

and Chinese ˜nancial services markets would be the ability to deliver ˜nancial 

services through new and more ef˜cient channels (in India) and to create value-

bearing partnerships in China (McKinsey, 2005a,b).
1 
As the case makes clear, ING™s business model is a clear success in that it enjoys supranormal 
pro˜ts.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 343
Recent reports in the business press have dwelt at length on the idea of 
ﬁhigh-endﬂ and ﬁlow-endﬂ work. Some of these reports seem to suggest that 
some work, such as call center work, is routine and can be seen as ﬁlow-end,ﬂ 

whereas other work, such as ˜nancial analytics and investment banking research, 

is ﬁhigh-end.ﬂ The lay reader may well take away the impression that in the global 

sourcing and delivery of ˜nancial services there is a clear understanding of what 

constitutes low- and high-end work and that corporations in the United States 

and Europe innovate while their service providers in Asia and other low-wage 

regimes provide routine low-end services at low cost. There is a widespread as
-sumption in media coverage of these trends that the so-called high-end work is 

complex whereas the low-end workŠas typi˜ed by a tech support call centerŠis 

essentially low-complexity work. As we show later in this chapter, this assump
-tion both is wrong and re˚ects a poor understanding of the subjective nature of 

complexity. To understand how global sourcing of services drives innovation and 

how the nature and extent of the innovation is itself determined by the subjective 

perception of complexity, it is necessary to ˜rst understand the globalization of 

the ˜nancial services industry.
The Scope and Growth of Offshore Activities in Financial Services
The phenomenon of globalization of ˜nancial services has both supply and 
market (demand) side implications. Large multinational ˜nancial services corpo
-rations such as American Express, Citigroup, and HSBC Inc. have established a 

signi˜cant sourcing and market presence in Asia and Europe. These companies 

have a retail, corporate, and investment banking presence in Indian and Chinese 

markets. In addition to these traditional ˜nancial services, investment and risk-

based ˜nancial services are also offered by multinational VCs and private equity 

˜rms. To compete against local companies, the aforementioned ˜rms have to 

constantly innovate and deliver services to niche segments such as urban retail 

customers in India.
Citibank launched its web-based corporate banking products in 2001 to cap
-ture a signi˜cant chunk of the market for cash management and trade services. 

The bank then rolled out this product widely in the Asia-Paci˜c region (Malaysia, 

Australia, Singapore, and Hong Kong) and later into India and parts of Europe.
2 The bank found a new way of distributing corporate banking services via the web 

based on a ˚exible electronic product that linked the bank™s front of˜ce to the 

clients™ back of˜ces. The web-based banking services that the bank launched in 

Asia and the United States were based on creating a ˚exible suite of corporate 

banking products that would connect their clients to the bank™s service delivery 

portals, provide a set of tools to the clients to automate and manage their accounts 
2 
Citibank™s e-Business Strategy for Global Corporate Banking, HBS Case Study, HKU197, 2002, 
Center for Asian Business Cases, University of Hong Kong.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.344
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
receivable and payables, and offer advanced treasury services to clients ranging 
from SMEs and MNCs.
3 The idea of creating an electronic channel that would of
-fer a ˚exible suite of ˜nancial services that wouldŠto quote the bankŠconnect, 
extend, and transform the operations of the clients was an idea that was tried in 

the highly competitive Asian markets of the Far East (Singapore, Malaysia) and 

then rolled out with variants in other parts of the world. As the technological ca
-pabilities offered by the Internet matured, the diffusion of the innovation in other 

markets such as Europe, India, and China was also accompanied by accommoda
-tions of local banking customs, market contexts, and numerous custom features 

that tailored the innovation to local market conditions.
4 Thus, the expansion of 
multinational ˜nancial services ˜rms into global markets has resulted in the 

globalization of innovation. Our de˜nition of the globalization of innovation is 

one where the innovation that takes place is global in natureŠnot that the output 

(e.g., the applications) of an innovation process (perhaps done in a single home 

country) is used globally.
On the sourcing side too there have been numerous innovations in the use 
of technology as well in new managerial initiatives. Of˜ceTiger,
5 an American 
business process outsourcing (BPO) ˜rm with of˜ces in India, Sri Lanka, and 

the Philippines, has been able to serve offshore clients in projects that often re
-quire near-real-time collaboration on highly judgment-intensive processes (i.e., 

processes require experts such as accountants and ˜nancial analysts to intervene 

and exercise judgment) executed by ˜nancial service professionals (Aron and 

Singh, 2005). A third of Of˜ceTiger™s deadlines are an hour or shorter. The ˜rm 

has been able to deploy a combination of technology and a collaborative inter
-organizational managerial structure called the Program Of˜ce in order to deliver 

highly strategic and value-added services to its clients.
6Thus, global sourcing of ˜nancial services too has left an ﬁinnovation foot
-printﬂ in various parts of the world. There is considerable divergence in the 

de˜nition of what constitutes offshore production of services and how these are 

categorized (by work type [i.e., call center] as opposed to vertical industry [i.e., 

˜nancial services]). There is also considerable variance in the sources of data 

and the sampling methods used by various ˜rms. Rather than go by any single 
3 
Citibank™s e-Business Strategy for Global Corporate Banking, HBS Case Study, HKU197, 2002, 
Center for Asian Business Cases, University of Hong Kong.
4 
The details of customization and localization of the innovation require a detailed exposition 
beyond the scope of this chapter. We refer the interested reader to a business case developed by the 
Center for Asian Business Cases, University of Hong Kong, entitled ﬁCitibank™s e-Business Strategy 

for Global Corporate Bankingﬂ HKU197, 2002.
5 
For an insightful discussion of the business challenges faced by the ˜rm Of˜ceTiger, we refer 
the reader to an article in 
The New Yorker
, July 5, 2004, titled ﬁThe Best Job in Townﬂ by Katherine 
Foo.
6 
We refer the reader to the 
Harvard Business Review
 article ﬁGetting Offshoring Rightﬂ in Decem
-ber 2005; see issue of the journal for further details. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 345
estimate of this phenomenon, we ˜nd that the meta-research done by the ˜rm 
Pipal Research summarizes the different estimates best. Figures 1 and 2 provide 
summaries of the estimates. There is wide variance in the estimates of outsourc
-ing because the term is de˜ned differently by different researchers. Some con˚ate 

outsourcing with offshoring (i.e., production of services and goods in a different 

country than the one in which the ˜nal output is consumed) while others group 

all offshoring under outsourcing.
7 BPO is the practice of sourcing services (pro
-cesses) from a third-party provider of these services. BPO could be an offshore or 

onshore phenomenon; indeed there is nothing in the nature of BPO that restricts 

it to a particular location. In popular usage, the term BPO is frequently used to 

mean offshoring.
Many of these reports include both offshoring and outsourcing activities, 
whereas some of these reports exclude offshoring of business processes to a sub
-sidiary of the parent corporation (offshoring but on outsourcing). For instance, the 

Gartner estimate of USD 173 billion includes all the processes in Tables 1 and 2 

only to the extent that they are outsourced to a third-party provider, whereas the 

estimates by IDC (2005) in Figure 1 include processes that are offshored even if 

they are not outsourced.
Political sensitivity and tensions with labor advocacy groups and organized 
labor surround the phenomenon of offshore outsourcing. As a result it is not 

possible to collect data exhaustively from offshore ˜rms on what processes have 

been offshored and how many agents are employed in executing these processes. 

We haveŠas part of our larger research agendaŠidenti˜ed the different kinds 

of services (and subprocesses) that are offshored in the domain of ˜nancial ser
-vices. Table 1 provides a list of major ˜nancial services offshored while Table 

2 provides a breakdown of these major ˜nancial services to the level of subpro
-cesses.
8 There exist no rigorous estimates that can quantify the extent of offshore 
outsourcing (or even just outsourcing for that matter) by process type (work type) 

in ˜nancial services in terms of either dollar volumes or of the FTE
9 involved in 
producing the services.
10
 What Tables 1 and 2 provide, however, is a ˜ne-grained 
analysis of what kinds of ˜nancial service-related tasks are offshored.
As we discussed earlier, the advent of BPO also led to the globalization of 
innovation in ˜nancial services. Other examples of such innovation include the 
7 
When a corporation, say, in the United Kingdom locates its back of˜ce in India and sources back 
of˜ce processes through a fully owned subsidiary, it is offshoring but not outsourcing.
8 
From a joint research project between The Wharton School and Gartner in 2003-2006.
9 
Full-time equivalent, a measure of the number of employees involved in executing a process.
10
 There are two reasons why this is not possible: As mentioned earlier, there is intense political sen
-sitivity that surrounds offshore outsourcing and, therefore, senior executives are reluctant to provide 
any estimates that will result in media attention being focused on their ˜rms. Second, measuring the 

economic signi˜cance of activities at the subprocess level requires the deployment of resources that 

represents a prohibitively high level of cost and effort, especially given the rapid growth of offshoring, 

which in turn creates a rapidly changing market that is not easily surveyed.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.346
 financial-1.eps
bitmap image
FIGURE 1
 The size of the offshore outsourcing market.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 347
financial-2.eps
65.2%22.7%12.1%$375.0100% =$ billionAsia/PacificEMEAAmericas200265.2%22.3%12.5%$405.1200365.0%22.0%13.0%$447.7200464.6%21.8%13.6%$497.8200563.9%21.6%14.5%$554.8200663.3%21.4%15.3%$614.9200762.5%21.3%16.2%$682.52008Sales &Marketing24.4%Customer Care29.8%FacilityOperations &Management0.5%Finance &Accounting10%EngineeringR&D6.2%HumanResources4.6%Training
15%Procurement0.2%Logistics22.8%Sales &Marketing32.9%Customer Care10.0%FacilityOperations &
Management6.6%Finance &Accounting3.4%EngineeringR&D2.8%HumanResources2.4%Training
0.8%Procurement0.4%Logistics40.7%Total BPO Market, $447.7 bn, 2004Offshoreable BPO Potential, $120.4 bn, 2004
FIGURE 2
 Growth of total BPO market and offshoreable BPO size.
TABLE 1
 Finance and Accounting Processes
Account management (transaction reconciliation, other asset and liability account administration)
Accounts payable

Accounts receivable

Actuarial analysis

Asset pricing research: equity research and ˜xed income asset research

Billing

Cash ˚ow analysis (including forecasting and related services)

Cost accounting and analysis

Electronic payments (in retail and institutional ˜nancial services)

Financial statement analysis

General ledger

Management accounting

Preparing asset schedules

Risk analytics

Tax accounting and analysis (individual and corporate)

Tax management

Treasury and cash management

Underwriting

Yield analysis
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.348
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 2
 Financial Services Subprocesses
Actuarial (insurance)
All data processing (banking and insurance)

Automated clearing house and/or electronic funds transfer

Business and corporate credit card issuing and processing

Cash management

Check processing and imaging

Claims processing

Core banking

Credit card issuing: retail ˜nancial services

Credit card merchant processing: retail ˜nancial services

Data warehousing (retail and corporate banking, insurance)

Liability and asset account management (deposits, savings accounts, certi˜cates of deposits, loans, 
etc.)
Electronic checks 

Electronic invoice presentment and payment

Exception processing and automation

Internet banking

Internet lending and asset creation

Investment and portfolio management (insurance)

Investments and trading

Mortgage banking (both loan origination and subsequent account services)

Pension administration (insurance)

Policy servicing and administration (insurance)

Policy underwriting (insurance)

Primary business applications (insurance)

Trade services (as necessary: cargo and business insurance)

Trust (as necessary: retirement and custodial plan trust and administration

Vehicle ˜nancing (vehicle leasing and lending)
use of LEAN techniques by Wipro Technologies in India for the production of 
processes such as ˜nancial accounting, management of accounts receivable, and 

payables. Wipro Technologies was able to cut the time required to execute these 

processes by between 12 and 47 percent while increasing the quality of output 

by between 7 and 29 percent.
11
 We studied other ˜rms such as Pipal Research 
Inc. and i-Flex Inc. that provide innovative services similar to those provided by 

Of˜ceTiger.
12
 Many of the drivers of offshore production of processes are also 
the drivers of innovation at those locations where these processes were sourced. 

To understand the globalization of innovation, it is necessary to understand the 

offshoring of business processes. The advent of GE™s BPO initiative in India in 
11
 From a paper titled ﬁThe Use of LEAN Techniques in Offshore Outsourcing,ﬂ forthcoming 
(2007).
12
 Pipal Research™s Manoj Jain: ﬁWe Have Created a Spot Market for Research,ﬂ 
Knowledge 
@ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/india/article.cfm?articleid=415
5; ﬁHow Some 
BPO Providers Seek to Build and Protect Their Turf,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=110
1.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 349
1996 started a spurt of offshore outsourcing activity in the region that has since 
grown rapidly.
13
 There are two reasons for the growth of offshore production of 
˜nancial services: competitive pressures of a maturing industry and technologi
-cal enabling factors. Indeed, these are also the factors that drive the globalization 
of innovation in ˜nancial services. Let us begin by analyzing the competitive 

pressures.
COMPETITION
 AND
 P
RODUCT
 M
ATURIT
YThe evolution of any product or service is characterized by three phases. In 
the ˜rst phase, when the product or service is initiated, the challenge is to simply 

make it work and deliver the core bene˜ts associated with the product. We term 

this the 
product creation phase
. There are numerous examples of products in 
˜nancial services that went through the product creation phase when they were 

introduced. In retail ˜nancial services, the now ubiquitous ATM provides a good 

example. The ATM was introduced for the ˜rst time in 1939 in New York City 

by the City Bank of New York and was withdrawn soon after for lack of adoption 

by consumers.
14
 It was reintroduced in 1967 in London and has since become a 
standard feature of all retail ˜nancial service products. When the ATM was ˜rst 

introduced it lacked ease of use and was not connected to the savings accounts 

of the consumers. For one thing there were no mainframe computers then and it 

was not possible to store account information and support transactions. And for 

another, without computer networks that could support multiple machines in dif
-ferent locations, the ATM could be used only at the physical location where the 

bank was situated. The advent of mainframes as the enablers of retail ˜nancial 

services meant that the ATM could be deployed remotely and connected to the 

accounts. This in turn allowed banks to deliver several ˜nancial services through 

the ATM and consumer adoption followed.
The second phase in the evolution of products and services is the 
integration 
phase
, where the objective is to integrate the product to work seamlessly with the 
˜rm™s existing products. As the ATM evolved into the integration phase it was 

extended to offer a suite of services that went beyond dispensing cash to include 

deposits, balance enquiry, money transfer, and so on. As the industry matures 

and all other ˜rms offer similar products and differentiation becomes increas
-ingly more costly, the ˜rm in the ˜nal phase outsources several components 

associated with the product. We term this the 
orchestration phase
, where ˜rms 
outsource (often to offshore entities) several aspects of production, delivery, and 

postpurchase service. Most banks now are connected to ATM networks run by 
13
 ﬁThe Little Start-Up That Could: A Conversation with Raman Roy, Father of Indian BPO,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=79
4.14
 MIT Series on Inventor of the Week: Luther George Simjian, see 
http://web.mit.edu/invent/iow/
simjian.htm
l.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
third parties. In the orchestration phase, ownership of ATM networks is no longer 
a source of competitive advantage because ATM services are bought by banks 
from third-party ˜rms that provide connectivity to ATM networks. Indeed, major 

ATM networks are now managed by third-party ˜rms that are not in the bank
-ing business, thus turning the ATM network into a ﬁbanking utilityﬂ comparable 

to electric power and other commoditized services. Many wealth management 

and personal ˜nancial services (PFS) ˜rms often offer portfolios of services that 

include offerings of other ˜rms.
Financial services are natural candidates for outsourcing, in the production 
and delivery of ˜nancial services, input, output, work in processŠare all infor
-mation. Most products and services in the ˜nancial services industry are mature 

and as a consequence there is considerable competition among ˜rms that offer 

all of these services. Almost all retail banks offer the spectrum of services rang
-ing from savings and checking accounts through money market accounts and 

PFS including wealth management services. As a result there is considerable 

pressure on ˜rms both to differentiate themselves by providing a higher quality 

of serviceŠmore accurate resolution of transactions, quicker balancing of asset 

accounts, better customer service, faster turnaround on loan and credit card ap
-plicationsŠand to lower the costs of production of services. As a result ˜rms 

have been forced to relocate the production of several services to wage regimes 

where skilled (white collar) labor can be sourced more cost-effectively. Finan
-cial service ˜rms have offshored processes both to third-party providers
15
 and 
to their own subsidiaries offshoreŠknown as 
captive centers
 (or simply ﬁcap
-tivesﬂ)Šthat execute these processes offshore. The phenomenon of offshoring 

that we witness is an evolution of ˜nancial service products where ˜rms have 

entered the orchestration phase.
As we can see, the business case for offshore production of ˜nancial services 
was chie˚y due to the maturation of products and the fact that differentiation of 

products had become costly. This alone was not enough to result in ˜rms moving 

offshore. The technological platforms and business infrastructure that would en
-able such a move were not in place before the advent of the Internet and its wide 

and ubiquitous adoption in countries like India and China. In 1996 Raman Roy 

set up a captive center for General Electric (GE) to process transactions and de
-liver support services.
16
 Roy ˜rst demonstrated his ability to deliver high-quality 
˜nancial services out of India as a part of American Express™s back-of˜ce team 

and then demonstrated it again with GE. After his success with GE he set up 

Spectramind Inc. as a third-party offshore ˜nancial service provider for MNCs. 

As the success of Roy™s Spectramind received attention from the business and 

trade press, several Western companies started sourcing services from India 
15
 As mentioned earlier, this is often referred to as BPO.
16
 ﬁThe Little Start-Up That Could: A Conversation with Raman Roy, Father of Indian BPO, Part 
2,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 351
and other third-party services providers and IT majors started offering these 
services.
17
Since then the BPO industry in India has grown rapidly. Corporations in the 
United States and United Kingdom could transfer raw data across the Internet 
and Indian companies would process the data according to prespeci˜ed rules and 

transmit information back to the clients. The service could range from simple 

transaction processing to ˜nance and accounting and as the industry matured it 

would grow to include ˜nancial analytics and research. For all of this to happen 

two factors were necessary: (1) the availability of the Internet as the physical 

medium of connection and (2) the availability of ˜rms that would provide these 

services, because not all corporations could run their own captive centers and the 

presence of third-party ˜rmsŠsuch as SpectramindŠwas necessary to scale up 

the offshoring trend.
18 In the period from 1999 to 2002 several third-party provid
-ers of BPO services came into being (principally) in India but also in countries 

such as China and the Philippines. By the end of 2004 there were several third-

party providers of these services as well as captive centers in several regions of 

the world including Sri Lanka, Jamaica, and the Philippines.
19
 The combination 
of competitive pressures in a maturing industry and the presence of technological 

factors of enablement made it possible for corporations to migrate the production 

of some ˜nancial services to offshore providers.
Offshore production of ˜nancial services is often seen as being analogous to 
the production of goods offshore. The production of physical goods offshore was 

facilitated by the emergence of large and cost-effective labor pools in Asia and 

parts of Latin America. Specialized supply chains emerged in industries such as 

apparel, auto components, consumer electronics, and toys, which enabled ˜rms 

to set up offshore operations to service markets in the advanced industrialized 

countries, thereby leveraging wage differentials for factory labor. While there are 

similarities between the two forms of production, it would be wrong to assume 

that the production of services is chie˚y about white collar unskilled labor, such 

as seen in call centers, which offers attractive wage arbitrage possibilities.
It is useful here to make a distinction between the production of ˜nancial 
services at a lower cost made possible by an attractive wage arbitrage to be found 

in migrating to low-labor-cost countries and the sourcing of innovative solutions, 

processes, and management techniques from providers offshore. The produc
-tion of ˜nancial services can be characterized by lower costs, productivity gains 
17
 ﬁThe Little Start-Up That Could: A Conversation with Raman Roy, Father of Indian BPO, Part 
2,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798; ﬁIn 
a Global Economy, Competition Among BPO Rivals Heats Up,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://
knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=64
2.18
 ﬁThe Little Start-Up That Could: A Conversation with Raman Roy, Father of Indian BPO, Part 
2,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798.
19
 ﬁMove Over, India: The Shifting Geography of Offshore Outsourcing Creates New Challengers,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=110
0.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
(sometimes), and continuous improvements in ef˜ciency over a period of time. 
These services produce modest gains in cost and quality ranging anywhere from 
1 to 10 percent over a period of 3 to 4 years.
In contrast to these incremental improvements, the execution of processes 
can be characterized by order-of-magnitude gains in both costs and quality over 

the same period of time. Usually, such gains result not from incremental improve
-ments but from radical redesign of elements of work. Such redesign can include 

some of the following: process redesign, radical changes in the work˚ows and 

information ˚ows associated with process production, automation in production 

leading to less human intervention, new information and knowledge transfer 

mechanisms that make it possible to offshore processes that were hitherto thought 

of as being too risky to decouple from where they are consumed (e.g., United 

States, United Kingdom), and the deployment of managerial practices that allow 

managers to monitor and in˚uence work remotely. Some features of such innova
-tions include the following: order-of-magnitude gains (as opposed to steady and 

incremental gains in costs and quality), gains realized over a compressed time pe
-riod (as opposed to small incremental gains), use of new techniques (as opposed 

to improvements to existing methods), and simultaneous improvements to aspects 

of production that are thought to be substitutes (such as cost of production and 

quality of output; in the absence of innovation, lowering the cost of production 

substantially would result in lowering the output quality).
Certain ˜nancial services such as bond pricing research, equity research, as
-set pricing research in general, cash ˚ow analysis, ˜nancial statement analysis, 

tax management, and modeling are now executed offshore. While the production 

of these ˜nancial services has been characterized by highly innovative practices, 

some so-called low-end services have proven to be dif˜cult to migrate offshore 

and have been characterized at best by gains from wage arbitrage and small incre
-mental improvements in ef˜ciency. To understand why some complex services 

have been successfully migrated to offshore entities and have, within a short pe
-riod of migration, resulted in innovations in the production and delivery of these 

services while other seemingly simple services could not be migrated offshore 

due to a high degree of operational errors, it is necessary to understand the subjec
-tive nature of process complexity that underlies the production of services.
The lay person might well think that the work involved in tasks such as asset 
pricing, tax analysis, ˜nancial analytics, and modeling is complex whereas the 

work involved in tasks such as customer service and selling credit card products 

is relatively simple. In fact, our research into the nature of complexity points to 

the contrary. There is considerable divergence between managers in different 

countries in their ratings of what is complex and what is not and as a result there 

are resulting differences between countries on the locus of innovation in the pro
-duction and delivery of ˜nancial services. Executives in India and Singapore tend 

to rate the complexity of different kinds of work very differently from executives 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 353
in the United States and United Kingdom.
20
 To understand how the different 
regions of the world forge very different kinds of innovation it is necessary to 
investigate the subjective nature of complexity and how offshoring may well set 

up a 
mechanism for complexity arbitrage
.THE
 S
UBJECTI
VE N
ATURE
 OF
 C
OMPLEXIT
YWe surveyed executives of BPO ˜rms and captive centers and their clients 
and users
21
 respectively and sought their views on what kinds of tasks they 
deemed to be ﬁcomplexﬂ and which ones not. Executives from BPOs and cap
-tive centers were mostly located in India, Singapore, and Mauritius while execu
-tives from their clients (and users) were located in the United States and United 

Kingdom. We showed executives an identical set of processes. As a measure of 

complexity we asked executives from the four countries to rate an identical set of 

processes on the level of complexity involved in executing the processes.
22
 Only 
those executives that managed the execution and delivery of a process were asked 

to rate the complexity of the process.
23
 Each process was rated by four executives 
(one for each region) and some raters rated more than a single process.
24
 They 
rated processes on a Likert scale of 1 to 7, where the highest level of complexity 

corresponded with a rating of 7 and the lowest complexity level was rated at 1. 

The results of the survey are shown in Table 3.
It is clear that while the executives of the client ˜rms in the United States and 
United Kingdom are in broad agreement on process complexityŠjust as Indian 

and Singaporean executives are in agreement with each otherŠthey differ to a 

signi˜cant degree from their Indian and Singaporean counterparts. For instance, 

U.S. and U.K. executives rate process
25
 P8 as a low-complexity process while 
their Indian and Singaporean counterparts rate the process as being of relatively 
20
 Based on a survey of BPOs and captive centers undertaken by the author and his doctoral 
students.
21
 For captive centers the term ﬁclientﬂ is less accurate as the users of the service and the providers 
belong to the same ˜rm. Instead of clients we call them users.
22
 As a measure of complexity we asked executives how dif˜cult it was to ensure that a particular 
process could be executed at an acceptable level of quality, at a required scale, reliably, and predict
-ably. It is clear that implicit in this de˜nition of complexity is the dif˜culty associated with staf˜ng 
the process and the costs incurred in retaining and training the workforce to reach the adequate levels 

of quality.
23
 In all there were 37 processes for which we were able to obtain comparable data for 28 processes. 
Each process was rated by an executive from each of four countries: the United States, United King
-dom, India, and Singapore. The 28 processes were rated by 112 raters.
24
 The same manager often managed two or three different processes and provided a rating for 
each.
25
 The companies that provided us with the data have placed strict restrictions on us whereby we 
are not allowed to mention the names of processes or ˜rms or reveal any information that may lead 

to the disclosure of the names of the companies or their clients. We therefore use generic names for 

processes such as ﬁP1ﬂ, ﬁP2ﬂ, etc.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.354
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
TABLE 3
 Subjective Perceptions of Process Complexity
Processes
Indian BPO Firms
Singaporean BPO Firms
UK Firms
US Firms
P1
1232P2
3423P3
2356P4
3455P5
3277P6
4543P7
7612P8
6522P9
3454P10
5432P11
3277P12
3256P13
2356P14
5534P15
5432P16
3454P17
1177P18
6721P19
3444P20
6721P21
6622P22
1357P23
5433P24
7512P25
2266P26
6547P27
2176P28
3354higher complexity. Similarly, executives in India and Singapore tend to rate pro
-cess P5 as a low-complexity process while executives in the United States and 
United Kingdom rate it as being of relatively higher complexity. Table 4 provides 

a summary of the levels of convergence and divergence of opinions, between 

executives from the buyer and provider countries, on process complexity. The 

coef˜cient of correlation in the ratings of process complexity between the four 

regions is furnished in Table 4.
The preceding ˜ndings can be explained when we analyze the factors that 
cause the divergence of opinions between the four regions. We found
26
 that 
when a process involved computational work, algorithmic execution, quantitative 

analysis, numerical analysis, or large dataset handling and analysis, the execu
-tives from the United States and United Kingdom tended to rate such processes 

as being highly complex, while their Indian and Singaporean counterparts rated 
26
 In interviews with executives that responded to the survey.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 355
TABLE 4
 Correlation Coef˜cients of Process Complexity Ratings
Correlations
India
Singapore
United 
Kingdom
United States
India
1.000
Singapore
0.831

7.61099815

4.4461E-08
1.000
 t-stat
 P-value
United 

Kingdom
Œ0.760

Œ5.9608215

2.7238E-06
Œ0.813

Œ7.112491

1.4903E-07
1.000
 t-stat
 P-value
United States
Œ0.644

Œ4.2870909

0.0002204
Œ0.720

Œ5.2887715

1.5708E-05
0.861

8.61462229

4.2947E-09
1.000
 t-stat
 P-value
such work as being of low complexity. Similarly, when the work involved in 
executing these processes required interpretation, judgment, understanding of 

the market context, understanding the client™s business context, communication, 

persuasion, or disambiguation,
27
 the executives in India and Singapore rated the 
processes as being highly complex while their Western counterparts rated such 

work as being of low complexity. Why do executives in India and Singapore ˜nd 

the latter kind of work complex? The answer to this question also has to with 

difference between domain expertise and domain experience and the difference 

in turn explains the very different kinds of innovation in ˜nancial services that 

we see in Western and Asian economies.
DOMAIN
 E
XPERTISE
 AND
 D
OMAIN
 E
XPERIENCE
Domain expertise refers to an expert™s understanding of a body of knowledge 
and ability to use a set of rules to execute some tasks in a given domain. For in
-stance, an employee in a captive center in India may have acquired the expertise 

needed to do equity research and forecast a stock price window for a basket of 

stocks. The techniques needed to do this can be learned from a doctoral course 

in asset pricing and require no experience on the part of the agent actually work
-ing in an investment bank. Similarly an agent working for a BPO in China could 

well forecast cash ˚ows and create scenario models for a client ˜rm without ever 

having worked for a corporate bank. The mastery of a set of techniques and un
-27
 Sometimes it is necessary for an agent that is executing the process to use personal understand
-ing of the business context of the process to remove ambiguities that may arise in executing the 
process.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.356
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
derstanding of rules needed to perform such work is termed 
domain expertise
 in 
this context. On the other hand, in order to design a new ˜nancial product or offer 
an asset of a speci˜c risk category to an investor it is necessary that the manager 

have an understanding of the nuances of the market that cannot be codi˜ed or 

captured in algorithms or cannot be easily transmitted to offshore providers via 

documentation. A private equity investor needs to understand the business of the 

client as well as be able to judge the quality of the management of the company 

in which he plans to invest. Similarly a wealth management specialist needs to 

have a clear understanding of the social and ˜nancial context of a high-net-worth 

individual as well as her personal goals in order to offer her a wealth management 

solution. These skills cannot be acquired without actually working in the business 

environment in which they are required. Employees of ˜nancial service ˜rms in 

developed economies have the domain experience needed to execute these tasks. 

The tasks that require interpretation, communication, persuasion, understand
-ing of the business context, and so forth very often need domain experience to 

execute. Those tasks that require computation, quantitative analysis, algorithmic 

execution, statistical analysis, and so forth can often be captured in terms of 

rules and expressed as techniques that can be learned. To execute such tasks it 

is enough for the agent to have domain expertiseŠthere is no need for domain 

experience. It is indeed this difference in the nature of the two sets of tasks that 

drives the divergence in perceptions of complexity. This difference is one of the 

principal reasons
28
 for the divergence in the approach to innovation adopted by 
managers in different parts of the world. The locus of innovation is different for 

the different regions in the world.
THE
 L
OCUS
 OF
 I
NNO
VATION
To launch new innovative features in ˜nancial products or entirely new cat
-egories of ˜nancial products it is necessary for the designers of these features (or 

products) to have considerable domain experience. It is not possible to launch 

new features or services for a segment of the market without knowing the busi
-ness context of the market segment. On the other hand, it is possible to improve 

how some back-of˜ce support processes work without having the same level of 

domain experience. As an example, consider a credit card-based ˜nancial service 

that a company may offer to the merchants that accept its credit card. It is neces
-sary for the company to know the needs of the merchants and have an estimate 

for their willingness to pay for the service, their preferred channel of service 

delivery, and the compliance procedures that they must follow. However, this 

company™s offshore captive center or BPO provider need not have the same level 
28
 Other factors too are important. Factors such as compliance regime in different countries, the 
economic systems, the extent of participation in the economy permitted by national governments, 
and the sociocultural beliefs of the consumers are also important. These factors can be thought of as 

exogenous or can be seen as parameters set by nature and constitute systemic variables.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 357
of understanding of the market in order to make some of the supporting back-
of˜ce processes work well. The offshore provider may be able to intelligently 
automate some segments of the process, may reengineer some information ˚ows, 

and may bring experts to resolve transactions that are otherwise dif˜cult to rec
-oncile. Thus, he can innovate with processes to be able to better support the new 

innovative features that the product carries.
Product innovation requires domain experience while process innovation 
requires only domain expertise. Executives in Asia often focus on process in
-novation, leaving product innovation to their Western counterparts. Product and 

process innovations often have very different implications and market dynamics 

associated with them. We explore these two kinds of innovation in the section 

that follows.
PRODUCT
 AND
 P
ROCESS
 I
NNO
VATIONS
The principal difference between Asian and Western executives in the kinds 
of innovation that they bring to the market has to do with process and product 

innovations. While Asian executives
29
Šespecially in the ˜nancial services in
-dustryŠare far more likely to bring to market process innovation, their Western 

counterparts focus almost exclusively on product innovations as a means of 

creating competitive advantage. This difference in focus of managerial priorities 

is because of the lack of domain experience on the part of the providers and is 

not due to any other factor. As we mentioned earlier, product innovation requires 

considerable domain experience, making it a daunting challenge for providers of 

offshore services to release innovations for the Western markets.
30
 In addition to 
this, there are crucial differences between product and process innovation that ex
-plain why the offshore providers and their Western clients specialize in different 

chunks of the value chain. Our studies of the offshore ˜nancial services industry 

since 2000 indicate that there is what amounts to a rough division of innovation 

laborŠWestern corporations increasingly look to product innovations to boost 

growth while their service providers (and captive centers) in Asia support them 

with process innovations.
Product Innovation
Product innovation in ˜nancial services is about adding new features to exist
-ing products or offering new products to the market. It is almost always customer 
29
 It does not matter whether these Asian executives are employed by Western or Asian ˜rms. Their 
lack of domain experience does not go away irrespective of who employs them.
30
 Of course for non-Western markets this is less of a problem. In Bangladesh, for instance, Mo
-hammed Yunus was able to formulate a microcredit mechanism via the Grameen Bank and serve an 
underserved segment of the market.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.358
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
facing.
31
 Product innovation usually takes several months of R&D effort (includ
-ing market research, research into product feature mix, pricing schemes, and 
the kinds of delivery channel to be deployed). It is usually piloted ˜rst to a few 

market segments; once it reaches a stable state, it is rolled out in scale. Examples 

of such innovation include the introduction of web-based banking and web-based 

insurance delivery. However, once product innovation is introduced into the mar
-ket, the extent to which the innovation has succeeded takes a far shorter time to 

measure and it can be measured through relatively well-understood and unam
-biguous measures of product performance such as extent of consumer adoption, 

market share, pro˜tability indices (including measures of gross and net margins), 

and customer satisfaction scores.
Product innovation nevertheless has an interesting ﬁdark sideﬂŠit often 
adds to the complexity of operations. Each new suite of features or product of
-ferings brings greater complexity in operations and more intense demands on 

the company™s service infrastructure. As an example consider the following: a 

bank adds a new featureŠthe ability to apply online for a loan and consolidate 

all asset balances into a single-view account at the level of each customer. This 

feature places considerable strain both on the back-of˜ce operations and on the 

technology infrastructure needed to support the feature. The underlying informa
-tion systems have to be modi˜ed to be able to store information in customer-

centric accounts as opposed to the legacy product-based storage of transactions. 

It will not suf˜ce if the information is aggregated in real time based on customer 

requests from multiple accounts. As the number of customer requests increase, 

this real-time aggregation is bound to break down under the load of processing 

requests. The entire database has to be redesigned and applications have to be 

rewritten. If the technology were substantial, the human operations challenges 

tend to be even more daunting. The bank would have historically supported cus
-tomer requests based on product type (banking related, credit card-related, etc.), 

while now it has to transition to a system where the customer™s requests have 

to be processed with a minimal set of interactions, both with the customer and 

between the bank™s back-of˜ce processors. The bank™s back-of˜ce staff are usu
-ally product-level experts that specialize by product type. Thus, a mortgage loan 

service staff will have little understanding on how to service a question related to 

credit card interest rate and the bank™s new feature of relationship banking may 

˚ounder due to a sharp and signi˜cant increase in operational complexity. Adding 

new features and products often results in placing a strain on the organization™s 

service operations amplifying the levels of complexity. This is where process in
-31
 Customer-facing activities are those that involve direct interaction with end customers, have a 
direct impact on the end customer experience, or both. Thus, a new product or service that is offered 
to the market is a customer-facing initiative, as opposed to sourcing a process from an overseas pro
-vider that will be subsumed into a service by a corporation. In the second case a corporation builds 

the process (sourced offshore) into its service but the offshore provider does not directly interact 

with the end customers.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 359
novationŠespecially by offshore providersŠplays a signi˜cant role as a comple
-ment to product innovation.
Process Innovation
Unlike product innovation, process innovation is not market-facing in its 
direct impact. Process innovation is about making signi˜cant changes to how 
tasks are executed, changing information ˚ows and work˚ows to achieve radical 

simpli˜cation of process execution in order to achieve greater process ef˜ciency 

and more effective support of the company™s market objectives. Process innova
-tion supports product innovation by reducing complexity in operations, making 

information work and its output more predictable, and improving the alignment 

between a company™s service and operations and its market objectives.
In the preceding example of the ˜nancial services corporation that introduced 
innovative features into the market, the offshore provider of back-of˜ce processes 

to whom the ˜rm outsourced these processes was able to radically reengineer 

processes by changing both the process architectureŠconsisting of informa
-tion ˚ows and work˚owŠand the skill sets of the agents that did the work. The 

company reengineered the entire back-of˜ce process from end to end to dispense 

with product-based specialists and instead moved to a model of deploying agents 

that had a 360-degree view of customer accounts and could process all kinds of 

products. To be able to support this process architecture the company needed 

back-of˜ce workers of a higher skill level than before. Under the changed scheme 

the agents had to be able to understand standard loans, split-coupon rate loans, 

mortgages, and credit lines. They hired agents with the necessary skill sets and 

trained them additionally as needed.
32
In another example of process innovation supporting product innovation, a 
large ˜nancial services MNC launched a new ˜nancial loan product to its corpo
-rate customers whereby the company would offer a series of small tranche loans 

to corporations for funding working capital requirements. The loan amounts 

would be priced, negotiated, and delivered to the corporation within 24 hours 

notwithstanding the complexity of the deal. Furthermore, the company offered 

to price each tranche based on the risk level associated with the tranche as op
-posed to a ˜xed-rate coupon for the whole loan. This was especially attractive to 

corporate customers who believed that there would be a reduction in risk as the 

business moved forward. To make this possible, the company had to radically re
-design its operations. It offshored the loan-processing tasks, including application 

management, credit risk assessment, and structuring the loan, ˜rst to a captive 

center that broke up the operations into modules. Thus, each set of related tasks 
32
 ﬁ‚Smart Growth™: Innovating to Meet the Needs of the Market without Feeding the Beast of 
Complexity,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=
 1585&CFID=2650244&CFTOKEN=97771378
#.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
would be carried by a modular operations unit team. Whenever a new customer 
entered the market a new operational silo could be assembled in real time to 
service that customer. The corporate loan-processing division was radically re
-organized into modular units that specialized in a particular task.
33
 For each new 
customer an assembly line of services would be created in real time by plugging 

in the modularized components.
The offshore ˜rm was able to do this in very short time as it could recruit 
employees with the specialized skills needed to achieve this within a much shorter 

period than was possible in the United States.
34
 Second, in order to get this design 
correct, the company had to carry some slack labor in the early months before it 

could reach a stable state of operations. This was not a problem in the offshore 

location because of the far lower wage costs. The ˜rm™s redesigned, modularized 

business processes are shown in Figure 3.
Product and process innovations differ in many aspects (as seen in Table 5), 
which we highlight in this section. 
Process innovation often complements product 
innovation and the two kinds of innovations have a lock-and-key structure
35
 of 
complementarily
. They also differ in some important ways; process innovation 
invariably takes far less time to deploy than product innovation. However, the 

metrics that measure the effectiveness of process innovation are rarely (if ever) 

directŠthey tend to measure the impact of product innovation such as process 

output quality and customer satisfaction with service. However, these measures 

are compounded by a number of internal factors and are at best proxies for mea
-suring process innovation effectiveness. Second, it takes much more time to judge 

the effectiveness of process innovations. Unlike the case of product innovation, 

where critical success factors such as market share and gross and net margins 

often provide an accurate picture of the success of the innovation, in the case of 

process innovation not only are there few (if any) direct metrics, there is also con
-siderable lag between introducing the innovation and measuring its effectiveness. 

The absence of direct measures means that it is necessary to capture measures of 

a variety of indirect proxies and to compare their change over a period of time 

to get some idea of how successful the innovation has been. Thus, while process 

and product innovations are complementary in the ˜nancial services industry, 
33
 The reader should note the direct contrast with the preceding example, where such specialized 
units were broken down into more versatile operational divisions. What should be clear is that there 
is no canonical way of engineering process innovation and very different solutions would work in 

slightly different situations.
34
 Mainly because it was located in a country with a very large labor pool with the necessary 
skills.
35
 The idea of a lock-and-key structure is used to illustrate how one kind of innovation holds the key 
to the success of another kind. New product introduction tends to snarl up the operational processes 

of a ˜rm. Process innovation opens up operational silos, eases information ˚ow, and reengineers 

work˚ow, thereby reducing complexity and allowing the bene˜ts of product innovation to be deliv
-ered to end customers. 
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 361
financial-3.eps
Customize
Loan
Products
Assessing
Customer™s
Risk-
Revenue
Profile
Credit Rating
Price the
Service
Bundle
Treasury
Services
Manage
Working
Capital
Account
Set Up An LC
Service
Set-Up
Working
Capital
Account
Create
Customer
Asset
Verify
Financial
Assets and
Collateral
Process
Transaction,
Instruments &
Manage A/c.
Configure
Channels
and Deliver
Service
Bundle PFS
and Retail
Financial
Services
Customer Interface
LCProcessing &
Management
Account
FIGURE 3
 The modular operational unit.
TABLE 5
 Product Versus Process Innovation
Innovation Factor
Product Innovation
Process Innovation
Locus of innovation
Market facing
Inside the ˜rm, directed at back-of˜ce 
and service operations
Principal goal
Competitive advantage, higher 
market share and revenues
Operational ef˜ciency, redesign of 
operations
Principal impact
Increases operational complexity
Lowering of complexity, increases 
service effectiveness
Gestation time
Comparatively long, often preceded 
by elaborate (several months of) 
R&D and market research efforts
Short; time lag between design and 
deployment is minimal
Metrics to measure 
effectiveness
Direct metrics, including market 
share, and gross and net margins
Only indirect proxies exist for 
measuring the effectiveness of the 

innovation
Time for market 
validation
Comparatively short; within a 
couple of quarters of introducing 

the innovation, CSFs can be 

measured
Much longer; it takes several 
periods of observation of indirect 

proxies for success to arrive at 

some estimate of the innovation™s 

effectiveness
Prerequisite for 
innovation
Domain experience and 
understanding of market and 

business context
Domain expertise, ability to manage 
complexity and deal with rapid 

changes in business volume
IP assets
Proprietary in nature; companies 
guard these carefully
Rarely, if ever, proprietary, companies 
share these in a nonzero fashion
Contract structure
Coordination between ˜rms, clearly 
de˜ned boundaries and control 

structures
Collaboration between ˜rms and 
between departments within 

˜rms; blurring of organizational 

boundaries
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
2 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
it is clear that they are very dissimilar. Table 5 contrasts process and product 
innovations.
Given the aforementioned nature of product and process innovation, are 
corporations willing to source from offshore providers? If so, what is the degree 
of acceptance of such sourcing mechanisms?
SOURCING
 I
NNO
VATIONS
 O
FFSHORE
We surveyed the views of senior executives of Fortune 1000 corporations on 
their willingness to source innovations from offshore providers (see Tables 6 and 

7).
36
 While the survey was not restricted to corporations in the ˜nancial services 
industry alone, we captured data about the industry to which respondents be
-longed and were able to extract the responses from the executives of the ˜nancial 

services industry.
37
 We found that senior executives in corporations are prepared 
to source innovations from offshore providers as long as they have a means of 

dealing with the risk inherent in such a relationship.
In response to the question, ﬁCan you partner with an offshore provider of 
innovation?ﬂ most executives (68 percent surveyed
38
) expressed their willingness 
to source innovations from offshore outsourcing ˜rms. Only a small minority (13 

percent) expressed the view that it was strategically risky to source innovations 

from offshore ˜rms. It is particularly interesting to note that there is little or no 

concern expressed about the ownership of the offshore provider. Of those manag
-ers that were open to sourcing from offshore providers only a minority wanted to 

have full ownership control of the offshore provider. About 56 percent of these 

managers were open to sourcing from a ˜rm that could become a strategic partner 

and another 15 percent or so were satis˜ed with additional control over outcomes 

offered by a joint venture with the offshore ˜rm.
Product innovation often results in the creation of IP assets that corpora
-tions try to protect. Large investment banks have proprietary program trading 

algorithms that they go to great lengths to safeguard. Similarly corporate banks 

have developed risk assessment and management systems for different kinds of 

businesses that are protected as valuable IP assets. As opposed to this, process 

innovation rarely results in the creation of sensitive IP assets. The gains of process 

innovation in ˜nancial services can be shared in a non-zero-sum fashion between 

the offshore provider and its Western clients.
A ˜nal contrast between product and process innovation that we wish to 
comment on is that product innovation usually involves tight control via contract 
36
 The survey was conducted by Knowledge@Wharton in 2006. About 75 percent of respondents 
worked either in ˜nancial services ˜rms or were executing processes that belonged to the ˜nance 
and accounting category.
37
 This is a subset of a larger set of responses.
38
 Sum of the ˜rst three rows, which represent the willngness to source innovations from offshore 
providers under different conditions.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 363
TABLE 6
 Sourcing Innovations from Abroad
Can you partner with an offshore provider of innovation?
Number of 
Responses
Percentage
Yes, if it is our fully owned subsidiary
12
7%
Yes, if we can establish a JV with an overseas ˜rm
27
15%
Yes, if we can exert some measure of operational control over the 
overseas ˜rm and make it a strategic partner
101
56%
No. We cannot risk sourcing innovative products and processes from 
an overseas ˜rm
23
13%
Other please specify
16
9%
Total responses
179
TABLE 7
 Product and Process Innovations and IP Assets
Product innovation usually results in valuable intellectual property (IP) assets that 
need to be protected
Strongly disagree
32%
Somewhat disagree
32%
Neither agree nor disagree
76%
Somewhat agree
51
40%
Strongly agree
62
49%
Total
126Process innovation, rarely, if ever, results in proprietary IP assets

Strongly disagree
11
9%
Somewhat disagree
17
13%
Neither agree nor disagree
19
15%
Somewhat agree
48
38%
Strongly agree
31
25%
Total
126The company that brings an innovative product to the market often takes ownership 
of the innovation
Strongly disagree
11%
Somewhat disagree
86%
Neither agree nor disagree
11
9%
Somewhat agree
59
47%
Strongly agree
47
37%
Total
126Gains from process innovation are often shared in a zero-sum manner

Strongly disagree
31
25%
Somewhat disagree
33
26%
Neither agree nor disagree
49
39%
Somewhat agree
11
9%
Strongly agree
22%
Total
126Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.364
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
by one ˜rm, due in part to the nature of the proprietary IP assets, which takes 
ownership of the innovation and takes it to the market. As opposed to this, process 
innovation works through collaboration. Some of the most successful examples 

of offshore process innovations feature close collaboration between the client in 

the United States/United Kingdom and the provider located in India/Sri Lanka/

China. The work that occurs on Of˜ceTiger™s premises involves a high degree 

of collaboration between the clients in the United States and United Kingdom 

and Of˜ceTiger™s Asian of˜ces. Sometimes the same project may be broken 

up in real time so that one chunk of it is handled in Sri Lanka while another is 

executed out of the Philippines even as a third piece is executed in Chennai in 

India. Of˜ceTiger™s managers work with the client, monitor the progress of work 

in three countries in real time, and stitch together the output so as to create a 

seamless delivery vehicle for the client.
This kind of collaboration raises the question of governance: what is the 
optimal governance structure for these offshore innovation centers? Is it neces
-sary for corporations to own (via a captive center) the innovations or will they be 

able to source these innovative solutions from a third-party provider? It turns out 

that the emergence of a new governance structure made possible by advances in 

information and communication technologies is particularly well suited to sourc
-ing innovations from offshore providers. Before we investigate this governance 

structure we will ˜rst discuss the different governance options open for sourcing 

services from offshore providers. We term this collection of options the 
gover
-nance spectrum
.THE
 G
OVERNANCE
 S
PECTRUM
Economists, following in the central tradition of Ronald Coase in 1933 
(Coase, 1937) have long posited that the two principal ways of coordinating work 

are through an organization or the market. These two solutionsŠorganization and 

marketŠthat straddle opposite ends of the means of governing the production of 

work, map onto the ﬁmake or buyﬂ options that executives face. The make option 

corresponds to doing the work in-house while the buy option is about outsourcing 

work to a third party. In offshore outsourcing in particular there are some inter
-esting options that have emerged in recent years. Figure 4 provides a schematic 

representation of the spectrum of governance solutions.
Build operate transfer (BOT) and run to outsource (RTO) are temporally 
separated variants of the make and buy options. In several offshoring deals in the 

˜nancial services domain we saw both BOT and RTO arrangements. In the BOT 

model, a third party runs an offshoring center for the client that after a period of 

time, is bought by the client and made into an in-house offering. Ownership in 

an RTO moves in the opposite direction: the client sells an in-house facility to a 

third-party provider after a prespeci˜ed period of time. A key point that is worth 

noting in this context is that offshore sourcing of ˜nancial services deals are par
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 365
financial-4.eps
Captive
Service
Center
(Hierarchy)
Joint

Venture
Build-
Operate
Transfer
Run-to-
Outsource
Third Party
Service
Provider
(Market
Solution)
Hierarchy
Market
The Extended
Organizational
Form
FIGURE 4
 The governance spectrum.
ticularly well suited for the governance structuresŠBOT, RTO, and the extended 
organizational form (EOF)Šthat we discuss here. Furthermore, we believe that 

the sourcing of innovations in ˜nancial servicesŠas opposed to the sourcing of 

services that are chie˚y about labor arbitrage
39
Šrequires some special features of 
governance, which we term the EOF and which we discuss later in this section.
In cases of both BOT and RTO, the transfer of ownership as well as the 
handover of assets is easier for ˜nancial services ˜rms for a variety of reasons. 

First, the input, output, and work in process are all information. There are no 

messy transfers of semi˜nished inventory nor is there transfer of raw materials 

and commodities that are factors of production (such as oil or coal). As a result 

there are few if any issues that have to do with valuing tangible assets that enter 

production. Second, it is possible for buyers to exert considerable operational 

control over suppliers via technological monitoring mechanisms and to integrate 

the work of the offshore supplier closely with the buyer™s ˜rm. Investment banks 

and corporate banks have used ˜ne-grained monitoring mechanisms to keep a 

close watch on the production process taking place offshore. Due to the continu
-ous proximity enabled by technology, the transfer of control from suppliers to 

buyers (or the other way around) becomes a lot easier than in the case of offshore 

production of other products and services. Finally, ˜nancial services ˜rms have 

a culture of measurement and use of metrics to track the critical success factors 

of their major initiatives (whether in their end-customer markets or having to 

do with offshore suppliers). As a result, both the buyer and the supplier have 

a reasonably clear idea of the health of the operation at the time of transfer of 

control.
39
 Lower wages for comparable skills in Asia and parts of Eastern Europe.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.366
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
These three factorsŠmonitoring, transfer of control, and metricsŠtaken 
together allow offshore ˜nancial services centers to work as if they are an exten
-sion of a client™s organization and to be able to sense and respond to the client™s 
context. For the sourcing of process innovations it is essential that the service pro
-vider be allowed the leeway to experiment and arrive at innovative solutions to 

problems. Second, too rigid a controlling structure results in the service provider 

being reduced to execute against speci˜cations and not try to formulate process 

innovations that may complement the client™s product innovations and address 

the problems of complexity. The optimal governance structure that allows both 

the sourcing of process innovations and delivers on contractual terms is a hybrid 

governance structure that has some measure of ˚exibility built into the contract 

while giving the client suf˜cient monitoring capabilities. We call this hybrid 

governance structure, which has features of both market-based governance and a 

hierarchy, the 
extended organizational form
. This is a governance structure that 
is seen predominantly in the ˜nancial services industry for the aforementioned 

reasons.
EMERGENCE
 OF
 THE
 E
XTENDED
 O
RGANIZATIONAL
 F
ORM
The extended organizational form (EOF) is a hybrid governance structure 
that brings together some elements of market and hierarchy. The strength of 

market-based governance (or sourcing processes from a third-party provider) is 

that it enforces the discipline of cost containment. Third-party ˜rms have to com
-pete with each other, and in order to lower costs they specialize or acquire scale 

economies and contain costs. However, the weakness of this mode of production 

is that the incentives of the supplier of services and the buyer are not aligned. The 

supplier would prefer to minimize the effort at any given price while the buyer 

would like to induce the highest possible effort from the supplier at the lowest 

possible price, thus setting up the classic problem of moral hazard.
40
 The use of 
contracts to mitigate moral hazard often involves wasteful expenditure involved 

in monitoring work, inspecting output, enforcing penalties, and so forth, which 

economists often refer to as transaction costs associated with market-based gov
-ernance (Coase, 1937). As opposed to market-based governance the ˜rm could 

produce these services in-house through a captive center in an offshore location. 

This would largely eliminate the misalignment of incentives and provide the 

corporation control over its production facilities offshore through the device 

of organizational hierarchy. However, the corporation would lose the bene˜ts 

of scale and specialization and the reduction in costs due to competition that a 

market solution would offer.
40
 The situation that arises when the incentives of the supplier and buyer diverge. When buyers 
cannot fully observe the effort level of the supplier, the supplier™s incentives would be to cut costs 
(make a suboptimal effort).
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 367
A solution to this problem of bringing together the strengths of the two 
forms of governance is the EOF. It affords the clients both more control over the 
supplier of services and lower costs of production. Some examples of the EOF 

include Pipal Research, a ˜rm that provides expertise-driven ˜nancial analytics 

and research services to corporations in the United States and the EU. The com
-pany is headquartered in Chicago and has of˜ces in India, China, and London. 

Once the client and provider establish a contractual relationship, the client works 

directly with researchers in India and China and the client™s managers can direct 

Pipal Research™s associates as well as collaborate with them in research.
An example of the EOF can be seen in the operation of Of˜ceTiger, a U.S.-
based company with operations in several countries including India, Philippines, 

Sri Lanka, and Switzerland. The ˜rm faces deadlines for work that range from 

one hour to a month. As a result of facing short deadlines, Of˜ceTiger does not 

have the luxury of negotiating arm™s-length contracts each time a client com
-missions a project. The corporation has established a managerial control mecha
-nisms called the ﬁProgram Of˜ceﬂ by which its managers work closely with 

managers of the clients. Furthermore, the company has created one of the most 

comprehensive management information systems that we have studied, called 

T-Tracks, which it deploys through extranets at the client™s site. Client managers 

as well as Of˜ceTiger™s managers can track the progress of work and slice and 

dice the work by project, by team, by shift, and even by individual agent in real 

time. The use of a very ˜ne-grained monitoring system combined with a system 

of metrics that allows every aspect of work to be tracked and monitored allows 

both Of˜ceTiger and clients to execute projects of considerable complexity.
41
 In fact Of˜ceTiger™s agents become extensions of the client™s organizationŠan 

example of the EOFŠwhich in turn allows the client to migrate the production 

of strategically signi˜cant services such as ˜nancial analytics, equity research, 

and market research to Of˜ceTiger™s production teams.
Another example of this phenomenon is the company EquinoxCorp.
42
 Equi
-noxCorp provides services across the mortgage ˜nance value chain that range 

from simple loan processing to predictive analytics leading to customer pro˜t
-ability gradient and retention. The company has created a network of partnerships 

along the mortgage processing value chain so that it is able to offer predictive 

analysis and customer retention services based on the use of a proprietary plat
-form that captures data from several stages of the mortgage ˜nancing process.
43
 Corporations such as EquinoxCorp and Of˜ceTiger are networks that span sev
-eral corporations. Their ability to offer innovative solutions results from process 
41
 ﬁHow Some BPO Providers Seek to Build and Protect Their Turf,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=110
1.42
 Recently acquired by i-Flex Solutions a subsidiary of Oracle Inc.
43
 ﬁHow Some BPO Providers Seek to Build and Protect Their Turf,ﬂ 
Knowledge @ Wharton
, see 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=110
1.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.368
 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
innovations that they forge across the value chain in the production and delivery 
of several products ranging from mortgage ˜nancing in retail ˜nancial services 
through tax analysis and ˜nancial analytics in corporate banking to strategic 

market analysis, forecasts, and research in investment banking.
To be able to deliver process innovations and calibrate their needs to the 
context of the clients and their changing market needs, companies such as Of
-˜ceTiger and Pipal Research require both considerable ˚exibility to try and 

experiment with their solutions as well as the ability to collaborate in real time 

with their clients. The EOF allows this ˚exibility as well as establishes deep 

collaborative links that span joint technology platforms, interorganization infor
-mation systems, extranet-based tools, and managerial mechanisms (such as the 

Program Of˜ce) that allow the ˜rms to deliver innovations to clients offshore. 

In the survey (mentioned earlier) we asked executives what forms of governance 

might be best suited to source different kinds of services and products. Their re
-sponses are shown in Figure 5.
44
 It is clear in the assessment of these executives 
that for sourcing innovations the form of governance structure that works best is 

the ﬁsense and adjustﬂ collaborative networks.
The EOF is a recent phenomenon. The strength of this form of governance 
emerges from the combination of ˜ne-grained monitoring enabled by technology 

and the ˚exibility of work enabled by removal of restrictions on experimentation. 

In our survey of business process offshoring starting in 1999, we found few if any 

cases of EOF in the ˜rst few years. It is only in the past 5 years or so that this 

organizational structure has become relatively more prevalent. The EOF, as we 

saw earlier, is a particularly effective tool for mitigating risk and for aligning the 

interests of the buyer and the provider of services, especially in ˜nancial services 

where the provider™s ability to innovate and create value for the buyer is signi˜
-cant (
Economist
, 2006). Indeed our past research also points in this direction: we 
˜nd the EOF being deployed in domains where close collaboration between the 

buyer and the provider of ˜nancial services is necessary to transform sourcing via 

contracts into collaborative networks that can deliver innovations.
CONCLUSION
The diffusion of innovations in ˜nancial services across the regions of the 
world has been propelled by the twin forces of market participation by ˜nancial 

services ˜rms and by the sourcing of process innovations that emerged as a result 

of global sourcing of ˜nancial services. A key factor that drives the division of la
-bor in bringing innovations to market is the divergence in perceptions of process 

complexity. As we showed earlier, process complexity is subjective and the di
-vergence in views of complexity often stem from the fact that many executives in 

Asia and Eastern Europe have domain expertise but domain experience is needed 
44
 Based on 102 responses.
Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 369
FIGURE 5
 Governance structures, sourcing, and innovations.
financial-5.eps
axis labels were behind clipping masks
020
40
60
80
100
Raw Materials Standardized
Components 
MRO Goods Call center
services 
Non-expert
BPO 
Expertise
Driven BPO
R & D /
Product Design
/ Development 
Innovations 
Type of Service Sourced
Percentage of Respondents
Command and Control 
Coordination via Contracts 
Sense & Adjust Collaborative Networks
to deliver innovative products. Thus, service providers in Asia and elsewhere 
have often restricted themselves to process innovations while their counterparts 
in the United States and EU have been able to deliver product innovations.
The strength of this model, however, is the complementarity between process 
and product innovations. Process and product innovations have a lock-and-key 

structure, where process innovations hold the key to resolving the problem of 

complexity that is unleashed by the introduction of new products. Finally, the 

sourcing of innovations in ˜nancial services requires forms of governance that 

are very different from the contractual, command-and-control mechanisms used 

for the procurement of more routine and highly codi˜able forms of work such 

as call centers and data processing. For sourcing innovations from offshore pro
-viders it is necessary to be able establish a collaborative mechanism that allows 

the Western clients to monitor their offshore service providers in ˜ne-grained 

fashion, which in turn allows them to give these ˜rms the leeway to experiment 

and arrive at innovative process-based solutions. Second, this form of governance 

also establishes deep collaborative linkages between ˜rms, thus enabling the 

client and the buyer to come up with highly customized solutions in relatively 

short time frames.
Where do we expect to see these trends lead? The cost of bandwidth has been 
falling over the past decade even as the reach of the Internet has been increas
-ing. Interoperability between computing platforms has made it relatively easy to 

transport vast datasets between ˜rms that are on very different platforms. The 

emergence of collaborative technological platforms such as Wikis and Web ser
-Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37
0 INNOVATION IN GLOBAL INDUSTRIES
vices (that can connect disparate systems over the Internet) as well as structured 
blogs will deepen the collaborative capabilities of corporations. Increasingly 
companies are able to monitor the working of the offshore providers at ˜ner and 

˜ner levels of detail thanks to technological advances. These forces will result 

in greater global sourcing of innovations from various regions and will expand 

the sourcing footprint of corporations to include regions other than China and 

India. Brazil, Sri Lanka, Philippines, the Republic of South Africa, and Poland 

could well become important providers of ˜nancial services innovations in the 

near future. International trade trends are also making it easier for corporations 

to compete in offshore markets. Free-trade agreements between the United States 

and Singapore and between the United States and Australia, as well as the inte
-gration of Eastern European countries into the EU, have all resulted in increased 

market participation in global markets by ˜nancial services ˜rms the world over. 

Technology has brought instant transparency to business practices and product 

strategies adopted by ˜rms in different regions and markets. As a ˜rm introduces 

a new product or new features of an existing product, it will rapidly get copied 

by all other ˜rms and will become a standard feature of the next generation of 

products. Firms will thus have to compete constantly for pro˜ts and market 

share. Competition is perhaps the most powerful driving force of innovation. As 

competition intensi˜es in world markets, we will surely see greater innovation 

in these markets.
AC
KNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the Mack Center for Technological Innovation and the 
Fishman Davidson Center for Service and Operations Management at the Whar
-ton School, University of Pennsylvania, for supporting this research.
REFERENCES
Aron, R., and J. Singh. (2005). Getting offshoring right. 
Harvard Business Review
 December: 
135-143.
Coase, R. (1937). The nature of the ˜rm. 
Economica
 4:386-405.
Economist. 
(2006). Partners in wealth. January 19.
Emloh, David von, and Yi Wang. (2005b). Competing for China™s credit card market. 
McKinsey. 
Avail
-able at 
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/competing_for_chinas_credit_card_market_171
3.Ensor, B. (2004). How ING DIRECT stole $17 billion in bank deposits. 
Forrester. 
Available at 
http://
www.forrester.com/Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,41632,00.htm
l.Gary, L. (2004). Taking disruption to the bank, Strategy & Innovation, September-October 2004.
Gupta, Rajat K. (2005). Ful˜lling India™s promise. 
McKinsey Quarterly Special Edition.
 Available 
at 
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/public_sector/economic_policy_ful˜lling_indias_promise
 _167
3.Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES
 371
Roxburgh, Charles. (2006). Industry comment: The outlook for European corporate and invest
-ment banking.
 McKinsey Quarterly 
Web Edition. Available at 
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.
com/industry_comment_the_outlook_for_european_corporate_and_investment_banking_183
8.Segupta, J., and Renny Thomas. (2005a).What Indian consumers want from banks. 
McKinsey. 
Avail
-able at 
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/what _indian_consumers_want_from_banks_166
2. Innovation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World (Collected Studies)Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.