DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12173State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions andFuture Improvements: Interim Report74 pages | 8.5 x 11 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38373-8 | DOI 10.17226/12173Committee on State Voter Registration Databases; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilState Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.      
 State Voter Registration Databases  Immediate Actions and Future Improvements 
 Interim Report   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Committee on State Voter Registration Databases 
 Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
 Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences     
    State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Prepublication Document Œ Subject to Further Editorial Correction 
 ii
 THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS                  500 Fifth Street, NW                         Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, 
whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and 
the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences 
and with regard for appropriate balance. 

 This project was supported by Contract No. 1406-04-07-CT-66599 between the National Academy of Sciences and the U.S. 
Election Assistance Commission. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are 

those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this 

project. 
 International Standard Book Number 13: 978-0-309-11878-1 

International Standard Book Number 10: 0-309-11878-6 

 Copies of this report are available from 
 
The National Academies Press 

500 Fifth Street, NW 
Box 285 
Washington, DC 20055 

 
800-624-6242 
202-334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area) 
http://www.nap.edu 

    

 Copyright 2008 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 
Printed in the United States of America 
  
 
 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished 
scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the 
Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that 
requires it to advise the federal government on 
scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Ciceron
e is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National 
Academy of Sciences, as a parallel
 organization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its 
administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the 
responsibility for advising the federal government. Th
e National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national 
needs, encourages education and research, and 
recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  
Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the Nationa
l Academy of Sciences to secure the 
services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to 
the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of 
Sciences by its congressional charter to be an a
dviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. 
Harvey V. Fineberg is president 
of the Institute of Medicine. 

The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering 
knowledge and advising the federa
l government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies 
determined by the Academy, the Council has become
 the principal operating agency of both the National 
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, 

the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both 

Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph 
J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v COMMITTEE ON STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES 
  FRANCES ULMER, University of Alaska, Anchorage, 
Co-chair OLENE WALKER, State of Utah (retired), 
Co-chair RAKESH AGRAWAL, Microsoft R. MICHAEL
 ALVAREZ, California Institute of Technology CHARLOTTE
 CLEARY, Independent Consultant GARY W. COX, University of California, San Diego 
PAULA HAWTHORN, Independent Consultant 
SARAH BALL JOHNSON, Kentucky State Board of Elections 
JEFF JONAS, IBM Corporation 
JOHN
 LINDBACK, Office of the Secretary of State, Oregon 
BRUCE McPHERSON, State of California (retired) 
WENDY NOREN, Boone County Clerk™s Office 
WILLIAM WINKLER, U.S. Census Bureau 
REBECCA N. WRIGHT, Rutgers University 
 
SHARON
 PRIEST, Downtown Little Rock Partnership, resigned from the committee in December 2007 
 
 Staff  HERBERT S. LIN, Study Director 
KRISTEN R. BATCH
, Associate Program Officer 
MORGAN R. MOTTO, Senior Program Assistant 
BRANDYE WILLIAMS,
 Program Assistant 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD 
  JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair ERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC 
FREDERICK R. CHANG, University of Texas, Austin 

WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University 

MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center 
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles 
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University 

KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation 

JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation 

MICHAEL KATZ, New York University 
RANDY KATZ, University of California, Berkeley 
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University 

JON KLEINBERG, Cornell University 

TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University 

PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University 
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw & Co. 
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
WILLIAM STEAD, Vanderbilt University 

ANDREW VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC 

PETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.   Staff  JON EISENBERG, Director 
KRISTEN R. BATCH, Associate Program Officer 
RADHIKA CHARI, Administrative Coordinator 

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate 

HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist 

MORGAN R. MOTTO, Senior Program Assistant 

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer 
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Officer 
JANICE M. SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant 

TED SCHMITT, CSTB Consultant 
BRANDYE WILLIAMS, Program Assistant 

JOAN WINSTON, Program Officer 
 For more information on CSTB, see its Web site 
at http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National 
Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the 

CSTB at cstb@nas.edu. 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii   
   Preface 
 
 
In late 2006, the National Research Council 
(NRC) convened the Committee on State Voter 
Registration Databases.  Supported by the U.S. 
Election Assistance Commission, the committee was charged with organizing a series of workshops a
nd the preparation of an interim report addressing 
challenges in implementing and maintaining state vot
er registration databases and providing advice to the 
states on how to evolve and maintain these databases 
in order to share information with other states 
securely and accurately in fulfillment of the Help Amer
ica Vote Act of 2002.  The committee™s charge is 
laid out in Box P.1. 
This report is an interim report to the Election Assistance Commission that outlines various 
challenges to the deployment of state voter registration databases and describes potential solutions to 
these challenges.  Some of these solutions can be 
implemented prior to the November 2008 election; 
others will require a longer timeline 
for implementation and indeed some
 serious thought about how they 
might be implemented. 
This study was undertaken by a committee of 14 people with a broad range of expertise and 
backgrounds, including election operations, databases, computer and network security, and political 
science (see Appendix F)Šsuch a range was necessary to
 address the topic of state voter registration in all of its organizational, technical, and political comp
lexity.  To put information on the public record 
quickly and to educate the committee, two works
hops were held in August and November 2007, the 
agendas for which are provided in Appendix E. 
The committee has focused on shorter-term recomme
ndations, both because that was what it was 
asked to do and because it had a limited time to develop 
an information-gathering record or to consider more complex, longer-term issues.  However, on 
several issues the committee does provide a small 
number of long-range recommendations in this report.
  The committee™s final report will elaborate on the 
argumentation underlying the long-range recommenda
tions and on the recommendations themselves as 
neededŠand in particular will address considerations related to interstate interoperability of voter 
registration databases.  
The committee thanks those who participated in 
the first two workshops and contributed to the 
committee™s deliberations (listed in Appendix E).  It al
so extends special appreciation to Brad Bryant for 
coordinating the participation of election officials in
 these workshops and to the National Association of 
State Election Directors for being willing to share with the committee the results of its 2007 survey of 
state election officials regarding their voter registration databases.  Finally, the committee thanks the NRC 
staff for their work on this report.  Herb Lin prov
ided invaluable and expert
 assistance to the committee by sorting through comments and suggestions and by 
drafting the report with the committee™s guidance.  
Kristen Batch did a masterful job in organizing the work
shops that served as the information basis for this 
report and in preparing the report for review.  Jon 
Eisenberg, director of the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, worked closely with th
e Election Assistance Commission to launch this 
study.  Brandye Williams and Morgan Motto pr
ovided administrative support, and Radhika Chari 
provided overall administrative coordination.  
  Frances Ulmer and Olene Walker, 
Co-chairs Committee on State Voter Registration Databases 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii  BOX P.1 Statement of Task 
 An ad hoc committee will organize a series of workshops and prepare an interim report 
addressing challenges in implementing and maintaining state voter registration databases and 
providing advice to the states on how to evolve and maintain these databases in order to share 
information with other states securely and accurately in fulfillment of the Help America Vote Act 
of 2002.  
A series of workshops will explore issues including the following: 
  Lessons learned from intrastate voter regi
stration database interoperability efforts 
 Technical approaches, proces
ses and safeguards associat
ed with identifying and 
removing duplicate registrations 
 Technical approaches and procedures for sh
aring voter registration data across state 
systems 
 Security issues that arise when sharing data
 among states, and tech
nical and procedural 
approaches for ad
dressing them. 
 Discussions at the workshops, expert testimony, and committee deliberations will be used to 
prepare an interim report outlining challenges to achieving interoperability of state voter 
registration databases and related challenges facing states as they develop, maintain, and evolve 
their voter registration databases.  The interim report will also describe potential solutions to these 
challenges and discuss specific timelines over 
which state and local el
ection officials could 
implement possible solutions, including solutions that could be implemented prior to the 2008 
Federal election. 
Additional workshops and committee deliberations will culminate in a final report that builds 
on the interim report by describing technical, procedural, and organizational impediments to full 
voter registration database in
teroperability and outlining a plan for achieving interstate 
interoperability of state voter registration databases.
 The final report will address such issues as:  
  What is the current state of voter re
gistration databases across the states? 
 What functionality is useful for a state in checking its voter registration database against 
that of another state? 
 What are the main technical, procedural, and organizational impediments standing in the 
way of full interoperability? 
 What paths to interstate interoperability minimize technical risk and expense? 
     State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ix     
 Acknowledgment of Review Participants 
  This report has been reviewed in draft form by 
individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives 
and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 

Report Review Committee.  The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical 

comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to ensure 
that the report meets institutional standards for obj
ectivity, evidence, and r
esponsiveness to the study 
charge.  The review comments and draft manuscript re
main confidential to protect the integrity of the 
deliberative process.  We wish to 
thank the following individuals fo
r their review of this report:  
Elwyn R. Berlekamp, University of California, Berkeley, 

Brad Bryant, Kansas Secretary of State Office, 
Alan H. Davidson, Election Management Solutions, Inc., 
Morris P. Fiorina, Jr., Stanford University, 
Venkatesh Ganti, Microsoft Research, 

Lloyd J. Leonard, League of Women Voters of the United States, 

Deirdre K. Mulligan, University of California, Berkeley, 
Glenn Newkirk, InfoSENTRY Services, Inc., and 
Daniel P. Tokaji, Ohio State University. 

 
Although the reviewers listed a
bove have provided many constr
uctive comments and suggestions, 
they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the 
report before its release.  The review of this repor
t was overseen by Elsa M. Garmire, Dartmouth College.  
Appointed by the National Research Council, she was 
responsible for making certain that an independent 
examination of this report was carried out in accordan
ce with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered.  Responsibility for 
the final content of this report rests entirely with 
the authoring committee and the institution. 
  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xi   
   Contents  
 SYNOPSIS   
1  
INTERIM REPORT 
4  The Context for Voter Registration, 4 

Key Processes for Voter Registration Databases, 4 

Technical Considerations for Voter Registration Databases, 8 

Immediate Actions Possible Before November 2008, 10 

Possible Future Improvements That Will Require Longer-Term Action, 15 
 
 
APPENDIXES 
 
A Background and Context 
23 B Matching Records Across Databases 
29 C Data Issues  
41 D Security and Privacy 
48 E Workshop Agendas 
53 F Biographical Information 
58  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1   
   Synopsis  
 
Voter registration plays a central role in elections in all states except North Dakota.  Today, the 
states operate under a federal mandate (the Help 
America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002) to develop ﬁa 
single, uniform, official, centralized, interactive comp
uterized statewide voter registration list defined, 
maintained, and administered at the state level.ﬂ
1  Each state™s database must contain the name and 
registration information of each legally registered voter
 in the state, and each legally registered voter is assigned a unique identifier.  Election officials must 
perform regular maintenance regarding the accuracy 
of the registration lists.  In addition, the Nati
onal Voter Registration Act (NVRA) of 1993 and HAVA 
establish rules under which names may be removed from voter registration lists. (A voter registration list 

is the list of names contained in a voter registration database, and the terms are often used 
interchangeably.) 
Two basic tasks must be performed for voter re
gistration databases: addi
ng individuals to the voter registration database (VRD) and maintaining the VRD. 
  Adding individuals to the VRD generally requi
res that the information provided on a first-
time voter registration application be verified ag
ainst the relevant state™s department of motor 
vehicles database of driver™s license numbers 
or the Social Security Administration™s 
database of Social Security numbers. 
 Maintaining the VRD is needed to keep voter 
registration information current and to remove 
the names of ineligible voters and duplicate registrations from the voter lists.  This task 
requires comparing records within a VRD to ot
her records in order to identify duplicate 
registrations (usually associated with changes of address or name) and (by law) comparing 
VRDs to databases of known felons, deceased i
ndividuals, and individuals declared mentally 
incompetent.  In addition, address changes for 
drivers™ licenses play a major role in updating 

and maintaining the VRD. 
 
Both of these tasks require databases that are 
accurate and complete, as well as good matching 
procedures.  However, in practice, a variety of prac
tical problems arise such as data entry error.  In 
addition, the matching procedures used by many states have not been subjected to rigorous evaluation or 

testing. The VRD also drives the preparation of pollbooks (t
he list of eligible voters in localities for use at polling places).  Additional functionality implemented by many states in their (centralized) voter 
registration systemsŠincluding ballot preparation; si
gnature verification for absentee or mail-in ballots; 
and management of election workers, polling pl
aces, petitions, and requirements for disability access 
under HAVAŠassists the local elections official in conducting an election. 
Given the time frame needed to implement chang
es that require the modification of computer 
systems (which involve at a minimum time to desi
gn, code, and test changes, and may require new 

procurements and/or procedures), it is unlikely that
 any recommendation concerning technology changes 
could be responsibly implemented in time for the 20
08 elections.  Moreover, solutions to these technical problems may in some cases also require changes to 
state election law and/or regulation; they are not 
                                                     
 1Section 303(a)(1)(A) of HAVA. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 exclusively issues about changing computer systems, but also might require that states alter law, 
regulation, or practice. 
Nevertheless, the Committee on State Voter Regi
stration Databases believes that a number of 
meaningful changes of a nontechnical nature can be implemented in two areas in time to make a 
difference in the November 2008 election: (1) 
education and dissemination of information and 
(2) administrative processes and procedures.  In addi
tion, this interim report notes a number of actions 
that can be taken to support elections in 2010 
and beyond, although states may wish to examine these 
longer-term actions to see if any can be implemen
ted in the few months before the 2008 election. 
These short-term changes and longer-term actions 
are directed primarily at election officials 
(voter registrars) at the state and local/county level.
  In some cases, the Election Assistance Commission 
has a useful role to play as well in facilitating and promoting their implementation. 
 
 SHORT-TERM ACTIONSŠPUBLIC EDUCATION AND 
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION 
  Raise public awareness about the legibility and 
the completeness of voter registration card 
information.  Jurisdictions could take so
me or all of the following specific steps: 
 Emphasize in the instructions for filling out voter registration forms the importance of 
legibility and completeness (for example, ﬁPlease print all responses; if your answers are 
illegible, your application may be mis-ente
red, rejected, or returned to you.ﬂ).   
Conduct media campaigns emphasizing the importance of legibility and completeness in 
the information provided on voter registration forms.  
Coordinate with third-party voter regist
ration groups and public service agencies, 
emphasizing the need for their field volunteers 
to attend to legibility and completeness as 
they distribute and/or collect registration materials.   
 
 SHORT-TERM ACTIONSŠADMINISTRATIVE PROCESSES 
AND PROCEDURES 
  Resubmit match queries if the response returned 
from the Social Security Administration or 
department of motor vehicles is a nonmatch. 
 Provide human review of all computer-indicated removal decisions. 
 Improve the transparency of procedures fo
r adding voters and for list maintenance. 
 Use fill-in online registration forms. 
 Perform empirical testing on the adequacy of processes for adding to and maintenance of 

lists.  Take steps to minimize errors during data entry. 
 Allow selected individuals to suppress address 
information on public disclosures of voter 
registration status.  Encourage (but do not require) entities sponsorin
g voter registration drives to submit voter 
registration forms in a timely manner to reduce massive influxes at the registration deadline. 
 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNOPSIS 
3  LONG-TERM ACTIONS FOR POSSIBLE FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  Develop and promote public access portals for on
line checking of voter registration status. 
 Encourage/require departments of motor ve
hicles as well as public assistance and disability 
service agencies to provide voter registration information electronically. 
 Encourage/require departments of motor vehicles, public assistance and disability service 
agencies, tax assessors, and other public service 
agencies of state and local government in 
their communications with the public to remind voters to check and update their information. 
 Improve matching procedures. 
 Establish a software repository 
of tested matching algorithms. 
 Provide voter registration receipts to improve administrative processes. 
 Allow voters to register and to update missing or
 incorrect registration information online if a 
signature is already on file with a state agency. 
 Develop procedures for handling disenfranchis
ement caused by mistaken removals from 
voter registration lists.  Improve the design of voter registration forms. 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4   
   Interim Report  
 THE CONTEXT FOR VOTER REGISTRATION 
 
Voter registration plays a central role in elections in most states.  Today, every state except North 
Dakota1 operates under a federal mandate 
(the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002) to develop ﬁa 
single, uniform, official, centralized, interactive comp
uterized statewide voter registration list defined, 
maintained, and administered at the state level.ﬂ
2  Each state™s database must contain the name and 
registration information of each legally registered voter
 in the state, and each legally registered voter is assigned a unique identifier.  Election officials must 
perform regular maintenance regarding the accuracy 
and completeness of the registration lists.  In add
ition, the National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) of 
1993 and HAVA establish rules under which names may 
be removed from voter registration lists.  
As a registration deadline nears, the processing 
of voter registration applications can present enormous logistical problems.  The reason is the sheer volume of voter registration records that need 
processing (either new voter registration applications or updates of information for already-registered 
voters)Šand especially in a presidential election year, 
this volume can be a substantial fraction of the 
entire voter registration database.  Most of these documents typically arrive within a few weeks of a 
registration deadline and, depending on the registration cutoff in a particular state, can mean around-the-
clock data entry up to the last minute (that is, on Electi
on Day) so that pollbooks can be printed.  In some 
instances, there have been outstandi
ng documents to be processed even by Election Day, and staff were 
needed to manage inquiries from polling places from a ma
nual file of registration cards not yet entered. 
A more detailed discussion of the background and context for voter registration can be found in 
Appendix A. 
 
 KEY PROCESSES FOR VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES 
 
It is helpful to consider the two basic informa
tion management functions of any voter registration 
database (VRD): adding individuals to
 the list and maintaining the list.
3  The VRD also drives the preparation of pollbooks (the list of eligible voters in localities for use at polling places).  Many states 

have implemented additional functiona
lity to their (centralized) voter registration systems that assists the 
local elections official in conducting an election. Such functionality may include ballot preparation, 

signature verification for absentee or mail-in ballots, management of election workers, polling places, 

petitions, and requirements for disability access under HAVA. 
                                                       
 1North Dakota does not require voter registration and was exempted from certain provisions of HAVA. For more 
background information, see http://
www.nd.gov/sos/forms/pdf/votereg.pdf. 
2Section 303(a)(1)(A) of HAVA. 
3These two general processesŠverifying voter registration information and maintaining voter registration listsŠare 
central to the technical and policy dimensions of voter registration databases.  Other processes, not covered in this 
report, are relevant to other requirements and verification procedures covered under Section 303(b) of HAVA. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
5  Posting New Voter Registration Informat
ion to a Voter Registration Database 
 In processing a voter registration application form, 
the first question is whether the applicant is already on the list (e.g., the person may already be on 
the list but with a different address, or the person 
may have changed his or her name due to a marriag
e, divorce, or legal action).  Although states handle 
this process in different ways, one notional way of handling it is that if the person is already in the VRD, 
the status of the previous registration is changed to ﬁout-of-dateﬂ and a pointer added to the new 

registration.  The new registration information must th
en be added to the VRD, just as it must be if the 
new registrant is not on the list, except that the verification procedures described below are then not 
relevant.  Alternatively, the database™s functionality 
may allow an update of the voter™s registration to 
reflect the new information regarding address or name. 
In those instances in which data are entered in a 
distributed manner throughout the state, checking 
to see if the applicant is already in the VRD may occur after the applicant has been added as a new 
registrant.  In this case, the new record must be ha
ndled as a duplicate of an existing record, each referring 
to the same person but with different recorded information.   
If the registrant is not already in the state™s VRD,
 the individual must be considered a first-time 
applicant.  (In addition, some states regard a voter as a ﬁnew registrationﬂ when he or she moves from one 
jurisdiction to another within the stateŠeven if the voter is contained in the statewide VRD, the 
registration is valid only in the first jurisdiction.
)  HAVA requires certain procedures for verifying voter 
registration applications.  With some exceptions,
4 first-time applicants are required to provide a current 
and valid driver™s license number (or a state-issued nondriver™s identification) or, lacking one, the last 

four digits of their Social Security number (SSN).
5  Those who register by mail are also required to 
present identifying information at the polls on Election Da
y (or with their mail-in ballots if they vote via 
mail) if their department of motor vehicles (DMV) or
 Social Security Administration (SSA) information 
cannot be verified.  HAVA requires the state motor vehicle agencies and the SSA to enter into agreements 

with states to verify voter registration informati
on.  Currently, the American Association of Motor 
Vehicle Administrators and the Social Security Admi
nistration are using the first name, last name, month 
and year of birth, and last 
four digits of the SSN (SSN4) for the verification process.  
Under these agreements, the applicant™s informati
on can be verified against the information on 
file with the DMV or the SSA.  In the case of a nonmat
ch (for example, the applicant cannot be found in 
the DMV or SSA databases), HAVA and other relevant federal laws provide little guidance or direction to 
the states about what to do
 next (with one exception
6).  Although in most states the voter registrar will 
make an attempt to contact the applicant so that he
 or she can provide additional information, there is 
variation in how the states manage the nonmatch, some of which is the subject of current legal 

challenges.7    
                                                      
 4See HAVA Section 303(b) for the exceptions for individuals 
who register or vote by mail, are entitled to vote by 
absentee ballot under the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act, or are provided the right to vote 
under the Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped Act.  
5If the applicant has neither a driver™s license nor an SSN, the jurisdiction is required to provide the applicant with a 
unique voter identifying number. 
6See HAVA Section 303(b). In the event that an individual registers to vote by mail without providing a copy of a 
current and valid driver™s license or other appropriate form of identification with the application, and his or her 
information cannot be verified (matched) against the DMV or SSA databases, HAVA requires this individual to 
present appropriate identification at
 the polling place on Election Day. 
7For example, in a case being litigated as this report is written, a Washington state law is being challenged that 
requires a nonmatch to result in an applicant not being registered.  See 
Washington Association of Churches v. Reed
, No. C06-0726RSM, 2006 WL 4604854, available at http://projectvote.org/fileadmin/ProjectVote/Legal_ 

Documents/WAC__PI_Decision.pdf.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 List Maintenance  A second important function of a VRD system is to maintain the list of eligible voters, that is, to 
keep voter registration information current and to re
move the names of ineligible voters and duplicate 
registrations from the voter lists.  Jurisdictions must perform periodic list maintenance in accordance with 
provisions of the NVRA.
8  Section 8 of the NVRA requires states to conduct a ﬁgeneral program that 
makes a reasonable effort to remove the names of ine
ligible votersﬂ at voter request or as a result of a 

felony conviction (presuming that state law directs rem
oval of felons from voter registration lists), mental 
incompetence, death, or change of residence outside the jurisdiction that holds the voter™s registration.  

The NVRA requires that any program of systematic removal of names of ineligible voters must be 

completed not less than 90 days prior to a federal elec
tion. This time limit does not apply to removals due 
to death, felony conviction, or judgment of mental 
incompetence, which may occur within 90 days of an 
election. Neither HAVA nor the NVRA requires advance 
notification of removal from the registration list 
except in the case of change of residenc
e outside the previous jurisdiction. 
  Felony Convictions, Death, and Mental Incompetence 
 
HAVA calls for coordination of state VRDs with 
state death and felony databases in accordance 
with state law. The Election Assistance Commission (E
AC) recommends that states also coordinate with 
relevant federal databases, Social Security Death 
Index databases, and criminal conviction records from 
U.S. attorneys and federal courts. The use of multiple databases is helpful to overcome gaps in or 

omissions of data from external state files.
9  However, HAVA does not specify how the coordination with 
other state agencies™ databases is to take place and 
lacks specific guidance on standards or methods for 
removal of ineligible voters from the databases for these reasons. 
Note also that state law governs state policy re
garding the relationship 
between voting eligibility 
and status as a felon.  In some states, convicted felo
ns are never permitted to vote after their conviction; in 
other states, the right to vote is reinstated automatic
ally upon the end of the individual™s sentence; in still 
other states, the individual must apply for reinstatemen
t after the end of his or her sentence or at a state-
specified time afterward. 
 
 Changes of Residence 
 
The NVRA requires states to establish a program to
 use information supplied by the U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS) to identify registrants whose address ma
y have changed; today, about 14 percent of the 
population changes an address every year.
10  Identifying voters who have
 moved is usually based on 
periodic mailings that registrars send to all voters in
 the jurisdiction by U.S. mail, indicating on the 

envelope ﬁdo not forward but rather 
return to sender.ﬂ  Notices that are returned to the registrar are an 
indication that the voter may have moved.   
The USPS does not automatically notify voter registra
rs of an individual™s ch
ange of address.  To 
use the USPS to check an individual™s status, the voter
 registrar must initiate a query to the USPS with a 
                                                     
 8See 42 U.S.C. 1973gg et seq., including Subsections (a)(4), 
(c)(2), (d), and (e) of Section 8 of that act (42 U.S.C. 
1973gg-6). 
9For instance, if a resident of Missouri dies in California, 
the death is recorded in Calif
ornia and notification may or 
may not be sent to Missouri in a timely manner, or ever. 
10See U.S. Census Bureau, 
Geographical Mobility
: 2006.  Highlights from this series are available at 
http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/w
ww/releases/archives/mobility_of_the_population/010755.html, and detailed 
tables are available at http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/migrate.html. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
7  list of names to see if anyone on the list has move
d or submitted a change-of-address form.  If so, the 
USPS will return to the voter registrar the new address 
for the relevant individuals if the query is made 
within the forwarding period.  Queries made after that
 point indicate that the new address is unavailable.  
In addition, a voter registrar could, in principle,
 also check the entire VRD against the USPS National 
Change of Address (NCOA) database
11 to catch any additional missed moves,
12 although the actual utility 
and practicality of such a check may va
ry depending on the jurisdiction involved. 
The NVRA requires election officials to notify the 
voter if they receive an indication that the voter has moved.  In particular, when a change of 
address is received from the USPS process, the registrar 
must send a confirmation card to the voter.  If the voter
 remains within the jurisdiction of the registrar, no 
further action is needed.  However, if the new address is
 outside the jurisdiction of the registrar, the voter 
is asked to return the card, and the voter registrati
on record is handled accordingly.  If the confirmation 
card is not returned and the voter does not vote in or
 by the second general federal election that occurs 
after the date of the notice, he or she may be removed from the VRD. 
Some states have implemented 
what is referred to as ﬁportableﬂ registration, meaning that 
registered voters who move within the state need 
not re-apply for registration at their new address; 
instead, procedures exist to automatically remove the 
voters from the registry at their old address and add 
them at their new address.  In principle, such 
systems can mitigate problems arising from the single 
largest source of duplicate registrations that a state faces. 
In addition, a state™s department of motor vehicl
es can be an important (and in some cases is the 
primary) source of information regarding changes of address.  States that have integrated their voter 
registration systems with DMV systems have found that many changes of address are much more easily 

managed.  
 Duplicate Registrations 
 
Duplicate registrations in a VRD often cause c
onfusion.  For example, since voter turnout 
percentages are calculated on the basis of the actual number of voters on Election Day divided by the 

number of registered voters, a VRD with a large number of duplicate registrations can lead to 

underestimates of voter turnout.  The same phenome
non has operational significance in states where 
referendum propositions require a certain
 percentage of registered voters to approve the placement of any 
given proposition on the ballot. 
It is important to distinguish between two types of ﬁduplicateﬂ registrations.  One type of 
duplicate (call it ﬁType Aﬂ) is a record in a database that
 is identical in all particulars to another recordŠthis may occur, for example, if an individual has su
bmitted more than one registration application, as he 
or she may do entirely by accident if a previous regi
stration is forgotten.  In general, removing Type A 
duplicates from voter registration lists is technically easy to do.   
A second type of duplicate (call it ﬁType Bﬂ) is 
present when two records in the VRD with non-
identical information correspond to the same individual.  Type B duplicate registrations arise in many 

ways.  Perhaps the most common source is a voter™s change of address (for example, as the result of a 

move); a second common source is change of name (for example, as the result of marriage). 
The NVRA establishes procedures that must be fo
llowed before a Type B duplicate registration is 
removed due to a change of address (though not for 
other reasons), and HAVA establishes a requirement 
that states provide a unique identifier for every register
ed voter that is intended to facilitate handling of 
                                                     
 11For more information on the NCOA database and address chan
ge services provided by th
e U.S. Postal Service, see 
http://www.usps.com/ncsc
/addressservices/moveupdate/changeaddress.htm. 
12Commercial software costing in the range of $50,000 is av
ailable that checks addresses and formats them so that 
they can be checked against the NCOA.  A less expensive op
tion available to states is to contract with a vendor 
licensed by the USPS, which can cost 
several thousand dollars per year 
to check the entire state database. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Type B duplicates.  The EAC™s 
Voluntary Guidance on Implementation of Statewide Voter Registration 
Lists further states that ﬁif a state has identified a na
me on the voter list that it believes is either a 
duplicate name (or an ineligible voter), election officials should contact the individual.ﬂ
13  Nevertheless, 
states establish the technical criteria for deciding wh
en a Type B duplicate exists and process removals 
according to their own state-specific rules and guidelines. 
The best computer matching procedures that have
 been developed and compared by industry and 
academic researchers do not appear to be widely u
sed by the states for voter registration purposes.  
Several of the procedures are relatively easy to im
plement and have been demonstrated to improve 
significantly on unsophisticated procedures.  States that are not using these procedures can consider how 
to implement them and how to evaluate the effects 
of their implementations in reducing error rates. 
Note also that the use of a unique identifier reduces the technical complexity of managing Type B 
duplicates.  Nevertheless, some matching issues arise 
even if unique identifiers are present (for example, 
what to do in the event that the unique identifier is recorded incorrectly). 
 
 TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES 
 A variety of technical issues affect the performance of voter registration databases. These issues 
and some of the areas for improvement are discussed below. 
 
 Data Capture and Quality  As is the case with all other databases, the utilit
y of a VRD depends strongly on the quality of the 
data it contains, although a variety of processes can be
 applied to the data in order to improve their 
quality.   
One common source of error in the data is data
 entry.  Applicants typically submit handwritten 
voter registration cards that are sent to the voter registrar.  The applicant can make a mistake, forget to 
answer a question, or not write legibly.  The form or
 its information could be 
altered in transmission (a field could get smudged in postal handling, for exampl
e).  Keying errors result in mistranscriptions. 
Another source of error is the quality of other lists
 that are compared with VRDs.  The quality of 
other lists similarly depends on the procedures for 
data collection and entry; methods employed to 
minimize errors in the data, such as removing dupl
icates and other anomalies from these secondary 
databases; and training provided to staff and monitori
ng of staff when entering data, among other aspects.   
Moreover, the different purposes for which secondary data are collected can limit their use for 
other purposes and may not fully address what is needed
 for the purposes of voter registration databases.  
For instance, the USPS compiles change-of-address data
 when customers move and request forwarding 
services through the USPS National Change of Address system. However, because of privacy 

considerations the USPS limits the disclosure of this 
information.  Also, USPS has defined its information 
services so as to serve its primary business function, that is, without considering the needs of voter 

registrars. As a result, the NCOA system cannot be queri
ed with name and date of birth to find out where 
an individual has moved to; rather a name and address
 must be presented before the information can be 
validated.  The data contained in a VRD can be characterized with respect to two different attributesŠ
accuracy and completeness.  For purposes of this repor
t, accuracy refers to the factual correctness of the 
data that exist in the database, whereas complete
ness refers to the presence in the database of all 
individuals who 
should be in the database.  If the database is 
perfect, it is both 100 percent accurate and 
100 percent completeŠthat is, all of the data in the 
database are correct (and thus the database contains 
                                                     
 13See http://www.eac.gov/election/docs/s
tatewide_registration_guidelines_072605.pdf/attachment
_download/ file. State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
9  no individual who should not be in the database), 
and the database includes all of the individuals who 
should be in the database.  Notice that
 in this formulation, accuracy does 
not subsume completeness, so 
that a database must be characterized with respect to 
both attributes. This usage of the term ﬁaccurateﬂ appears to be
 consistent with the meaning of the word in 
common discourse.  However, the reader is cautioned 
that some other commentators and analysts use the 
term ﬁaccurateﬂ to mean both ﬁfactually correctﬂ and ﬁcomplete.ﬂ 
Although accuracy and completeness are conceptua
lly distinct attributes, they are generally 
linked, as the discussion in the next section on matching shows. 
A more detailed discussion of data capture
 and quality can be found in Appendix C. 
  Matching  Adding new voters to the VRD and maintaining the VRD both require a procedure by which 
attributes of one data record (for example, a record
 of an individual in the VRD) are compared to 
attributes of another record (for example, a voter regi
stration application, a DMV driver™s license, an SSA 
record, a record in a database of felons, and so on).  This procedure, variously known as record linkage, 
identity matching, identity resolution, or simply ﬁreco
rd matching,ﬂ is ﬁgoodﬂ when it results in low rates 
of false positives (matches indicated when no match 
in fact exists) and false negatives (nonmatches 
indicated when a match does in fact exist).     In adding individuals to a VRD, poor proce
dures could result in improper indications of a 
nonmatch when a match should be indicated (a result that could be used to disenfranchise 
voters if an applicant™s information cannot be veri
fied or to inflate the size of the VRD list if 
an earlier registration for an applicant cannot be found) and/or improper indications of a 
match when a nonmatch should be indicated (a r
esult that could be used to add ineligible 
names to the VRD list). 
 In maintaining the VRD, procedures of poor quality will result in improper indications of a 
match between the voter registration list and 
one of the databases of ineligible-to-vote 
individuals when a nonmatch should be indicated
 (a result that tends to remove voters from 
the voter registration list improperly) or impr
oper indications of a nonmatch when a match 
should be indicated (a result that would keep 
felons, mentally incompetent individuals, and 
deceased people in the VRD).   
 
The consequences of false positives and false ne
gatives may vary depending on the purpose of 
the matching (and thus depending on the other databases 
against which VRD records are being matched).  
By law, the information on new voter registration a
pplications must be matched against DMV or SSA 
records, and the consequences of a false negative (tha
t is, no matches found when an individual is in fact 
represented in the DMV or SSA database) may be to
 wrongly keep the individual off the rollsŠfalse 
negatives in this context may lead to a less 
complete VRD.  List maintenance often calls for existing VRD 
records to be matched against felon or death record
s.  The consequences of a false negative are precisely 
the opposite: individuals may erroneou
sly be kept on the rollsŠfalse negatives in this context may lead to 
a less accurate
 VRD.  The converse is true with respect to false positives. 
Because of data quality issues and the lack of a truly unique identifier, record matching cannot be 
done perfectly in this context, that is, with zero 
false positives and zero false negatives.  The consequence 
is that achieving the goal of a simultaneously 100 percent accurate and 100 percent complete voter 

registration list is virtually impossible.  At the same
 time, what counts as an acceptable rate of false 
positives or false negatives, or an acceptable tradeoff between accuracy and completeness, depends on the 
particular policy goals that are desired.   
For example, given that a choice is necessary, a state may prefer to emphasize completeness over 
accuracy in its VRD.  With this goal in mind, it ma
y choose to minimize the rate of false positives in 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 matching the VRD against a list of felons, a policy 
choice that almost certainly will increase the number 
of ineligible individuals on the list.  Alternatively, a state may prefer to emphasize accuracy over 
completeness in its VRD.  With this goal in mind, 
it may choose to minimize the rate of false negatives in 
matching the VRD against a list of felons, a policy 
choice that almost certainly will increase the number 
of legitimately eligible individuals removed from the list.
14   Note also that record-matching procedures can, in
 principle, be executed by computer, by a 
human being, or both.  Computer-based procedures 
for verification or maintenance have the advantages 
that they can perform matches very rapidly and can 
operate consistently (because they depend only on the 
specific data involved and the prescriptive rules as implemented).  But computers using naïve matching 
rules can also be ﬁfooledﬂ by data problems th
at suitably trained humans can often handle.   
Human-based matching has the advantage of bri
nging to bear training a
nd personal experience, 
which can be used to determine a match or nonmatch in any given case.  However, human-based 
matching is impractical when large numbers of record
s are involved.  Human-based matching is generally 
less consistent than computer-based matching but 
may be better in other areas, such as comparing 
signatures.  These procedures can be used in tandem, so that any anomaly found by a computer-based 
procedure is directed to a human being before any action is taken.
15  (In effect, however, these procedures 
can break down under the stress of large numbers of 
applications, as may happen when applications are 
submitted near the deadline for submission of registrations.) 
A more detailed discussion of matching can be found in Appendix B.  Some privacy issues that 
arise with matching are addressed in Appendix D. 
 
 IMMEDIATE ACTIONS POSSIBLE BEFORE NOVEMBER 2008 
 
Given the time frame needed to implement chang
es that require the modification of computer 
systems (which involve at a minimum time to design,
 code, test, and document 
changes, and may require 
new procurements, procedures, and/or training), 
it is unlikely that any recommendation concerning 

technology changes could be respons
ibly implemented in time for the 2008 electionsŠindeed, if any state 
is planning significant technology changes intended for use in the 2008 elections, the committee 

recommends extreme caution in proceeding at this time.   
This point does not mean that nothing can be 
done to improve the voter registration process 
between now and November 2008Šthe committee believes that a number of meaningful nontechnical 

changes can be implemented in time to make a differe
nce.  These changes are clustered in two areas: (1) 
education and dissemination of information and (2) ad
ministrative processes and procedures.  Of course, 
implementation will depend on the availability of fina
ncial resources to support hitherto unanticipated 
                                                     
 14Arguments might sometimes be put forth to make only a particular subset of the database maximally accurate or 
maximally complete.  While legitimate policy reasons for doing so in some cases cannot be ruled out, such actions 
are inherently suspect and deserve the highest scrutiny before
 being implemented.  For ex
ample, an election official 
might be motivated to maximize the number of voters in a particular socioeconomic class or other group in order to 
give his or her party of preference an advantage at the polls.  Although the political motivation for wishing to take 
such action is clear, such an action wo
uld do serious injustice to the democr
atic process, and such a motivation 
would never be acknowledged publicly. 
15These comments should not be taken to imply that the combination of computer plus human review is necessarily 
better than the computer alone in all circumstances.  Indeed
, the literature indicates that for human review to add to 
the quality of the outcome, human reviewers must be we
ll trained (see, for example, H.B. Newcombe et al., 
ﬁReliability of Computerized Versus Manual Death Sear
ches in a Study of the Health of Eldorado Uranium 
Workers,ﬂ 
Computers in Biology and Medicine
 13(3):157-69, 1983).  Nonetheless, it tends to be true that the 
combination of good computer matching procedures and well-trained human reviewers is often superior in 
performance to the use of those procedures alone.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
11  actions and activitiesŠsuch resources are especially important when human-intensive actions are 
involved.  The section ﬁPossible Future Improvements That Will Require Longer-Term Actionﬂ identifies 

actions that can be taken to support elections in 2
010 and beyond, although states may wish to examine 
these longer-term actions to see if any can be implemen
ted in the few months before the 2008 election. 
These short-term changes and longer-term actions 
are directed primarily at election officials 
(voter registrars) at the state and local/county level.
  In some cases, the Election Assistance Commission 
has a useful role to play as well in facilitating and promoting their implementation. 

 
 Public Education and Dissemination of Information 
 Raise Public Awareness About the Legibility and th
e Completeness of Voter Registration Card 
Information  
Accurate and complete data are a basic element 
of a high-quality VRD.  But as noted in Appendix 
C, the quality of the data in a VRD is no better than
 the data that are entered into the system.  For 
example, illegible information impairs the ability of registrars to verify registrations as required by 

HAVA and/or state law, possibly placing additional 
downstream burdens on the voter (such as having to 
verify information by mail or having to provide an ID when voting the first time). 
Efforts to raise public awareness about the importance of legibility and fully completing voter 
registration forms would help to reduce the amount 
of illegible or missing information on these forms 
when they are submitted for data entry.  Properly 
undertaken, these efforts to
 raise public awareness of this particular issue could be integrated with ongoing
 efforts to encourage people to register to vote.  
Jurisdictions could take some or all of the following specific steps: 
  Emphasize in the instructions for filling out voter registration forms the importance of 
legibility and completeness (for example, ﬁPlease print all responses; if your answers are 

illegible, your application may be mis-en
tered, rejected, or returned to you.ﬂ).
16  Conduct media campaigns (perhaps undertaken by the Ad Council) emphasizing the 

importance of legibility and completeness in 
the information provided on voter registration 
forms.   Coordinate with third-party voter registration groups and public service agencies, 

emphasizing the need for their field volunteers 
to attend to legibility and completeness as 
they distribute and/or collect registration materials.   
 
 Administrative Processes and Procedures 
 
A variety of recommended administrative processes 
and procedures will also help to ensure 
higher-quality matching and increase voter confidence in
 VRDs.  Note, however, that large volumes of 
registration forms usually need to be processed as 
registration deadlines approach, a workload for which 
jurisdictions commonly rely on temporary staff.  Unle
ss other arrangements are made to adjust workflow 
(such as ensuring that actions that require human
 judgment are routed to permanent staff), these 
temporary staff will, in many cases, have to ca
rry out these recommended processes and procedures, 
suggesting that training them to do so will be necessary. 
 
                                                      
 16Even the National Mail Voter Registration Form does not address this point. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Resubmit Match Queries If the Response Returned from the Social Security Administration or 
Department of Motor Vehicles Is a Nonmatch 
 An election official can use any additional informat
ion available to generate
 match variations for 
a given name.  For example, a match might be soug
ht on standard name variations (for example, Bill 
versus William), or transposed fields (for exampl
e, last name and first name), or compound names 
separated, or on a maiden name if available.  Finall
y, it may be possible to resolve a nonmatch result by 
direct contact with the voter, either by phone or in writing. 
 
 Provide Human Review of All Computer-indicated Removal Decisions  
 Because inaccuracies in data may lead to false matching by automated processes, the committee 
urges jurisdictions to provide a human review of each
 and every decision to remove a registered voter 
from a VRD subject to the availability of trained personnel to do so.  (Note that most of the parties 

responding to a 2007 survey of the National Associati
on of State Election Directors on voter registration 
practices indicated that they did rely on humans to verify a match before a voter registration is 

canceled.17) For example, in one county, letters are sent to 
individuals who are at risk for being removed from 
the voter registration list; these letters have a ﬁrespond by
 date X or be deletedﬂ notice.  If a notice comes 
back as ﬁundeliverable as addressed,ﬂ the name of the indi
vidual is deleted after date X.  If the issue is 
duplicate records (that is, if two records appear for the same individual), the incorrect record is deleted. 

To determine which record is correct, the county check
s all data sources (for example, tax records, real 
estate records, and occasionally the telephone book) and/or contacts the voter. 

  Improve the Transparency of Procedures fo
r Adding Voters and for List Maintenance 
 As noted in Appendix B, there is little transpar
ency in the procedures of any given state for 
adding voters to a VRD or in maintaining the VRD itsel
f.  To improve transparency, the states and local 
jurisdictions if necessary would be well advised to: 
  Develop written procedures for the verification of new voters and the handling of removals.  
These procedures should address explicitly the speci
fic field-level and record-level matching 
criteria used for each of these processes.  Writte
n procedures are needed both to inform the 
public of what election officials intend to be 
done and to provide a standard for accountability 
regarding what is being done. 
 Publicize these procedures widely. 
 Collect and publish data on the outcomes 
of initial applications for registration:18  How many 
applications were received?  Of these, how ma
ny were approved and how many rejected?  Of 
those rejected, what were the reasons for 
rejectionŠillegibility, incompleteness, person 
ineligible (cite reason for ineligibility), and so on. 
 Collect and publish data on how the state ha
ndles removals from the registry:  How many 
removals were made?  Of these, how many were
 due to intrastate movement, death, and so 
on.                                                       
 17See http://www.surveymonkey.com/sr.aspx?sm=jK8QyNXCIwgdaY4SjASFyN0v4coilbBEvQxDuSyIS4s_3d. 
18Many jurisdictions already collect such data, and aggrega
tions of some of these data are published in the EAC 
Election Day Survey.  For more info
rmation on the Election Day Survey
, see http://www.eac.gov/schedule/2008-
election-day-survey/. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
13  BOX I.1 Examples of Auditing Applied to VRD Processes 
  Auditing Removals from Voter Registration Rolls 
 Voter registrars need the date of receipt of regi
stration applications, the date on which a registration-related notice was sent to the voter, the date, if any,
 of any response from the voter, and the date on which 
the corrected or completed information was received; indexes of all of these dates must be kept if 
correspondence and documentation are to be located. In 
one state, the denial letter is kept with the original application, and these are sorted by year of fi
rst receipt and then alphabetically by name.  In this 
state™s experience, the individuals claiming they had registered but not been found on the voter 
registration list had often received a copy of the remova
l letter, as could be demonstrated by referring to 
the voter™s file. 
 Auditing Changes in Voter Registrations Records 
 The main text of this report suggests that voter access to a voter registration database (VRD) should 
be implemented through buffered access to a synchroni
zed copy of the VRD, not to the VRD itself.  One 
kind of audit procedure checks expected behavior 
against actual behavior.  For example, an audit 
procedure could keep a log of which records were changed in the primary source (the VRD) since the last 
synchronization.  This log could be used to identif
y the records in the copy that are supposed to be 
changedŠchanges in the copy that don™t match this 
list would indicate a problem that election officials 
could and should investigate further.  
  
  Audit the processes to ensure that procedures 
are being followed (see Box I.1 for examples). 
 Note that collecting and publishing the data 
suggested above can provide a basis for assessing 
how big a problem illegibility actually is, how many
 persons apply who are actually ineligible (for 
various reasons), and so on.  The more of such data 
there are, the easier it will be for election officials to identify problems and to improve list maintenance procedures. 
 
 Use Fill-in Online Registration Forms  Typewritten or printed information is almost always
 more legible than handwritten information.  
Assuming they already have Web sites from which vot
ers may obtain voter registration forms and other 
election-related materials, jurisdictions could encourage the use of fill-in online registration forms, such 
as fill-in PDF or Web forms that accept keyboard input 
(that can be printed, input and all); a number of 
states provide this service today.  Although the form 
must still be printed, signed, and then mailed or 
delivered to the voter registrar, the information on 
the form will be much more legible.  (Note that 
although the deployment of a new encoding of an old formŠsuch as the Nationa
l Mail Voter Registration FormŠshould be possible in a relatively short time fram
e (the EAC is a logical focal point for any such 
effort), it should not be regarded as a trivial effo
rt that can be accomplished without some care and 
testing.)  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Perform Empirical Testing on the Adequacy of Processes for Adding to and Maintenance of Lists  
 The only way to know how well a system is working is
 to test it.  One way to test the adequacy of 
VRD adding and maintenance processes is to corrupt 
a copy of the most recent VRD by seeding it with 
artificial records with names and other identifying in
formation from lists of felons, deaths, and mentally 
incompetent people and with duplicate records of indi
viduals already in the database but with realistic 
types of error in them.  Once corrupted in this way, the VRD can be matched against all of the usual 

databases (DMV, felons, and so on) to see what fractions of the corruption in each category were 

detected, thus providing estimates of rates of fal
se positives and false negatives.  Because ﬁground truthﬂ 
is known in the form of the original seedings, the 
fractions of detected corruption are likely to be 

reasonable estimates of the effectiveness of the process overall.
19 A corollary of such testing is that those w
ho receive the data resulting from such testing 
(ultimately, the public at large) must be educated to
 interpret the data in contextŠand specifically to 
understand that no procedure for adding or removing voter
s can be perfect.  At the same time, there is nothing to suggest that individual voters who are wrongly eliminated from the VRD cannot complain or 
seek correction of the problem through existing channels
 that are available for resolving such problems. 
Another possible approach to testing is to audit actual acceptance, rejection, and removal 
decisions, not just to verify that procedures have
 been followed but also to estimate error rates. 
  Take Steps to Minimize Errors During Data Entry 
 A number of steps can be taken to minimize data entry errors. 
  Sample audits can be undertaken to assess th
e degree of the problem and to identify the 
sourceŠsome data entry personnel, for example,
 may be much less accurate than others.  
Some systems produce daily data entry reports that can be compared against the original card 
for errors; such systems are used
 in a number of jurisdictions. 
 The registrant can be provided with a copy 
of the data that were actually entered (for 
example, when a voter receives his or her registration card, which should in most cases reflect 

all of the data entered on behalf of the vo
ter), reminded to check the data, and given 
information on how to contact the election ju
risdiction if there are errors on the card. 
 During the input process, the entered values can be tested against domains (for example, 
common names, valid addresses including street
 name and postal code, valid phone numbers, 
valid dates of birth).   Data can be entered twice by different people and compared for discrepancies (an expensive 

way to check, but effective in most instances).  
 Discrepancies can be found when matching new inputs to previously known values (an ideal 

way to detect transposition keying errors in dates of birth, for example).  
 When errors or inconsistencies in the entere
d data are found, they should be immediately 
corrected.  In some cases, an examination of the 
records themselves will indicate how corrections should 
be made; in other cases, it may be necessary to consult 
additional data sources or even the voter to make 
the necessary corrections.  For example, the voter re
gistrar might provide a special telephone number for 
voters to call to make corrections.  
                                                     
 19However, note that even the best state-
of-the-art ﬁerror generatorsﬂ are not capable of generating the full range of 
errors encountered in real databases.  Thus, these estimates
 are likely not to account for certain kinds of errors; as a 
result, actual performance in realistic settings could be expected to be different and probably somewhat worse. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
15  The first two of these steps can be taken in the short term.  The other three require a nontrivial 
amount of new technology deployment, and it is unlikel
y that they could be undertaken successfully in 
time for the November 2008 election. 
  Allow Selected Individuals to Suppress Address Information on Public Disclosures of Voter 

Registration Status  
Although voter registration information is nominally
 public in most states, certain individuals 
(domestic violence victims, undercover police officer
s, witness protection program participants) have 

legitimate reasons for wanting to make address 
information inaccessible to the public, and an administrative process should be available to prot
ect such information on request.  Some privacy 
advocates might argue for the broadest possible sc
ope of individuals who should be granted such 
privileges, but the committee is s
ilent on this particular point. Enacting this recommendation may require legislati
on in many jurisdictions; if so, it is probably 
not practical for 2008. 
 
 Encourage (but Do Not Require) Entities Sponsori
ng Voter Registration Drives to Submit Voter Registration Forms in a Timely Manner to Redu
ce Massive Influxes at the Registration Deadline 
 
Voter registrar offices can be overwhelmed by the 
mechanics of data entry if large numbers of 
voter registration applications must be processed in a ve
ry short time.  Such a volume reduces the time for 
error checking or multiple attempts to verify voter 
information, and often forces registrars to hire inexperienced temporary workers for data entry.  These 
conditions in turn are like
ly to increase the error 
rate of data entry and may invalidate more registration applications than would be the case if more time 

were available to handle the applications.   
 
 POSSIBLE FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL REQUIRE 
LONGER-TERM ACTION 
 
 
As indicated in the previous section, a number of
 improvements are possible in state VRDs that 
can only be implemented in a longer time frame than
 that provided by the November 2008 election.  
Some discussion of these improvements is included in 
this interim report to provide advice to states as 
they begin developing their priorities for voter registration databases for the 2010 elections and in next 

year™s budgeting and planning process.
  In some cases, the improvement
s discussed will require a time-
delimited investment associated with acquisition 
and deployment and a smaller stream of funding 
afterward; in other cases, they will require additional 
funding on a continuing basis as operating expenses.  
The committee™s final report will address these longe
r-term recommendations in greater detail when 
needed.  
 Develop and Promote Public Access Portals for Online Checking of  
Voter Registration Status 
 
In anticipation of being able to vote on Election 
Day, prospective voters may wish to check their 
voter registration status so that any irregularities 
can be corrected in time.  Web-based portals for 
checking the state VRD incr
ease the ability of individuals to do so. 
 For example, such a portal may ask 
the user to provide a name, birth date, and Zip code, a
nd return either the user™s current registration status 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 or an indication that there is no record on file that matches the information provided.  Some jurisdictions 
already provide this service to voters today. 
Such portals help to increase transparency in 
the VRD and will create another opportunity for the 
verification of voter information.  They benefit indi
vidual voters who want to verify their information, 
and may provide an opportunity (if it is legal to do so
, and if potential privacy concerns over retention of 
the data can be addressed) for third-party voter registration groups that wish to confirm that the 
applications they have collected have been recei
ved, processed, and accurately entered in the voter 
registration database. States that have developed such portals (for example, Nevada
20 and Nebraska
21) have generally 
integrated them into their voter registration Web sit
es.  These portals must access information stored in a 
state™s VRD, which means that their development requi
res some sensitivity to and technical capacity for 
dealing with security issues.  For example, data co
mpromises have been reported in other instances when 
live queries have been allowed access to the primary 
database, suggesting that it may be safer to 
implement some sort of buffered arrangement wher
eby the portal provides access only to a synchronized 
copy containing only the minimum amount of information.   
Another point to be considered is the prevention of automated exploitation that might circumvent 
existing legal restrictions on making the voter regi
stration database available to commercial users; 
automated tests that distinguish between human 
and automated responses (such as ﬁcaptchas,ﬂ which 
require the user to type the letters displayed in a dist
orted image) may be relevant
 in this regard, although 
this is an ongoing battle.  Special steps must also be
 taken to prevent the display of voter registration 
information for individuals who need protection, su
ch as victims of domestic abuse or individuals in 
witness protection, and in any event, the information to be displayed at all should be the minimum 

information needed for the voter to know that he or sh
e is registered to vote and to inform the voter of the 
proper polling place (for example, driver™s license nu
mbers or SSNs (even SSN4) do not need to be 
displayed).  Some states collect more informati
on (for example, phone numbers, occupation, or e-mail 
addresses) on their application forms than is necessar
y for voter registration per se; such information 
poses increased privacy risks to the 
individual if needlessly disclosed. 
Finally, for all states that provide online verification of voter registration information, it is 
important to inform voters that they should check 
their voter registration status well in advance of 
Election Day.  
Some security issues are discussed in Appendix D. 

 
 Encourage/Require Departments of Motor Vehicles as Well as Public Assistance and Disability 
Service Agencies to Provide Voter Regi
stration Information Electronically  
The NVRA requires state DMVs, public assistance 
agencies, and disability service agencies to 
facilitate the voter registration process.  Today, th
is facilitation is mostly paper-based.  Automatically 
providing information on new applica
tions or changes of address to vot
er registrars would significantly 
reduce the burden of maintaining VRDs by reducing requirements for manual data entry and updating 

registrations with new addresses.
22                                                      
 20See https://nvsos.g
ov/VoterSearch/. 21See https://www.voterch
eck.necvr.ne.gov/. 
22This recommendation is consistent with the EAC™s 
Voluntary Guidance on Implementation of Statewide Voter 
Registration Lists, III-D.2-d.  This particular guidance notes that states should ﬁensure that the coordination of 
information in the verification process is accurate and effi
cient. Verification of voter registration information shall 
be accomplished through electronic transmission. Further, 
to the greatest extent allowe
d by State law and available 
technologies, this electronic transfer
 between statewide voter registration lists and coordinating, verification 
databases should be accomplished through direct, secure
, interactive and integrated connections.ﬂ  See 
http://www.eac.gov/election/docs/statewide_registra
tion_guidelines_072605.pdf/attachment_download/file. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
17  As part of promoting coopera
tion and coordination between voter registrars and these other 
public service agencies, states may wish to develop and maintain performance metrics on the percentage 
of voter registration additions, modifi
cations, and deletions that arrive 
electronically and on the number of 
electronic files that arrive from NVRA agencies that 
contain errors requiring correction.  Such figures 
would provide a way of holding these agencies mo
re accountable for their NVRA responsibilities.  
The committee recognizes that election officials have
 no control over the budgets or operations of 
these agencies, a fact that often leads to a certain amount of bureaucratic politics as Agency A seeks to 
persuade Agency B to help carry out the mission of Agency A. 
  Encourage/Require Departments of Motor Vehicl
es, Public Assistance and Disability Service 
Agencies, Tax Assessors, and Other Public Servic
e Agencies of State and Local Government in 
Their Communications with the Public to Remind Voters to Check and Update Their Information 
 Agencies of state and local government communicate with the public regularly, and each such 
communication is an opportunity to remind voters to ch
eck and update their information.  Such reminders 
would entail little additional cost a
nd could be helpful in increasing the accuracy and completeness of the 
data contained in VRDs.   Further, the online environment provides opport
unities for less passive forms of reminderŠfor 
example, individuals who use online government ser
vices to indicate a change of address (for example, 
on tax or property assessment records) can be offered 
reminders to update their registration information, 
or can even be routed automatically to online voter
 registration services to effect a similar change of 
address.  Note that such additions to the online 
environment for these other service agencies would be 
significantly less expensive than implementing th
e previous recommendation on developing and 
promoting portals for online checking of registration status and thus might well be a first long-term step 

that states could take. 
 Improve Matching Procedures 
 
As noted in Appendix B, many (if not most) of the matching procedures used by the states have 
been developed on the basis of intuitive reasoning wit
hout further systematic validation or mathematically 
rigorous analysis, do not reflect the state of the art in
 matching techniques, and have not been validated in 
the market, scientifically, or otherwise.  State-of-t
he-art matching techniques have been successfully used 
in a variety of commercial and government applicati
ons.  The committee believes that there are several 
areas in which matching involving VRDs can be impr
oved, and thus recommends that voter registrars 
engage the relevant technical community when 
considering improvements in matching techniques as 
described in the section ﬁImproving Record-Level Matchingﬂ in Appendix B. 
The enhanced methods should improve the capability
 for locating of duplicates in the VRD, the 
matching of voters against the state DMV file and the SSA files, and the matching of registered voters 

against any secondary federal or state list (for example,
 of deaths, felons, and so on).  A demonstration of 
the effectiveness of these enhanced methods could be performed by applying them to a particular state™s 

VRD file and showing how rates of false positives ca
n be quite low even while significantly lowering 
rates of false negatives.   
  Establish a Software Repository of Tested Matching Algorithms 
 To support the adoption of improved matching pro
cedures, a software repository of tested and 
debugged matching algorithms to which states had 
free access could reduce the burden on individual 
states to implement such procedures.  A number of 
entities could provide such a repository, such as the 
EAC or the National Association of State Elections Directors.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Provide Voter Registration Receipts to Improve Administrative Processes 
  Voter registration cards should have a tear-off r
eceipt, and online registrants should be told to make a copy of the online form as their receipts. Then 
the data should be kept by the states, and reported 
to the EAC, on how many individuals attempted to 
vote and were not registered but had their receipts. 
States should then be encouraged to lower that number.   
In addition, the receipt might also include a tr
acking number or bar code to match it with the 
registration card itself, facilitating the association of 
specific individuals with specific forms.  On the 
other hand, because including such a number or code 
would almost certainly have to be a government 
function, such numbers or codes might run afoul of the NVRA, which specifically allows private 
duplication of voter registration forms in order to facilita
te their widest possible distribution.  In addition, 
numbered forms entail additional costs for printing.  
Some states provide numbered registration forms 
today.  The committee, however, takes no position on
 the general desirability of tracking numbers or 
codes at this time. 
Although the use of these receipts is not intended 
to substitute for a proper voter registration or 
for provisional voting, such receipts would provide a f
actual basis for investigating, at least partially, 
claims from one political party that supporters of 
the other party had ﬁpocketedﬂ voter registration formsŠthat is, when conducting voter registration 
drives, receiving registrations for people of the 
opposite party and never turning them in. This activity 
is against the law, but there can be no proof as to 
whether it has occurred unless there is some form of r
eceipt given to the person registering. If there were receipts, then people who possessed the receipts but were not in the VRD would be proof of some 

problem, including the possibility that registration forms had gone missing. 
The committee recognizes that the NVRA (Section 8(a
)(2)) already requires that election officials provide notice to applicants on the disposition of all vo
ter registration applications.  But this requirement 

can only be met when the applications indeed make 
it into the hands of these officialsŠif they never 
arrive, notice cannot be given, and individuals who never receive a notice cannot prove that they should 

have received notice.  

 
 Allow Voters to Register and to Update Missing
 or Incorrect Registration Information Online 
If a Signature Is Already on File with a State Agency 
 
As noted in Appendix C, typographical errors c
ould be reduced significantly by eliminating the 
data transcription process and importing most or all of
 the relevant data from another system and/or 
allowing the voter to enter data himself or herself wh
en necessary.  However, the voter will always have 
to provide at registration some means of authenticating 
himself or herself at the polls, such as a signature.  
A mail-in registration form can contain a box for the 
voter™s signature, but online registration requires the 
applicant to appear (or to have appeared) somewhere in person at some
 official government agency to 
provide a signature.  If this signature is digitized, it can be made available to the voter registrar along with 
the information needed to register to vote.  A number 
of states today take advantage of the fact that their driver™s licenses have signatures and 
have developed online registration por
tals that enable citizens with such licenses to register to vote online wit
hout having to appear in person anywhere. 
Registration portals can also leverage the fact that basic information about the individual, such as 
name, address, birth date, and so on, is often al
so stored along with the signatureŠsuggesting that 
importing the relevant data from the original state ag
ency with the signature into the voter registration 
database is feasible in principle.  When the voter re
gistration application required information not already 
on file, the user would enter the information himself or
 herself and then be given a chance to verify and 
correct the information. In addition, individuals whose registration form
s contain illegible or missing information could 
be notified of that fact and at the same time be give
n a special code or password that would grant entry to 
a secure Web page, whereupon the individual could corr
ect or provide the missing data.  In the longer 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERIM REPORT 
19  term, it might be possible to imagine real-time verifica
tion of a voter application, so that an applicant whose information did not match DMV or SSA information on file could be informed of that fact 
immediately, so that corrections could be made at the moment. 
  Develop Procedures for Handling Disenfranchisement Caused by  
Mistaken Removals from Voter Registration Lists 
 
Any given removal of a name from a voter registra
tion list may have been performed in error.  
Indeed, a great deal of experience with informati
on technology suggests that even a combination of 
automated and human matching can sometimes result in inappropriate action 
because of data errors, 
inherent ambiguity in the data, algorithm deficiencies,
 human error, and so on.  For example, a felony 
may have been reduced to a misdemeanor by the c
ourt without that fact being made known to election 
officials.  Other sources of error exist as well, and th
ere is an inherent unfairness in changing a voter™s 
status and potentially disenfranchising him or her w
ithout providing an opportunity for contesting the 
removal.   
Procedures for addressing disenfranchisement could be handled in a number of different ways.  
For example, one approach is to provide the pe
rson removed from a voter registration list with the 
opportunity to contest that decision before the remova
l is made final.  Yet small election offices might 
find this approach onerous in light of small staffs
, high mailing costs, and other pertinent issues.  In 
addition, notification of voters removed from the list 
may be upsetting to the families of those individuals 
suffering from the pain of a relative™s death or being 
declared mentally incompetent.  Another approach 
might be to allow a voter disenfranchised by being re
moved to vote provisionally.  Such an approach is 
mandated by HAVA for federal elections, but it could 
be adopted for state and local elections as well. 
Developing such procedures might well require 
new legislation and administrative processes. 
 
 Improve the Design of Voter Registration Forms 
 
The design of forms has a significant impact on thei
r usability and their ability to capture the data 
that the form filler intends to record.  For ex
ample, providing a specific separate space for each 

letter/number of the name/address often improves the le
gibility of forms completed, and may improve the 
suitability of the filled-out form for processing by opti
cal character recognition software.  However, form 
design is often challenging and generally requires a significant degree of empirical testing to assess the 
usability of any given design.
23                                                       
 23An informative reference on the design of forms 
for use by election officials is Marcia Lausen, 
Design for 
Democracy: Ballot and Election Design
, University of Chicago Press and Amer
ican Institute of Graphic Arts, 2007. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
   Appendixes State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23   
   A  Background and Context 
 
 THE ROLE AND STRUCTURE OF VOTER REGISTRATION 
 
Voter registration (described briefly in Box A.1) play
s a central role in elections in most states.  
Today, in all states except one (North Dakota), a voter must be registered for his or her vote to count in an 

election; some states allow same-day voter registration on Election Day. 
During reforms of the Progressive era, voter registration procedures spread throughout the states, 
beginning in urban areas, launched at least in part in 
an attempt to reform how elections were carried out.  
These reforms aimed to restore fairness in the conduc
t of elections by, for example, minimizing the 
influence of urban political machines over elections.  
However, many believe that these procedures also 
caused voter turnout to decline sharply. The use of strict registration rules to verify the eligibility of a 

voter, such as requiring in-person registration duri
ng limited weekday hours, effectively limited the 
participation of many eligible voters who could not af
ford to take time off work to register to vote.
1  These rules were eventually eased by a series of federal mandates. 
The U.S. Constitution (Article I, Section 4 and Article II, Section I) gives states the power to 
make rules governing federal elections, subject to the 
authority of Congress to make or alter such rules.  
Amendments to the Constitution prohibit racial discrimin
ation in the right to vote or gender, prohibit poll 
taxes, and grant individuals the right to vote at age 18.  The one-person, one-vote principle emerges 

mainly from Supreme Court interpretations of the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment and 
subsequent legislation.   In addition, starting with the 1960s civil rights 
legislation, Congress gradually expanded federal 
oversight of election administration and registra
tion provisions, although states continue to have 
considerable discretion in how to implement federa
l requirements.  The Voting Rights Act of 1965 aims 
to broadly protect voter rights by prohibiting discriminatory voting practices and by preventing an 
individual from being denied the right to vote ﬁbecause 
of an error or omission on any record or paper 
relating to any application, registration, or other act re
quisite to voting, if such error or omission is not 
material in determining whether such individual is qu
alified under the State law to vote in such election.ﬂ 
Subsequent legislation aimed at facilitating voter re
gistration and increasing the accessibility of absentee 
ballots for particular classes of voters includes 
the Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped 
Act of 1984 and the Uniformed and Overseas Citizen Absentee Voting Act of 1986.  
The National Voter Registration Act of 1994 
(NVRA) added two requirements to voter registration.  The first was to increase voter registrations
 by requiring applications to be made available at 
a number of physical locationsŠmotor vehicle agen
cies, all offices that provide public assistance or 
services to persons with disabilities, other places that states could designate (for example, public 
libraries), and nongovernmental offices that agree to serve as voter registration sitesŠand by mail.  The 
second focused on the maintenance of voter lists 
by establishing rules under which names could be 
removed from the voter registration list. It also mandated that states monitor and report on their  
                                                     
 1A. Keyssar, 
The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States
, Basic Books, New York, 
2000. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  BOX A.1 A Thumbnail Description of Voter Registration 
 States generally require that a voter be a U.S. citizen, at least 18 years of age, and a resident (in some 
cases, a resident for some minimum period of time, such as 30 days).  Some states also limit voter 
eligibility on the basis of criminal status (for example,
 incarcerated felons may not be permitted to vote), 
and some on the basis of mental competency, although the specifics of these limitations vary.
1   
As a general rule, a voter registers to vote in a sp
ecific geographic jurisdiction that is determined from 
the residential address that he or she provides for the purpose of voting.  Citizens can register to vote at 
election offices.  Depending on the state, citizens can also obtain voter registration materials in many 
places, including military facilities, assisted living 
facilities, high schools, vocational schools, social 
service agencies, nursing homes, and libraries, or th
rough voter registration drives, or by downloading 
materials from the Internet.  In addition, the National 
Voter Registration Act requires all states to provide 
such materials at their departments of motor ve
hicles, departments of human services, and public 
assistance agencies.  By filling out the required form
s and providing the necessary
 identification, citizens in all states can also register to vote by mail.  In 
at least two states (Washington and Arizona), a citizen 
can register to vote through the Internet if he or sh
e already has a driver™s license or a state-issued ID 
from that state. 
The voter completes the registration form and it is 
returned to the election 
office.  The returned materials are accompanied by an original signature
 that serves as an authen
tication mechanism when 
voter registration must be checked in the future.  If th
e voter registers at a department of motor vehicles, 
the relevant information may be extracted from the in
formation on file or provided at the department of 
motor vehicles (DMV) and transmitted electronically 
to the election office, along with the signature on 
file with the DMV as an authentication device for the 
voter at the polls.  Overseas voters, and members of 
the U.S. armed forces and their dependents, can sometimes register to vote by fax. 
The voting address of record determines the precinc
t from which the voter may cast his or her ballot, 
whether at the polling place, or by absentee or mail ballot,
 or by an early vote.  A precinct is a subdivision 
of a local election jurisdiction, and all voters in a 
given precinct vote at one polling place.  (Sometimes, a 
number of small precincts are consolidated at one
 polling place, and sometimes election officials can 
require that all voters from certain precincts vote by mail.)  A local election jurisdiction is an 
administrative entity responsible for the conduct and ad
ministration of elections within it, and may be a 
county or a municipality (a city or town). 
____________________ 
1A description of the legal restrictions on felons and voting rights in a large number of states can be found in 
American Civil Liberties Union, 
Purged! How Flawed and Inconsistent Voting Systems Could Deprive Millions of 
Americans of the Right to Vote
, October 2004, available at http://www.aclu.org/VotingRights/VotingRights. 
cfm?ID=16845&c=167. 
SOURCE: Adapted largely from National Research Council, 
Asking the Right Questions About Electronic Voting
, Richard Celeste, Dick Thornburgh, and Herbert Lin (eds.), The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
   implementation of the NVRA. Figure A.1 illustrat
es the various list maintenance options under the 
NVRA. Following the passage of the NVRA, a variety of proposals were made to further enhance voter 
registration by the creation of centralized statewide 
voter registration databases.  Following the Florida recount in the 2000 presidential election, the He
lp America Vote Act (HAVA) was passed in 2002 to 
undertake a number of electoral reforms.   
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25    FIGURE A.1  Voter registration list main
tenance options under the National Voter Registration Act. SOURCE: National Clearinghou
se on Election 
Administration, ﬁImplementing the National Voter Registration Act 
of 1993: Requirements, Issues, Approaches, and Examples,ﬂ Fed
eral Election Commission, Washington, D.C., January 1, 1994, p. 5-1. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 HAVA aimed to improve election administration 
by allocating funds to upgrade and certify 
voting systems and by creating the U.S. Election Assistance Commission (EAC) to provide voluntary 
guidance to states.  Another goal of HAVA was to establish more uniformity within individual states and 
to empower the states to take a stronger role vis-
à-vis local election officials. Finally, HAVA included 
several provisions related to voter registration databases.  It required states to shift to centralized voter registration lists at the state level and away from the estimated 3,000, mostly locally administered, voter 

registration lists.  It requires that each state™s data
base contain the name and registration information of 
each legally registered voter in the state and that
 each legally registered voter be assigned a unique 
identifier. HAVA specifies that the state list is the offi
cial voter registration list for federal elections. It 
also requires election officials to perform regular 
maintenance regarding the accuracy and completeness 
of the registration lists.2   
 THE POLITICAL LANDSCAPE OF VOTER REGISTRATION 
 
The tensions that gave rise to laws related to voter registration persist today.  In an ideal world, 
voter registration lists would include all those individuals eligible to vote and none of the individuals not 

eligible to vote.  In addition, all of the data in the database would be factually correct.  For purposes of 
this report, the term ﬁaccuracyﬂ refers to the factual 
correctness of the data that exist in the database and 
also the notion that the database contains none of the i
ndividuals not eligible to vote.  Completeness refers 
to the presence in the database of all individuals who should
 be in the database.  If the database is perfect, 
it is both 100 percent accurate and 100 percent comple
teŠthat is, all of the data in the database are 
correct (and thus the database contains no indi
vidual who should not be in the database), 
and the database includes all of the individuals who should be in the da
tabase.  Notice that in this formulation, accuracy 
does not subsume completeness, so that a database 
must be characterized with respect to 
both attributes. It is often true in practice that efforts to maximize in the voter registration database (VRD) the 
number of individuals eligible to vo
te conflict with efforts to minimize the number of individuals in the 
VRD who are 
not eligible to vote.  One view of this tension emphasizes the risks of voter fraud and 
highlights the need to maintain the integrity of the 
voting list by placing the greatest effort on minimizing 
the number of individuals in the VRD who are 
not eligible to vote.  This side argues that if election fraud 
were to occur, it could undermine 
public confidence in an election. A different view of these tensions emphasizes th
e importance of inclusivity in a representative 
democracy.  Individuals with these concerns believe th
at the number of eligible but unregistered voters 
could be decreased through better access to and easier vot
er registration procedures. This side contends 
that confidence in the election process could be lost
 if methods and procedures used to improve the 
accuracy of voter registration lists cause eligible voters 
to be removed erroneously, and that overly strict 
or onerous procedures could suppress registering and/or 
voting.  Additionally, there is concern that the 
barrier of registration might skew a representativ
e government toward certain interests because the 
political views and values of those who do not vote as a result of registration issues may differ from those 
of individuals who do vote.  Completeness serves the end of inclusivity by ensuring that all eligible 

individuals who have sought to register to 
vote are not erroneously deleted from the VRD. 
These two views are commonly identified with specifi
c political parties.  Another set of concerns about voter registration, generally not associated with one party or another, stems from the fact that 

exercising the right to vote in the United States require
s the active participation of the voter to registerŠ
and some individuals in policy-making or operationa
l positions have been known to be dismissive of 
efforts to ease the voter registration process or to redu
ce voter effort in maintaining registration by saying, 
in effect, ﬁIf the person isn™t willing to do X, 
then he or she shouldn™t be voting anyway.ﬂ 
                                                     
 2HAVA uses the term ﬁaccuracyﬂ to mean a list both from whic
h ineligible individuals have
 been eliminated and for 
which safeguards have been established to ensure that eligible individuals have not been improperly eliminated. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 
27  Ultimately, voter registration lists cannot be pe
rfect with respect to either completeness or 
accuracy, in part because the voting population change
s by the day and even by the hour.  But today™s 
political environment raises the stakes significantly for even small deviations from perfection in either 
direction.  Today™s political campaigns and debates ar
e rancorous and bitter. In
 addition, many elections 
today are closeŠa reflection of an electorate that h
as been about evenly dividedŠand close elections are 
breeding grounds for postelection suspicion, on the theory that even a small amount of fraud or accident 
or mishap or improperly followed procedure might 
have tipped the election the other way. While the 
presidential election of 2000 is perhaps the most salie
nt example, outcomes in other close races have been 
very closely scrutinized by supporters of the losi
ng side for irregularities in all aspects of the voting process, including voter registration. 
These tensions and political sensitivities point to the need for voter registration procedures and 
practices that are transparent, consistent, and robu
st, and for the use of approaches that balance the 
inherent tensions.  This report does not aim to resolve these tensions, but they must be kept in mind as 
technical, policy, and procedural challenges of impl
ementing and maintaining statewide voter registration 
databases are considered.   

 
 OTHER USES OF VOTER REGISTRATION LISTS 
 Voter registration lists are used for a number of
 purposes other than establishing the eligibility of an individual to vote in an election.  For example,
 voter registration lists are used by candidates and 
political parties to reach out to potential voters by phone and by mail.  At the local level, they are used to 
estimate the financial, personnel, and logistical re
quirements for elections.  
They are used to track 
absentee ballots and voter histories.  They are used 
in some jurisdictions to establish signature and vote 
thresholds for referenda and petitions.  They are used, at
 least in part, to establish jury pools.  All of these 
uses require voter registration information to be as accurate and complete as possible. 
Some of these applications have led to privacy concerns, and although 
most voter registration 
data are generally public information, there are sometimes restrictions on making such information 

broadly available.  For example, some states restrict the sale or use of voter registration lists for 

commercial solicitation purposes.  Concerns have also 
been raised about the safety of battered men or 
women if the contact information contained in their vo
ter registration were to be disclosed publicly, and 
some jurisdictions have enacted special protections in this instance.  
 
 THE BASIC REQUIREMENT FOR STATEW
IDE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES 
 HAVA Section 303 requires each state to establish and maintain a ﬁsingle, uniform, official, 
centralized, interactive computerized statewide voter re
gistration listﬂ that contains the voter registration 
information for all eligible voters in the state and 
requires that the VRD be electronically accessible by 
any election official in the state.  But although HAVA provides some criteria for developing and 
maintaining this database, and the Election 
Assistance Commission has issued its 2005 Voluntary Guidance on Implementation of Statewide Voter Registration Lists
,3 the states still maintain a degree of discretion in how to conform to HAVA.  Such discretion,
 exercised in different ways by different states, 
inevitably leads to various problems and inconsistenc
ies within and between statewide voter registration 
databases.  States have taken different architectural approach
es to building systems to meet the centralized 
voter registration list requirement.  Under the so-ca
lled top-down approach followed by many states, state 
election officials maintain a single, unified database and local election officials provide the state with the 
                                                     
 3Available at http://www
.eac.gov/election/docs/statewide
_registration_guidelines_072605.pdf/attachment_download/file. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 information needed to update the database.  Some st
ates instead opted for a bottom-up approach, in which 
local jurisdictions continue to maintain their own re
gistration lists but also provide periodic updates to a 
separate statewide system.  Other states have adopted
 a hybrid architecture that combines elements of 
both the top-down and the bottom-up approach.  Ke
ntucky and Michigan had already implemented 
statewide voter registration databases before the enactment of HAVA, but most states have had to 
implement new systems to comply with HAVA.   
Does HAVA mandate a particular architectural approach to the implementation of VRDs?  This 
issue has been argued both in the affirmative and 
in the negative at length, and the committee takes no 
position on this question.  HAVA does require that the c
ontrol of the VRD be maintained at the statewide 
level.  Thus, the committee believes that the particular technical architecture used is less significant than 
the structure of the actual workflow used within a state.  For instance, a county or municipality that 

remains in full control over the registration process 
and over who is on or off the voting rolls is not 
comporting itself within the spirit of HAVA, which 
mandates statewide control.  As a result, any 

assessment of whether a system conforms to the re
quirements and expectations of HAVA should consider 
the processes whereby information is entered in
to the system, verified, and maintained. 
It should also be noted that although guidance re
garding database structures or system attributes 
has been promulgated through the EAC™s 
Voluntary Guidance on Implementation of Statewide Voter 
Registration Lists,4 the guidance remains voluntary, and the ag
ency charged with enforcing HAVAŠthe 
Department of JusticeŠhas not issued guidelines or re
gulations of its own.  Thus, state election officials 
may proceed at their own risk that some design 
decision might be challenged later as not being HAVA-
compliant.  
                                                       
 4Available at http://www
.eac.gov/election/docs/statewide
_registration_guidelines_072605.pdf/attachment_download/file. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 29   
   B  Matching Records Across Databases 
  As noted in Appendix A, HAVA and the NVRA dir
ect the states to implement a variety of 
procedures that require the ﬁcoordinationﬂ of voter registration databases (VRDs) with other databases.  
The central technical issue in such coordination 
(known in this appendix as ﬁmatchingﬂ or, more 
precisely, record-level matching) is finding individuals who are represented in both the VRD and another 
database (or the reverseŠfinding an 
individual who is represen
ted in only one of these databases).  (In the 
case of removing duplicate registrations, the ﬁcoordi
nationﬂ occurs within the same database.) 
  THE BASIC PROCESS OF MATCHING RECORDS ACROSS DATABASES WITHOUT 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIERS
1  The basic element of a VRD is a record with data
 contained within specific fields associated with 
an individualŠfirst name, last name, street address, date of birth, and so on.  Databases may differ in the 

number of fields that a given record contains (for 
example, one database may include a field for telephone 
number and another might not) or in definitions of 
the fields (for example, one database may have one 
field for street name and number together (123 Main 
Street), and another may have separate fields for 
street name (Main Street) and street number (123). 
Matching records across databases (that is, record-level matching) involves the comparison of 
corresponding fields between databases.  HAVA requires 
states to verify the information provided on a 
new voter registration application by verifying the a
pplicable information with the state™s motor vehicle 
agency, in the case of a driver™s license, or with the 
Social Security Administration (SSA), to verify the 
last four digits of the Social Security number.  Individual states also have the authority toŠand often 

doŠuse additional databases and criteria to 
verify voter registration information.
2  The matching process is greatly simplified if each individual has used the same unique identifier 
(such as the driver™s license number or the fu
ll Social Security number) in each database.
3  In this case, 
matching records across databases is simplified.  Ho
wever, in the absence of a unique identifier, it is 
necessary to use combinations of fields in order to
 match records.  Matches based on the comparison of 
corresponding fields such as first name, last name, addr
ess, and date of birth are inherently inferential, 
and thus subject to higher rates of error.  (Some combin
ations, such as first name, last name, date of birth, 
                                                     
 1For an overall background document that covers many elem
entary aspects of matching records (that is, record 
linkage), see William E. Winkler, ﬁMatching and Record Linkage,ﬂ pp. 355-384 in 
Business Survey Methods
, Brenda G. Cox et al. (eds.), Wiley, New York, 1995.  
2See Election Assistance Commission, 
Impact of the National Voter Registration Act on Federal Elections 2005-
2006
, Table 12, ﬁVerification of Applications,ﬂ p. 72, 
available at http://www.eac.
gov/clearinghouse/docs/the-impact-of-the-national-voter-registration-act-on-federal-elections-2005-2006/attachment_download/file. 
3In fact, even the full SSN is flawed as a unique identifier, 
as the SSA has been known from time to time to issue the 
same SSN to different individuals.  Identity theft in whic
h an individual appropriates someone else™s SSN has also 
happened.  Lastly, because the SSN lacks a check digit and 
is most often entered manually (rather than swiped as 
credit cards are), typographical errors often occur with no way of catching identifying them at the point of entry. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 and last four digits of the Social Security numbe
r, have a high likelihood of uniquely identifying an 
individual.
4)   Errors in record-level matching may be false positives (a match is indicated when in fact the two 
records refer to different individuals) or false nega
tives (a nonmatch is indicated when the two records 
refer to the same individual).  What is an acceptabl
e upper limit on a given type of error depends on the 
application in question.  For example, if the vot
er registration database is being checked against a 
database of felons or dead people, a low rate of 
false positives is needed to reduce the likelihood that 
eligible voters are removed from the VRD.  Just 
how low a rate is acceptable is a policy choice. 
In this report, the term ﬁfield-level matchﬂ de
notes the process of comparing individual fields, so 
that the ﬁfirst nameﬂ field of a record in Database 1 
is compared to the ﬁfirst nameﬂ field of a record in 
Database 2.  In addition, a field-level match can be 
indicated on the basis of different match rules, which 
might include: 
  Exact matchŠthe fields are exactly equal, 
character by character for every character. 
 Fuzzy or approximate match, which is intended to
 deal with typographical variation.  At its 
simplest level, it allows comparison of fields
 with very simple errors (ﬁSmithﬂ versus 
ﬁSmothﬂ).  Fuzzy matching methods can be deve
loped intuitively as seems to be the case in 
many VRD applications or based on principles th
at computer scientists have shown to work 
consistently well in practice.  
 Content equivalenceŠﬂRoadﬂ and ﬁRd,ﬂ or 
ﬁBillﬂ and ﬁWilliamﬂ are treated as equal.  The need for such rules arises for many reasons, 
not the least of which is that when asked for information, people often provide inconsistent information unintentionally.  They use nicknames, include 
or omit middle initials, use abbreviations or not, and so
 onŠand forget what they have done on previous 
occasions.  An area code for a phone number may have 
changed.  A street address might be recorded with 
digits transposed in the house number, or a street na
me spelled incorrectly, or with the wrong Zip code.   
A record-level match occurs when several field-level matches are indicated.  The decision about 
how many field-level matches are needed to define a 
record-level match is an important influence on the 
accuracy of the match.  For example, a record-level match rule that
 required only field-level matches on 
first name and last name would lead to many more 
false positives than a rule requiring field-level matches 
on first name, last name, and date of birth.  If the fo
rmer rule were used instead of the latter to remove 
voters from registration lists (for example, if the voter
 registration list were compared against a list of 
state felons), many more eligible
 voters would be improperly removed.
5  (In principle and sometimes in 
practice, matching algorithms can also consider differe
nces as well as similarities.  For example, if the 
                                                     
 4One way to estimate how many combinations exist is to consider that the population of the United States is 
currently approximately 300 million.  The number of possible four-digit SSNs is 10,000.  A plausible estimate of the 
number of distinct birth dates (month, day, year) is perhaps 365 × 70 = ~ 25,000.  Thus, there are around 250 million 

possible combinations of birth date and four-digit SSN, which corresponds approximately to about one such 
combination for every American. 
5An example of such a problem was a case with a record-l
evel match conducted to identify felons in the voter 
registration database in Florida before the 2000 election.  In matching the Florida VRD to a national list of felons, 

the applicable rule used exact field-level matches on the first four letters of the first name, middle initial, gender, and 
last four digits of the Social Security number (when available) and used approximate matches for last name 

(matching on 80 percent of the letters in the last name) and date of birth.  Certain name variations were also 
explicitly taken into account (Willie could match William; John Richard could match Richard John).  The result of 
this match was that approximately 15 percent of the names removed from the VRD were improperly removed.  See 

Gregory Palast, ﬁThe Wrong Way to Fix the Vote,ﬂ 
The Washington Post
, Sunday, June 10, 2001, Outlook section, 
p. 1, available at http://www.legitgov.org/palast_wrong_way_f
ix_vote.html.  To remediate the issues raised in this 
case, ChoicepointŠthe firm responsible for conducting the matchŠagreed to a very detailed set of criteria 

described in Box B.1. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 
31   BOX B.1 The Detailed Nature of Match CriteriaŠAn Illustration 
 As an illustration of the detail with which match 
criteria must be specified, consider the following 
criteria taken from the consent decree in 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. 
Katherine Harris, Secretary of State of Florida et al.
 (Case No. 01-120-CIV-Gold/Simonton, United 
States District Court, for the Southern District of Florida).  
 Notice of Filing Fully Executed Copy of June 28, 2002, Choicepoint Settlement Agreement . . . 
 9. The matching criteria described in Paragraph A.8 . . . [are] as follows:  
 ChoicePoint will identify all matches on the comprehensive list resulting from the processing 
described in Paragraphs A.2-A.7 that do not match based on all of the following data fields:  
  Validated 9 digit Social
 Security Number  
 Non-normalized (i.e., as name appears 
in original source data) Last Name  
 Non-normalized (i.e., as name appears 
in original source data) First Name  
 Non-normalized (i.e., as name appears 
in original source data) Middle Name  
 Suffix   Race   Gender  
 Date of Birth  
 ChoicePoint will perform 
Social Security Number validatio
n in accordance w
ith guidelines established by the Social Security Administration.  
Records will be deemed to match under the criteria listed above if a middle name in one 
record begins with the same letter as a middle initial shown in the match record assuming all other 
fields listed above match.  
Records will be deemed not to match under the criteria listed above if they share common 
blank data fields among the fields listed above, except for cases in which the middle name field or 
suffix field is blank in both records.  
Records will be deemed not to match under the criteria listed above if one of the fields being 
compared contains data and the same fiel
d in the match record contains no data. 
  name and date of birth are the same but the Social
 Security number and gender values are inconsistent 
between the records, a nonmatch might be
 indicated under some circumstances.) 
States have considerable discretion to decide for 
themselves the criteria to be used for matching, 
although these criteria cannot be used to disenfranchise legitimate voters.
6  Some states will use fuzzy 
matching and others exact matching for checking any given 
data field.  States also vary in the fields that 
they checkŠfor example, some will compare addresses 
and others will not.  In general, some election 
offices may be using match criteria without sufficien
t consideration of possible false-positive and false-
negative error rates with any variants of the methods. 
                                                     
 6A description of the various practices employed by the various states in late 2005 can be found in Wendy Weiser, 
Justin Levitt, and Ana Munoz, 
Making the List: Database Matching and Verification Processes for Voter 
Registration, Brennan Center, New York University, 2006, av
ailable at http://www.brennancenter.org/dynamic/ 
subpages/download_file_49479.pdf. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Finally, a manual review of matches is sometime
s performed.  That is, under some circumstances, 
a voter registrar will review a match (or a nonmatch) indicated by automated processes. 
  COMPLICATIONS IN MATCHING 
 Apart from the issues involved in the matching crite
ria, a variety of data issues also complicate 
matching.  Data quality (addressed in more detail in Appendix C) is impaired by many different sources 
of error, including illegible handwriting, incomple
te or lost forms, and keypunching errors.   
Another problem occurs because certain names are 
quite common.  For example, it is known that 
the name ﬁJohn Smithﬂ occurs between 30,000 and 60,0
00 times in national lists. This means that there 
are between 1.5 and 3.0 John Smith™s
 for each date of birth.  Assuming there are 500 individuals named 
John Smith in a given state, then a certain (low) proporti
on of them will have the same date of birth.  With 
certain other commonly occurring names, some chance 
agreements on dates of birth would be expected as 
well.7 This point suggests that more accurate record-lev
el matching will take into account the possibility 
of chance agreement on date of birth for certain commonly occurring combinations of first and last name, 

which will in turn require knowledge of the most co
mmon names in any given state.  Such information 
can easily be computed from either state-held databases (such as the department of motor vehicles (DMV) 
or voter registration databases, whichever is of high
er quality as indicated by fewer typographical errors, 
more current entries, and so on) or commercially 
available databases (such as credit header records
8). Matches involving common names may require 
additional processing (perhaps manual) and 
involve the use of additional information not contai
ned in databases.  For instance, a prior address may 
confirm a match on a name when date of birth is mi
ssing.  An e-mail address, phone number, or other 
corroborating information may confirm a match when there is typographical error in any of the first name, 

last name, or date of birth.   
At the same time, using other fields may entail other complications.  For example, addresses may 
be represented differently in different databases; 
for example, in one database, ﬁ123 Main Streetﬂ 
represents an address, whereas in another database, addresses are represented in three fields (house 
number (ﬁ123ﬂ), street name (ﬁMainﬂ), and suffix (ﬁSt
reetﬂ)).  Address standardization is often required 
to fix this problem. 
Finally, the above technically oriented comments 
presume that the databases to be matched 
against the VRD are in fact available.  But in th
e real world of state voter registration databases, fragmented state control over state social service 
agencies and departments of motor vehicles, and 
state/county tensions regarding authority over voter re
gistration, the politics of database availability are at 
least as challenging as the technology for matching.  
Achieving integration or interoperability of the 
information systems of election officials and of ot
her state and/or local agencies may be deeply 
problematic if strong political leadership is not av
ailable to demand cooperation.  Database-providing 
agencies not under the authority of state election officials (whether state or county) may well give low 

priority to meeting the election needs of the state, resulting in difficulties for state election officials in 

gaining access without undue delay or difficulty.  Fo
r example, a database-providing agency may demand 
that election officials provide a voter registration list in
 a particular format that is hard or time-consuming 
to generate before the agency is willing to perform a match between the two databases.  A more serious 

problem occurs when the database-providing agency
 is made responsible for matching the voter 
registration data against its own dataŠthe agency ma
y be unable to devote serious resources to doing so, 
                                                     
 7See, for example, Michael P. McDonald
, ﬁThe True Electorate: A Cross-Validation of Voter File and Election Poll 
Demographics,ﬂ 
Public Opinion Quarterly
 71(4):588-602, 2007. 
8Credit headers refer to information in the credit report 
such as name, address, and phone number, not the credit 
history portion of the report. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 
33  or lack the inclination or skills to do the matching pr
operly.  An agency may be 
unmotivated to resolve or 
address possible interoperability problems. 
  THE POSSIBLE IMPACT OF INADEQ
UATE RECORD-LEVEL MATCHING 
 According to the EAC report 
Impact of the National Voter Registration Act on Federal Elections 
2005-2006
,9 there were 36,277,749 voter applications received by 45 reporting states.  Among those 
received, there were 10,938,385 changes of address 
or party; 2,196,608 dupli
cate applications; and 
1,138,955 invalid or rejected applications
resulting in a total of 17,281,234 new registrants.
10  The percentage of applications not entered into the database because they were ﬁinvalid or rejectedﬂ or 
ﬁduplicate applicationsﬂ was about 9 percent, a total of 3,335,563 in the 45 reporting states.  For 

comparison purposes, Table 4b from page 50 of th
e EAC report indicates that 333,663 people from 34 
reporting states were removed from voter registra
tion lists due to presumed felony convictions. 
Once it is known that an application is not a dupli
cate, and not just a change of address or party, 
the application needs to be verified. Table 12, ﬁVer
ification of Applications,ﬂ on page 72 in the EAC 
report11 shows that each state has its own unique set of 
criteria for verifying the applications, ranging 
from states like Pennsylvania, which verifies only through the DMV and the SSA, to Montana, which 
verifies against the DMV, the SSA, Vital Records, ﬁMatch Against Voter Registration Databases,ﬂ 
ﬁTracking Returned Voter ID Cards,ﬂ ﬁTracking 
Returned Disposition Notices,ﬂ and ﬁVerify Through 
Other Agency.ﬂ  According to Table 13, ﬁData Fields
 for Comparison to Identify Duplications,ﬂ in the 
EAC report, 15 states verify using the address; 48 verify 
the date of birth; 38 verify the driver™s license number; 46 verify the names provided by the regist
rant; 40 verify ﬁSocial Security numberﬂ (although 

surely that is just the last four digits in most 
cases, since according to Table 11, pages 68-69, in the EAC 
report, only 7 states use the full SSN); and 10 verify ﬁotherﬂ data. 
Consider two points.  First, the state with the hi
ghest rate of ﬁinvalid or rejectedﬂ applications (Table 3, p. 38, in the EAC report) also reported in th
is survey that it verifies application information only 
through the DMV and the SSA (Table 12).  Second, the state reporting in this survey the highest 

percentage of applications rejected because they were
 duplicates also reports in this survey that it uses 
only date of birth and names provided by the appli
cant to identify duplications (Table 13 in the EAC 
report).  These points do not prove a causal relationship between use of a small number of non-VRD 

databases or a small number of fields in verification and a high percentage of rejected applications, but 

presuming that the data reported are valid and accurate
ly reported, these points raise the question of how a 
broader set of criteria would have changed 
the percentage of applications rejected.12                                                      
 9Available at http://www.eac.
gov/clearinghouse/docs/the-im
pact-of-the-national-voter-
registration-act-on-federal-
elections-2005-2006/attachment_download/file. 
10The EAC report also notes that it ﬁmay also have under-reported various voter registration activities because 
several States were in the middle of converting their local vot
er registration files into a statewide system in 2005. As 
a result, some States indicated that their local jurisdictions stopped keeping track of various registration functions 
and activities because they understood the State 
would be compiling this informationﬂ (p. 10). 
11In this and the next paragraph, the tables (and 
page numbers) referred to are in the EAC report 
Impact of the 
National Voter Registration Act on Federal Elections 2005-2006, 
available at http://www
.eac.gov/clearinghouse/ 
docs/the-impact-of-the-national-voter-registration-act-on-federal-elections-2005-2006/attachment_download/file. 
12The committee recognizes that the issue of data validity is an important one.  For example, states may have 
reported their figures using definitions or criteria that we
re not uniform across all reporting jurisdictions.  Issues 
with terminology are also known to cause difficulties for su
rvey design.  Until such matters are resolved, these data 
can only be regarded as providing tentative indications of possible relationships. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 AN IMPORTANT EXAMPLE OF MATCHING IN PRACTICE 
 To illustrate the issues described above, consider a record-level match based on exact matches for 
an individual™s first and last name, the month and year of
 birth, and the last four digits of an SSN.  This 
example is significant because HAVA requires the Social
 Security Administration to verify the name, 
date of birth and the last four digits of the SSN (ﬁthe applicable informationﬂ) in support of the federal 

voting process (usually to verify info
rmation for first-time voter appli
cants who do not provide a driver™s 
license number to be checked against 
state DMV records), and to notify the voter registrar if the person so 
identified is deceased.  (This requirement does not 
mean that the SSA mechanism is the only means 
through which voter information can be verifiedŠsta
tes with other mechanisms available to them can 
select another method.  According to the Brennan Cent
er, 24 states in late 2005 planned to use the process 
described above.13) The requirement of using only the last four di
gits of the SSN increases the number of false 
positives, even though the absolute number of false positives is still quite low. The limitation to the use of 
the last four digits of the SSN reflects a balancing between a more effective matching of records and 
concerns about privacy. 
Upon receipt of the applicable information, the 
SSA queries its database and returns one of five responses: no match found; one unique match, death i
ndicator absent; one unique match, death indicator 
present; multiple matches found with at least one lack
ing a death indicator; multiple matches found but all 
with death indicator.  As noted above, the query is 
based on searching for exact matches on the applicable 
information.  At its November 2007 workshop, the committee heard testimony that this particular strategy 

for matching was developed by the SSA through the 
efforts of a working group involving the National 
Association of Secretaries of State, National Association of State Election Directors, American 

Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, and five
 states.  However, to th
e best of the committee™s knowledge, no testing of match criteria was conducted in
 advance of deployment, and the error rates that 
such a strategy would entail were unknown at the time of deployment. 
This strategy has a number of limitations that 
would prevent records from being matched when 
they should be matched.  For example, the search 
query does not account for content equivalence of 
names (so that Bill and William are regarded as complete
ly different names).  Using only the first and last 
name causes difficulty, because the number of multiple and compound names is increasing rapidly in the 
population.  In addition, a full legal name was not originally required to obtain an SSN, and thus many 
SSA records do not contain the full legal names of individuals.  Changes in last name (for example, of 

women who change their last names through marriage
) are also problematic, as someone may not report a 
change of last name to the SSA until it is needed to
 determine Social Security benefits.  In addition, 
individuals were not required until 1972 to provide SS
A proof of identity when applying for an SSN.  
Finally, individuals may st
ill have been assigned SSNs even if their applications did not contain birth date information. 
Data provided by the SSA to the committee™
s second workshop in November 2007 indicate that 
55 percent of queries result in at least one match be
ing indicated; queries using the full SSN result in a 
match rate of about 88 percent.  The cost per query 
is at less than one cent ($.0062), which is low enough 
to allow election officials to vary 
the queries themselves in the event that a nonmatch
 response is received 
(for example, querying on ﬁBillﬂ if ﬁWilliamﬂ did not return a match). 
                                                     
 13Wendy Weiser, Justin Levitt, and Ana Munoz, 
Making the List: Database Matching and Verification Processes for 
Voter Registration
, Brennan Center, New York University, 2006, 
 available at http://
www.brennancenter.org/ 
dynamic/subpages/download_file_49479.pdf. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 
35  As an example of a matching procedure in action, consider the elements of a new voter 
registration application card as shown on the left below and the SSA record on the right (presume these 
records are, in fact, supposed to refer to the same person): 
 New Registration Card  SSA Record 
 Tom T Bowden   Taylor T Bowden 

3121 Escondido Way 

11/04/77   11/04/77 
SSN 000001087  SSN 000001087 
 In this case, the SSA would return a response of ﬁno match found.ﬂ  However, if the voter 
registrar could determine that either Tom has a middle
 name of Taylor or Taylor has a middle name of 
Tom or Thomas, then this registrar could associate th
ese records with some degree of confidence if he or 
she concluded that the first and middle names have been transposed.  But 
in the absence of other information, the registrar has no way to make such a determination. 
States vary in their treatment of what happens in the event that an applicant™s information cannot 
be matched against the SSA or DMV databases.  In
 some cases, a state may grant the applicant a 
conditional registration that requires the voter to present an ID at the polls before voting (indeed, in some 
states, all first-time voters are required to present an ID at the polls, regardless of whether a match is 
found); others may provide a provisional ballot to the vot
er on election day.  At the time of this writing, a 
Washington state law that requires a nonmatch to resu
lt in an applicant not being registered is being 
challenged.14    
 IMPROVING RECORD-LEVEL MATCHING 
 
In general, three approaches can be used to im
prove record-level matching: allowing more data 
(that is, using more data fields 
or more complete data fields in
 performing the match), improving the 
quality of the data contained in the 
relevant databases (including the use of tertiary/external data), and 
introducing systematic field-level matching algorithms to augment certain locally developed matching 

techniques.  The first approach often runs afoul of privacy concerns, and it requires policy makers to be 
willing to make a tradeoff between less privacy an
d better record-level matching.  In this case, 
experiments with using more data fields or more co
mplete data fields are necessary to determine the 
incremental benefit in record-level matching (for exampl
e, adding another field or using the last six digits 
of the SSN instead of only the last four).  The sec
ond approach, improving data quality, is addressed in 
more detail in Appendix C.   
For purposes of this report, ﬁad hoc matchingﬂ is
 used to mean matching developed on the basis 
of intuitive reasoning that is not further validated syst
ematically or analyzed with mathematical rigor.  By 
contrast, systematic matching is based on a formal mathematical approach that develops metrics to 
measure match efficacy.  With metrics in hand, policy makers can set scales for three relevant areasŠ
what determines a match, what determines a nonmatch, 
and what is indeterminat
e.  Implementation of 
systematic techniques for matching can use 
some or all of the following elements: 
                                                      
 14See Washington Association of Churches v. Reed
, No. C06-0726RSM, 2006 WL 4604854, available at 
http://projectvote.org/fileadmin/ProjectVote/Legal_Documents/WAC__PI_Decision.pdf.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  Use of modern matching techniques
 (also known in the statistical literature as techniques for 
record linkage).  For example, a model introduced by Fellegi and Sunter
15 formalizes ideas of 
Howard Newcombe based on likelihood ratios 
in which it becomes somewhat easier to 
estimate record linkage parameters (even without
 training data).  Training data is a large 
representative ﬁtruthﬂ set of truly matching and nonmatching pairs of records.  In the Fellegi-

Sunter model each pair is given a score (or weight).  The higher the score, the more likely a 

pair is to be a match.  Use of preprocessing to standardize data elements
.  Preprocessing involves breaking fields 
into components and standardizing component
s, and a common preprocessing application is 
the use of address standardization software in
 which a house-number-and-street-name type of 
address may be broken into house number, st
reet name, direction words (such as East, 
Southwest, and so on), and street type (Drive, 
Avenue) that are given standard spellings or abbreviations.  Other methods can facilitate use of name information.
16  Although some of the 
methods described in this appendix are a good starting point, individual states may need to 

have specific methods for the types of idiosyncr
asies and errors relevant to their individual 

needs.  Accounting for the relative frequency of occurrence
 of values of strings such as first and last 
names.  A relatively rare name such as ﬁZabrinskyﬂ may have more distinguishing power 
than a common name such as ﬁSmith.ﬂ  Th
e primary purpose of the frequency-based (or 
value-specific) matching is to downweight pa
irs having the more commonly occurring values 
of strings.  If one has a large file representi
ng an entire state, then one can compute the 
frequency-based scores associated with different 
strings by comparing the entire file against 
itself.  The entire file becomes the surrogate
 training data.  These ideas were introduced by 
Newcombe and extended by Fellegi and Sunter
17 and by Winkler
18 (Box B.2) in demonstrating how to implement frequency-
based matching.  In production matching 
software for the Decennial Censuses (1990 and beyond), Winkler had methods that 

automatically created the frequency-based weights.  The distinguishing power of a particular 
name may vary considerably by geography.  In Minnesota, for example, names such as 
ﬁGarciaﬂ and ﬁMartinezﬂ were relatively rarer 
and given more distinguishing power; in 
California the names are much more common and given less distinguishing power.  
 Accounting for minor typographical error (such 
as ﬁSmithﬂ versus ﬁSmothﬂ) and having an 
automatic mechanism for downweighting the matching scores for pairs of strings that do not agree exactly.  Winkler19 provided such a mechanism (Box B.3), which yields significantly 
improved matching results in comparison to exact character-by-character matching and often 
outperforms ad hoc methods of ﬁfuzzy matching.ﬂ  The Jaro-Winkler string comparator is 
widely used by computer scientists.  It is a fast alternative to ﬁedit 
distanceﬂ that measures the 
                                                     
 15Ivan P. Fellegi and Alan B. Sunter, ﬁA Theory for Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Statistical 
Association
 64(328):1183-1210, December 1969. 
16See William E. Winkler, ﬁBusiness Name Parsing and Stan
dardization Software,ﬂ unpublished report, Statistical 
Research Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Wash
ington, D.C., 1993; and William E. Winkler, ﬁAdvanced 
Methods for Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical 
Association
, pp. 467-472, 1994.  
17Ivan P. Fellegi and Alan B. Sunter, ﬁA Theory for Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Statistical 
Association
 64(328):1183-1210, December 1969. 
18William E. Winkler, ﬁFrequency-based Matching in 
the Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of 
the Section on Survey Research Methods
, American Statistical Association
, pp. 778-783, 1989. 
19William E. Winkler, ﬁString Comparator
 Metrics and Enhanced Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of 
Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research
 Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 354-359, 1990. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 
37  minimum number of insertions, deletions, and substitutions to get from one string to another 
and has been extensively vetted using data that
 are highly similar to DMV and VRD data.   
 Estimation of optimal matching parameters (pr
obabilities in the Fellegi-Sunter model) for 
classifying pairs as matches or nonmatches
.  The probabilities can be computed by 
comparing an entire state file against itself, using a simple unsupervised learning method 

such as a properly applied expectation-maximization algorithm,
20 or an alternative method.
21  The optimal parameters have the effect of
 better separating matches from nonmatches.  
Although this improves matching, it does not yield estimates of error rates. 
 Providing methods for estimating false match rates
.  Estimates of matching rates vary 
according to the matching scores (or weights).  
A certain false match rate will be associated 
with the designation of all pairs above a value 
U1 as matches. If all pairs above a value U2 are designated as matches where U2 > U1, then th
e typical result is a lower false match rate 
and fewer pairs designated as matches.  Belin and Rubin
22 and Winkler
23 have given unsupervised learning methods for estimating fal
se match rates in situations for which there 
are no training data.   
 Providing methods for estimating false nonmatch rates
.  Estimates of false nonmatches may 
partially be accomplished via methods of Winkler,
24 although these techniques may need to 
be modified if they are to be used on state DMV and VRD files. 
 Use of heuristic search strategies to sp
eed up the matching process when necessary
.  Although most changes to VRDs are incrementa
l, an operation involving entire database-to-
database comparisons may sometimes be necessar
y.  If two databases each have 5 million 
records, the number of possible pairs that must be compared is 25 × 10
12, a number that is much too large to search with most computer syst
ems available to states.  Heuristic strategies 
may be needed to reduce significantly the numbe
r of pairs that must be compared if the 
databases involved are large. 
 Use of name rooting equivalency tables that automatically generate common variants of a 
given name (for example, Bill, Billy, and Will for William).  Such tables greatly reduce the 
need for multiple manual queries using name vari
ants.  Implementation of a name rooting at 
the SSA would benefit all states that verify 
voter registration information using the SSA.  
Notably, name rooting could be used as a co
mponent of any intrastate query mechanism as 
well.                                                       
 20William E. Winkler, ﬁUsing the EM Algorithm for Weight 
Computation in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record 
Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Resear
ch Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 667-671, 
1988. 
21William E. Winkler, ﬁString Comparator
 Metrics and Enhanced Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of 
Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research
 Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 354-359, 1990. 
22Thomas R. Belin and Donald B. Rubin, ﬁA Method for Calibrating False-Match Rates in Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Statistical Association
 90(430):694-707, 1995. 
23William E. Winkler, ﬁAutomatically Estima
tion Record Linkage False Match Rates,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section 
on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Association
, CD-ROM.  Also available at 
http://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/rrs2007-05.pdf. 
24William E. Winkler, ﬁMatching and Record Linkage,ﬂ pp. 355-384 in 
Business Survey Methods
, Brenda G. Cox et 
al. (eds.), Wiley, New York, 1995; William E. Winkler, 
ﬁApproximate String Comparat
or Search Strategies for 
Very Large Administrative Lists,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey 
Research Methods, American Statistical 
Association
, 2004. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  BOX B.2 Accounting for Commonly Occurring Names 
 The earliest computerized record linkage methods
1 do effectively account for the commonly 
occurring name plus ﬁchanceﬂ date-of-birth phenomenon. 
Newcombe™s matching classification rule was to u
se the fields in pairs of records to compute a 
matching score
.  The idea was that agreement on individual fields was more likely to occur among ﬁtruly 
matchingﬂ pairs.  Pairs above a certain upper bound 
were designated as matches; pairs below a certain 
lower bound were designated as nonmatches; and pairs w
ith in-between scores we
re held for clerical review (when auxiliary information might be used to 
fill in missing information or ﬁcorrectﬂ contradictory 
information).  If the upper bound is raised, then the 
false positive (false match) 
rate decreases.  If the lower bound is decreased, then the false 
negative (false nonmatch
) rate decreases. The frequencies (probabilities) used in computing 
the scores can be estimated a priori using the 
frequencies in the large administrative lists, recognizing that matters such as ﬁthe list of most common 
namesﬂ will change slowly over time (which requires 
periodic adjustment of that set and the probabilities 
that those names will occur).  Efficiently computed
 frequencies (conditional probabilities) are optimal in 
the sense that they can minimize the size of the clerical 
review region.  Further, in many situations such as 
with voter registration databases or department of moto
r vehicle files, it is possible to estimate or give 
reasonable approximations of the error rates even without training data.
2  The earliest matching parameter 
and error-rate estimation procedures are the easiest to
 implement and most likely appropriate for VRD 
files.  The most general version of the parameter estimation procedures
3 generalize the iterative scaling procedures of Della Pietra et al.
4  The frequency-based methods
5 automatically adjust match scores downward for the most frequently 
occurring first and last names.  The effect of the down
ward adjustment is that pairs of records that are 
associated with commonly occurring names such as ﬁJ
ames Smithﬂ fall into an indeterminate region in 
which additional information (possibly via clerical
 review and callbacks) is required to determine matching status.  In many situations, it is straightfo
rward to obtain the extra matching information for the 
indeterminate pairs.  Most other (much less commonly occurring names) can be matched effectively 
because the false positive rate is much
 less than 0.004 percent when using the combination of name, date 
of birth, and last four digits of the SSN (that is, typically they uniquely identify).   
If the state VRD files can be examined a priori, then for each common first-name-last-name 
combination, we can find the most frequent dates of
 birth and lower the matching score of the associated 
  MATCHING RECORDS WITH UNIQUE IDENTIFIERS 
 Many of the difficulties described above can be re
duced or eliminated through the use of a unique 
identifier (UID) for every voter, such as a driver™s license number.  If every voter has a single UID, 

records for a voter can be matched more simply. 
In practice, even UIDs are sometimes improperly keyed in transcribing from a 
handwritten application or improperly recorded on 
the application (for example, because digits 
were transposed or one digit is illegible).  If there is an error in the UID, a search could be 
performed using the name and the date of birth to
 find all possible UIDs associated with those 
names and dates to find the UID that is most sim
ilar to the one recorded in errorŠthat UID would 
likely be the ﬁcorrectﬂ UID for the person in question. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 
39   pairs of records.  We first lower the matching score 
for the common name combination and then again for 
the common dates of birth.  To match the pairs with the lowered matching scores, we would need 
additional corroborating information such as telephon
e number or middle initial.  If driver™s license 
number or the last four digits of the SSN are availabl
e, then we can use the string comparators to check 
whether the pairs of corresponding numbers are almost
 the same.  The corroborating information might 
vary somewhat in differing states.  In particular, some states request e-mail address. 
In this situation, it is possible to repeat anal
ogous procedures to raise the worst-case false positive 
probabilities for certain specific name-date-of-birth 
combinations while significantly reducing the false 
match probabilities associated with the same name but
 different dates-of-birth combinations.  This 
approach has the effect of significantly increasing the 
number of pairs of records for which match status 
can effectively be computed. 
    1Howard B. Newcombe et al., ﬁAutomatic Linkage of Vital Records,ﬂ 
Science
 130(3381):954-959, October 1959; 
Howard B. Newcombe and James M. Kennedy, ﬁRecord Linkage: Making Maximum Use of the Discriminating 
Power of Identifying Information,ﬂ 
Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery
 5(11):563-566, 
November 1962. 
2William E. Winkler, ﬁComparative Analysis of Record Linkage Decision Rules,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on 
Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 829-834, 1992; William E. Winkler, ﬁImproved 
Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research 
Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 274-279, 1993; William E. Winkler, ﬁAutomatically Estimation 
Record Linkage False Match Rates,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical 
Association
, CD-ROM, 2006, also at http://www.census.gov/srd/
papers/pdf/rrs2007-05.pdf ; Thomas R. Belin and 
Donald B. Rubin, ﬁA Method for Calibrating False-Match Rates in Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Journal of the American 
Statistical Association
 90(430):694-707, 1995. 
3William E. Winkler, ﬁOn Dykstra™
s Iterative Fitting Procedure,ﬂ 
The Annals of Probability
 18(1):1410-1415, July 
1990; William E. Winkler, ﬁImproved Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings 
of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 274-279, 1993. 
4Stephen Della Pietra et al., ﬁInducing Features of Random Fields,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence
 19(4):380-393, April 1997. 
5Howard B. Newcombe et al., ﬁAutomatic Linkage of Vital Records,ﬂ 
Science
 130(3381):954-959, October 
1959; Howard B. Newcombe and James M. Kennedy, ﬁRecord Linkage: Making Maximum Use of the 
Discriminating Power of Identifying Information,ﬂ 
Communications of the Association for Computing 
Machinery
 5(11):563-566, November 1962.
   A more general strategy would be needed when 
there is a possibility of typographical error in 
every field.  The matching strategy is to search the 
entire file and apply suitable proximity metrics that 
indicate that the UID, first name, last name, and date of birth are sufficiently close to the query record.  

The feasibility of this strategy depends on the fre
quency with which invalid UIDs are encountered, 
because it is not practical to sequentially read ever
y record in the database and perform substantial 
computation on every record in the file for every query. 
The most general strategy involves substantial r
estructuring of the database to facilitate fast 
searches.  Keys such as first character of first name plus
 last name plus date of birth, telephone number, or 
house number plus street name are defined and added 
to the database to allow fast searches.  Using all 
appropriate fields, only records with proximity scores 
sufficiently close to the query record are retrieved 
for review.  Definition of the keys and the order in 
which they are applied requires certain experience and 
skill. 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  BOX B.3 Blocking and String Comparators 
 The two methods for dealing with minor typographical variation are blocking and string comparators.  
The idea of blocking
 was to search on given characteristics and use remaining information to compute 
matching scores.  For instance, a search might be perfo
rmed on first initials ﬁJﬂ and ﬁSﬂ and year of birth 
to retrieve records for which all remaining informati
on is considered to compute a matching score against 
a record in another database for John Smith.  A string comparator allows computation of a value for 
partial agreement for two strings.  For instance, a 
comparison of ﬁJohnﬂ with ﬁJohnﬂ might yield a value 
of 1.0; a comparison of ﬁJohmﬂ with ﬁJohnﬂ might yield 0.90; and a comparison of ﬁSmithﬂ with ﬁSmethﬂ 
might yield 0.94.   
The overall matching score can be reduced from th
e score associated with exact character-by-
character agreements on individual fields to account 
for the partial agreements.  Widely used string 
comparators are edit distance and the Jaro-Winkler string comparator.
1  Code for both methods is widely 
available on the Internet.  Independent verification has consistently shown that the Jaro-Winkler 
comparator is 10 times as fast as edit distance and retu
rns equally high-quality results with administrative 
lists of the types that are similar to voter registra
tion databases or department of motor vehicle files. 
Other technical approaches to blocking and string 
comparators can be found in Fienberg et al.
2       1William E. Winkler, ﬁString Comparator Metrics and Enhanced Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of 
Record Linkage,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research
 Methods, American Statistical Association
, pp. 354-359, 1990; William E. Winkler, ﬁOverview of Record Li
nkage and Current Research Directions,ﬂ Statistical 
Research Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washin
gton, D.C., 2006, available at http://www.census.gov/ 
srd/papers/pdf/rrs2006-02.pdf. 
2William W. Cohen, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Stephen E. Fi
enberg, ﬁA Comparison of String Metrics for Matching 
Names and Addresses,ﬂ pp. 73-78 in 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Information Integration on the Web
, International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Acapulco, Mexico, August 2003; William W. Cohen, 
Pradeep Ravikumar, and Stephen E. Fienberg, ﬁA Comp
arison of String Distance 
Metrics for Name-Matching 
Tasks,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Data Cleaning, Record Linkage and Object Identification
, Washington D.C., August 2003.
    State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 41      C  Data Issues   As noted in Appendix B, the quality of data w
ith which matching procedures must work has a 
significant impact on the rate of false positives and false negatives that result from such procedures. 
  SOURCES OF VOTER REGISTRATION INFORMATION 
 
The NVRA requires state departments of motor vehicles to incorporate the voter registration 
application into the application for driver™s licen
ses in a way that does not require the applicant to 
duplicate any information (except for a second signature
).  Thus, the DMV is responsible for passing to 
voter registrars the information needed to register a 
voter.  In most states, the forms are simply sent from 
DMV offices to the local elections office, where a sec
ond manual data entry into the VRD takes place.  In 

a few states, the data from the form is entered into
 DMV records, and then the proper information is 
extracted and sent to the registrar electronically (e
liminating the need for a second data entry).  State 
DMVs are also required to transmit changes of address received for driver™s licenses to the appropriate 
voter registrar for a change of registration address unless the individual involved indicates otherwise.  The NVRA also requires public assistance and disab
ility service agencies to provide voters with voter registration forms that voters complete manually 
and then return to the agency or department for 
delivery to the voter registrar, or to certify in writing that the individual applying for assistance or service 
has declined the opportunity to register to vote.
1  (However, the committee also recognizes that election 
officials are not generally in the chain of command for 
these agencies, a fact that 
often leads to a certain amount of bureaucratic politics as Agency A seeks to pe
rsuade Agency B to help carry out the mission of 
Agency A.)  The availability of registration forms in these many locations increases the opportunities for 

eligible voters to register, but can also result in duplicate registrations that are sent to election agencies, 
and if voters themselves fill out the form manually, they can and do make mistakes. 

 
 DATA CAPTURE AND QUALITY 
 Under all procedures used for voter registration in the United States today, the prospective voter 
must take action to register to vote.
2  Through such action, the voter provides certain pieces of 
information that eventually wind up in a voter regi
stration database.  If this process could be guaranteed 
to be error-free, many fewer problems of data quality w
ould exist.  But unfortunately, this is not the case. 
It is useful to distinguish between three categori
es of error that may be introduced in the journey 
of these pieces of information from the voter™s head
 to the database.  Usually, the voter provides 
                                                     
 1The committee received testimony during its
 second workshop that many state 
assistance and service agencies are 
not following through with this obligation. 
2Exceptions arise from the fact that so
me states allow same-day registration and that North Dakota does not require 
voter registration.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 handwritten information on a form.  The form is transm
itted or carried to the voter registrar, where the 
data are transcribed from the form into machine-re
adable form, usually by a data-entry clerk who 
performs this task manually.  Once in
 machine-readable form, the data may then be processed in some 
minimal fashion before it is stored permanently in th
e database.  All of these steps can result in some kind 
of error. A variety of problems complicate the data capture 
process.  For example, data capture efforts are 
often compromised by: 
  Illegibility.  The information on most voter registration forms is handwritten, and in many 
cases, the handwriting is difficult to read, entirely illegible, or misunderstood.  This makes 
the act of entering this information more cha
llenging and increases the potential for errors in 
voter registration records to be entered in the database. 
 Inaccurate or incomplete voter registration information
.  Applicants may fill out the forms 
inaccurately or incompletely if they misunderstand what information is required.  Although 

applicants make such errors in all venues in 
which they fill out applications, they are more 
likely to make errors when the venue is crowde
d, noisy, and chaotic a
nd when those available to help applicants do not have time or are 
not knowledgeable enough to answer questions 
about the applications.  These conditions are often met during voter registration drives that 
take place in locations other than election officesŠshopping centers, university campuses, 

and other locations that attract large crowds. 
 In addition, voter registration drives are 
frequently staffed by volunteers, some of 
whom may not have sufficient knowledge of 
process and procedures in collecting voter information; this may be especially true when 
volunteers are brought in from out of town. 
 Missing voter registrations
.  For example, Jim Dickson of the American Association of 
People with Disabilities testified to the committee that the volume of voter registration 

applications received from state social service and disability agencies (a service to potential 

voters that the NVRA directs these agencies to provide) has dropped significantly since the 
initial implementation of the law in 1995, alth
ough the committee notes that the causality of 

this drop remains unclearŠthat is, it is unknown 
whether this drop reflects failures in the 
social service agencies to meet their legal oblig
ations; a change in the demographics and/or 
preferences of those applying for social services; problems in conveying completed 

applications to voter registrars; or some other reason(s). 
 Repeated (duplicate) registration applications
.  An individual may submit multiple voter 
registration applications ﬁjust to be sure,ﬂ or because s/he may have forgotten that s/he is 
already registered to vote.  Although voter re
gistrars are supposed to have mechanisms in 
place to screen duplicate registrations, the screening process does not always work smoothly, 

and sometimes the same individual may be registered more than once. 
 Inconsistencies in submitted information.  In filling out forms, individuals are often 
unintentionally inconsistent in the information th
ey provide, especially if a period of time has 
elapsed between multiple form-fillings (either acr
oss registrations or between registrations 
and other activities such as applying for a driver
™s license or an SSN).  An individual may use 
a nickname in one case and the full legal name in
 another, or include a middle initial in one 
and omit it in another.  Such inconsistencies 
may arise because of a lack of clarity in the 
instructions given to the individual about what 
specific information to provide or a lack of 
recall about what s/he entered on a previous occasion.  In other cases, the information 
requested may have changed (names sometimes change upon marriage, for example). 
 Data entry errors
.  Typographical errors are made by hitting one key when another was 
intended.  Transposition errors transpose two letters in a field, or even two fields.  Even with 
carefully handwritten registration forms, it is possible that transcription/keying error may  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 
43  TABLE C.1  Illustrative Sources of Error in Names Source of Error  Name on Voter Registration Form
a Name in Database 
Typos  Pierce  Peirce or Pearce or Perce or 
Pierrce Transliteration  
Mohammad  
Muhammed Marriage   Mary Pierce (maiden name Owens)  Mary Owens or Mrs. Martin 
Pierce Nickname  
Sam Pierce  
Samuel Pierce 
Transposed field  Bao Lu  Lu Bao Double names ﬁMary Annﬂ (first) ﬁPierceﬂ 
(last)  ﬁMaryﬂ (first) ﬁAnnﬂ (middle) 
ﬁPierceﬂ (last) 
Hyphenated name  
ﬁMaryﬂ (first) ﬁOwens-Pierceﬂ (last) ﬁMaryﬂ (firstﬂ) ﬁOwensﬂ 
(middle) ﬁPierceﬂ (last) 
Punctuation  al-Amin  
al Amin 
Omitted middle name or initial John Philip Pierce 
John Pierce aHandwriting assumed to be readable. 
SOURCE for all rows but the last: Justin 
Levitt, Wendy R. Weiser, and Ana Muñoz, 
Making the List: Database 
Matching and Verification Processes for Voter Registration, 
Brennan Center, New York University, 2006.  
Reprinted with permission. 
  approach 5 percent or more in fields such as firs
t name, last name, and date of birth if the data 
entry clerks lack adequate training and monitoring.
3  Systematic errors stemming from 
different data representation conventions.  Among the most 
important are those associated with dates and names. 
 In many countries (including most of Europe
), 01/03/2007 means March 1, 2007, whereas 
in the United States it means January 3, 2007.  
A naturalized U.S. citizen is perhaps more 
likely to make such a mistake than an 
individual raised in the United States. 
In many Asian nations, the family name is al
ways stated first.  Kim Jong-il is a Korean 
name; the family name is Kim, and the given 
name is Jong-il.  However, it would be easy 
for an American to recognize Kim as a fi
rst name, perhaps as an abbreviation for 
Kimberly, and Jong-il as a last name. 
Names normally rendered in an alphabet othe
r than a Roman alphabet may well be spelled 
inconsistently when transcribed into a Roman alphabet.  This problem is of particular 
concern to those of Russian, Asian, Israeli, and Arabic descent. 
 These factors generate a wide range of errors.  
Table C.1 describes a variety of additional error 
types that may also exist in name fields; Table C.2 d
escribes some possible errors in date-of-birth fields.  
Voter registrars are left with the problem of managi
ng an environment in which such errors are common. 
                                                     
 3See J.J. Pollock and A. Zamora, ﬁAutomatic Spellin
g Correction in Scientific and Scholary Text,ﬂ 
Communications 
of the ACM
 27(4):358-368, 1984.  In a highly controlled situation, keying error rates were in excess of 2 percent (in 
keystrokes).  A 1-2 percent error rate in keystrokes 
could easily yield a 5 percent error rate in fields.  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 TABLE C.2  Illustrative Sources of Error in Dates of Birth Source of Error  On Voter Registration Form  
In Database (Voter, DMV, and/or 
SSA) Typos  01/03/05  
02/03/05 or 1/00/05 or 1/03/05 or 
11/03/05 
Transposed field  01/03/05  
03/01/05 or 05/01/03 
Invented default  01/03/05  
01/01/05 (submitted only as January 
2005) SOURCE: Justin Levitt, Wendy R. Weiser, and Ana Muñoz, 
Making the List: Database Matching and Verification 
Processes for Voter Registration, 
Brennan Center, New York University, 2006.  Reprinted with permission. 
  Problems with data capture and errors in the vot
er registration database can have an important 
effect on the individuals whose data are involved.  The 
voter believes that he or she is properly registered, 
but the registration may have been rejected as a 
result of the inaccurate, incomplete, or illegible 
information on the form, or the voter may not know to
 bring to the polls on Election Day the additional 
identification required because of a problem with his or her form.  In some cases, the voter may be 
entirely absent from the voter registration rolls. 
Errors in databases will accumulate if action is no
t taken to correct them promptly.  For example, 
assume that 16 percent of all records in a database reflect
 at least one change in a field per year.  After 3 
years, 40 percent of the records will be different.  This
 means that if the database is not updated yearly, 40 
percent of the records in the database will be in error.   
In addition, it may become more difficult over tim
e to correct errors that occurred at previous 
time periods in the absence of mechanisms to keep 
track of individuals uniquely (for example, through 
driver™s license numbers or through secondary systems that keep history)Šthat is, errors can compound 
as multiple matches and corrections take place.  For 
instance, if a state VRD file has dates of birth 
corrected using a semiautomatic procedure that utiliz
es matching with a state DMV file, then incorrect 
matching or an erroneous date of birth in the DMV file will induce error in the state VRD file.  
Subsequent matching against state social services files 
or SSA files to determine whether an individual is 
deceased will either fail or po
ssibly induce additional error. 
  IMPROVING DATA CAPTURE AND QUALITY 
 
A number of approaches are available for improving 
the quality of data within a VRD.  However, 
all such approaches require certain skills and resources 
on a continuing basis
.  This last point is 
importantŠbecause of ongoing changes in the population elig
ible to vote, a continuous effort to maintain 
data quality in a voter registra
tion database is needed if the database is not
 to fall into an error-filled state.  Inadequate resources for database maintenance 
will result in greater amounts of error.   
The remainder of this section addresses a variety of
 ways for improving data quality.  However, 
one often-used method for improving 
data quality is not an option for 
voter registrarsŠstarting over from 
scratch.  In many cases, databases with errors that acc
umulate over time eventually become so filled with 
erroneous data that it is more cost-effective to rebuild
 the databases from scratch th
an to try to clean them 
up.  Voter registrars in Kentucky did so in 1973, re
quiring all voters to re-register.  However, ﬁstarting 
from scratchﬂ for a VRD would mean purging every
one from the VRD, and since the NVRA establishes 
specific criteria for removing voters from registration lis
ts, such an act would be contrary to existing law. 
 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 
45  Human-assisted Data Cleaning 
 Many traditional systems for managing administrative lists incorporate procedures that improve 
data capture and remove some typographical variations.  The data-capture procedures are intended to 

improve the quality (legibility and completeness) of
 the information on written forms and the subsequent 
keying of the data-derived information into computer files.  In traditional systems, list cleanup is often 

performed by skilled specialists who can determine na
me variations or possible missing information in 
the main administrative files.  Using experience and a
uxiliary information, the specialists might determine 
that ﬁJohm Smethﬂ must really be ﬁJohn Smith.ﬂ  They might determine that the date of birth (in the form 
MMDDYYYY) ﬁ06139182ﬂ might have really 
have been meant to be ﬁ06131982.ﬂ 
The intent of the corrections by the specialists wa
s to remove typographical errors in the main 
administrative list.  A cleaned-up list allows more effective searching of large files and effective 
comparison of pairs of records.  For a new record ﬁJohn Smithﬂ with date of birth ﬁ06131982,ﬂ it is much 

easier to search for ﬁJohn Smithﬂ in 
the corrected administrative list and compare dates of birth or search 
for ﬁ06131982.ﬂ   
Note that some types of typographical error simp
ly cannot be identified using such a technique.  
Although automated accounting for the presence of typogr
aphical errors in a database is often possible, 
certain ﬁerrorsﬂ may not in fact be errors.  ﬁBillﬂ 
is only one character away from ﬁBullﬂŠand indeed the 
ﬁiﬂ in Bill may be a mistyped ﬁu,ﬂ but ﬁBullﬂ is used
 as a first name from time to time as well.  There are 
no known ways to handle such ﬁerrorsﬂ automatically w
ithout the availability of tertiary reference data. 
In some instances, such as UK national health fil
es or U.S. SSA files, a full-time staff locates, 
follows up, and corrects for certain types of errors. 
 This effort can significantly reduce the number of 
individuals who are represented in 
the lists two or more times.  If these cleaned-up lists are used in 
verifying information associated with other lists, th
en these other lists are much less likely to induce 
additional error than are lists that have not undergone intense cleanup. 
 
 Voter-assisted Error Correction 
 
New registrants can sometimes be given the opportu
nity to correct erroneous information.  For 
example, the name and address provided on a registra
tion card may be legible, but the date of birth 
illegible.  If enough legible informa
tion is provided, voter registrars can contact the voter to inform 
him/her of the problem and ask them to resubmit correct information. 
In many polling places today, voters can correct 
registration informationŠa poll worker notes an 
error on the registry or on another log, and the election officials can update their registry as part of the 

postelection canvass.  In addition, voters in many stat
es now receive confirmation cards that confirm their 
registrations; these cards provide the voter with an opportunity to review the information that is part of 

their registration. To help minimize keying errors, registrars might
 ask individuals with access to the relevant 
facilities to correct their information online through 
a Web site; security would be provided by a special 
code or password returned to the individual with the 
data correction request to ensure that only the proper 
individual could view or correct the information. 

 
 Electronic Transmission of Voter Registration Applications 
 
Important sources of voter registration applicati
ons include departments of motor vehicles and 
social service agencies.  Today™s processes usually re
quire individuals to register using handwriting on 
paper forms, a process that is highly subject to error 
upon data entry.  But there is no reason in principle 
that the information collected by the DMVs and soci
al service agencies (which is almost surely being 
captured in electronic form for use in DMV or social 
service agency systems) that is relevant to voter 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 registration could not be transmitted electronically 
to voter registrars, thereby eliminating errors 
associated with repeated keying (o
nce for the agency in question and a second time for the VRD).  Some 
states also require that the voter provide a signature 
for the voter registration record, which is used for 
verification against pollbooks or ballot return envelopes in the mail-in voting process.  An electronic 
transfer of voter registration forms must therefore accommodate in some way the need for the signature. 
Though recommended by the Election Assistance Commission in its 
Voluntary Guidance on 
Implementation of Statewide Voter Registration Lists
,4 electronic transmission is not required by any 
present regulation and would entail some nontrivial work to implement on a large scale, such as 
agreement on the format for transmission and the co
nstruction of additional software to permit the 
exchange of information. 
  Use of Other Databases (Including Third-party Data) 
 Yet another way to correct errors in an existi
ng database is to match as many of its records as 
possible with those in another complete, (nearly) e
rror-free database (or several such databases) and to use these other databases as ﬁtruth
ﬂ for error correction.  If there are no such complete high-quality 
databases available, then the use of other databases 
can still be useful to triangulate on the correct information, but the error correction process will ta
ke a lot more work under these circumstances.   
At the same time, the fact that other databases ma
y contain data with fewer errors does not mean 
that the information they provide should automatical
ly be used to update the voter™s registration.  
Discrepancies between the voter™s registration information as represented in the VRD and data in these 
other databases are indicators of possible errors in the VRD, but in most cases voter registrars are required 

by law or policy to follow up on such discrepancies by contacting the voter to inquire as to which 

information is accurateŠthe voter database or
 the other database used in the match.  
Third-party data, or secondary data, of high qualit
y can be used to reduce ambiguity in record-
level matches because they can be u
sed to associate the same identity w
ith a different record using data values based on a different time period or on differences in the values recorded.  Sources of such data include telephone books and credit h
eader data (credit records), which can be used to determine or 
validate middle names, addresses, dates of birth, and 
so on.  Other generally available sources of data 
sometimes worth consideration include databases of property ownership, magazine
 subscriptions, and so on.  Data aggregators, such as Lexis-Nexis, Choi
cepoint, and Acxiom, collect data from a variety of 
disparate sources and sell data on a record-by-record 
request basis over an Internet connection, although 
the expense of access to such data may be a significant barrier to their use. 
Third-party data vary in quality, with some source
s worse than others.  In addition, data collected 
to serve one purpose are sometimes less well suited 
for another purpose.  These issues with quality may 
affect judgments about the suitability of available 
third-party data for correcting errors in a VRD. 
Note that 94 percent of the parties responding to a 2007 National Association of State Election 
Directors survey on voter registration practices indicated that they did not use secondary data sources 

such as phone directories or real-property records to reconstruct a voter™s information if information 

supplied by the voter on a voter registration card was missing or incomplete.
5 A special source of third-party data for a given state is the VRDs of other states.  That is, under 
most circumstances, an individual can vote in only one
 jurisdiction.  Generally, it violates no law for an 
individual to be registered to vote in more than one 
jurisdiction, but the presence of the same person in the 
VRDs of two states suggests that one of those registrations does not accurately reflect the status of that 

individual.  A number of states have agreed to exch
ange voter registration data in a couple of ongoing 
collaborations.  Only preliminary data from these co
llaborations are available at this point, and the 
                                                     
 4Available at http://www.eac.gov/election/docs/statewide_r
egistration_guidelin
es_072605.pdf/attach
ment_download/file. 
5See http://www.surveymonkey.com/sr.aspx?sm=jK8QyNXCIwgdaY4SjASFyN0v4coilbBEvQxDuSyIS4s_3d. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 
47  committee looks forward to analyzing more detailed data from these projects in the future, including 
information on the fields they are matching, the number of potential duplicates on the lists, and the 

number of actual duplicates they remove from their lists. 
 A start at tracking some efforts at interstate 
checking of duplicate registrations can be found in the EAC report 
Impact of the National Voter 
Registration Act on Federal Elections 2005-2006.
6  On page 76 of that report can be found the fact that at 
least three groups of states have checked for such dupli
cates at least once: District of Columbia, Virginia, 
and Maryland; Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Kans
as, and Iowa; and Kentucky, South Carolina, and 
Tennessee.  Improving match accuracy can contribute to improve
d completeness of a VRD.  Match accuracy, 
whether performed by automated processes or manual re
view, can be benefited by tertiary, third-party, 
data.  When such external data are carefully ha
rnessed for improved match accuracy, systems can more 
often resolve ambiguities without human involvement.  Reducing the number of exceptions necessitating 

human review and judgment increases the repeatability of list maintenance. 
Such data can be used in two ways.  First, su
ch data can be acquired across the entire population 
and made available for error-correction processes.  
Second, data can be selectively made available only 
when they are needed to resolve ambiguities in any putative record
-level matchŠan approach that 
minimizes privacy concerns because it obtains additiona
l data on individuals only when they are needed.
7 When using third-party data to enhance matc
hing accuracy, additional logging and accountability 
requirements must be introduced.  Each third-party 
record requested and received must be retained and 
retained in its original form until it is no longer n
eeded (for example, until the 
point that the voter has confirmed any changes that may have resulted from the 
use of such data).  Furthermore, any third-party 
record used to improve a match should be logged and 
accounted for similarly.  In addition, government 
matching with third-party datasets raises privacy con
cerns (such as concerns if credit header data is 
merged with voter history data, for example). 
  COLLATERAL ISSUES IN IMPROVING DATA QUALITY 
 Application of the techniques discussed above is intended to improve the quality of the data in a 
VRD by making the data more accurateŠthat is, th
ese techniques allow erroneous
 data to be changed 
into correct data.  But their success in doing so is not guaranteedŠuse of the techiques may introduce 
additional error, or the original data may in fact have
 been correct.  Thus, it may well be advisable to keep 
the old data as well as the new, but with a flag that 
indicates that the old data have been corrected.  In 
addition, a policy must be established regarding notificati
on of the voter if a field is changed.  The cost of 
such notification must be weighed against the valu
e of ensuring with high confidence that the updated 
data are correct.
                                                      
 6Available at http://www.eac.
gov/clearinghouse/docs/the-im
pact-of-the-national-voter-
registration-act-on-federal-
elections-2005-2006/attachment_download/file.  See also Thad Hall and Michael Alvarez, ﬁThe Next Big Election 
Challenge:  Developing Electronic Data Transaction Standards for Election Administration,ﬂ IBM Center for the 

Business of Goverment, 2005, available at http://www
.vote.caltech.edu/media/documents/AlvarezReport.pdf. 
7This technique is explained in detail in Paul Rosenzweig
 and Jeff Jonas, ﬁCorrecting False Positives: Redress and 
the Watch List Conundrum,ﬂ Legal Memorandum 17, The Heritage Foundation, June 17, 2005, available at 

http://www.heritage.org/Research/HomelandSecurity/lm17.cfm. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 48   
   D  Security and Privacy   Voter registration systems are known to be points of risk in election administration systems.  
Indeed, the ostensible purpose of voter registration is
 to make the election system more secure against 
fraud in the first place.  When a voter registration system is computer-based, security thus becomes an 
issue.   Security is the property of a computer system whereby the system does what is required and 
expected in the face of deliberate attack.
1  For purposes of this report, privacy refers to the protection of 
the information contained within the VRD against improper access.   
As the comments in this appendix indicate, priv
acy and security issues related to VRDs are not 
merely technical issues.  Indeed, a mix of policy and 
technology is relevant to their consideration, and 
these issues are nothing else if not hard to resolve, especially on a limited timescale.  It is largely for this 

reason that the committee does not view these issu
es as having easy resolution in the short term.  
Accordingly, the committee will be addressing these issues 
in its future deliberations, and the final report will include both more substantial analysis and recommendations related to security and privacy. 
 
 SECURITY
2  
Although the security of electronic voter registration systems has not been subject to the levels of 
scrutiny directed at electronic voting systems, the security of VRD systems is nonetheless important.  

Security of computer systems is usually conceptua
lized in terms of confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability:
3   Confidentiality
.  A secure system will keep protected information away from those who 
should not have access to it.  Examples of failures that affect the confidentiality of a VRD 
                                                     
 1Reliability in the face of hu
man, machine, or network failure is al
so an important dimension of system 
trustworthiness, but this appendix focuse
s on security against deliberate attack. 
2There is an extensive body of National Research Council work on computer security issues, beginning with 
Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
, 1990, and continuing with 
Cryptography™s Role in 
Securing the Information Society
, 1996; 
Trust in Cyberspace
, 1999; 
Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental 
Challenges
, 1999; 
Making IT Better: Ex
panding IT Research to
 Meet Society™s Needs
, 2000; 
Cybersecurity Today 
and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later
, 2002; 
Software for Dependable Systems: Sufficient Evidence?
, 2007; and 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
, 2007, all published by the National Academy [Academies] Press, 
Washington, D.C. In addition, an extensive discussion of se
curity and privacy issues spec
ifically with reference to 
voter registration databases is contained in U.S. Public Policy Committee of the Association for Computing 
Machinery, Statewide Databases of Registered Voters: Study of Accuracy, Privacy, Usability, Security, and 
Reliability Issues, 
2006, available at http://usacm.acm.org/us
acm/PDF/VRD_report.pdf.  Excerpts from the 
executive summary of this report relevant to 
privacy and security are provided in Box D.1. 
3See for example, NRC, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
, The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2007. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D 
49   include an unauthorized party obtaining voter in
formation on a large scale or a spouse abuser 
obtaining the address of his/her spouse from a VR
D even if such information is supposed to 
be protected.  Integrity.  A secure system produces the same resu
lts or information whether or not the 
system has been attacked.  When integrity is 
violated, the system may continue to operate, 
but under some circumstances of operation it does 
not provide accurate results or information 
that one would normally expect.  An example of 
a failure that affects the integrity of a VRD 
is an unauthorized change in a VRD that could 
force an individual to show identification at 
the polls when in fact there is no such requirement for that individual to do so. 
 Availability.  A secure system is available for normal 
use even in the face of an attack.  An 
example of a failure in availability might be a 
system that is clogged with so much bad data 
that the system no longer operates reliably (for example, a flood of bogus paper voter 
registration applications that overwhelms the da
ta-entry staff in a particularly critical 
jurisdiction).  A number of security breaches of VRDs have been reported.
4  For example, on October 23, 2006, 
an official from the not-for-profit Illinois Ballot Integr
ity Project reported that his organization had used 
the Chicago voter database remotely to compromise th
e names, SSNs, and dates of birth of 1.35 million 
residents. According to a spokesman for the Chicago 
Election Board, the problem arose because the city™s 
database allowing voters to locate their voting precinc
t once asked voters for detailed information such as 
Social Security numbers, and even though the Web 
site was updated to require only names and addresses 
to make a query, the links to the Social Security num
bers and the dates of birth were never eliminated.
5 Developing secure systems (where ﬁsystemﬂ is in
tended to include the human and organizational 
aspects of a system as well as the technology) is a ch
allenging task, and much has been written about such 
matters.  But it is essential to consider th
ree fundamental points about security.   
First, good security practices require thinking about building security in from the start.  Good 
system specifications inform analysts of what is ﬁrequired and expectedﬂ behavior.  Good software 
engineering enables the system to be implemented in 
a way that conforms to the system specification.  
Formal verification methods and other analysis tools may be helpful in showing that implementations 
faithfully conform to certain aspects of their specifications. 
Second, security threats can arise even in syst
ems that are not connected to the Internet.  
Although Internet connections are of
ten an important source of vulnerability, they are most assuredly not 
the only source.  The recent history of computer 
security is replete with examples of security 
compromises that had nothing to do with the Internet, su
ch as data on stolen laptops, attacks from insiders 
abusing their privileges, and ﬁsocial engineeringﬂ 
attacks involving humans posing as other humans, often 
over the telephone, in order to learn credentials such as passwords that can enable them to access systems 

and files they should not be able to access. 
For example, video surveillance cameras caught 
two intruders in Mississippi on June 23, 2006, 
stealing hard drives from 18 computers. Data files contained names, addresses, and SSNs of current and 

former city employees and registered voters as we
ll as bank account information for employees paid 
through direct deposit and water system 
customers who paid bills electronically.
6 Third, any realistic assessment of a system™s security involves actual testing of the system™s 
security by an adversary who is motivated to co
mpromise it.  Although testing cannot, and does not,  
                                                     
 4See http://www.privacyrigh
ts.org/ar/ChronDataBreaches.htm. 
 This site contains descriptions of a number of data 
breaches involving actual VRDs, and a number of others of potential relevance to VRDs. 
5See http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/story?id=2601085; http
://www.electiondefensea
lliance.org/chicago_voter_ 
registration_database_wide_open. 
6See http://www.privacy
rights.org/ar/ChronD
ataBreaches.htm.   
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
  BOX D.1 Excerpts from a 2006 Study of Voter Registration Databases Relevant to Privacy and Security 
 The following material is reprinted from th
e executive summary and the main text of 
Statewide 
Databases of Registered Voters: Study of Accuracy,
 Privacy, Usability, Security, and Reliability Issues,
 a 2006 report by the U.S. Public Policy Committee 
of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
 2. Accountability should be apparent throughout each VRD. 
 It should be clear who is proposing, making, or approving changes to the data, the system, or 
its policies. Security policies are an important 
tool for ensuring accountability. For example, 
access control policies can be structured to restrict 
actions of certain groups 
or individual users of 
the system. Further, users™ actions can be logged using audit trails (discussed below). 
Accountability also should extend to external uses of VRD data. For example, state and local 
officials should require recipients of data from VRDs to sign use agreements consistent with the 
government™s official policies and procedures. 
 3. Audit trails should be employed throughout the VRD. 
 VRDs that can be independently verified, checked, and proven to be fair will increase voter 
confidence and help avoid litigation. Audit trails are important for independent verification, 
which, in turn, makes the system more transparent and provides a mechanism for accountability. 
They should include records of data changes, configuration changes, security policy changes, and 
database design changes. The trails may be independent records for each part of the VRD, but they 
should include both who made the change and who approved the change. 
 4. Privacy values should be a fundamental part of the VRD, not an afterthought. 
 Privacy policies for voter registration activities should be based on Fair Information Practices 
(FIPs), which are a set of principles for addre
ssing concerns about information privacy. FIPs 
typically address collection limitation, data quality, purpose specification, use limitation, security 
safeguards, openness, individual participatio
n, and accountability. There are many ways to 
implement good privacy policies. For example, we recommend that government both limit 
   
necessarily reveal all security problems (and does nothi
ng by itself to eliminate such problems), testing 
can often identify some remaining failures. 
  PRIVACY 
 
Some of the information in VRDs is, by law, public information, although the specifics of which 
data items can be regarded as public 
information vary from state to state.  In addition, states often limit 
the purposes for which such informati
on may be used.  Nevertheless, the electronic availability of such 
information raises concerns about the privacy of 
that information, because electronic access greatly 

increases the ease with which it can be made available 
to anyone, including those who might abuse it.   
One of the thorniest issues regarding privacy is the tension it sometimes poses with transparency.  
In its starkest terms, maintaining privacy involv
es withholding certain information associated with 
individuals from public view, while transparency invol
ves the maximum disclosure of information, even 
if such information is associated with individuals. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D 
51    collection to only the data required for proper re
gistration and explain why each piece of personal 
information is necessary. Further, privacy policies should be published and widely distributed, and 
the public should be given an opportunity to comment on any changes. . . . 
 6. Election officials should rigorously test the usability, security and reliability of VRDs while 
they are being designed and while they are in use. 
 Testing is a critical tool that can reveal 
that ﬁreal-worldﬂ poll wo
rkers find interfaces 
confusing and unusable, expose security flaws in the system, or that the system is likely to fail 
under the stress of Election Day. All of these issues, if caught before they are problems through 
testing will reduce voter fraud and the disenf
ranchisement of legitimate voters. . . . 
 Security Against Technical Attacks 
  . . . [M]echanisms should be deployed to detect any penetration of system defenses, as well as 
any insider misuse. For example, application-specific intrusion detection systems could be used to 
monitor the number of updates to the VRD. Any la
rge spike in activity, whet
her by an authorized 
user or in the aggregate, might warrant human attention. In addition, officials could consider 
contracting with a third-party network security monitoring service to detect network intrusions and 
attempted attacks on the system. . . . 
 . . . Officials should consider including an inde
pendent security review and publication of the 
software as part of the acceptance testing for the 
system. Claims that the security of the system 
will be endangered by such a review should be 
treated with extreme skepticism or rejected 
outright. . . . 
     SOURCE: U.S. Public Policy Committee of th
e Association for Computing Machinery, 
Statewide Databases of 
Registered Voters: Study of Accuracy, Priva
cy, Usability, Security, and Reliability Issues, 
2006, available at 
http://usacm.acm.org/usacm/PDF/VRD_report.pdf.  (c) 
2006 ACM. Excerpted with permission. ISBN: 1-59593-
344-1. Permission to make digital or hard copies of portions of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copi
es are not made or distributed for profit or
 commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permission from permissions@acm.org.  
   As an illustration of how these tensions play out
, consider a proposition regarding the public 
disclosure of the reason(s) for removing specific individuals from voter registration lists.  On one hand, 
the removal of a voter from a VRD is often associated 
with a stigmatizing condition, such as being a felon 
or being declared mentally incompetent.  T
hose mistakenly removed from a VRD may experience 
adverse consequences from such association, and even
 if the removal is correctly performed, those 
individuals are still arguably entitled to some measure of
 privacy.  Thus, a person balancing the scales in 
favor of privacy would argue that the reasons for 
removing individuals from the VRD should be kept 
confidential, as they are in some states already. 
On the other hand, advocates of greater transparency argue that removals from a VRD should be 
subject to public oversight in the same way that additi
ons are.  They point out that convictions and even 
arrest records are generally public
, and thus argue that not disclosing reasons for removal from a VRD 
does not really protect the privacy of these individua
ls anyway.  At the same time, they argue that 

associating reasons for removal with specific individuals is critical to determining the qualification of 
votersŠand that statistical tabulations alone would not provide the detail needed to investigate individual 
errors that might indicate systemic problems. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 The committee noted significant value without much negative impact on privacy in statistical 
tabulations of the reasons for voters being droppe
d from a VRD and publication of such tabulations, as 
well as in personal and private notification of individual voters of the reason(s) for being dropped.  But 
the different points of view described above were 
reflected in the committee, and thus the committee 
takes no position on the desirability or undesirab
ility of the above proposition.  The committee might 
address this point in its final report. Other privacy advocates have raised concerns about the widespread availability of complete voter 
registration information in the context of the phys
ical security of battered men or women.  Such 
individuals have good reason to keep their addresses pr
ivate, and might be apprehensive with good reason 
about the availability of their addresses to their battere
rs.  A second concern relates to abuse of lists of 
validated addresses for commercial marketing purposesŠ
many citizens would be upset to know that the 
information they provided to exercise their right to vo
te in a democracy is also being used for commercial 
purposes.  Addressing such issues properly belongs to state policy makers, who can develop (and 
sometimes have developed) regulati
on and law to protect citizen interestsŠfor example, some states only 
allow political parties to obtain voter registration lists. A second set of privacy issues arises from matching and linking records.  For example, voter 
registration lists may be matched against a list of co
nvicted felons.  If a list of voters removed from the 
VRD is made public, those removed from the list impr
operly or removed for other reasons (that is, all 
nonfelons removed from the list) may be tainted by asso
ciation in the public eye.  Similarly, if a voter 
registration list is made public that indicates the source
 of an individual application, those who registered 
to vote at public assistance agencies 
might regard their privacy rights 
as having been violated.  Although 
overt public disclosure would violate the NVRA, accidental disclosure through a security breach might 
have a similar result.  This could in turn reduce th
e likelihood that people will seek out public assistance if 
seeking it will automatically place that information in
 a voter registration record that is publicly 
accessible.  Alternatively, where registration is not automatic, it may reduce the number of individuals 
who take advantage of the ease of registering at th
e public assistance agency and thereby undercut the 
goal of the program. 
A third set of privacy issues arises from insider 
access to the VRD.  Insiders such as election 
officials could be expected to have access to the fu
ll set of information associated with any individual 
record, and possibly to some of the information in matched records existing in other databases.  Although 

most election officials are trustworthy in this re
gard, a few might seek to use this accessŠimproperlyŠ
for personal benefit or gain, and security measures (such as tamper-proof audit logs) are needed to 
prevent or deter such inappropriate insider access. 

 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 53   
   E  Workshop Agendas 
 
 WORKSHOP OF AUGUST 6, 2007, WASHINGTON, D.C. 
 
10:30Œ10:45 a.m. 
Welcome to the Workshop  Sharon Priest and Olene Walker, Committee and Workshop Co-chairs 
 
10:45Œ12:00 p.m. 
Panel I   Overview of the Issues  
 What are key voter registration issues, and how do they affect the establishment of 

statewide voter registration databases as mandated by HAVA?  

Moderator: Sharon Priest/Olene Walker
  Panelists: Gracia M. Hillman, Commissioner, U.S. Election Assistance Commission 
Caroline C. Hunter, Commissioner, U.S. Election Assistance Commission 

Leonard M. Shambon, formerly with Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr  

Robert A. Pastor, Executive Director, Carter-Baker Commission and Director of the 
Center for Democracy and Election Management, American University
  Q&A with presenters 
 
12:00Œ12:45 Lunch Available 

 Continue discussion from first panel session and prepare for afternoon sessions 
 
12:45Œ2:15 
Panel II   Status of Voter Registration Database Efforts  What are the different types of and appro
aches to voter registration systems? What 
are the benefits and tradeoffs? Do you bu
ild it on your own or do you contract it out?
 What are some upcoming challenges that will 
need to be addressed in the near term 
(1-2 years) and in the longer term (5+ years)? 

Moderator: Bruce McPherson
  
Panelists: Deborah Markowitz, Secretary of State, Vermont, and Immediate Past President of 
the National Association of Secretaries of State  
Brad Bryant, President, National Association of State Election Directors
 and Deputy Assistant for Elections, Kansas Linda Lindberg, General Registrar, Arlington County, Virginia  
  Q&A with presenters  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 2:15Œ2:30 Break 
    
2:30  Web Cast Begins 
 2:30Œ2:35 
Welcome and Brief Overview for Web Cast Audience 
 Sharon Priest and Olene Walker, Committee and Workshop Co-chairs
  2:35Œ4:00 
Panel III   Record Matching: Technical/Operational Issues and Problems 
 What types of technical problems can occur 
in record linking? What is the impact on 
data quality? What type of data cleaning is
 required? What are potential solutions to 
these problems? 

Moderator: William Winkler   Panelists: Gio Wiederhold, Professor (Emeritus), Computer Science, Medicine, and Electrical 
Engineering, Stanford University  
William Cohen, Associate Research Prof
essor, Machine Learning Department, 
Carnegie Mellon University  
Michael Franklin, Professor, Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, 
University of California, Berkeley 
 Respondents: 
James Willis, Principal, Banyan Socia
l Technology, and Former Director, eGovernment for Rhode Island 
Frank Olken, Computer Scientist, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
 Q&A with presenters 
 4:00Œ5:30 
Panel IV   Interoperability and Database Operations in Other Domains 
 What kinds of problems or issues exist in
 non-election domains (i.e., government and 
nongovernmental settings), including technical
 and organization dimensions? What is 
the range of possible solutions? 

Moderator: Paula Hawthorn
 
 Panelists: John Glaser, Vice President and Chief Information Officer, Partners Healthcare 
System Dan Schutzer, Executive Director, Financial Services Technology Consortium 
Vivek Narasayya, Senior Researcher, Data 
Management, Exploration and Mining Group, Microsoft Research 
Ken Orr, Founder, Ken Orr Institute (participating by phone and Web conference) 
  Q&A with presenters 

 5:30  Adjourn  
5:30Œ6:30 p.m. Open Reception  
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E 
55   WORKSHOP OF NOVEMBER 29-30, 2007, WASHINGTON, D.C. 
 Thursday, November 29, 2007 
 8:30Œ8:40 a.m. 
Welcome to the Workshop  Olene Walker, Committee and Workshop Co-chair 
 
8:40Œ10:15 
Panel I Data Providers Issues and Challenges  
 Moderator: William Winkler   Panelists: Peter Monaghan, Director, Information E
xchange and Computer Matching, Social Security Administration  
William L. Farrell, Director, Office of 
Systems Security Operations Management, Social Security Administration  Walter A. Jackson III, Senior Systems Analyst, Systems Analysis Division, American 
Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators   James Wilson, Program Manager, Address 
Technology, U.S. Postal Service  
Garland Land, Executive Director, National Association for Public Health Statistics 
and Information Systems  
 Q&A with presenters 
 10:15Œ10:45 Break 

 10:45Œ11:45 
Panel I Data Providers Issues and ChallengesŠcontinued 
 Moderator: Paula Hawthorn
  Respondents: Kimball Brace, President, Election Data Services (remote participation) 
Clark Bensen, Principal Consultant, Polidata  
Keith Cunningham, Director of the Board of Elections for Allen County, Ohio     Q&A with presenters 

 11:45Œ1:00 p.m. Lunch Available 
 Continue discussion from morning sessions and prepare for afternoon panels 
 1:00Œ3:00 
Panel II   IT OperationsŠState and Local  

Moderator: John Lindback
   Panelists: Ray Palmer, Information Technology Manager, Office of the Governor, Utah  
Mike Stewart, Chief Information Officer, Office of the Secretary of State, Kansas 

Paul Miller, Technical Services Manager, Elections Division, Office of Secretary of 
State, Washington  
Shane Hamlin, Assistant Director of Elections, Office of Secretary of State, 
Washington 
   
 Q&A with presenters 
 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 3:00Œ3:15 Break 
 
3:15Œ4:45 
Panel III   Impact of Technical Implementation on Policy
 Moderator: Olene Walker
   Panelists: Wendy R. Weiser, Deputy Director, Brennan
 Center for Justice at NYU School of 
Law  James C. Dickson, Vice President of Govern
ment Affairs, American Association of 
People with Disabilities  
Melanie L. Campbell, Executive Director, National Coalition on Black Civic 
Participation  Lloyd Leonard, Senior Director for Advocacy, League of Women Voters  
  Q&A with presenters 
 4:45Œ5:45 
Panel III   Impact of Technical Implementation on PolicyŠcontinued 
 Moderator: Michael Alvarez   Panelists: Vincent Keenan, Executive Director, Publius  Michael P. McDonald, Associate Professor, George Mason University and Non-
Resident Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution  
Chris Thomas, Director, Bureau of Elections, Michigan Department of State 

Ernie Hawkins, CERA, Chair of Election Center Board of Directors, California  
 Q&A with presenters 
 
5:45Œ6:15 p.m. ReceptionŠRotunda 

  Friday, November 30, 2007 
  
8:30Œ8:35 a.m. 
Welcome and Overview  
 Olene Walker, Committee and Workshop Co-chair 
 
8:35Œ10:00
 Panel IV   Security and Privacy Issues
  Moderator: Jeff Jonas   Panelists: 
Peter G. Neumann, SRI International Computer Science Laboratory  

Glenn Newkirk, President, InfoSENTRY Services Inc. (remote participation) 

James J. Horning, Chief Scientist, Information Systems Security Operation, SPARTA 
Inc.  Bradley A. Malin, Assistant Professor, Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University  
 
 Q&A with presenters 

 10:00Œ10:30  Break 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E 
57   10:30Œ11:15 
Panel V   IT OperationsŠVendors 
 Moderator: John Lindback
   Panelists: Thomas H. Ferguson, Director, Saber Corporation Neil McClure, Chief Technology Officer, Hart InterCivic  
 
11:15 a.m. Workshop Adjourns 

  State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 58   
   F  Biographical Information   
 COMMITTEE MEMBERS  
Frances Ulmer, 
Co-chair, is the interim chancellor of the Univers
ity of Alaska, Anchorage, bringing to 
this position 30 years of experience in public policy 
in Alaska.  Previously, she was a fellow at the 
Institute of Politics at Harvard University™s Kennedy
 School of Government and a Distinguished Visiting 

Professor of Public Policy at the Institute of Social
 and Economic Research. In the early 1980s, she was 
the mayor of Juneau, then became
 a member of the Alaska House of Representatives (1986-1994), and in 
1994 became the first female lieutenant governor of Al
aska. In that year, she was appointed to the North 
Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission by President Bill Clinton and served on this 
international board for 11 years. She has participated in numerous panels, 
task forces, commissions, and forums as a speaker, 
moderator, and panelist to address the intersection 
of science, economics, politics, and policy.  She 
currently serves on the Board of Trustees of the Natio
nal Parks Conservation Association, the Advisory 
Board of the Union of Concerned Scientists, and th
e Alaska Nature Conservancy Board. At the national 
level, Ms. Ulmer has served as a member of the above-mentioned North Pacific Anadromous Fish 

Commission, the Federal Communications Commission™
s State and Local Advisory Committee, and the 
Federal Elections Commissions Committee. She has a B.A. in political science and economics and a law 
degree from the University of Wisconsin. 

 Olene Walker
, Co-chair, was the first woman governor of the state of Utah. Before being appointed as 
governor, she served as the first woman lieutenant governor of Utah. During her time in office, Dr. 
Walker spearheaded many important initiatives, in
cluding education programs, budget security measures, 

health care reform, and workforce development.  She al
so worked to implement the federal ﬁmotor voterﬂ 
legislation in Utah and oversaw the plan to bring Ut
ah into compliance with the Help America Vote Act 
(HAVA). She has chaired the National Conference of Lieu
tenant Governors and is a past president of the 
National Association of Secretaries of State.  She w
as the first lieutenant governor ever to serve as the 
president of that organization.  Dr. Walker received her bachelor™s, master™s, and doctoral degrees from 

Brigham Young University, Stanford University, 
and the University of Utah, respectively. 
 Rakesh Agrawal
, NAE, is a Microsoft Technical Fellow at the newly founded Search Labs.  His areas of 
expertise are in developing fundamental data 
mining concepts and technologies and pioneering key 
concepts in data privacy, including Hippocratic Da
tabase, Sovereign Information Sharing, and Privacy-
Preserving Data Mining. He is the recipient of the ACM-SIGKDD First Innovation Award, ACM-
SIGMOD Edgar F. Codd Innovations Award, ACM-SIGMOD 
Test of Time Award, VLDB 10-Year Most 
Influential Paper Award, and the Computerworld Firs
t Horizon Award. He is a member of the National 
Academy of Engineering, a fellow of the Associati
on for Computing Machinery, and a fellow of IEEE. 
Scientific American named him to the list of 50 top scientists and technologists in 2003. Prior to joining 

Microsoft in March 2006, Dr. Agrawal was an IBM 
fellow and led the Quest group at the IBM Almaden 
Research Center.  Earlier, he was with the Bell La
boratories, Murray Hill, from 1983 to 1989.  He also 
worked for 3 years at India™s premier company, the Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.  He received M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University
 of Wisconsin-Madison in 1983. He also holds a State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX F 
59   B.E. degree in electronics and communication engineering from IIT-Roorkee, as well as a 2-year 
postgraduate diploma in industrial 
engineering from the National Ins
titute of Industrial Engineering 
(NITIE), Bombay. 
 R. Michael Alvarez 
is a professor of political science at the California Institute of Technology 
(CalTech).  His research interests have been in 
the areas of elections and electoral behavior, survey 
methodology, statistics and political 
methodology, and more recently, election administration.  Professor 
Alvarez is currently the co-director of the Calt
ech/MIT Voting Technology Project and recently co-
authored a book published by 
the Brookings Institution Press, Point, Click and Vote:  The Future of 
Internet Voting. Professor Alvarez received his Ph.D. and M.A. degrees in political science from Duke 
University and his B.A., magna cum laude, in political science from Carleton College.  

 
Charlotte Cleary
, retired, was general registrar of Arlington 
for 19 years. As such, she was responsible 
for planning, organizing, and directing voter regist
ration and elections. After she retired, she continued working in the election field on a temporary basis. She has served as a member of the writing and 

research team for the Poll Worker Ins
titute grant on poll worker recruitment, training, and retention, for 
the Election Assistance Commission. In 2004 she ser
ved on the Virginia State Board of elections 
evaluation committee to review requests for proposals for the new statewide election system. She was a 
certified professional general registrar in Virginia
 under the Weldon Cooper Center from 1994 through 
2000. She has been a member of the Federal Election Commission Advisory Panel from 1998 through 

2003, the Election Center from 1990 through 2003, and the Constitution Project Forum on Election 

Reform from 2001 to 2003. She received a B.A. in 
English from American University, in Washington, 

D.C.  
 
Gary W. Cox, NAS, is a professor of political science at the University of California, San Diego. In 
addition to numerous articles in the areas of legisla
tive and electoral politics, Professor Cox is author of The Efficient Secret (winner of the Samuel H. Beer dissertation prize in 1983 and of the 2003 George H. 

Hallett Award), coauthor of 
Legislative Leviathan (winner of the Richard F. Fenno Prize in 1993), author 
of Making Votes Count
 (winner of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation Award, the Luebbert Prize, and the 
Best Book in Political Economy Award in 1998); and coauthor of 
Elbridge Gerry™s Salamander: The 
Electoral Consequences of the Reapportionment Revolution
. His latest book, 
Setting the Agenda
, was published in 2005. A former Guggenheim Fellow, Prof
essor Cox was elected to the American Academy 

of Arts and Sciences in 1996 and to the National Academy of Sciences in 2005. He received a Ph.D. from 

the California Institute of Technology in 1983.  

 
Paula Hawthorn, retired, serves as a consultant and continu
es her involvement with the University of 
California, Berkeley.  She received her Ph.D. in el
ectrical engineering and computer science from the 
University of California in 1979. Her thesis topic was on the performance of database systems. She has 

spent much of her career as a manager of database development, including vice-president of Software 

Development for start-ups such as Britton Lee a
nd Illustra, and both management and individual 
contributor positions at Hewlett-Packard (wor
king on database performance issues) and Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory.  
 Sarah Ball Johnson currently serves as the executive director
 of the Commonwealth of Kentucky™s State 
Board of Elections. She has 12 years of experience in election administration on the state level. She has a 
bachelor of arts degree in business administration fro
m Transylvania University and a master of public 
administration degree, specializing in state and local government, from the University of Kentucky.  She 
participated in four international election observation trips, to Slovakia, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Nigeria.  
A member of the National Association of State Election Directors, she serves as the southern region 

representative on the board of the association and 
also serves on the Election Assistance Commission 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Standards Board.  She was elected by her peers to
 the Executive Committee of the Standards Board and serves as chair of that committee. She is a member of the Election Center.  
 Jeff Jonas is a distinguished engineer and chief scientist of Entity Analytic Solutions at IBM. He is 
responsible for shaping the overall technical strategy of
 next-generation identity analytics and the use of 
this new capability in the overall IBM technology strategy. The IBM Entity Analytic Solutions group was 
formed based on technologies he developed as the fo
under and chief scientist of Systems Research & 
Development (SRD). SRD was acquired by IBM in Janua
ry 2005. He applies his real-world experience in 
software design and development to drive technolog
y innovations while delivering higher levels of 
privacy and civil liberties protections. He is a memb
er of the Markle Foundation Task Force on National 

Security in the Information Age and actively cont
ributes on issues of privacy, technology, and homeland 
security to leading national think tanks, privacy 
advocacy groups, and policy research organizations, 
including the Center for Democracy and Technology,
 Heritage Foundation, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense Highlands Forum.  
 John Lindback is director of elections for the state of Oregon, a position he has held since March 2001.
 His duties include enforcing laws governing the cond
uct of elections in Oregon, enforcing Oregon™s 
campaign finance laws, administering the state™s initiative and referendum process, and publishing state 

voters™ pamphlets. Previously, he worked for 6 y
ears as chief of staff for the lieutenant governor of 
Alaska, a job that included administrative oversight 
of Alaska™s statewide election system. After earning a 
journalism degree from the University of Arizona 
in 1976, Mr. Lindback reported on government for 
newspapers for 12 years. He has worked in the publ
ic sector since 1988 as a budget analyst, legislative 
finance aide, public information officer, chief of st
aff to a lieutenant governor, and now state elections 
director. He is secretary of the National Association of State Elections Directors. He was also elected to 

the Executive Board of the Elections Assistance Co
mmission™s national Standards Advisory Board, a 
group composed of 110 elections officials from across the nation.  

 
Bruce McPherson
 was the 30th California secretary of state.  The first 26 years of his career he worked 

in the newsroom of the family-owned 
Santa Cruz Sentinel
, serving as sports editor, news reporter, editor-editorial writer, and city editor.  During this 
time he served on, and was president of, numerous 
community organizations.  In his 11 years in the 
California legislature, he focused his attention on 
education, environmental protection, and public safety. 
 In the aftermath of the resignation in early 2005 
of California™s secretary of state, he was nominated by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger to be secretary 

of state. Mr. McPherson was confirmed unanimously in both the Senate and the Assembly.  While in 

office, he updated the information technology requi
red to meet election laws, and he oversaw three 
statewide elections and two special elections. Mr. 
McPherson graduated from Cal PolyŒSan Luis Obispo 
with a B.S. degree in journalism in 1965.  He sub
sequently was given an honorary degree in humane 

letters from Cal PolyŒSan Luis Obispo in 2005. 

 
Wendy Noren is county clerk of Boone County, Missouri,
 a position she has held since 1982, and she 
managed the election division of the office for 4 years pr
ior to that.  Ms. Noren is responsible for keeping 
records of the orders, rules, and proceedings of th
e County Commission. In addition, she is responsible 
for inspecting and reviewing all voter precinct boun
daries within the county and conducting elections.  
Throughout this period, she has served as a programmer 
for all of the voter registration functions.  Over 
the past 25 years, she has been one of the first to
 implement emerging technology for the county™s voter 
registration system
often years before most jurisdictions. As both the programmer and user, she has a 
unique perspective on the critical components of a voter registration system.  Other administrative 

responsibilities of the clerk include maintaining payroll files, administering employee benefits, 

administering the records management budget, and pr
ocuring adequate insurance and bonding for the 

county™s assets and elected officials.  

 State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX F 
61   William Winkler is a principal researcher with the U.S. Census Bureau.  He is a fellow of the American 
Statistical Association.  He has published more than 130 papers and has devel
oped eight (and counting) 
generalized computer systems for record linkage, edit/imputation, multipurpose and multiway sampling, 
text classification, and masking for public-use microdata
.  Dr. Winkler holds a Ph.D. in probability theory 
from Ohio State University.  
 
Rebecca N. Wright 
is an associate professor of computer scien
ce at Rutgers University. She is also 
deputy director of the DIMACS Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science. 

Prior to that, she was a professor of computer science 
at Stevens Institute of Technology and a researcher 
in the Secure Systems Research Department at AT&T
 Labs and AT&T Bell Labs. Her research spans the 
area of information security, including cryptography, privacy, foundations of computer security, and 

fault-tolerant distributed computing. Professor Wright
 serves as an editor of the Journal of Computer 
Security and the International Journal of Informati
on and Computer Security, and was a member of the 
board of directors of the International Associati
on for Cryptologic Research from 2001 to 2005. She was 
a co-author on a study, ﬁStatewide Databases of 
Registered Voters: Study of Accuracy, Privacy, 
Usability, Security, and Reliability Issues,ﬂ commissioned 
by USACM. She was an invited speaker in the 
National Academy of Engineering™s 2007 U.S. Front
iers of Engineering Symposium. She received a 
Ph.D. in Computer Science from Yale University in 
1994 and a B.A. from Columbia University in 1988. 
  CSTB STAFF 
 Herbert S. Lin 
is chief scientist, CSTB at the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 
National Research Council of the National Academies, 
where he has been the study director for major 
projects on public policy and information technol
ogy. These studies include a 1996 study on national 
cryptography policy (
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
), a 1991 study on the 
future of computer science (
Computing the Future
), a 1999 study of Defense Department systems for 
command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (
Realizing the Potential of C4I: 
Fundamental Challenges
), a 2000 study on workforce issues in high-technology (
Building a Workforce
 for the Information Economy
), a 2002 study on protecting kids from Internet pornography and sexual 
exploitation (Youth, Pornography, and the Internet
), a 2004 study on aspects of the FBI™s information 
technology modernization program (
A Review of the FBI™s Trilogy IT Modernization Program
), a 2005 study on electronic voting (
Asking the Right Questions About Electronic Voting
), and a 2005 study on 
computational biology (
Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and Biology
). Prior to his NRC service, he was a professional staff member and staff scientist for the House 
Armed Services Committee 
(1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense 
policy and arms control issues. He received his 
doctorate in physics from MIT. 
 
Kristen R. Batch
 is an associate program officer for th
e Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board of the National Academies. She is currently in
volved with projects focusing on the interoperability 
of voter registration databases, the policy and ethical implications of offensive information warfare, and 
the information technology R&D ecosystem. Since joining CSTB in 2002, she has worked on studies that 
produced Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
, Engaging Privacy and Information Technology 
in a Digital Age
, Asking the Right Questions About Electronic Voting, Signposts in Cyberspace: The 
Domain Name System and Internet Navigation,
 A Review of the FBI™s Trilogy Information Technology 
Modernization Program
, and The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11
. While pursuing an M.A. in international communications 
from American University
, she interned at the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administra
tion, in the Office of International Affairs, and 
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies,
 in the Technology and Public Policy Program. She 
also received a B.A. from Carnegie Mellon University
 in literary and cultural studies and Spanish, and 

she received two travel grants to conduct independent research in Spain. 
State Voter Registration Databases: Immediate Actions and Future Improvements: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 STATE VOTER REGISTRATION DATABASES: IMMEDIATE ACTIONS AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
 Morgan R. Motto
, senior program assistant, has been w
ith CSTB since December 2007 supporting 
several projects, including the Wireless Technolog
y Prospects and Policy and Assessing the Impacts of 
Changes in the Information Technology Rese
arch and Development Ecosystem projects
. Previously, she 
worked with the Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology (BEST) on the reports 
Human Biomonitoring for Environmental Chemicals, Sediment Dredging at Superfund Megasites, Applications of 
Toxicogenomic Technologies to Predictive Toxicology and Risk Assessment, Evaluating Research 
Efficiency in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Respiratory Disease Research at NIOSH, Review of the Federal Strategy to Address Environmental, 
Health, and Safety Resea
rch Needs for Engineered Nanoscale Materials, and Improving Risk Analysis Approaches Used by the US EPA.
 Prior to coming to 
the NRC, Ms. Motto worked as a project manager for international affairs and technology at the U.S. Pan 

Asian American Chamber of Commerce.
 She earned a B.A. in international affairs and East Asian studies 
from the Elliott School of International Affa
irs at the George Washington University. 
 