DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12174Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the InformationTechnology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in anIncreasingly Global Environment204 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-11882-8 | DOI 10.17226/12174Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information TechnologyResearch and Development Ecosystem; Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoard; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilAssessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in an...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information 
 
Technology Research and Development Ecosystem
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under 
award number IIS-0552216. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommenda
-tions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
re˚ect the views of the organization that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-11882-8
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-11882-4
This report is available from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20001
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
Internet: http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 
Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
 Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE
 ON
 A
SSESSIN
G 
THE
 I
MPACTS
 OF
 C
HAN
GES
 IN
 THE
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R
ESEARCH
 AND
 DEVELOPMENT
 E
COS
YSTEM
 ERIC BENHAMOU, Benhamou Global Ventures,
 Co-Chair
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley, 
Co-Chair
STEPHEN R. BARLEY, Stanford University
ANDREW B. HARGADON, University of California, Davis
MARTIN KENNEY, University of California, Davis
STEVEN KLEPPER, Carnegie Mellon University
EDWARD D. LAZOWSKA, University of Washington
LENNY MENDONCA, McKinsey & Company
DAVID C. NAGEL, Ascona Group
ARATI PRABHAKAR, U.S. Venture Partners
RAJ REDDY, Carnegie Mellon University
LUCINDA SANDERS, National Center for Women and Information 
Technology
Staff
JON
 E
ISENBERG
, 
Director
, 
Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board
JOAN D. WINSTON,
1 Program Of˜cer
KRISTEN R. BATCH,
2 Associate Program Of˜cer
MARGARET MARSH HUYNH,
3 Senior Program Assistant
MORGAN R. MOTTO,
4 Program Associate
1Until May 2008.
2Until August 2008.
3Until November 2007.
4As of December 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair
PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE
, Hewlett Packard Company
FREDERICK R. CHANG, University of Texas, Austin
WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Research
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
KEVIN C. KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
JOHN E. KELLY III, IBM Research
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
JON KLEINBERG, Cornell University
PETER LEE, Carnegie Mellon University
TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
WILLIAM H. PRESS, University of Texas, Austin
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc.
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Sun Microsystems, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC
PETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.
JON EISENBERG, Director
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˜cer
NANCY GILLIS, Program Of˜cer
ENITA
 A. 
WILLIAMS
, Associate Program Of˜cer
MORGAN R. MOTTO, Program Associate
SHENAE
 B
RADLEY
, Senior Program Assistant
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washing
-ton, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
The sustained development of information technology (IT) over the 
past several decades has contributed signi˜cantly to nearly every aspect 
of the U.S. economy and society. This development has been fueled by the 
participation and cooperation of members of an ecosystem comprising 
academic, industry, and government IT research and development (R&D) 
performers and supporters. Concern has been growing, however, that the 
historically highly successful U.S. IT innovation ecosystem is at risk. In 
this period of intense global competitionŠre˚ecting, notably, the growing 
economic strength of India and ChinaŠthe consequences for the United 
States of a less than vital IT R&D ecosystem could be quite severe.
To address these concerns, the National Science Foundation asked 
the National Research Council (NRC) to assess the impacts of changes 
in the IT R&D infrastructure. The statement of task for the study was as 
follows: 
This study will assess the changes occurring to the structure, processes 
and outcomes that have historically characterized the nation™s long-
term investment in information technology research and development. 
It will look broadly across academic, government and industry activities 
(including research, human resource and venture capital development), 
characterize issues and identify opportunities to sustain innovation. It 
will examine issues including the maturation of information technology 
research ˜elds, economic processes of information technology research 
and production, international competition and collaboration (intellectual 
and economic), patterns of funding, and the structure of funding pro
-grams as they affect the innovation and human resources pipeline. The 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 PREFACE
study will examine alternative strategies and develop recommendations 
on actions that could be taken by the public and private sectors, alone 
and in partnership, to sustain and improve the health of the relevant 
research ˜elds, and the historic pattern of technical innovation and na
-tional economic and security bene˜ts.
The Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Informa
-tion Technology Research and Development Ecosystem was appointed 
by the NRC and convened under the auspices of the NRC™s Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board. The members of the study com
-mittee were drawn from academia and industry (see Appendix A for 
biosketches of the committee members). Individuals on the committee 
have expertise spanning the areas of IT software and hardware research; 
IT education; the economic and business aspects of R&D and innovation; 
globalization and IT; IT issues, history, and policy; participation in the 
˜eld; the use of IT in organizations; regional and thematic R&D consortia 
and centers; and venture capital.
The committee™s goals for the study were to do the following: 

Describe
 the current IT-speci˜c ecosystem through which innova
-tive, market-creating information technologies and products are concep
-tualized, transitioned, and developed into new economic sectors and 
globally competitive products (i.e., ﬁthe next billion-dollar industriesﬂ). 
Identify this ecosystem™s essential components and their dynamic interre
-lationships, the contextual forces that in˚uence its health, and the nature 
of its products and contributions to the nation™s economy and its society.

Assess
, considering both national R&D priorities and global com
-petition, the ecosystem™s current health in the United States, through 
the quanti˜cation of relevant ﬁvital signs,ﬂ especially with respect to the 
dynamics of industrial globalization, the sociology of new-industry cre
-ation brought about by innovation networks, the changing economics and 
funding sources for underwriting innovation, and the role of regulation 
in accelerating or impeding the commercialization of new ideas. 

Identify
 the role of emerging technology platformsŠsuch as per
-sonal computers (PCs), Windows, and client-server processing in the 
1980s; the Internet and the World Wide Web in the 1990s; and open-
source software and Web 2.0 services and ﬁmashupsﬂ (Web applications 
that combine data from multiple sources) in the ˜rst decade of the 21st 
centuryŠthat dramatically reduce the barriers to the deployment of new 
concepts and products.
 
Illustrate
 this assessment with several case studies that highlight 
recent successes and failures of the current IT R&D ecosystem. 
 
Formulate
 policy recommendations aimed at enhancing the sur
-vival and increasing the agility of the U.S. technological and commercial 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ix
IT R&D enterprise through the appropriate nurturing and sustenance of 
its ecosystem.
Of necessity the committee had to limit its consideration of each of 
the many sub˜elds of IT R&D, and the lack of discussion of any particular 
sub˜eld is thus not an indication of the importance attached to it by the 
committee. In particular, this study did not devote signi˜cant attention to 
cybersecurity, which was the focus of the 2007 NRC report 
Toward a Safer 
and More Secure Cyberspace
. That report calls for ﬁa broad, robust, and 
sustained research agenda at levels which ensure that a large fraction of 
good ideas for cybersecurity research can be explored . . . commensurate 
with a rapidly growing cybersecurity threatﬂ and observes that ﬁa sub
-stantial increase in federal budgetary resources devoted to cybersecurity 
will be needed.ﬂ
1 In addition, because the committee focused on IT R&D ecosystem 
changes that occurred during the period from 1995 to 2007 and largely 
wrapped up its deliberations in mid-2008, it was not in a position to 
consider the implications of the 2008 global economic crisis, which was 
continuing to unfold as this report went to press. What was apparent 
in late 2008 was that several conditionsŠincluding a marked reduction 
in the availability of venture capital funds following losses in pension 
funds and endowments; a dramatic reduction in initial public offerings 
by technology companies and a decline in mergers and acquisitions; steep 
declines in consumer con˜dence; and signi˜cant layoffs and hiring cut
-backs in IT ˜rms and across the global economyŠwould all have adverse 
impacts on both investments made in and revenue earned by the IT sector. 
Those conditions will almost certainly also signi˜cantly affect the IT R&D 
ecosystem, undermining the partial recovery seen over the past couple 
of years, although the magnitude, duration, and enduring impacts of the 
downturn are not yet clear. 
With the economic downturn have come prospects for additional fed
-eral stimulus spending in 2009, which has in turn prompted debate about 
the role that federal R&D investment should play as part of a stimulus 
package. This report underscores both the importance of the IT sector to 
the economy and the importance of R&D investment to the IT sector™s 
health and growth. The committee was, of course, not in a position to 
consider what stimulus effect federal R&D spending would have or the 
relative merits of investment in R&D versus alternatives. Nonetheless, 
the committee believes that this report will be helpful to those setting 
1National Research Council, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace, 
The National Acad
-emies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, pp. 11-12.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
priorities and otherwise structuring whatever additional investments in 
IT R&D are ultimately made. 
Most importantly, the committee believes that the report™s main mes
-sageŠthat the need has never been greater for the nation to recommit 
itself to providing the resources required to fuel U.S. IT innovation, to 
mitigate unintended negative consequences of laws and regulations, and 
to remain a nation of leading innovators and users of ITŠtakes on even 
greater importance in light of the recent economic downturn.
The committee drew heavily on perspectives and other inputs
 gathered 
during three, day-long public workshops (detailed workshop agendas and 
lists of speakers are provided in Appendix B):

In Washington, D.C.:
 The ˜rst study workshop and meeting took 
place at the National Academies Keck Center in Washington, D.C., on 
November 2-3, 2006. The focus was on the committee™s receiving its charge 
and terms of reference and being briefed on an initial set of important per
-spectives on the IT ecosystem. In particular, the study committee received 
presentations on the federal agency view of the ecosystem, university and 
business perspectives on the state of R&D in the ˜eld, and an overview of 
the state of technology start-up activity in the Washington, D.C., area.

In Mountain View, California:
 The second study workshop and 
meeting were held at the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, 
California, on February 23-24, 2007. The emphasis of this meeting was 
on gathering input from the Silicon Valley community and the greater 
academic and business community of the San Francisco Bay Area, one of 
the key cluster regions of the IT industry in the United States. The topics 
covered included perspectives on the emergence of the IT industry in 
China and India, changes in the IT R&D ecosystem as observed by lead
-ing journalists and writers on technology, the changing experiences of 
serial entrepreneurs and early-stage angel investors, and the thoughts of 
leading scholars who have studied the evolution of several industries in 
response to globalization and technology shifts.

In Boston, Massachusetts:
 The third study workshop and meeting 
were held in Boston, Massachusetts, on April 19-20, 2007, to gain insights 
from the second-largest cluster of the IT industry in the United States. The 
topics covered included public policy aspects of the industry; the relation
-ship between universities and both U.S.-based and international ˜rms; 
perspectives on the development of the IT industry in Israel, Ireland, and 
Scandinavia; the emerging technology platforms for information technol
-ogy and their impact on research and development; and workforce and 
social issues.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xi
The committee deliberated and developed draft materials in working 
meetings held in conjunction with each workshop and held an additional 
working meeting on June 7-8, 2007 (in Menlo Park, California) to develop 
the study™s recommendations and report outline. It worked on this report 
throughout the study period by e-mail and teleconference.
This study and report were made possible by sponsorship from the 
National Science Foundation. The committee is grateful to all of the work
-shop participants for their thoughtful presentations and discussion and 
appreciates the comments and constructive criticisms of reviewers of the 
draft report. 
Eric Benhamou and Randy H. Katz, 
Co-Chairs
Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the 
Information Technology  Research and Development Ecosystem
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
xiii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Roger D. Blandford, Stanford University,
Eric A. Brewer, University of California, Berkeley,
Daryl E. Chubin, American Association for the Advancement of Science,
Dixon Doll, DCM,
Shane Greenstein, Northwestern University,
Anita K. Jones, University of Virginia,
Robert E. Litan, The Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation,
Peter Miller, Vanderbilt HealthTech Laboratory,
David Moschella, Leading Edge Forum,
Linda R. Petzold, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Prabhakar Raghavan, Yahoo! Research,
Daniel A. Reed, Microsoft Research,
Anna Lee Saxenian, University of California, Berkeley,
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
Robert F. Sproull, Sun Microsystems,
Myron F. Uman, National Research Council (retired),
Andrew J. Viterbi, Viterbi Group, LLC, and
Irving Wladawsky-Berger, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center 
(retired).
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many con
-structive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse 
the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of 
 the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by 
Lewis M. Branscomb, University of California, San Diego. Appointed by 
the National Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that 
an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely 
with the authoring committee and the institution.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvContents
SUMMARY  
11 DEFINING
 THE
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOGY
  14
 R&D E
COSYSTEM
   Anatomy of the Ecosystem, 15
 Selected Key Elements of the Ecosystem, 17
 Relationships and Interactions Among Major Actors in the 
   
Ecosystem, 20
2 INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOGY
: T
HE
 E
SSENTIAL
  22
  ENABLER
 FOR
 THE
 I
NFORMATION
 S
OCIETY
 The Importance of Information Technology, 22
 Results and Impact of Information Technology R&D, 31
 Information Technology ResearchŠThe Boundless Frontier, 36
 Summary, 41
3 THE
 C
HANGING
 L
ANDSCAPE
 OF
 THE
 U.S. 
 42
 INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLOGY
 R&D E
COSYSTEM
:  1995-2007
 Shocks to the U.S. Ecosystem, 42
 The Evolution of Technology Platforms, 54
 The Evolution of Information Technology Industry Sectors, 68
 Infrastructure to Enable Multifaceted Innovation, 88
 Summary, 104
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi CONTENTS
4 A G
LOBALIZED
, D
YNAMIC
 I
NFORMATION
  106
  TECHNOLOGY
 R&D E
COSYSTEM
 The Globalization of Product and Labor Markets, 106
 The Globalization of Venture Capital, 116
 Frictions in the U.S. IT R&D Ecosystem, 122
 Industrial Research: Shifting Patterns of Corporate Information 
   
Technology R&D, 128
 The Funding and Organization of Information Technology 
   
R&D, 132
 Changes in the Relationship Between Employees and 
   
Employers, 145
5 FINDINGS
 AND
 R
ECOMMENDATIONS
 149
 Objective 1. Strengthen the Effectiveness and Impact of 
   
Federally Funded Information Technology Research, 150
 Objective 2. Remain the Strongest Generator of and Magnet 
   
for Technical Talent, 155
 Objective 3. Reduce Friction That Harms the Effectiveness of 
   
the U.S. Information Technology R&D Ecosystem, 160
 Objective 4. Ensure That the United States Has an 
  
Infrastructure That Can Enable U.S. Information 
  
Technology Users and Innovators to Lead the World, 163
 Conclusion, 166
APPENDIX
ES
A Biosketches of Committee Members and Staff
 169
B Workshop Agendas
 180
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
The U.S. 
information technology (IT)
1 research and de
velopment (R&D) 
ecosystem
 was the envy of the world in 1995. (See Box S.1 for a discussion 
of the term and its origins.) That ecosystemŠencompassing university 
and industrial research enterprises, emerging start-up companies and 
more mature technology companies, the industry that ˜nances innovative 
˜rms, and the regulatory environment and legal frameworksŠremains 
unquestionably the strongest such ecosystem in the world today. How
-ever, this position of leadership is not a birthright, and it is now under 
pressure. In recent years, the rapid globalization of markets, labor pools, 
and capital ˚ows has encouraged many strong national competitors. Dur
-ing the same period, national policies have not suf˜ciently buttressed the 
ecosystem or have generated side effects that have reduced its effective
-ness. This is particularly true of such areas as IT education, federal IT 
research funding, and the regulations that affect the corporate overhead 
and competitiveness of innovative IT companies. As a result, the U.S. 
position in IT leadership today has materially eroded compared with that 
of prior decades, and the nation risks ceding IT leadership to other nations 
within a generation unless the United States recommits itself to providing 
the resources needed to fuel U.S. IT innovation, to removing important 
roadblocks that reduce the ecosystem™s effectiveness in generating inno
-vation and the fruits of innovation, and to becoming a lead innovator 
1In this report, the term 
information technology
 is used broadly to include computing and 
communications components, equipment, software, and services. 
1Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
and user of IT. Globalization is a broad and sweeping phenomenon that 
cannot be easily stemmed, let alone contained. If embraced rather than 
resisted, it presents more opportunities than threats to the U.S. national IT 
R&D ecosystem. The Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in 
the Information Technology Research and Development Ecosystem was 
established under the auspices of the National Research Council™s Com
-puter Science and Telecommunications Board to examine these issues and 
make recommendations to strengthen the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem.
The period from 1995 to 2007 was marked by rapid and signi˜cant 
change in the U.S. and world economies. From the perspective of infor
-mation technology, the United States enjoyed a strong industrial base, an 
ability to create and leverage ever new technological advances, and an 
extraordinary system for creating world-class technology
 companiesŠall 
of which have been the envy of the world. Yet over this period, the IT 
industry became more globalized, especially with the dramatic rise of the 
economies of India and China, fueled in no small part by their develop
-ment of vibrant information technology industries. Ireland, Israel, Korea, 
Taiwan, Japan, and some Scandinavian countries have also
 developed 
BOX
 S.1
 Defining the Information Technology Research and 
Development Ecosystem
In this study, the term 
ecosystem
 is used in the sense ˜rst introduced by James 
F. Moore when he applied biological concepts to the world of business.
1 The con
-cept of a national innovation ecosystem was further developed and
 re˜ned by such 
scholars as Michael Porter and Scott Stern
2 and, more recently,
 Egils Milbergs.
3 The information technology (IT) research and development (R&D) ecosystem 
comprises IT researchers and scientists (and their institutions), IT businesses 
(both large and small), IT customers (consumers, businesses, governments), and 
powerful contextual forces such as regulatory and legal environments, the supply 
of ˜nancial and human and intellectual capital, the economic infrastructure, and 
the pressure of international competition, in the production of IT-based goods and 
services that create economic wealth, jobs, and societal bene˜ts. See Chapter 1 
in this report for further discussion of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem, its elements, 
and interactions among them.
1James F. Moore, ﬁPredators and Prey: A New Ecology of Competition,ﬂ 
Harvard Business 
Review
 71(3):75-86, May/June 1993.
2Michael Porter and Scott Stern, 
The New Challenge to America™s Prosperity: Findings from 
the Innovation Index,
 Council on Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., 1999.
3Egils Milbergs, 
Innovation Vital SignsŠFramework Report,
 Center for Accelerating Innova
-tion, Washington, D.C., 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
3strong niches within the increasingly globalized industry. Today, a product 
conceptualized and marketed in the United States might be designed to 
speci˜cations in Taiwan, and batteries or hard drives obtained from Japan 
might become parts in a product assembled in China. High-value soft
-ware and integrated circuits at the heart of a product might be designed 
and developed in the United States, fabricated in Taiwan, and incorpo
-rated into a product assembled from components supplied from around 
the world.
As the logical starting date for its study, the committee adopted 1995, 
a year that marked the emergence of the Internet as a commercial entity 
and the beginning of a period of turbulence in the IT sector. The technolo
-gies that developed around the Internet and the services that it enabled 
generated a period of euphoria characterized by exuberance, burgeoning 
enrollments in IT programs, rising valuations, the suspension of ˜scal 
prudence, and a stock market in the stratosphere between 1995 and 2000. 
The period of the late 1990s witnessed the unusual convergence of three 
trends: the move to deregulate many parts of the nation™s telecommunica
-tions system (with implications for network connectivity), the rise of the 
World Wide Web as a technology platform, and the commercialization of 
the Internet from what had been the
 government-funded, research-only 
National Science Foundation Network (NSFnet). These trends were most 
strongly embraced in the United States, and the U.S. IT ecosystem reaped 
many bene˜ts. 
The year 2000 is noted not only for the calendar problem faced by 
older computer systems but also for the realization that ﬁthe Emperor had 
no clothesﬂ with respect to the plans of many Internet-based businesses. 
Greed turned to fear as the stock market dropped, the technology-heavy 
NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quota
-tions) plummeted, and the boom turned to bust. Many of the ˚edgling 
˜rms born in the Internet euphoria failed. Both ˚edgling and established 
˜rms were driven to conserve cash in order to survive, and all sought 
lower-cost ways to continue to develop and manufacture their products. 
These events had the effect of accelerating the rise of Indian and Chinese 
IT industries. 
This period was also marked by the spectacular bankruptcies of 
highly visible companies such as Enron Corporation and WorldCom. 
The regulatory responseŠnotably the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
of 2002 (Public Law 107-204), commonly called SOXŠestablished new 
standards for U.S. public company boards, management, and accounting 
˜rms with respect to the visibility of and responsibility for the ˜nancial 
dealings within U.S. public companies. In the wake of the passage of SOX, 
these companies faced signi˜cant new requirements to implement and 
assess internal controls over ˜nancial reporting. For young IT companies 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
seeking to go public in the United States, SOX Section 404 (pertaining to 
the certi˜cation of the integrity of the ˜nancial control structure of a ˜rm) 
has proved disproportionately costly relative to the limited resources of 
these young companies. 
Companies™ emphasis on cost reduction over growth investments 
during this period fueled interest in outsourcing and offshoring.
2 Also, 
˜rms that might have sought capital in U.S. markets increasingly began 
to seek capital in overseas markets such as the London Alternative Invest
-ment Market (AIM), or sought to be acquired by larger companiesŠa 
trend that for some companies may have had as much to do with cost 
pressures as with the availability of capital in the United States.
These developments fueled a perception that jobs in the IT industry in 
the United States were being shed and that future prospects were bleak, 
even though this is not necessarily the case: according to a 2006 study of 
data from the Department of Commerce, there were more professional IT 
workers in the United States than ever before.
3The shock of September 11, 2001, refocused the nation on home
-land defense and affected research priorities, and national attention and 
resources were redirected to combating new threats. The funding for IT 
research at the nation™s universities underwent major shifts as the priori
-ties of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency shifted and time 
horizons shortened. In the meantime, industry increased its support for 
university research.
Yet starting in 2005, the pendulum began to swing back in a posi
-tive direction, with the emergence of new technologies such as multicore 
 
processors, new programming languages and environments, Internet data 
centers, and new applications that capture the phenomenon of social 
networking. Technology companies once again were able to launch suc
-cessful initial public offerings (IPOs), and funding for new ventures began 
returning to pre-boom levels. Enrollments in the IT ˜elds in U.S. universi
-ties started to rise again.
Today, there are signs that the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem is in recov
-ery. The continued global spread of IT and its overwhelmingly positive 
impacts on people™s daily lives are quite evident in the developed world 
and increasingly so in the developing world. The widespread use of 
2Outsourcing
 is the practice of purchasing work, formerly done in-house, from an outside 
vendor. 
Offshoring
 is the practice of moving work to developing nations.
3Association for Computing Machinery Job Migration Task Force, 
Globalization and Off
-shoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force,
 W. Aspray, F. Mayadas, and 
 M. Vardi, eds., Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2006.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
5 
cellular telephones (now nearly 3 billion subscribers worldwide
4) and the 
rising number of Internet users (more than 1 billion
5) illustrates the size 
and scope of these developments. Today, ﬁinformation at your ˜ngertipsﬂ 
is largely a reality, made possible by leading Web sites such as Google, 
Yahoo!, and Microsoft Live. And Amazon, eBay, and many others have 
changed the way we shop and swap.
Notable recent technology IPOs such as Google (2004), Riverbed 
Technology (2006), and VMware (2007) indicate that great technologies 
and solid businesses can still attract investors. Venture investment in 
information technology has rebounded to the pre-boom levels. Active 
consideration is being given to ways of easing such frictions in the U.S. 
IT ecosystem as the unintended consequences of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
for small companies, and there is serious discussion of patent and intel
-lectual property litigation reforms. Technology continues to evolve and 
even accelerate: radio-frequency identi˜cation, grid computing, dynamic 
Web pages, social networking and Web 2.0, open-source development, 
and the emerging shifts toward IT-enabled services represent exciting 
opportunities.
6Much remains to be accomplished in applying information technol
-ogy for the bene˜t of humankind, in terms of improved health, better 
education, and more social opportunity. As other industries are becoming 
increasingly IT-intensive, information technology is intimately entwined 
with virtually all economic activity.
Given this context, this study was charged with answering some fun
-damental questions. Has the nation™s ecosystem for IT R&D emerged as 
strong as it was before the boom and bust? Is it suf˜ciently healthy today 
to continue generating the innovative concepts, products, and services 
that have made the U.S. information technology industry the envy of the 
world?
The global landscape in 2007 is quite different from what it was in 
1995. The globalization of the world™s economy is a fact that cannot be 
ignored. India is a strong presence in software and services. China is the 
world™s manufacturer. Moreover, those nations represent fast-growing 
markets for information technology products, and both are likely to grow 
4International Telecommunication Union (ITU), ﬁWorldwide Mobile Cellular Subscribers 
to Reach 4 Billion Mark Late 2008,ﬂ Press release, ITU, Geneva, Switzerland, September 25, 
2008. 
5Computer Industry Almanac, ﬁWorldwide Internet Users Top 1.2 Billion in 2006,ﬂ Febru
-ary 12, 2007, available at http://www.c-i-a.com/pr0207.htm; accessed December 31, 2008. 
6As this report was being prepared for publication in late 2008, a new major shock to the 
ecosystem came in the form of a global credit crisis. The duration and implications of the 
crisis are unclear, but decreased access to capital (both equity and debt) for young IT com
-panies and decreased robustness of end-user markets are among the likely effects.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
their IT industries into economic powerhouses for the world, re˚ecting 
both deliberate government policies and the existence of strong, vibrant 
private-sector ˜rms, both domestic and foreign.
To thrive in this landscape, the United States should play to its 
strengths, notably its continued leadership in conceptualizing the idea-
intensive new concepts, products, and services that the rest of the world 
desires and where the greatest increments of value added are captured. 
Toward this end, it is necessary for the United States to have the best-
funded and most-creative research institutions; to develop and attract 
the best technical and entrepreneurial talent among its own people as 
well as those from around the world; to make its economy the world™s 
most attractive for forming new ventures and nurturing small, innovative 
˜rms; and to create the environment that will ensure the deployment of 
the most advanced technology infrastructures, applications, and services 
in the United States itself for the bene˜t of the nation™s people, institu
-tions, and ˜rms.
The ˜ndings and recommendations of the committee presented in 
the sections below are organized according to four broad objectives. The 
numbering of the objectives and the related numbering of the ˜ndings 
and recommendations re˚ect the logical ˚ow of the committee™s argu
-ments, not necessarily temporal or other priorities. The objectives are as 
follows:

Objecti
ve 
1. Strengthen the effectiveness and impact of federally 
funded information technology research.

Objecti
ve 
2. Remain the strongest generator of and magnet for tech
-nical talent.

Objecti
ve 
3. Reduce friction that harms the effectiveness of the U.S. 
information technology R&D ecosystem, while maintaining other impor
-tant political and economic objectives.

Objecti
ve 
4. Ensure that the United States has an infrastructure for 
communications, computing, applications, and services that can enable 
U.S. information technology users and innovators to lead the world.
These objectives are discussed in some detail below.
OB
JECTI
VE 1. 
STREN
GTHEN
 THE
 EFFECTI
VENESS
  AND
 IMPACT
 OF
 F
EDERALL
Y F
UNDED
 I
NFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY 
RESEARCH
Measures of ﬁresearchﬂ generally fail to distinguish between explor
-atory research that leads to wholly new technologies and applications, and 
work that yields advanced prototypes and proofs of concept. University 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
7research is focused largely on the former and industrial research concen
-trates on the latter, which means that much of the feedstock for long-term 
innovation is to be found in the nation™s universities. As a result, support 
for university education and research is essential to generating the stream 
of innovations that nourish the rest of the ecosystem. Measures to enhance 
the productivity of university research funding, as well as that of other 
R&D funding, would increase the payoff from these investments.
Information technology and its impact on the economy continue to 
grow in size and importance. According to estimates of the Bureau of Eco-
  
nomic Analysis, for 2006 the IT-intensive ﬁinformation-communications-
technology (ICT)-producingﬂ industries accounted for about 4 percent of 
the $13,247 billion U.S. economy but contributed more than 14 percent of 
real gross domestic product (GDP) growth.
7 (As a point of reference, fed
-eral funding in ˜scal year 2008 for computer sciences research was around 
$3 billion, less than 0.025 percent of GDP.
8) This substantial contribution to 
the economy re˚ects only a portion of the overall long-term bene˜ts from 
IT research investments. It is in the nation™s interest for these bene˜ts to 
continue to grow and accrue. 
Although the advances of information technology over the past 50 
years have been truly breathtaking, the ˜eld remains in its relative infancy, 
and continuing advances over the coming decades can be expected as long 
as the IT R&D ecosystem™s capacity to sustain innovation is preserved and 
enhanced. Among the impacts anticipated from advances in IT during the 
coming decades are, for example, safer, robotics-enhanced automobiles; a 
more scalable, manageable, secure, and robust ﬁnew Internetﬂ; enhanced 
information storage devices for personal use with improved search and 
retrieval capabilities; personalized and collaborative educational tools for 
tutoring and just-in-time learning; and personalized health monitoring.
Current decisions about how the nation should make federal invest
-mentsŠboth civilian and militaryŠin basic IT research do not seem to 
re˚ect the full impact of IT on society and the economy. For example, 
data collected for the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and 
Technology (PCAST) indicate that the United States lags behind Europe 
7Thomas F. Howells III and Kevin B. Barefoot, ﬁAnnual Industry Accounts: Advance 
Estimates for 2006,ﬂ 
Sur
vey of Current Business,
 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, 
D.C., May 2007, Tables A, B, 1, available at http://bea.gov/scb/pdf/2007/05%20May/0507_
 annual_industry_accounts.pdf; accessed August 28, 2007.
8Intersociety Working Group, 
AAAS Report XXXII: Research and De
velopment F
Y 2008,
 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Publication Number 07-1A, 
AAAS, Washington, D.C., 2007, Table I-9, p. 57, available at http://www.aaas.org/spp/rd/
rd08main.htm; accessed December 31, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
and Japan in civilian funding for IT R&D.
9 Regaining a lead position will 
require aggressive action, including ambitious targets for increased R&D 
investment. The European Union and ChinaŠthe latter a strong emerging 
competitorŠhave aggressive plans for strengthening their global posi
-tions in IT through substantial and increasing IT R&D investments. In its 
August 2007 report 
Leadership Under Challenge: Information Technology R&D 
in a Competiti
ve World,
 PCAST noted that the European Union is pursuing 
the goal of strengthening its position in information and communication 
technologies through increased cooperative R&D investment (roughly 
$12 billion) through 2013.
10
 The PCAST report also noted that by 2006, 
China™s overall R&D spending had exceeded that of Japan and amounted 
to about 1.4 percent of its GDPŠon a path to achieve a national goal of 
2.5 percent of GDP by 2020.
11
As China, Japan, and Europe aggressively increase their targeted IT 
R&D investment levels, it is appropriate and necessary for the United 
States to adjust its own federal IT R&D spending level correspondingly, 
just as individual businesses, following best practices, track their global 
competitors™ business models in order to avoid falling behind in global 
market share. Increased federal investment in IT research would re˚ect 
the importance of IT to the nation™s society and economy as a whole and 
would allow the United States to build and sustain the already large posi
-tive impact of IT on the economy.
The desirability of increased federal investment in IT R&D has also 
been recognized in the 2007 report of the National Academies, 
Rising 
Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future,
12
 and, to some extent, by provisions in the subsequently 
passed America COMPETES Act of 2007
 (Public Law 100-69).
13
 Moreover, 
in its August 2007 report,
 PCAST found an imbalance in the current fed
-eral R&D portfolio in that more long-term, large-scale, multidisciplinary 
R&D is needed. PCAST concluded that current interagency coordination 
processes for networking and IT R&D are inadequate for meeting antici
-9President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 
Leadership Under Challenge: 
Information Technology R&D in a Competiti
ve World, 
Executive Of˜ce of the President, Wash
-ington, D.C., August 2007, Table 4.3.
10
Ibid., pp. 13-14.
11
Ibid.
12National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Eco
-nomic Future, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, Actions B-1 and B-4.
13
The America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technol
-ogy, Education, and Science Act (America COMPETES Act) became Public Law 110-69 on 
August 9, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
9pated national needs and for maintaining U.S. leadership in an era of 
global competitiveness.
14
 A strategic reassessment of national R&D priorities is neededŠan 
analysis meriting the attention of ˜rst-tier scientists and engineers from 
academia, industry, and government. (According to a 2006 National 
 
Science Foundation study on R&D by funding sector, industry invest
-ments in R&D overall were more than double those of the federal govern
-ment.
15
) A strong focus on IT will be important because of the unique role 
of IT within science and engineering. 
Toward that end, a means of delivering to the highest levels of the 
U.S. government the best possible advice on the transformational power 
of information technology would help ensure that the nation invests at 
appropriate levels in IT research and that these investments are made as 
ef˜ciently and as effectively as possibleŠin part through improved coor
-dination for federal R&D investments. This advice could be provided in 
a number of ways, including the augmentation of the current presidential 
science and technology advisory structure, the establishment of a high-
level IT adviser to the President, or the reestablishment of an IT-speci˜c 
presidential advisory committee (such as the President™s Information 
Technology Advisory Committee, which operated from 1997 to 2005). 
Finding 1.1. A robust program of federally sponsored research and 
development in information technology (IT) is vital to the nation.
Finding 1.2. The level of federal investment in fundamental research 
in information technology continues to be inadequate.
Recommendation 1.1. As the federal government increases its 
investment in long-term basic research in the physical sciences, 
engineering, mathematics, and information sciences, it should care
-fully assess the level of investment in IT R&D, mindful of the 
economic return, societal impact, enablement of discovery across 
science and engineering, and other bene˜ts of additional effort in 
IT, and should ensure that appropriate advisory mechanisms are in 
place to guide investment within the IT R&D portfolio.
14
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 
Leadership Under Challenge: 
Information Technology R&D in a Competiti
ve World, 
Executive Of˜ce of the President, Wash
-ington, D.C., August 2007, pp. 14, 37.
15National Science Foundation, 
US R&D Continues to Rebound in 
200
4, NSF-06-306, January 
2006, available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf06306/; accessed December 
31, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
OB
JECTI
VE 2. 
REMAIN
 THE
 STRON
GEST
 G
ENERATOR
 OF
  AND
 MA
GNET
 FOR
 TECHNICAL
 TALENT
There is cause for concern that an undersized and insuf˜ciently pre
-pared workforce for the information technology industry will accelerate 
the migration of higher-value activities to other nations. This report does 
not address the entire array of technology-sector wage and job-security 
issues. However, without a workforce that is knowledgeable with respect 
to technology and that has suf˜cient numbers of highly trained workers, 
the United States will ˜nd it dif˜cult to retain the most innovation-driven 
parts of the IT industry. Despite the demand for such workers, the number 
of students specifying an intention to major in computing and informa
-tion sciences has dropped signi˜cantly in the past 6 years. The problem 
of declining enrollments in the computing disciplines (as compared with 
the projected demand) is compounded by the very low participation of 
underrepresented groups in IT.
16,17,18,19
The United States should rebuild the national IT educational pipe
-line, encouraging all quali˜ed students, regardless of race, gender, or 
ethnicity, to enter the discipline. Without sustained, ampli˜ed interven
-tion, the United States is unlikely to produce an educational pipeline 
yielding a revived and diverse IT workforce over the next 10 years. To 
achieve the needed revitalization, the United States should pursue a mul
-tipronged approach: it should improve technology education at all levels 
from kindergarten through grade 12; broaden participation in IT careers 
by women, people with disabilities, and certain minorities, including 
African-Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans; and retain for
-eign students who have received advanced degrees in IT. Immigrants 
have been especially signi˜cant in high-technology entrepreneurship; for 
at least one-quarter of the U.S. engineering and technology companies 
started between 1995 and 2005, mostly in software and innovation and in 
manufacturing-related services, at least one of the key founders was born 
outside the United States.
20
16
National Center for Education Statistics, 
Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System 
(200
5-0
6),
 U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C., May 1, 2007.
17
S. Zweben, ﬁRecord PhD Production Continues; Undergraduate Enrollments Turning the 
Corner,ﬂ 
Computing Research News 
19(3):7-22, 2007.
18
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
Current Population Sur
vey, Annual A
verages 
2000-
200
6, U.S. 
Department of Labor, Washington, D.C., 2006.
19
College Board, 
200
6 College Bound Seniors: Total Group Pro˜le Report,
 2006, available 
at http://www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2006/
 national-report.pdf; accessed July 2, 2007.
20
Vivek Wadhwa, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Geref˜, ﬁAmerica™s New Immi
-grant Entrepreneurs: Part 1,ﬂ Duke Science, Innovation, and Technology Paper No. 23, January 
4, 2007, p. 19, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=990152; accessed December 26, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
11
Finding 2.1. Rebuilding the computing education pipeline at all 
levels requires overcoming numerous obstacles, which in turn por
-tends signi˜cant challenges for the development of future U.S. IT 
workforce talent.
Finding 2.2. The participation in IT of women, people with disabili
-ties, and certain minorities, including African-Americans, Hispan
-ics, and Native Americans, is especially low and is declining. This 
low level of participation will affect the ability of the United States 
to meet its workforce needs and place it at a competitive disadvan
-tage by not allowing it to capitalize on the innovative thinking of 
half of its population. 
Recommendation 2.1. To build the skilled workforce that it will 
need to retain high-value IT industries, the United States should 
invest more in education and outreach initiatives to nurture and 
increase its IT talent pool.
Finding 2.3. Although some IT professional jobs will be offshored, 
there are more IT jobs in the United States than at any time during 
the dot-com boom, even in the face of corporate offshoring trends.
Recommendation 2.2. The United States should increase the avail
-ability and facilitate the issuance of work and residency visas to 
foreign students who graduate with advanced IT degrees from U.S. 
educational institutions.
OB
JECTI
VE 3. 
REDUCE
 FRICTION
 THAT
 HARMS
 THE
 EFFECTI
VENESS
 OF
 THE
 U.S. I
NFORMATION
  TECHNOLO
GY R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
The committee is concerned that such factors as intellectual property 
litigation and corporate governance regulations have become sources of 
increased friction in the conduct of business in the United States and that 
such burdens can have the effect of making other countries more attrac
-tive places to establish the small, innovative companies that are an essen
-tial component of the ecosystem. The committee recognizes that these 
issues are not simpleŠfor example, in the case of corporate governance, 
the dampening effects of increased regulation have to be weighed against 
the bene˜ts of restoring and maintaining public con˜dence in equity mar
-kets. But the committee believes that it is vital to keep the United States 
attractive for new venture formation and to sustain the nation™s unrivaled 
ability to transform innovative new concepts into category-de˜ning prod
-Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
ucts and services that the world desires; the committee emphasizes that 
in considering new measures or reforms in such areas as corporate gov
-ernance or intellectual property litigation, the potential impacts on the IT 
R&D ecosystem should be heavily weighed.
Finding 3.1. Fewer young, innovative IT companies are gaining 
access to U.S. public equity markets.
Recommendation 3.1. Congress and federal agencies such as the 
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Patent and Trade
-mark Of˜ce should consider the impact of both current and pro
-posed policies and regulations on the IT ecosystemŠand especially 
on young, innovative IT businessesŠand consider measures to 
mitigate these where appropriate.
OB
JECTI
VE 4. 
ENSURE
 THAT
 THE
 UNITED
 STATES
 HAS
  THE
 INFRASTRUCTURE
 THAT
 ENABLES
 U.S. 
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY 
USERS
 AND
  INNO
VATORS
 TO
 LEAD
 THE
 WORLD
The United States has long enjoyed the position of being the largest 
market for IT; global demographics and relative growth rates suggest 
that this advantage is unlikely to endure. Fortunately, although a healthy 
domestic IT market is an important element of a healthy domestic eco
-system, market size is not the only factor in leadership. The environ
-ment fostered by leading-edge users of technologyŠincluding those who 
can leverage research, innovate, and create additional value
Šcreates the 
essential context for technology™s next wave and its effective applica
-tion. In such an environment, all sectors of society (including consumers, 
businesses, and governments) exploit and make the best use of advanced 
information technology. The committee is concerned that the United 
States has lost its leadership in the use of information technology. In par
-ticular, the U.S. broadband infrastructure is not as advanced or as widely 
deployed as that in many other countries. Should this situation persist 
into the future, the United States will no longer be the nation in which 
the most innovative, most advanced technology and highest value-added 
products and services are conceptualized and developed. 
Moreover, in addition to broadly fostering research and commer
-cial innovation, government-sponsored R&D can help meet particular 
government demands. Although the government is no longer a lead IT 
user across the board, it continues to have an appropriate leadership role 
where federal agencies™ requirements are particular to their missions and 
commercial analogues are scarce or nonexistent.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAR
Y 
13
Finding 4.1. The most dynamic IT sector is likely to be in the coun
-try with the most demanding IT customers and consumers. 
Finding 4.2. In terms of nationwide availability, use, and speed of 
broadband, the United StatesŠthe inventor of broadband technol
-ogyŠhas been losing ground compared with other nations. 
Recommendation 4.1. The United States should establish an ambi
-tious target for regaining and holding a decisive lead in the broad 
deployment of affordable gigabit broadband services. Federal and 
state regulators should explore models and approaches that reduce 
regulatory and jurisdictional bottlenecks and should increase incen
-tives for investment in these services. 
Recommendation 4.2. 
Government (federal, state, and local) should 
foster commercial innovation and itself make strategic investments 
in IT R&D and deployment so that the United States can retain 
a global lead position in areas where it has particular mission 
requirements.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1De˜ning the Information Technology 
R&D Ecosystem
In this study, the term 
ecosystem
 is used in the sense ˜rst introduced 
by James F. Moore when he applied biological concepts to the world of 
business. Referring to a business ecosystem, Moore wrote that it isŠ
an economic community supported by a foundation of interacting or
-ganizations and individualsŠthe organisms of the business world. This 
economic community produces goods and services of value to custom
-ers, who are themselves members of the ecosystem.
1The concept of a national innovation ecosystem was further devel
-oped and re˜ned by such scholars as Michael Porter and Scott Stern
2 and, 
more recently, Egils Milbergs.
3 This report focuses on the complex interre
-lationships among information technology (IT)
4 researchers and scientists 
(and their institutions), IT businesses (both large and small), IT custom
-ers (consumers, businesses, governments), and the powerful contextual 
forces such as regulatory and legal environments, the supply of ˜nancial 
and human and intellectual capital, the economic infrastructure, and the 
1James F. Moore, ﬁPredators and Prey: A New Ecology of Competition,ﬂ 
Har
vard Business 
Re
view
 71(3):75-86, May/June 1993.
2Michael Porter and Scott Stern, 
The New Challenge to America™s Prosperity: Findings from the 
Inno
vation Index,
 Council on Competitiveness, Washington D.C., 1999.
3Egils Milbergs, 
Inno
vation Vital SignsŠFramework Report,
 Center for Accelerating Innova
-tion, Washington, D.C., 2007.
4In this report, the term 
information technology
 is used broadly to include computing and 
communications components, equipment, software, and services. 
14
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEFINING
 THE INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&
D ECOS
YSTEM
 15
pressure of international competition, in the production of IT-based goods 
and services that create economic wealth, jobs, and societal bene˜ts.
A healthy and vibrant IT R&D ecosystem is characterized by the 
following:

The quality and quantity of intellectual property that it generates 
over time,

The economic value of the businesses that it creates,

The richness of the goods and services that it produces or enables,

The number and quality of the jobs that it creates,

Its ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions, and

Its ability to collaborate with and compete against other IT R&D 
ecosystems around the globe.
Precise measurements along these various dimensions are not always 
practical or available, but a detailed examination of each reveals enough 
information to allow an educated opinion to be formed about the relative 
health of the U.S. national IT R&D ecosystem today, relative to the past, 
relative to other nations, and relative to this nation™s own potential.
ANATOM
Y 
OF
 THE
 E
COS
YSTEM
The national IT R&D ecosystem is complex, involving many actors 
and many types of relationships. When well tuned, it produces industry-
leading innovative products and services that bene˜t virtually every 
aspect of our society and economy and generates returns that substan
-tially justify the enormous ˜nancial risks incurred in the early stages of a 
technology cycle. To be sure, risks and returns are not evenly distributed. 
Some ˜rms that incur large costs for technology and market exploration 
and make large investments in infrastructure will succeed (and reap large 
returns); others will not. Some incumbents will face dislocation costs as 
new entrants and new products succeed. 
The early to mid-1990sŠthe years immediately preceding the period 
of interest (1995 to 2007) for this reportŠwas a time of economic expan
-sion led by IT-induced productivity enhancement when the U.S. IT R&D 
ecosystem was broadly perceived to be very healthy and competitive. To 
understand how parts of this system could drift out of kilter and how 
these local disequilibria could impact the output of the system as a whole, 
one must examine the anatomy of this ecosystem in terms of some of its 
key elements and relationships, as shown in Figure 1.1.
As Figure 1.1 shows, the ecosystem is populated with a number of 
actors, ranging from individuals (for example, students and
 researchers), 
to institutions (such as industrial and government laboratories), to 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
Figure 
1-
1.
epslandscape
Con
te
xt
and 
Pu
blic
Po
licy
Pe
rf
orme
rs
 Resource
sFu
ndin
gan
dCapi
tal 
Flow
sTe
chnology
,Applica
tions,
and User
sInfrastruct
ur
ean
dPl
at
fo
rm
sConsumer
, Se
rv
ic
e, 
Commercial
, In
dustrial
Lo
ca
l, 
Na
tional
, Inte
rn
at
ional
Te
chnology
Pu
sh
Applic
at
ions
Pu
ll
Immigratio
nHealth
 Care
Pe
nsions
R&
D Ta
xCredit
sIntelle
ct
ua
lPr
op
er
ty
Financ
ia
lAc
coun
ting
Rules an
dRegulation
sTr
ad
eBroadban
dMobil
eOp
en
Communi
ty
De
ve
lopmen
tTe
chnology
Pl
at
fo
rm
sResear
ch
Computin
gan
d Ne
tw
orks
Univ
er
sities
Ve
nture an
dAnge
l Capital
Indust
ry
Go
ve
rnment
Industrial an
dGo
ve
rnment
Labo
ratories
Smal
l, 
Medium
,La
rg
e Te
chnology
Fir
ms
K-
12
Fore
ig
nStudents
Fore
ig
nWo
rk
er
sGo
ve
rnment
an
d In
dust
ry
Po
licies
 fo
rR&
DFu
ndin
gMark
et
sPr
oduct De
ve
lopmen
tBasic Rese
ar
ch
Applied Rese
ar
ch
Ad
va
nced Concep
tand Human FIGURE
 1.1
 Some key elements and relationships in the U.S. information technology research and development (R&D) ecosystem.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEFINING
 THE INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&
D ECOS
YSTEM
 17
 
governments. Several elements that are key to the committee™s assess
-ment of the impacts of changes on the IT R&D ecosystem are described 
in the following section.
SELECTED
 K
EY E
LEMENTS
 OF
 THE
 ECOS
YSTEM
Research Universities
U.S. research universities carry out the majority of the fundamental 
and advanced IT research work in this country. They have been and con
-tinue to be one of the primary competitive assets in the IT R&D ecosystem. 
They attract the best research talent from around the world, including the 
most talented domestic and foreign students and faculty, and receive 
an increasing amount of attention and sponsorship from foreign ˜rms. 
The largest and most signi˜cant source of research funding for research 
universities remains the federal government, through its key grant-mak
-ing agencies (e.g., those agencies that participate in the Networking and 
Information Technology Research and Development program).
K-12 Schools, Colleges, and Universities
U.S. schools and colleges are the primary source of human resources 
for the nation™s research universities. The quality of middle and high 
school science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education is 
a primary determinant of the strength and motivation of the cohorts of 
students that will attend U.S. universities in years to come.
5 Innovative Start-up Firms
The entrepreneurial culture that characterizes much of American heri
-tage and values has found fertile ground in the ˜eld of IT. The United 
States is home to the largest number of and most talented IT start-up 
˜rms, concentrated primarily in clusters such as in Silicon Valley and a 
number of other areas. These start-up ˜rms are a major source of innova
-tion and national competitiveness in the ˜eld of IT. In recent years, ˜rms 
such as Google and Facebook have risen to prominence and wield signi˜
-cant in˚uence in the Internet industry.
5Grades 5 through 8 are crucial years for cultivating or discouraging students™ inter
-est in STEM careers. Students begin losing enthusiasm for STEM ˜elds in elementary 
and middle school. See, for example: J. Jovanovic and S.S. King, ﬁBoys and Girls in the 
 
Performance-Based Science Classroom: Who™s Doing the Performing?ﬂ 
American Educational 
Research Journal
 35(3):477-496, Autumn 1998; and T.A. Green˜eld, ﬁGender, Ethnicity, Science 
Achievement, and Attitudes,ﬂ 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching
 33(8):901-933, 1996.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
A trend of immigrant-led high-technology entrepreneurship that was 
˜rst documented for Silicon Valley has spread nationwide: for at least 
one-quarter of the U.S. engineering and technology companies started 
between 1995 and 2005, at least one of the key founders was born outside 
the United States. Almost 80 percent of these immigrant-founded com
-panies were in two industry ˜elds: in software and innovation and in 
manufacturing-related services.
6Medium-Size and Large Corporations
Successful start-up ˜rms can rapidly grow into medium-size and 
large corporations. Historically, examples of IT start-ups that have become 
industry leaders include Microsoft Corporation, which is a leader in per
-sonal computer (PC) software; Intel Corporation, a leader in semicon
-ductors; Dell, in PCs and peripherals; Cisco Systems, in networking and 
communications technologies; and Oracle, in database and enterprise 
software systems. Sometimes start-ups grow into very large companies 
that later on must adapt to changing markets and enter new ones. IT com
-panies that have navigated this path include Hewlett-Packard
 Company, 
which adapted to become a leader in PC hardware, imaging, and print
-ing; and International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), which now 
focuses on enterprise computing and services. Together, in late 2007, the 
˜rms listed in this paragraph had a market capitalization in excess of 
$1 trillion and employed almost 900,000 people.
7 Note that although only 
a few corporations participate directly in the IT industry by producing or 
selling IT components or solutions, virtually every corporation today uses 
IT products and services to deliver its own goods and services into the 
marketplace and contributes its own experience and innovation to the IT 
industry and the ecosystem in which it participates.
End Markets
One of the reasons why most IT ˜rms need to have a strong presence 
in the United States is that this country (still) represents the largest IT 
market in the world. Industry sectors such as ˜nancial services, where 
the United States is particularly strong, are heavily dependent on the 
quality and performance of their IT infrastructure and tend to be early 
6Vivek Wadhwa, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Geref˜, ﬁAmerica™s New Im
-migrant Entrepreneurs: Part 1,ﬂ Duke Science, Innovation, and Technology Paper No. 23, 
January 4, 2007, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=990152; accessed December 26, 2007. 
7Together, the ˜rms listed in this paragraph had 894,295 full-time employees worldwide 
and a total market capitalization of $1.09 trillion on September 27, 2007, according to infor
-mation compiled from NASDAQ and New York Stock Exchange ˜nancial data, available at 
Yahoo! Financial data, http://˜nance.yahoo.com; accessed October 28, 2008. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEFINING
 THE INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&
D ECOS
YSTEM
 19
adopters of new technologies. More recently, however, consumer markets, 
particularly in such segments as digital entertainment and communica
-tions, have become important IT markets. As the shift in the importance 
of consumer markets continues, the leadership of U.S. IT end markets 
may be challenged because of demographic considerationsŠfor example, 
there are other nations whose markets are as large as those in the United 
StatesŠor because of niche specializations in certain markets as in the 
case of computer games produced in Korea. 
Private Capital
Start-up companies tend to receive their initial funding from private-
capital sources such as angel investors (af˚uent individuals who invest 
their own funds in start-ups) and venture capital. The U.S. venture capi
-tal industry has led the world in the magnitude of the funds raised and 
deployed, as well as in the number of successful ˜rms that it has enabled 
and the ˜nancial returns that it has generated for its investors. 
In recent years, private equity ˜rms have become more prominent in 
acquiring and recapitalizing medium-size and large IT corporations. These 
new owners have a natural focus on economic returns rather than on long-
standing ties to particular sets of employees or certain locations. Thus, the 
increased prominence of private equity capital may tend to increase the 
movement of IT jobs and capabilities overseas, at least in the short term, in 
order to increase pro˜ts, reduce costs, or seek additional markets. 
A recent empirical study prepared by the World Economic Forum 
on the impact of private equity investment on the behaviors of ˜rms 
post-transaction considered such factors as the impact on investment in 
innovation and employment. It found that ˜rms that undergo a buyout 
pursue inventions that are more economically important (as measured 
by patent citations). Increased patent citation rates indicate that inno
-vation becomes more targeted post-buyout and that patent portfolios 
become more focused on core technologies. The same study found that 
the observed impact of private equity on employment was mixed, but pri
-vate equity was seen to speed up the pace of acquisitions and divestitures: 
ﬁprivate equity groups act as catalysts for change in the economy.ﬂ
8 8Josh Lerner and Anuradha Gurung, ﬁExecutive Summary,ﬂ 
The
 Global Economic
 Impact 
of Pri
vate Equity Report 
2008
, World Economic Forum, p. xi; available at http://www.
weforum.org/pdf/cgi/pe/Executive_Summary.pdf; accessed April 16, 2008. Companies 
tended to have workforce cuts in the years immediately before and after a buyout trans
-action, as well as adding some new jobs afterward, for a net decrease overall. The study 
did not look at jobs created in or transferred to other countries. The entire report is avail
-able at http://www.weforum.org/en/media/Latest%20Press%20Releases/PrivateEquity_
 
PressRelease;
 accessed April 16, 2008. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Public Capital
The traditional and ideal trajectory of a successful IT start-up ˜rm 
includes the milestone of a public stock offering along the way. The U.S. 
stock markets have attracted the largest numbers of IT start-up initial 
public offerings. The liquidity and vitality of U.S. markets have helped 
fast-growing IT ˜rms gain access to the ˜nancial capital that they require 
to fund their growth. In recent years, other markets have developed that 
offer access to public capital (both debt and equity) on competitive terms, 
in both Europe and Asia. These markets have improved, but they are not 
yet comparable to the NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Deal
-ers Automated Quotations) in depth, breadth, or quality. 
Regulatory and Legislative Bodies
The U.S. regulatory and legislative environments have a signi˜cant 
in˚uence on the quality and transparency that IT ˜rms demonstrate, as 
well as on the administrative overhead and other sources of friction that 
they must deal with in their operations. Enlightened regulations and laws 
can be a major source of national competitive advantage when their rigor 
supports the quality of the market and provides a stable rule of law for 
contracts and investments. Conversely, the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem can 
be hampered by regulations and laws that have not kept pace with tech
-nological advances or whose bene˜ts do not outweigh the costs. There 
is a balance to be struck between disclosure, honesty, and transparency 
that can increase investor con˜dence on the one hand and, on the other, 
regulatory burdens that can retard markets and chill the ˚ow of capital 
to worthy ˜rms.
Global Context
The U.S. IT R&D ecosystem has been materially transformed in 
recent years by globalization. Markets, ˜nancial ˚ows, access to human 
resources, and intellectual property are now global phenomena. As a 
result, an assessment of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem and measures taken 
to strengthen it must re˚ect the ecosystem™s interactions with those of 
other nations.
RELATIONSHIPS
 AND
 I
NTERACTIONS
 AMON
G 
MA
JOR
 ACTORS
 IN
 THE
 ECOS
YSTEM
The complexity of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem precludes exhaustively 
enumerating (or drawing) the relationships and interactions among the 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEFINING
 THE INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&
D ECOS
YSTEM
 21
major actors shown in Figure 1.1. The most important of these for the 
purposes of this study are the following: 

A large fraction of the graduate students recruited and graduated 
by U.S. research universities come from overseas.

The funding for IT research in U.S. research universities comes pri
-marily from the federal government and secondarily from private sources, 
of which foreign corporations represent a small but growing percentage.

IT companies (small, medium-size, and large) must access global 
markets to design, manufacture, and sell their products and services. A 
growing percentage of employment in IT research and development is 
overseas for a variety of reasons, including market access, access to
 cutting-
edge knowledge and consumers, and lower-cost trained personnel. 

The creation of intellectual property in the ˜eldŠwhether formally 
protected or notŠis the primary basis on which IT ˜rms get started and 
continue to grow and compete over time. The ˚ow of entrepreneurial tal
-ent out of universities into young start-up ˜rms is particularly vital in the 
U.S. IT R&D ecosystem. The collaboration between U.S. universities and 
small, medium-size, and large IT ˜rms enables the rapid productization 
and commercialization of the most promising discoveries. It is critical that 
the ability to connect intellectual property to markets be kept vibrant and 
ef˜cient.

Access to ˜nancial capital at different stages of growth is one of the 
important characteristics of the U.S. market that has made it competitive 
since the dawn of the IT industry. These various capital ˚ows are now far 
more complex and far more global. 
These topics are discussed in the following chapters. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Information Technology: The Essential 
Enabler for the Information Society
THE
 I
MPORTANCE
 OF
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY
The economic contributions of information technology (IT) are not in 
question. Put simply, IT is the enabling technology of the 21st century. The 
effective use of IT is now recognized as a major component of economic 
growth and innovation in other areas of society and the economy. As the 
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology acknowl
-edged in its 2007 assessment of the federal networking and IT research 
and development (R&D) program: 
IT leadership is essential to U.S. economic prosperity, security, and qual
-ity of life. . . . It is dif˜cult to overstate the contribution of [networking 
and information technology] to America™s security, economy, and qual
-ity of life. . . . The cumulative effect of these technologies on life in the 
United States and around the world has been profound and bene˜cial.
1Since 1995, the networking and information technology industries 
have accounted for 25 percent of U.S. economic growth, measured as 
real change in gross domestic product (GDP), despite representing only 
3 percent of GDP.
21President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 
Leadership Under Challenge: 
Information Technology R&D in a Competiti
ve World, 
Executive Of˜ce of the President, Wash
-ington, D.C., August 2007, pp. 1, 5. 
2Ibid., p. 9, citing National Research Council,
 Enhancing Producti
vity Growth in the In
-formation Age: Measuring and Sustaining the New Economy,
 The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2007. 
22
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  23
Advances in IT and its effective use can be expected to continue to 
drive economic and social gains and are key to future innovation and 
growth. IT is diffused throughout the economy: it is critical to or sup
-ports production in all sectors. IT underpins all ˜elds of scienti˜c and 
engineering endeavorŠfrom basic and applied research to product devel
-opment, sales, and distribution (see also the discussion of pervasive IT in 
Chapter 3).
The Economic Case: The Contributions 
 of IT to the Economy
Although economists had debated the exact nature of its impact, the 
permanent, positive contribution of IT to economic output and growth is 
now unquestioned.
3 Previous dif˜culties in capturing the impact of IT in 
the national income and product accounts had been expressed in Nobel 
Prize-winning economist Robert M. Solow™s often-quoted statement in 
1987: ﬁYou can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity 
statistics.ﬂ
4 In economics circles, this was known as the Solow productiv
-ity paradox. However, improvements in how the national income and 
product accounts are constructed have convincingly revealed IT™s funda
-mental contributions to output and growth.
5 The paradox is resolved. 
In the past decade, worker productivity increased dramatically owing 
to investments in information technology and, perhaps more importantly, 
to the effective use of that technology by ˜rms.
6 Jorgenson points out 
that ﬁthe development and deployment of Information Technology is the 
3For a resolution to the economic debate about whether the effect of IT was a positive but 
temporary ﬁshockﬂ to the economy or a permanent improvement, see Dale W. Jorgenson, 
ﬁInformation Technology and the U.S. Economyﬂ (President™s Address to the American 
Economic Association, January 6, 2001), 
American Economic Re
view
 91(1):1-32, March 2001. 
See also the statement by Alan Greenspan, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, June 14, 1999: ﬁIn
-novations in information technologyŠso-called ITŠhave begun to alter the manner in 
which we do business and create value, often in ways that were not readily foreseeable even 
˜ve years ago.ﬂ See 
http://˜ndarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m4126/is_8_85/ai_5567197
3; accessed March 24, 2008.
4 Robert M. Solow, ﬁWe Had Better Watch Out,ﬂ 
New 
York Re
view of Books
, July 12, 1987.
5 These improvements began with a revision in 1999 that started treating software expendi
-tures as an investment rather than as an expense to be written off against current income. See 
Dale W. Jorgenson, Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh, 
Information Technology and the American 
Growth Resurgence,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2005. 
6Jason Dedrick, Vijay Gurbaxani, and Kenneth Kraemer, ﬁInformation Technology and 
Economic Performance: A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence,ﬂ 
ACM Computing 
Sur
veys
 35(1):1-28, March 2003.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
foundation of the American growth resurgence.ﬂ
7 His capital-investment/
capital-services analysis starts with the technology-driven pattern of rela
-tive decreases in quality-adjusted semiconductor prices over time. The 
precipitous fall in semiconductor prices ˚ows through to falling prices for 
computers, software, communications equipment, and IT services, which 
in turn reduce the cost of all kinds of sophisticated products, from aircraft 
to automobiles. Jorgenson also notes the pervasive nature of IT and that 
the impacts of IT investments are broadly felt throughout the economy, 
ﬁaltering product markets and business organizations.ﬂ
8Yet the impact of information technology goes well beyond its yield
-ing of cost reductions in traditional products and productivity gains in 
the services sector. IT intersects with other sectors and disciplines and is 
no longer so self-contained: it is pervasive. According to Apte and Nath, 
ﬁinformation workersﬂ now account for as much as 70 percent of the 
U.S. labor force and contribute over 60 percent of the total value added 
in the U.S. economy.
9 Information ﬁprocessingﬂ by workers represents a 
growing component of the GDP, and it is predicated upon information 
technology. 
For example, ˜nancial analysts use search engines and databases 
to collect information about investments, retrieve it for analysis with 
spreadsheets and other modeling tools, and communicate their results to 
other workers by way of electronic mail and Web sites. At the ˜rm level, 
integrated supply chain management allows greater communication and 
coordination between customers and their suppliers, enabling the former 
to ˜nd the lowest-cost supplies subject to delivery constraints, reduce 
their inventories, and increase their overall production ef˜ciency. These 
capabilities yield direct bene˜ts to consumers, and not simply in terms of 
reduced costs. For example, it is now possible for a consumer to purchase 
a custom-built vehicle with speci˜ed color, trim, and other options, and 
to track its progress through production to dealer delivery.
Brynjolfsson offers an interesting comparison between two major 
retailers in their use of IT.
10
 By investing in more IT per worker, one of 
these competitors has also enabled a more decentralized decision-making 
process, pushing purchasing decisions to lower-level workers. This com
-7Dale W. Jorgensen, ﬁInformation Technology and the U.S. Economy,ﬂ 
American Economic 
Re
view
 91(1):1-32, March 2001.
8Ibid.
9U. Apte and H. Nath, ﬁSize, Structure, and Growth of the U.S. Economy,ﬂ Center for Man
-agement in the Information Economy, Business and Information Technology (BIT) Working 
Paper, December 2004, available at http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/documents/areas/ctr/
bit/ApteNath.pdf; accessed October 28, 2008.
10
Erik Brynjolfsson, ﬁThe IT Productivity GAP,ﬂ 
Optimize,
 Issue 21, July 2003, available at 
http://ebusiness.mit.edu/erik/Optimize/pr_roi.html; accessed October 28, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  25
bination of technology and business process has contributed to higher 
levels of productivity and business value for that ˜rm.
Brynjolfsson also observes that from 1995 to 2005, productivity in the 
U.S. economy grew by more than 3 percent per year, essentially twice 
the rate of the preceding 20 years. This growth rate persisted through 
the recession of the latter part of this period, when productivity grew 
at the impressiveŠand counterintuitiveŠrate of 4.8 percent. Brynjolfs
-son attributes this remarkable productivity growth to the investments 
in ever-improving information technology by ˜rms.
11
 Furthermore, it is 
not simply the size of the IT investment, but the way that the technology 
is used to affect the organization of work that is important for realizing 
productivity increases. One dollar spent on IT equipment yields $9 in 
intangible assets. For example, computerized business processes yield 
more and better data that in turn can be mined for analysis and to support 
decision making. An example is online customer support that yields valu
-able information about customer needs that in turn can lead to insights 
into the kinds of new products to develop.
Thus, not only does IT have an impact on the economy in terms of 
the value of information technology goods sold, but it has a multiplicative 
effect on the ef˜ciency and quality of economic activity. And as Brynjolfs
-son also argues, the effective use of IT places high demands on the capa
-bilities of the workforce. There is a strong correlation between those ˜rms 
that are the most productive users of IT and those that place a high value 
on skilled workers, managers, and professionals, that is, on human capi
-tal.
12
 Data from the U.S. Department of Labor™s Bureau of Labor Statistics 
consistently rank information technology professions such as software 
engineer and systems administrator among those for which employment 
is projected to grow the fastest from 2006 to 2016.
13
Undoubtedly IT will continue to be a growing contributor to GDP, but 
it takes time to reap its bene˜ts in terms of products and organizations. 
Brynjolfsson points out that investment in IT by U.S. ˜rms fell during the 
period of the recession of the early 2000s; this decline has implications for 
the nation™s ability to sustain productivity growth into the future. 
The bene˜ts of IT are not evenly distributed. For example, inequal
-ity among workers will increase as some kinds of work are replaced by 
machines and virtually all occupations demand enhanced information 
skills. Economic turbulence will grow as industries undergo fundamental 
11
Ibid.
12
Ibid.
13
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
Occupational Outlook 
Handbook: 
Tomorrow™s Jobs,
 Washington, D.C., available at http://www.bls.gov/oco/oco2003.htm; ac
-cessed August 21, 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
changes in response to new information technologies. For example, as new 
entrants such as localized classi˜ed-advertisement Web sites, numerous 
national and local job-search and real estate Web sites, and online auctions 
have displaced traditional newspaper classi˜ed advertising, newspapers 
have sought new revenue sources, including their own online offerings. 
Information technology may be the strategic differentiator that allows 
some ˜rms and industries to survive while others inexorably decline.
14
 IT allows greater ef˜ciency and sparks creative destruction in cer
-tain sectors (as, for example, the replacement of classi˜ed advertising by 
craigslist, a set of Web sites containing classi˜ed advertisements). Even 
more important, however, is that IT has created entirely new products and 
markets that have kept the U.S. economy growing. Much of this growth 
was achieved through an increase in exports as the impact of IT became 
felt globally and U.S. companies (in the IT sector in particular) took 
advantage of new international market opportunities, both in emerging 
and developed economies around the globe.
Information Technology, Services, and the Post-Scienti˜c Society
Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh found that during the latter half of the 20th 
century, more than 80 percent of U.S. economic growth was driven by 
input growthŠthat is, investments in capital and human capital. Growth 
in total factor productivity (a measure that includes the contribution 
of purchased inputsŠnamely, goods and servicesŠas well as capital 
and labor inputs) accounted for only about 20 percent of U.S. economic 
growth.
15
 However, during the 1995-2000 boom period, labor productivity 
growth accelerated; even as IT investments slowed after 2000, labor pro
-ductivity growth continued to increase even more rapidly through 2005.
16
 Jorgenson and coauthors traced this acceleration in labor productivity 
growth to a sharp rise in productivity growth in IT-intensive industries, 
principally in services, ˜nding that the locus of innovation had shifted 
from IT-producing industries in manufacturing to IT-using industries in 
trade and services.
17
 The committee that authored the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) 
14
Erik Brynjolfsson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ﬁInformation Technology and 
the Economy: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?,ﬂ workshop presentation to 
the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
15
Dale W. Jorgenson, Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh, 
Information Technology and the Ameri
-can Growth Resurgence, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2005. 
16
Ibid.
17
Dale W. Jorgenson, Mun S. Ho, Jon D. Samuels, and Kevin J. Stiroh, ﬁIndustry Origins of 
the American Productivity Resurgence,ﬂ 
Economic Systems Research 
19(3):229-252, September 
2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  27
2007 report 
Enhancing Producti
vity Growth in the Information Age: Measuring 
and Sustaining the New Economy
 found that 
new information technologies have a broad and positive impact on U.S. 
productivity growth through industries that produce new information 
technologies and the many more that apply them. New IT applications 
are also contributing to enhanced workplace productivity as a wide va
-riety of ˜rms adapt to changes in information ˚ows and take advantage 
of new organizational structures made possible by these innovations. .
 . . These developments are changing the structure of ˜rms, creating more 
innovative and more agile enterprises, with positive indirect and long-
term implications for productivity growth. .
 . .18
That committee also identi˜ed IT as foundational for the structural change 
to a more services-based economy: 
A structural change most associated with the New Economy today is 
the transformation of the Internet from a communication [medium] to a 
platform for service delivery. .
 . . This has contributed to the remarkable 
growth of the U.S. service economy, as companies like Google and eBay 
increasingly exploit information services in new ways. As new business 
models, enabled by the Web, continue to emerge, they will contribute to 
sustaining the productivity growth of U.S. economy.
19
Another interpretation of this ﬁNew Economyﬂ structural change is 
that the country is moving to a ﬁpost-scienti˜cﬂ society. Christopher T. 
Hill describes the United States during the last half of the 20th
 century 
as (broadly speaking) a ﬁscienti˜cﬂ society, in which deep understanding 
of scienti˜c principles was sought as the basis for technological progress. 
During this period, U.S. leadership in the scienti˜c and technological 
underpinnings and applications of IT led to U.S. economic leadership in 
IT and contributed to productivity growth and market development in 
other sectors as well. But now, he argues, the United States may be well 
on its way to being a
 post-
scienti˜c society, in which market leadership 
and the creation of wealth depend less on scienti˜c and technological 
fundamentals and more on integrating these creatively with a knowledge 
of organizations, business processes, and markets: 
In the post-scienti˜c society, the creation of wealth and jobs based on 
innovation and new ideas will tend to draw less on the natural sciences 
and engineering and more on the organizational and social sciences, on 
the arts, on new business processes, and on meeting consumer needs 
based on niche production of specialized products and services in which 
18
National Research Council, 
Enhancing Producti
vity Growth in the Information Age: Measur
-ing and Sustaining the New Economy, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, 
p. 20 [citations deleted from extract]. 
19
Ibid., pp. 22-23 [citation deleted from extract].
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
interesting design and appeal to individual tastes matter more than low 
cost or radical new technologies. 
  
Businesses will not succeed in the post-scienti˜c society by adopting 
a fast-follower strategy, seeking to emulate the products ˜rst brought 
to market by ˜rms in other countries. Rather, success will arise in part 
from the disciplined search for useful new knowledge that, regardless 
of its origins, can be integrated with intimate knowledge of cultures and 
consumer preferences. Networks of highly creative individuals and col
-laborating ˜rms will devise and produce complex new systems that meet 
human needs in unexpectedly new and responsive ways.
20
Already today, IT products and services rely on sophisticated memory, 
computing, and communications infrastructures with fundamental sci
-ence and technology underpinningsŠthese will always be important. 
However, the value added and wealth generation are accruing most 
where there is less competitionŠat the top, at the user- or customer-
 facing levels, where a knowledge of customers and business processes is 
not a commodity.
 21
Thus, the economic landscape is clearly one in which the productiv
-ity drivers are all complementary to and/or built on top of IT. Innovation 
in IT includes foundational work in the underlying technologies as well 
as innovation in IT-intensive and IT-enabled goods and, increasingly, 
services. 
The Scienti˜c Case: A Fundamental Infrastructure 
 for All Science and Technology
It is generally acknowledged that the third leg of scienti˜c inves
-tigation, joining theory and experiment, is computation. For example, 
computer models, describing the quantum mechanical behavior at the 
atomic and molecular levels, allow scientists to simulate physical systems 
in detail, to understand physical phenomena better than is possible by 
theory or experimentation alone. Computer imaging, such as computed 
axial tomography (CAT) scans, has become vital in the biosciences and 
medicine. 
Computational science models physical systems by large numbers 
of equations in many variables. The dynamics of a physical system, such 
as a chemical reaction, requires the solution of these equations over the 
time domain with a very high degree of accuracy. The ˜eld makes use of 
numerical algorithms and their analysis to ensure that accurate results 
20
Christopher T. Hill, ﬁThe Post-Scienti˜c Society,ﬂ
 Issues in Science and Technology,
 Fall 
2007, available at http://www.issues.org/24.1/c_hill.html; accessed December 3, 2007.
21
Ibid.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  29
are achieved as rapidly as possible. Techniques include ˜nite-element 
methods, fast Fourier transforms, Monte Carlo simulations, multigrid 
methods, methods for sparse problems, randomized algorithms, deter
-ministic sampling strategies, and average case analysis.
Because the kinds of problems tackled by computational scientists are 
so large and complex, algorithm designers have learned to exploit parallel 
computer architectures so that the systems that they wish to study can be 
modeled in a reasonable amount of time. Computational science problems 
have traditionally driven the highest performance envelope of computing, 
from vector supercomputers to very large clusters of co
mputers. As com
-puters become faster, larger and more-complex and ˜ne-grained models 
are generated for the computers™ increased capabilities for prediction and 
design. At the same time, experimental and computational sciences are 
generating massive amounts of data, straining the capacities of even the 
largest supercomputer systems. 
The most pressing problems to be solved by computational science are 
commonly known as Grand Challenges. In 1995, the National Research 
Council produced a report entitled 
Evol
ving the 
High Performance Comput
-ing and Communications Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s Information Infra
-structure
 (commonly referred to as the Brooks-Sutherland report, after its 
co-chairs Frederick P. Brooks, Jr., and Ivan E. Sutherland) that de˜ned a 
new set of scienti˜c and societal Grand Challenges.
22
 It identi˜ed progress 
in solving scienti˜c Grand Challenges in such disciplines as cosmology, 
molecular biology, chemistry, and materials science. In 2005, the NRC 
report 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Supercomputing
 identi˜ed a dozen 
ﬁcompelling applicationsﬂ for supercomputing. These ranged from mili
-tary applications (such as stewardship of the nuclear weapons stockpile) 
to those enabling advances in science and engineering (for example, cli
-mate prediction, predicting and mitigating the effects of earthquakes), and 
transportation (for example, improving vehicle dynamics, fuel consump
-tion, comfort, and safety).
23
In 2003, the U.S. government™s Networking and Information Tech
-nology R&D (NITRD) program identi˜ed 16 illustrative problems that 
simultaneously challenge our computational capabilities and would rep
-resent signi˜cant bene˜ts to society if they could be solved accurately 
and quickly:
22
National Research Council,
 E
vol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communica
-tions Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure,
 National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 1995.
23
National Research Council, 
Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Supercomputing,
 The Na
-tional Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, Ch. 4. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM

Knowledge environments for science and engineering,

Clean energy production through improved combustion,

High-con˜dence infrastructure control systems,

Improved patient safety and health quality,

Informed strategic planning for long-term regional climate change,

Nanoscale science and technology (explore and exploit the behavior 
of ensembles of atoms and molecules),

Predicting pathways and health effects of pollutants,

Real-time detection, assessment, and response to natural or man-
made threats,

Safer, more secure, more ef˜cient, higher-capacity, multi-modal trans
-portation system,

Anticipate consequences of universal participation in a digital society,

Collaborative intelligence (integrating humans with intelligent 
technologies),

Generating insights from information at your ˜ngertips,

Managing knowledge-intensive dynamic systems,

Rapidly acquiring pro˜ciency in natural languages,

SimUniverse (learning by exploring), and

Virtual lifetime tutor for all.
 24
These challenge problems were selected for the way that they support 
six national priorities, as identi˜ed by the science and technology agencies 
of the U.S. government: leadership in science and technology, national 
and homeland security, health and environment, economic prosperity, a 
well-educated populace, and a vibrant civil society. Information technol
-ogy plays a foundational role in achieving each of these priorities.
The list of illustrative challenges is not expressed directly in terms of 
trillions of operations per second, petabytes of storage, terabits of network 
bandwidth, or gigapixels of display. Nevertheless, each depends on enor
-mous advances in computation, storage, communications, and displays 
for its effective solution. Beyond more powerful computers and networks, 
NITRD identi˜ed the dif˜cult computer technology componentsŠthe 
so-called IT Hard ProblemsŠthat require signi˜cant advancement in 
order to construct effective information-technology-based solutions to 
these societal challenges: new algorithms and capabilities for construct
-ing applications, technologies to support complex heterogeneous systems, 
more capable hardware technologies, techniques and architectures to 
achieve high con˜dence in information technology systems, the architec
-24
See Networking and Information Technology Research and Development, 
Grand Chal
-lenges: Science, Engineering, and Societal Ad
vances Requiring Networking and Information Tech
-nology Research and De
velopment,
 Interagency Working Group on Information Technology 
Research and Development, available at http://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/200311_grand_
 challenges.pdf; accessed October 28, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  31
ture of high-end computing systems, information technology for human 
augmentation, information management, intelligent systems, method
-ologies and frameworks for IT system design, techniques to improve IT 
usability, the development of a highly capable IT workforce, technologies 
to improve the management of IT, high-performance and ubiquitous net
-work technology and architecture, and more capable software technolo
-gies for rapid system design and implementation.
Clearly, information technology is the essential fuel that will propel 
the knowledge-based society of the 21st century. 
RESULTS
 AND
 I
MPACT
 OF
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R&D
Advances in information technology and its applications represent 
the signal success of U.S. scienti˜c, engineering, business, and govern
-mental communities in the past 50 years.
Information technology has transformed, and continues to transform, 
all aspects of our lives: commerce, education, employment, health care, 
manufacturing, government, national security, communications, enter
-tainment, science, and engineering. Information technology also drives 
the economyŠboth directly (the IT sector itself) and indirectly (other 
sectors that are ﬁpoweredﬂ by advances in IT).
25
 To appreciate the mag
-nitude and breadth of these impacts, imagine spending a day without IT. 
This would be a day without the Internet and all that it enables. A day 
without diagnostic medical imaging. A day during which automobiles 
lacked electronic ignition, antilock brakes, and electronic stability control. 
A day without digital mediaŠwithout wireless telephones, high-de˜ni
-tion televisions, MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3) audio, DVD video, com
-puter animation, and videogames. A day during which aircraft could not 
˚y, travelers had to navigate without bene˜t of the Global Positioning 
System, weather forecasters had no models, banks and merchants could 
not transfer funds electronically, factory automation ceased to function, 
and the U.S. military lacked technological supremacy. It would be, for 
most people in the United States and the rest of the developed world, a 
ﬁday the Earth stood still.ﬂ
Leadership in information technology is vital to our nation. For this 
reason, it is not surprising that the NRC™s Computer Science and Tele
-25
Analysis suggests that the remarkable growth experienced in the United States between 
1995 and 2000 was spurred by an increase in productivity enabled almost completely by 
factors related to information technology: IT drove the U.S. ﬁproductivity revivalﬂ during 
the 1995-2000 period as compared with the 1973-1995 period. See Dale W. Jorgenson, Mun 
S. Ho, and Kevin Stiroh, ﬁProjecting Productivity Growth: Lessons from the U.S. Growth 
Resurgence,ﬂ presentation to the Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insur
-ance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds, Washington, D.C., November 7, 2002.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
communications Board (CSTB) has frequently been asked to study vari
-ous aspects of the IT innovation ecosystem. The 1995 report 
Evol
ving 
the 
High Performance Computing and Communications Initiati
ve to Support 
the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
26
 explored these impacts and origi
-nated the subsequently often-reproduced ﬁtire tracksﬂ ˜gure (so called 
because of its appearance) that illustrated some of the many cases in 
which fundamental research in information technology, conducted in 
industry and universities, led to entirely new product categories that 
became billion-dollar industries 10 to 15 years later. The tire tracks ˜gure 
also illustrated the complex interplay between industry, universities, and 
governmentŠthe ˚ow of ideas and peopleŠand the interdependencies 
of research advances in various sub˜elds: there is a complex research 
ecology at work, in which concurrent advances in multiple sub˜elds are 
mutually reinforcing, stimulating, and enabling one another. 
In 2003, the CSTB report 
Inno
vation in Information Technology
27
 distilled 
the lessons from eight prior CSTB studies
28
 and summarized the nature 
of innovation in information technology as understood circa 2003 (see 
Box 2.1). That report™s update of the original tire tracks ˜gure is repro
-duced as Figure 2.1 in this chapter.
Interestingly, during the preparation of the ˜rst version of Figure 2.1, 
in 1994, members of the authoring committee were discouraged because 
they could not identify current research advances that were likely to 
lead to new billion-dollar industries. Eight years later, when the second 
version of the ˜gure was being prepared, more than half a dozen such 
26
National Research Council, 
Evol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communica
-tions Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure,
 National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 1995.
27
National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Information Technology,
 The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.
28
The eight CSTB studies, arranged here chronologically, are these:

Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering 
(1992);

Academic Careers for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers 
(1994);

Evol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communications Initiati
ve to Support the 
Nation™s Information Infrastructure 
(1995);

More Than Screen Deep
: 
Toward E
very-Citizen Interfaces to the Nation™s Information Infra
-structure 
(1997);

Funding a Re
volution: Go
vernment Support for Computing Research 
(1999);

Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet
 Society™s Needs 
(2000);

Building a Workforce for the Information Economy 
(2001); and

Embedded, E
verywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of
 Embedded Computers 
(2001).
These National Research Council reports were published by the National Academy Press 
(The National Academies Press as of June 2003), Washington, D.C.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  33
BOX
 2.1
 Important Themes from the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board™s Studies of Innovation 
 in Information Technology
A 2003 report of the National Research Council™s Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, 
Innovation in Information Technology, 
distilled lessons 
about the nature of research in information technologyŠincluding the unpredict
-ability of and synergy among research results; the roles of government, industry, 
and academia; and the social returns from research.  The 2003 report summarized 
these as follows:
The results of research
ŠAmerica™s international leadership in ITŠleadership that is vital to the 
nationŠsprings from a deep tradition of research. . . .
ŠThe unanticipated results of research are often as important as the an
-ticipated resultsŠfor example, electronic mail and instant messaging were 
by-products of research in the 1960s that was aimed at making it possible 
to share expensive computing resources among multiple simultaneous in
-teractive users. . . .
ŠThe interaction of research ideas multiplies their impactŠfor example, 
concurrent research programs targeted at integrated circuit design, com
-puter graphics, networking, and workstation-based computing strongly rein
-forced and ampli˜ed one another. . . .
Research as a partnership
ŠThe success of the IT research enterprise re˚ects a complex partnership 
among government, industry, and universities. . . .
ŠThe federal government has had and will continue to have an essential 
role in sponsoring fundamental research in ITŠlargely university-basedŠ
because it does what industry does not and cannot do. . . . Industrial and 
governmental investments in research re˚ect different motivations, resulting 
in differences in style, focus, and time horizon. . . .
ŠCompanies have little incentive to invest signi˜cantly in activities whose 
bene˜ts will spread quickly to their rivals. . . . Fundamental research often 
falls into this category. By contrast, the vast majority of corporate research 
and development (R&D) addresses product and process development. . . .
ŠGovernment funding for research has leveraged the effective decision 
making of visionary program managers and program of˜ce directors from the 
research community, empowering them to take risks in designing programs 
and selecting grantees. . . . Government sponsorship of research especially 
in universities also helps to develop the IT talent used by industry, universi
-ties, and other parts of the economy. . . .
The economic payoff of research
ŠPast returns on federal investments in IT research have been extraordi
-nary for both U.S. society and the U.S. economy. . . . The transformative 
effects of IT grow as innovations build on one another and as user know-how 
compounds. Priming that pump for tomorrow is today™s challenge.
ŠWhen companies create products using the ideas and workforce that 
result from federally sponsored research, they repay the nation in jobs, tax 
revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership. . . .
SOURCE: National Research Council, 
Innovation in Information Technology,
 The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003, pp. 2-4.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Figure 
2-
1a
.e
ps
LA
Ns
Rings,
 Hubn
et
Ethe
rnet
, 
Da
ta
kit,
 Autone
tLA
Ns
, 
sw
itched
 Ethe
rnet
Graphi
ca
l user
 inte
rf
aces
 Wo
rkst
at
ions
Graphi
cs
Sk
etch
pad,
 Utah
GM
/I
BM
, 
Xero
x,
 Microsof
tE&S,
 SG
I,
 AT
I,
 Adob
eLisp
 machine,
 St
anford
Xero
x 
Al
to
Xero
x 
St
ar
, 
Ap
ollo
, 
Su
nEngelba
rt
 / 
Ro
chester
Al
to
, 
Smal
ltal
kSt
ar
, 
Mac,
 Microsof
tTi
mesharin
gCTSS
, 
Mu
ltic
s / 
BS
DUn
ix
SD
S 
94
0,
 360/67
, 
VM
SInternet
AR
PA
NE
T,
 Al
oh
a,
 In
ternet
Pu
pDECn
et
, 
TC
P/
IP
RISC
  processo
rs
Be
rk
eley
, 
St
anford
IB
M 
80
1SUN,
 SG
I,
 IB
M,
 HP
VLSI
 desig
nBe
rk
eley
, 
Caltec
h,
 MO
SI
Smany
19
65
19
70
19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
05
19
65
19
70
19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
05
Client
/s
er
ve
r computin
gBe
rk
eley
, 
CM
U,
 CERN
PA
RC
, 
DEC, IB
MNovell,
 EMC,
 Sun,
 Or
acle
Ente
rt
ainmen
tSpac
ewar
 (MIT
), 
Tr
ek
 (R
ochester
)At
ar
i,
 Nintendo
, 
SG
I,
 Pi
xa
rTh
e to
pics
 ar
e ordere
d roughly
 by 
increasing
 da
te
 of
 $1
 B indust
ry
.Uni
ve
rsit
yIndustr
y R&
DProdu
ct
s$1 B mark
et
to 
Wo
rl
d Wide
 We
bFIGURE
 2.1  The updated ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram originally published in a 1995 
report of the National Research Council to provide examples of government-
sponsored information technology research and development in the creation of 
commercial products and industries.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  35
Figure 
2-
1b
.e
ps
Th
e to
pics
 ar
e ordere
d roughl
y by 
increasing
 da
te
 of
 $1
 B indust
ry
.Univ
er
si
ty
Indust
ry
 R&
DProdu
ct
s$1 B mark
et
RA
ID
 /d
is
k se
rv
er
sRelational
 da
tabase
sBe
rk
eley
, 
Wisc
onsi
nIB
MOr
acle
, 
IB
M,
 Sy
base
Be
rk
eley
St
ri
ping
/D
at
amesh,
 Pe
ta
lmany
19
65
19
70
19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
05
Wo
rl
d Wide
 We
bAlta
 Vi
st
aNets
ca
pe
, Ya
ho
o,
 Google
19
65
19
70
19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
05
Speech
 re
cognitio
nCM
U,
 S
RI,
 MI
TBell,
 IB
M,
 Dr
agon
Dr
agon
, 
IB
MBroadban
d in
 last
 mile
Bellco
re
 (T
elcordia
)Amat
i,
 Alca
tel,
 Broadcom
St
anford
, 
UC
LA
Po
rt
able
 communica
tion
Linkabit
, 
Hughes
Qualcomm
Be
rk
eley
, 
Purdue
 (C
DM
A)
Pa
rallel
 da
tabase
sTo
ky
o,
 Wisc
onsin,
 UC
LA
IB
M,
 IC
LICL,
 Te
ra
da
ta
, 
Ta
nde
mPa
rallel
 computin
gIlli
ac
 4,
 CM
U,
 Caltec
h,
 HP
CIB
M,
 In
te
lCM
-5
, 
Te
ra
da
ta
, 
Cr
ay
 T3
DData
 minin
gWisc
onsin,
 St
anford
IB
M,
 Arbo
rIRI,
 Arbo
r,
 Plat
oCERN
, I
llinois
 (Mos
ai
c)
from Inte
rn
et
SOURCE
: Reprinted from National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Information 
Technology,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003. Updated and 
adapted from ˜gure originally published in National Research Council, 
Evol
ving 
the 
High Performance Computing and Communications Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s 
Information Infrastructure, 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
industries had emerged, which demonstrates that predicting the future 
in a ˜eld as dynamic as information technology is incredibly dif˜cult, 
even for experts.
INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R
ESEARCH
Š THE
 B
OUNDLESS
 F
RONTIER
The advances of information technology over the past 50 years have 
been truly breathtaking. However, the ˜eld remains in its relative infancy, 
and there is every reason to believe that the best is yet to comeŠif we 
take steps to preserve and enhance critical elements of the IT innovation 
ecosystem.
29
 This section highlights just a few examples of the impacts 
that can be anticipated from advances in information technology during 
the coming decades.
Improved Auto Safety
In the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency™s (DARPA™s) 
Grand Challenge in 2005, four cars successfully negotiated autonomously 
a dif˜cult, 103-mile obstacle course in the Mojave Desert. In DARPA™s 
2007 Urban Challenge, autonomous vehicles performed such maneuvers 
as merging, passing, negotiating intersections, and parking in a simulated 
urban environment at the former George Air Force Base in California. 
These milestones re˚ect advances in robotics which indicate that it is 
time to launch a program to create ﬁcars that cannot crash.ﬂ In the United 
States alone, automobile accidents cost roughly 40,000 lives and $250 bil
-lion each year.
30
 It is reasonable to believe that within a decade, tens of 
thousands of lives, hundreds of thousands of injuries, and tens of billions 
of dollars could be saved annually, while giving U.S. products a sizable 
competitive advantage in the $1 trillion worldwide automotive market.
Designing a Next Internet
In 2005, Vinton G. Cerf and Robert E. Kahn received computing™s 
highest prize, the A.M. Turing Award, as well as the National Medal of 
29
See, for example, the slides from Jim Gray™s 1998 Turing Lecture, ﬁWhat Next? A Few 
Remaining Problems in Information Technology,ﬂ available at http://research.microsoft.
com/~gray/talks/Gray_Turing_FCRC.pdf; accessed August 16, 2007.
 30
National Highway Traf˜c Safety Administration, ﬁ2006 FARS/GES Traf˜c Safety Facts 
Annual Report,ﬂ DOT HS 810 818, available at http://www.nhtsa.gov/portal/nhtsa_static_
˜le_downloader.jsp?˜le=/static˜les/DOT/NHTSA/NCSA/Content/TSF/TSF2006FE.pdf; 
accessed June 19, 2008. In 2006, 42,642 people were killed in highway accidents; the eco
-nomic cost of motor vehicle crashes in 2000 was $230.6 billion. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  37
Technology and the Presidential Medal of Freedom, for their creation 
in 1973 of the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), the language of the 
Internet. It is remarkable that today™s Internet employs the protocols that 
Cerf and Kahn devised more than 30 years ago (with many signi˜cant 
engineering improvements, of course). 
In 1980, there were roughly 200 hosts on the InternetŠall of them 
operated by computer scientists and their friends. In 1990, there were 
roughly 150,000 Internet hosts. Today, there are about 160 million Inter
-net hostnames, about 64 million active Internet hosts,
31
 and an estimated 
1 billion Internet users worldwide. The Internet is a victim of its own 
success. It has reached its limits in terms of scalability, security, robust
-ness, and manageability. Fundamentally new approaches are required 
in some areas. Creating a ﬁnew Internetﬂ that meets the demands of the 
21st century is a national priority replete with deep intellectual challenges. 
The National Science Foundation™s Networking Technology and Systems 
(NeTS) program
32
 and its Global Environment for Network Innovations 
(GENI) experimental infrastructure project were established to work on 
these and related challenges.
33
The Personal Memex
In his seminal 1945 paper ﬁAs We May Think,ﬂ
34
 Vannevar Bush 
described the Memex, a device that would store all information relevant 
to an individual and which could be searched using spoken commands. 
Dramatic advances in storage are on the verge of making the Memex fea
-sible in terms of cost and size. Equally dramatic advances in search and 
retrieval technology, though, are needed to make it feasible functionally. 
Today™s Web search engines represent a remarkable advance in the ability 
to retrieve informationŠbut even greater advances can be envisioned. For 
example, today™s Web search engines do not really ﬁunderstandﬂŠthey 
can point to a Web page where an answer to a question might be (if such 
a Web page exists), but they cannot synthesize an answer to a question. 
Image and video retrieval works well when the media are explicitly or 
implicitly tagged, but not so well otherwise. The ﬁcontextualizationﬂ of 
retrieval requests similarly has vast room for improvement. A personal 
31
See February 2008 Web server survey, available at http://news.netcraft.com/archives/
web_server_survey.html; accessed February 27, 2008.
32
See ﬁNetworking Technology and Systems (NeTS),ﬂ available at http://www.nsf.gov/
cise/cns/nets_pgm.jsp; accessed November 20, 2008. 
33
See ﬁGENI Project Of˜ce F.A.Q.,ﬂ available at http://geni.net/faq.html; accessed April 
14, 2008. 
34
Vannevar Bush, ﬁAs We May Think,ﬂ 
The Atlantic,
 July 1945, available at http://www.
theatlantic.com/doc/194507/bush; accessed January 6, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Memex should be able to store and effectively retrieve any digital infor
-mation ever encountered by its owner, and bring this information to bear 
on relevant tasks. A Memex for storing and retrieving any digital informa
-tion encountered within an enterprise might be equally achievableŠand 
at least equally valuable.
Post-Moore™s Law Computing
Moore™s law describes the exponential increase in inexpensive inte
-grated circuit density that has been enjoyed for more than 30 years. Of 
course, advances in computing have required more than just a decrease 
in feature size. The following have also been needed: new design meth
-odologies and tools to handle hundreds of millions of transistors rather 
than tens of thousands, computer architectures that use these additional 
transistors to achieve a proportional increase in performance, system 
architectures that are synergistic with processor capabilities, and system 
and application software to exploit these new capabilities. 
Today the game is changing.
35
 It has been possible to continue increas
-ing transistor density. However, concerns about power consumption and 
heat dissipation, which are of particular importance for mobile and data-
center systems, have forced designers to hold back on increased micro
-processor clock speeds. ﬁMulticoreﬂ and other architectures that provide 
signi˜cant increases in parallelism are a possible response to this chal
-lenge. Revolutionary new approaches to programming will be required 
in either case. And research into post-silicon computing substratesŠsuch 
as quantum computingŠmay open up important new avenues for con
-tinued computing performance increases.
Personalized Education
To make educational excellence the norm rather than the exception 
will help U.S. students reach their full potential. Although information 
technology is not a panacea for all of the shortfalls associated with the 
nation™s educational system, IT nonetheless offers the potential not only 
for signi˜cantly enhancing learning for all learners, but also for transform
-ing the way that people learn. Coupling educational practice and educa
-tional technology with recent advances in the learning sciencesŠthat 
35
These topics are being addressed by a National Research Council study being conducted 
by the Committee on Sustaining Growth in Computing Performance. See http://sites.
 nationalacademies.org/cstb/CurrentProjects/CSTB_042221.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  39
is, knowledge of how people learnŠcan be fruitful.
36
 Educational tools 
including adaptive tutors, massive multiplayer online games, collabora
-tive authoring, learning in context and just-in-time learning, and ˚exible 
simulation are needed. IT can contribute to creating a future in which 
educational excellence is ubiquitous. 
Personalized Health Monitoring
The combined trends of Moore™s law, microelectromechanical systems 
sensors, and low-power radios are enabling an explosion of opportunities 
to create ﬁsensors for everyone.ﬂ Embedding sensors in everyday devices 
such as cellular telephones, wristwatches, and household appliances can 
provide a wealth of important information on individuals™ personal activ
-ity patterns. As an example, researchers on the subject of obesity want 
to see day-long and week-long activity patterns so that they can better 
advise patients on how to alter their behavior. The speci˜cs of where 
and when people walk, run, use stairs, and so on are important because 
ﬁlifestyle adviceﬂ must be customized to each individual in order to be 
most effective. In elder care, long-term patterns in the frequency, duration, 
and mix of an elder™s activities can lead to early warning signs of various 
conditions, both physical and cognitive. Techniques for processing this 
kind of sensor data range from basic signal processing to sophisticated 
statistical machine learning. Creating visualization tools and user inter
-faces that consumers and health care providers can use and with which 
they can perform what-if analyses is another important direction, coupled 
with research in psychology on appropriate motivation strategies. Fur
-thermore, IT can provide the security mechanisms and help implement 
the privacy protections that will be necessary for such monitoring and 
research programs.
37
 Mastering IT System Complexity
The ever-increasing capabilities of computing systems (including 
both hardware and software) have managed to keep pace with the ever-
increasing aspirations that users have for these systems. However, this 
remarkable progress has been accompanied by ever-increasing complex
-ity. As a result, today™s computer systems are tremendously dif˜cult to 
design, install, con˜gure, operate, and maintain. The situation is incon
-36
See, for example, National Research Council, 
How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, 
and School, 
Expanded Edition, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2000.
37
See National Research Council, 
Engaging Pri
vacy and Information Technology in a Digital 
Age,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
venient, risky, and expensiveŠtypically, annual outlays for maintenance 
and operations far exceed total hardware and software costs. Research 
has ˜nally begun to focus on these issues, and there have been some 
notable successes: companies such as Akamai Technologies and Google, 
for example, ef˜ciently operate massive collections of systems that span 
the globe. These are special situations, though; for the typical home or 
business desktop system or server facility, the costs of ownershipŠand 
the risksŠcontinue to be far too great. A ﬁgrand challengeﬂ in computer 
systems for the next decade is to reduce these costs and risksŠto make 
as much progress on security, privacy, dependability, and ease of use as 
has been made on increasing computing performance.
38
Transforming the Developing World
One of the greatest available opportunities for fostering economic 
growth and security for the United States is to improve the status of the 
several billion people on the planet currently living in poverty. On the sur
-face it may seem that IT has little role to play in confronting this problem; 
most of the trappings of IT are far more expensive than can be affordably 
replicated at this scale. Digging deeper, however, it becomes clear that 
IT can play a role in designing effective ways to address af˚ictions such 
as inadequate health care, lack of clean water, de˜cient education, and 
lack of economic opportunity. The design of contextually appropriate 
information and communication technology to address nations™ develop
-ment issues has recently become a major research focus for a number of 
institutions. Global projects to develop and deploy low-cost laptops, for 
example, are intended to address the problem of affordable IT for educa
-tion and other purposes.
Augmented Cognition
The amount of information with which one is bombarded daily is 
increasing relentlessly, but a person™s ability to absorb, evaluate, and act 
on that information is not. Information technology is largely responsible 
for information overload, and information technology must also provide 
effective tools for copingŠfor helping people absorb and evaluate infor
-mation and for calling to their attention at the appropriate time informa
-38
See, for example, National Research Council, 
Software for Dependable Systems: Suf˜cient 
Evidence? 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007; and 
Toward a Safer and More 
Secure Cyberspace,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007. An ongoing study 
by the Committee on Advancing Software-Intensive Systems Producibility, under the auspices 
of the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, is expected to be completed 
in 2009. See http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cstb/CurrentProjects/CSTB_042212.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y: 
THE ESSENTIAL
 ENABLER
  41
tion that requires action on their part. This ﬁaugmented cognitionﬂ is 
critical for those who operate in high-stress, high-information environ
-ments, but it may be even more important for those who are cognitively 
impairedŠfor example, Alzheimer™s patients, who with cognitive assis
-tance and monitoring could live fuller, more independent lives.
Driving Advances in All Fields of Science and Engineering
The role of simulation, enabled by advances in high performance 
computing, in driving advances in all ˜elds of science and engineer
-ing is well documented. Today though, we are seeing the emergence of 
a new form of computational science: one focused on the collection of 
massive amounts of data from sensors in the world around us and aided 
by advances in techniques for storing, retrieving, mining, visualizing, 
and discovering knowledge in those data. Sensors are everywhereŠin 
the oceans, in scienti˜c instruments ranging from telescopes to medical 
imaging systems, in our civilian infrastructure (buildings, roads, bridges). 
These sensors generate relentlessly increasing amounts of data. Discovery 
involves data analysis on a massive scale. Rapid advances in information 
technology are essential.
SUMMAR
YThe impacts that can be anticipated from advances in IT during the 
coming decades as described above are but a few examples of the promise 
of information technology. Advances in IT have transformed our lives, 
powered our economy, and changed the conduct of science and engineer
-ing. Even so, the ˜eld remains in its relative infancy, and greater oppor
-tunities lie ahead. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3The Changing Landscape of the 
U.S. Information Technology R&D 
Ecosystem: 1995-2007
This chapter reviews the evolution of the information technology 
(IT) research and development (R&D) ecosystem in the time period 1995 
through 2007. As with any ecosystem in nature, the IT R&D ecosystem 
responds to external forces to which it has been subjected, in turn in˚u
-encing those forces by the way that the system evolves. The time from 
the mid-1990s to the present has been a period of almost unprecedented 
change, in the global, technical, and industrial contexts.
The chapter is organized in four sections. The ˜rst reviews the shocks 
to the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem in terms of the rise and aftermath of the 
speculative ˜nancial bubble. The second section discusses the emergence 
of new technology platforms, based on open-source software, collab
-orative community development, and Web-centric technologies, and the 
challenges that these present to traditional IT industrial organization. 
The third section addresses the rapid globalization of the underlying IT 
industrial sectors, with a particular focus on the cases of the semiconduc
-tor, computer, and software industries. It also describes the rise of new 
regions where IT R&D is performed, both nationally and internationally, 
focusing particularly on the new IT powerhouses of India, China, and 
Taiwan. The fourth section describes the role that infrastructure plays in 
enabling innovation and the importance of enhancing U.S. broadband 
local-access infrastructure. The chapter concludes with a brief summary.
SHOCKS
 TO
 THE
 U.S. E
COS
YSTEM
 The period 1995 to 2007 has been a turbulent one for the U.S. economy 
and the world economy. The early part of the period was characterized 
42
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 43
by an IT-fueled speculative boom, followed by an economic bust from 
which the IT sector is just now starting to emerge. This section reviews the 
shocks to which the IT R&D ecosystem was subjected during this time.
The Rise of ﬁIrrational Exuberanceﬂ
The term ﬁirrational exuberanceﬂ is credited to former Federal Reserve 
Board Chairman Alan Greenspan. In a speech given at the American 
Enterprise Institute in 1996, Greenspan made a general observation about 
the dif˜culty of recognizing ﬁunduly escalated asset values.ﬂ Few seemed 
concerned about the possibility of irrational exuberance or unduly high 
asset values as the excitement about the Internet created the dot-com 
boom. The initial public offering (IPO) of Netscape Communications Cor
-poration in August 1995 symbolizes the beginning of this period. With the 
bene˜t of hindsight, those early years can be seen to have fueled a mas
-sive expansion and upgrade of the global telecommunications system and 
powered the adoption of the Internet, but when the bubble of excitement 
burst in 2000,
1 a powerful jolt was in˚icted on the IT R&D ecosystem.
2The introduction and adoption of the World Wide Web were predi
-cated on the ubiquity of the personal computer. With intuitive browsers 
and simple mark-up language, the Web enabled millions of individuals 
and businesses to create Web sites that could reach hundreds of millions 
of people and to engage in commerce. Companies formed rapidly, raising 
venture capital at high valuations to pursue new Web-enabled opportuni
-ties. Entrepreneurs and investors were lured into adopting business plans 
with weak fundamentals and (at least in retrospect) objectives that did not 
create lasting and tangible customer value. And yet, despite the agony of 
the bursting bubble, the Internet changed the lives of hundreds of millions 
of people around the world.
Figure 3.1 shows the rapid growth in venture funding for IT start-ups, 
particularly in the software and telecommunications sectors, following 
the creation of the Web in the mid-1990s. (For comparison, biotechnology 
funding, which did not experience such extreme funding changes, is also 
shown.) According to data from the 
MoneyTree
 survey, the number of IT 
start-up companies receiving venture investments reached a peak of more 
1For a broad study of the 1995 stock market boom in the context of others and with respect 
to structural factors contributing to speculative bubbles, see Robert Schiller, 
Irrational Exuber
-ance,
 Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 2000.
2The overall peak in terms of both the total number of venture deals and total amounts 
raised came in the ˜rst quarter of 2000: in that quarter there were 2,129 deals amount
-ing to $28,414 million, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers/Thomson Financial/National 
Venture Capital Association 
MoneyTree
 Report
 historical data, available at https://www.
 pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/ns/nav.jsp?page=historical; accessed August 20, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
than 5,600 in the year 2000, compared with fewer than 1,300 in 1995; the 
average investment per deal was over $18 million for year 2000 invest
-ments, compared with $4.5 million in 1995.
3The period 1995 through 2000 was characterized by a number of high-
pro˜le success stories along with many large-scale capital deployment 
mistakes. In retrospect, too many of the IT start-ups that received ven
-ture capital funding were ill-conceived, too few of the funded start-ups 
had solid business fundamentals, and ultimately most squandered their 
invested capital and went bankrupt.
3Data from PricewaterhouseCoopers/Thomson Financial/National Venture Capital Asso
-ciation 
MoneyTree
 Report,
 available at https://www.pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/ns/nav.
jsp?page=historical; accessed November 20, 2008.
Figure 
3-
1.
epsU.
S. $ 
(b
illion
)19
95
19
97
1999
20
01
20
03
20
05
20
0730
25
20
15
10
50Ye
ar
So
ft
ware
Te
lecommunications
Comput
er
s and 
Pe
ripheral
sNe
tw
orks and 
Eq
uipmen
tSemiconductors
Bi
otec
hnology
FIGURE
 3.1
 Total amount of investments by year, 1995 through 2007, in venture 
funding for IT start-ups in ˜ve sectors, compared with that for biotechnology start-
ups. The investment bubble in IT start-ups ballooned after 1995 and was de˚ating 
by 2001. 
SOURCE
: Data (national aggregate data by industry from 1995 to 2007) from 
PricewaterhouseCoopers/Thomson Financial/National Venture Capital Association 
MoneyTree Report.
 Available at https://www.pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/ns/nav.
jsp?page=notice&iden=B.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 45
The ˜nancial woes, and even bankruptcies, of several large telecom
-munications providers suggest that too many of them attempted to build 
next-generation data network backbones. This investment occurred even 
as the somewhat lackluster state of U.S. broadband suggests that too little 
investment went into the transformation of U.S. narrowband local-access 
infrastructure into a broadband local-access infrastructureŠthus creat
-ing a potential impediment to the deployment of cutting-edge applica
-tions and services that depend on high data rates. (See the section below 
entitled ﬁInfrastructure to Enable Multifaceted Innovation.ﬂ)
At the same time, there are differing perspectives on the net success 
of investment strategies during this period. Researchers have begun to 
explore some of the entrepreneurial and investment dynamics of the era. 
For example, drawing on data contributed to the Business Plan Archive,
4 Goldfarb, Kirsch, and Pfarrer estimate that many less-visible and privately 
held venturesŠaccounting for nearly half of dot-com era venturesŠsur
-vived until 2004.
5 Thus, they characterize the dot-com era as a ﬁlegitimate 
response to a technology shock.ﬂ However, these authors also recognize 
that ﬁmany 
good
 opportunities were oversold to investors and the public 
as 
large
 opportunitiesﬂ and that the bursting bubble brought reduced, but 
more realistic, private and public market valuations.
6Subsequent research by Goldfarb, Kirsch, and Miller explored the 
implications of the pre-2000 ﬁpervasive and persistent beliefﬂ in a ﬁGet 
Big Fast (GBF)ﬂ business strategy that was based on the market preemp
-tion of competitors and on expected economies of scale associated with 
network effects. They concluded that belief in the GBF strategy by entre
-preneurs, investors, and the public led to overly focused investment in too 
4The Business Plan Archive (www.businessplanarchive.org) was established in 2002 
to preserve business plans and other digital ephemera from the dot-com era technology 
companies. 
5Using a sample of new technology ventures drawn from the funding solicitations re
-ceived by one venture capital fund, Goldfarb, Kirsch, and Pfarrer extrapolated estimates of 
venture creation during the 1996-2002 period that include transactions not published in the 
Thomson Financial data. They estimate that 50,000 new ventures were formed to exploit 
the commercialization of the Internet and that 24,000 of these received some $256 billion 
from formal and informal investors over the 1996-2002 period. By contrast, according to 
the authors, Thomson Financial reported only 8,500 transactions but the vast majority ($217 
billion) of the investment during this period. See Brent D. Goldfarb, David A. Kirsch, and 
Michael D. Pfarrer, ﬁSearching for Ghosts: Business Survival, Unmeasured Entrepreneur
-ial Activity and Private Equity Investment in the Dot-Com Era,ﬂ Robert H. Smith School 
of Business Working Paper No. RHS-06-027, October 2005, available at http://ssrn.com/
 abstract=825687; accessed December 1, 2007.
6Brent D. Goldfarb, David A. Kirsch, and Michael D. Pfarrer, ﬁSearching for Ghosts: Busi
-ness Survival, Unmeasured Entrepreneurial Activity and Private Equity Investment in the 
Dot-Com Era,ﬂ Robert H. Smith School of Business Working Paper No. RHS-06-027, October 
2005, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=825687; accessed December 1, 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
few start-ups and resulted both in too little entry and in both private and 
public market overcorrections once its limitations were realized.
7In retrospect, the GBF strategy had mixed results. It did not work well 
for a number of ˜rms such as Webvan, Pets.com, or Scient, whose failures 
and resulting ˜nancial losses contributed to a negative public perception 
of the era.
8 However, the strategy worked well in the long term (i.e., until 
the present) for a small number of ˜rms such as Amazon, Yahoo!, eBay, 
and Monster. Indeed, the existence of an environment that led to the suc
-cessful creation of these leading ˜rms is arguably a unique strength of the 
U.S. IT R&D ecosystem.
From another perspective, however, the rapid birth and death of IT 
start-ups and the venture investments during the peak amounted to a 
valuable form of experimentationŠwith business models, customer pref
-erences, consumer adoption of the relatively new Internet for entertain
-ment and commerceŠthat was both faster and perhaps more effective 
than applied research in a university environment on the same ques
-tions might have been. For society as a whole, the hundreds of millions 
of ﬁwritten-offﬂ venture dollars went toward market experimentation 
and toward operationalizing the scienti˜c and engineering advances 
made possible in part by traditional IT R&D. Nonetheless, going for
-ward, one lesson from this period is that capital misallocation might be 
avoided through greater focus on how consumers use and value IT (see 
the section entitled ﬁInfrastructure to Enable Multifaceted Innovation,ﬂ 
below).
ﬁY2Kﬂ and the Development of the Indian Software Industry
The year 2000 problem, known as Y2K, or the Millennium Bug, refers 
to the perceived dif˜culty of handling 21st century dates in older but still 
used computing systems. Industry and government voiced concern that 
mission-critical software that used only two digits to store years would 
confuse 2000 with 1900 when the calendar wrapped from 1999 to 2000. In 
the end, after considerable effort to revamp software or introduce opera
-tional workarounds, the disruptions caused were minor. 
Global efforts to address the Y2K problem provided a major growth 
impetus for the Indian software industry. Few programmers in the United 
7Brent D. Goldfarb, David A. Kirsch, and David A. Miller, ﬁWas There Too Little Entry 
During the Dot Com Era?ﬂ 
Journal of Financial Economics 
86(1):100-144, 2007, available at 
www.sciencedirect.com; accessed December 4, 2007. 
8David Kirsch and Brent Goldfarb, ﬁSmall Ideas, Big Ideas, Bad Ideas, Good Ideas: Get Big 
Fast and Dot Com Venture Creation,ﬂ Robert H. Smith School of Business Working Paper 
No. RHS-06-049, November 2006, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=946446; accessed 
December 1, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 47
States were prepared, or even wanted, to deal with ˜xing the legacy 
software problems. Firms turned to Indian companies to develop tools 
to analyze their software for vulnerabilities and to modify their applica
-tions. The build-out of global telecommunications services and adop
-tion of the Internet that had recently taken place in India and the rest of 
Asia helped make it possible to coordinate activities between the United 
States and overseas. India™s Y2K success enticed global IT ˜rms to locate 
development laboratories and product groups there, where products for 
global markets are being developed. By 2007, Indian ˜rms had emerged 
as world-class IT services enterprises.
NASDAQ Bust (2000)
The NASDAQŠNational Association of Securities Dealers Auto
-mated QuotationsŠbust came in the aftermath of a soaring stock market 
of the 1990s. It peaked in March 2000, and the bust began when the valu
-ations of ˜rms with questionable business models could no longer be 
sustained. The immediate effect was to end the unsustainable expansion 
plans of many ˜rms, leading to retrenchments and even bankruptcies. A 
recession ensued, even affecting IT workers. Venture capital investments 
declined, with start-up companies encouraged to outsource development 
to reduce costs. The public markets no longer supported technology 
IPOs, reducing the returns to early-stage investors and increasing inves
-tors™ aversions.
The general sense of pessimism about the IT sector and a perceived 
lack of employment appear to have led to the ensuing decline in enroll
-ments in computer science programs. This happened at the same time that 
the software industry in India and Eastern Europe enjoyed high rates of 
growth, helping to accelerate the migration of projects to these regions.
In 2007, the markets and the ˜eld continued their recovery.
9 Venture 
capital investment was up, reaching the highest levels since 2001. There 
had been a number of spectacular recent IPOs, including those of Google 
(2004), Riverbed Technology (2006), and VMware (2007). The number of 
technology IPOs on U.S. exchanges was once again increasing,
10
 albeit at 
a sobered pace.
11
 As the pace of investment in IT ˜rms increases, access 
to talent becomes a limiting factor. The demand for students with IT skills 
9See Kristina Shevory, ﬁIn Silicon Valley, Steady But Cautious Growth Returns,ﬂ 
New 
York 
Times,
 June 27, 2007.
10
See ﬁDoor Is Open to High-Tech Offerings That Meet Thresholds,ﬂ
 New 
York Time
s, June 
29, 2007.
11
As this report went to press in 2008, there were indications of at least a temporary falloff 
in IPOs, re˚ecting prevailing economic conditions.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
is increasing, but with their numbers reduced, salaries rise and ˜rms look 
globally for technical talent.
12
Aftereffects of September 11, 2001
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, profoundly affected the 
United States, with a redirection of national attention focused on address
-ing the terrorist threat. Subsequent con˚icts in Afghanistan and Iraq led 
national resources to be redirected to the war effort.
 There is evidence 
that some IT research funding has been redirected to national and home
-land defense objectives.
13
 This type of research is not easily performed 
in universities owing to campus restrictions on classi˜ed research and 
the presence of large numbers of students, faculty, and other researchers 
who are foreign nationals. Funding data suggest that the Department 
of Defense (DOD) has reduced its investment in university research 
programs.
14
Furthermore, the post-September 11 environment had other effects. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that in the immediate aftermath of Septem
-ber 11, foreign students found it more dif˜cult to enroll in U.S. graduate 
programs owing to visa dif˜culties and new background checks at U.S. 
embassies and consulates abroad.
15
 In any case, survey data were col
-lected in early 2004 by the Council of Graduate Schools (CGS) from the 
113 graduate schools that enroll nearly half of all international graduate 
students in the United States. These data indicated an overall decline of 
12
The average salary offer for a college graduate with a computer science major was 
$53,051 in 2007, up 4.5 percent from the previous year. Only graduates with majors in chemi
-cal, electrical, and mechanical engineering had higher average starting salaries. See National 
Association of Colleges and Employers data reported by Computing Research Association, 
available at http://www.cra.org/wp/index.php?p=123; accessed February 20, 2008.
13
See John Markoff, ﬁPentagon Redirects Its Research Dollars,ﬂ 
New 
York Times,
 April 
2, 2005, quoting of˜cials of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) as 
saying that, while the amount of DARPA computer science research funding rose slightly 
from 2001 to 2004, the portion going to university researchers fell by about 40 percent; avail
-able at http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/02/technology/02darpa.html; accessed April 
16, 2008.
14
For example, the ˜scal year 2008 budget request for total DOD basic research (known 
as 6.1 funding) declined 7.8 percent from the ˜scal year 2007 budget, but total DOD uni
-versity research initiatives declined more, by 14 percent. See http://www.aaas.org/spp/
rd/08ptbii4.pdf; accessed October 17, 2007.
15
See ﬁScience and Security in the Post-9/11 Environment: Foreign Students and Scholars 
(Updated),ﬂ available at http://www.aaas.org/spp/post911/visas/; accessed October 27, 
2008. Legislation such as the USA 
PATRIOT
 Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-56) and the En
-hanced Border Security and Visa Entry Reform Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-173) affected 
visa procedures. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 49
32 percent in international student applications for the fall of 2004 com
-pared with applications for the fall of 2003. Eighty percent of the schools 
responding reported decreases in applications for graduate engineering 
programs; the majority of respondents reported declines in applications 
from students in the two largest ﬁsendingﬂ countries, China (76 percent 
of respondents reported a decline) and India (58 percent of respondents 
reported a decline). In the fall of 2004, the CGS reported a 6 percent 
decline in overall ˜rst-time international student enrollment from 2003 
to 2004; engineering enrollments dropped 8 percent. This represented the 
third consecutive year in which the number of ˜rst-time international 
graduate students studying in the United States decreased between 6 
percent and 10 percent from the preceding year.
16
This effect appears to have mitigated by 2007, by which time enroll
-ments were once again increasing. CGS survey data from 172 U.S. uni
-versities (including 9 of the 10 with the largest international graduate 
student enrollment) on international graduate student admissions offers 
and enrollments for 2006 and 2007 showed that admissions offers were up 
14 percent for 2006 compared with those in 2005 and that they were up 7 
percent for 2007 compared with those for 2006. First-time enrollment was 
up 12 percent for 2006 compared with that in 2005 and was up 4 percent 
for 2007 compared with that in 2006. Admissions and enrollments from 
China and India showed the greatest increases, with engineering being 
the ˜eld of study showing the largest increases.
17
Findings for international students overall (undergraduate and grad
-uate) were reported by the Institute for International Education (IIE), 
which publishes the annual 
Open Doors: Report on International Education 
Exchange
 with support from the U.S. Department of State. According to 
the IIE, the total number of international students enrolled in colleges 
and universities in the United States increased by 3 percent over that of 
the previous year to a total of 582,984 in the 2006/2007 academic year; 
this is the ˜rst signi˜cant increase since 2001/2002. Engineering students 
16
See Council of Graduate Schools, ﬁCouncil of Graduate Schools Finds Widespread 
Declines in International Graduate Student Applications to U.S. Graduate Schools for Fall 
2004ﬂ and ﬁCouncil of Graduate Schools Finds Decline in New International Graduate 
Student Enrollment for the Third Consecutive Year,ﬂ Washington, D.C., March 2, 2004, and 
November 4, 2004, respectively. Research reports and summaries from the CGS are available 
at http://www.cgsnet.org/Default.aspx?tabid=172; accessed December 11, 2007. 
17
See Council of Graduate Schools, ﬁFindings from the 2007 CGS International Graduate 
Admissions Survey Phase III: Final Offers of Admission and Enrollment,ﬂ Washington, D.C., 
November 2007, available at http://www.cgsnet.org/portals/0/pdf/R_intlenrl07_III.pdf; 
accessed December 11, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
represented about 14 percent of the 2006/2007 international enrollment, 
up 1.5 percent from the previous year.
18
However, despite the overall increase in international student enroll
-ment and in engineering enrollment by international students, the IIE 
data showed a continuing 
decrease
 in international student enrollments in 
computer and information sciences. These dropped by about 40 percent 
from 2003/2004 through 2006/2007. In 2003/2004, about 10 percent of 
international students (57,739 students) were enrolled in computer and 
information sciences; by 2006/2007 this had fallen to 5.7 percent (33,437 
students).
19
 Because computer science departments rely heavily on for
-eign graduate students, this decrease can have a large impact on computer 
science degree production.
20
With respect to graduate education, the Computing Research Asso
-ciation™s (CRA™s) analysis of National Science Foundation (NSF) data on 
˜rst-time, full-time graduate student enrollments in computer science 
showed a large drop in foreign student enrollments, from 6,500 students 
in 2001 to about 4,300 students in 2003. There was a small decline to about 
4,000 students in 2004, then a small rise in 2005 to just over 4,500 stu
-dents. Throughout this period, the number of foreign graduate students 
exceeded the number of U.S. graduate students in computer science: U.S. 
student enrollments rose from about 2,500 in 2001 to about 4,000 in 2003 
and then declined to about 3,500 in 2005.
21
Attracting talented, foreign-born students and retaining them after 
they graduate are important goals for enabling continued technology 
entrepreneurship, business formation, and job creation. As noted in 
Chapter 1, for at least 25 percent of U.S. engineering and technology 
companies started between 1995 and 2005, at least one key founder 
18
See Institute for International Education, 2007 data tables and summaries, available at 
http://opendoors.iienetwork.org/?p=113743; accessed December 11, 2007. See Institute for 
International Education, 
Open Doors 
200
7: Report on International Education Exchange,
 New 
York, N.Y., 2008.
19
See the IIE 
Open Doors
 report statistics by ˜eld of study tabulated in Jay Vegso, ﬁContin
-ued Drop in Foreign Total Enrollment in CIS,ﬂ 
CRA Bulletin,
 November 12, 2007, available 
at http://www.cra.org/wp/index.php?p=130; accessed January 2, 2008. 
20
In 2004, over half of doctoral degrees and over 40 percent of master™s degrees in the ˜eld 
of computer science were earned by foreign students. Fields that enjoyed growth in foreign 
student enrollments from 2005/2006 to 2006/2007 included intensive English language (30.0 
percent increase), mathematics and statistics (12.3 percent increase), health professions (4.3 
percent increase), physical and life sciences (3.4 percent increase), and business and man
-agement (2.7 percent increase). See Jay Vegso, ﬁContinued Drop in Foreign Total Enrollment 
in CIS,ﬂ 
CRA Bulletin,
 November 12, 2007, available at http://www.cra.org/wp/index.
php?p=130; accessed January 2, 2008. 
21
Computing Research Association, ﬁFirst-Time, Full-Time Graduate Enrollment in CS by 
Citizenship,ﬂ available at http://www.cra.org/wp/index.php?p=120; accessed February 
20, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 51
was born outside the United States. In 2005, these immigrant-founded 
companies (about 80 percent of which were in the ˜elds of software and 
innovation and in manufacturing-related services) produced $52 billion 
in sales and employed 450,000 people.
22
 Yet an equally important goal 
will be to attract a larger share of U.S. citizens to advanced study in the 
˜eld, as opportunities increase for foreign students to pursue informa
-tion technology research and development in their own and other parts 
of the world.
Financial Scandals and Bankruptcies (December 2001)
Enron Corporation was a leading U.S. energy company that went 
spectacularly bankrupt in late 2001 after claiming revenues of $111 bil
-lion in 2000. Its bankruptcy and the subsequent criminal charges brought 
against company executives, as well as other highly publicized failures 
such as that of WorldCom, led the U.S. Congress to respond with the 
 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, informally referred to as SOX.
23
 SOX estab
-lished new standards for boards, management, and accounting ˜rms of 
U.S. public companies with respect to the visibility of and responsibility 
for the ˜nancial dealings within such companies. In the wake of the pas
-sage of SOX, U.S. public companies have faced signi˜cant new require
-ments for implementing and assessing internal controls over ˜nancial 
reporting. Section 404 in particular (pertaining to the certi˜cation of the 
integrity of the ˜nancial control structure of a ˜rm) has proven dispropor
-tionately costly for young IT companies relative to their limited resources, 
imposing new costs on venture ˜rms that seek to pursue an IPO.
24
Various efforts have been advanced to propose modi˜cations to 
SOX. These include reforms under consideration by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) and other efforts to relax some of the most 
disproportionate aspects for IT start-ups pursuing an IPO. Whether the 
SEC reforms or others will go as fast or as far as members of the IT indus
-try hope is uncertain.
25
 A secondary concern, more subtle to detect but 
22
Vivek Wadhwa, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Geref˜, ﬁAmerica™s New Im
-migrant Entrepreneurs,ﬂ Duke Science, Innovation, and Technology Paper No. 23, January 
4, 2007, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=990152; accessed December 26, 2007.
23
The of˜cial name of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-204, 116 Stat. 745) 
is the Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002. 
24
Section 404 of SOX requires company management and an external auditor to report on 
the adequacy of the company™s internal controls on ˜nancial reporting; compliance requires 
extensive compliance documentation and testing of ˜nancial systems and controls. For a 
summary of a survey on the costs of SOX compliance, see http://fei.mediaroom.com/index.
php?s=43&item=204; accessed May 1, 2008.
25
See Sean Wolfe, ﬁSarbanes-Oxley Lite,ﬂ 
Red 
Herring,
 January 10, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
with potentially deeper consequences over time, is that over time, boards 
of directors and the corporate culture that they inspire in these young, 
small IT companies may shift their primary emphasis on innovation and 
entrepreneurship to one of regulatory compliance.
26
Surviving After the Bubble Burst (2001-2004)
Following the bursting of the investment bubble, the eruption of 
˜nancial scandals, and the spectacular bankruptcies, ˜rms™ focus turned 
both to cost cutting and to regulatory compliance. For ˚edgling IT start-
ups, the most urgent issues involved survival and prospects for going 
public. For larger ˜rms, cash conservation became far more important. 
IT budgets gave priority to compliance projects such as fraud detection, 
internal controls, risk assessment, regulations, and conforming with legis
-lation on corporate governance.
27
 Boards became concerned with personal 
liability and saw a signi˜cant increase in their board duties. For many 
segments of the IT industry, this was the ˜rst period of prolonged spend
-ing cuts. (By contrast, ˜rms offering compliance systems faced increas
-ing demand.) Spending by telecommunications carriers on equipment in 
the United States dropped sharply between 2000 and 2003 (from some 
$52 billion to $20 billion) and has only slowly increased through 2006 (to 
just over $24 billion).
28
 Similarly, growth in data-center equipment such 
as high-end servers stalled and moved into negative territory. Not all IT 
segments shrank, and IT spending as a whole grew, albeit at a far reduced 
pace and according to a substantially altered spending portfolio allocation 
(for example, companies began to spend more on compliance and control 
systems to help them meet regulatory requirements, sometimes at the 
expense of R&D and other longer-term investments).
26
See Tom Perkins, ﬁThe ‚Compliance™ Board,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal
, March 2, 2007. A former 
board member of the Hewlett-Packard Company, Tom Perkins advocated the ﬁguidance 
boardﬂ over the ﬁcompliance boardﬂ in this op-ed piece.
27
In addition to SOX, this legislation includes the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Launder
-ing Laws. The Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act, 31 U.S.C. Sections 5311-5330 
and 12 U.S.C. Sections 1818(s), 1829(b), and 1951-1959, also known as the Bank Secrecy Act 
(BSA), and its implementing regulation, 31 CFR 103, constitute a tool that the U.S. govern
-ment uses to ˜ght drug traf˜cking, money laundering, and other crimes. Other laws also 
provide tools to prevent money laundering. See 
Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering: 
Comptroller™s 
Handbook,
 September 2000, available at http://www.occ.treas.gov/handbook/
bsa.pdf; accessed October 19, 2007.
28
ﬁTelecommunications Industry Association 2007 Industry Playbook,ﬂ p. 4, available 
at http://www.tiaonline.org/gov_affairs/policyplaybook2007.swf?/policy/policyplay
 book2007.swf; accessed March 7, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 53
The emphasis on cost reduction over growth investments fueled inter
-est in offshoring and outsourcing.
29 For the ˜rst time, even young start-up 
companies in Silicon Valley had to consider these strategies, despite their 
lack of the infrastructure that larger companies had for managing offshore 
functions such as R&D.
The Recovery (2005-2007)
The shocks to the IT R&D ecosystem eventually gave way to gradual 
recovery, beginning in 2005 and continuing through 2007.
30
 This recov
-ery has positive attributes. IT budgets are growing globally, consistent 
with the generally positive economic climate. The enterprise market is 
no longer the main driver of IT innovation. The consumer market had 
certainly been important during the bubble period, but during the recov
-ery consumers often became the dominant force, driving IT advances in 
many segments such as multimedia, social networking, gaming, cellular 
telephones, personal computers, and even automobiles. Venture capital 
funding was on the rise through 2007. Yet valuations remain modest, and 
the concern for cash conservation and sound business models remains 
strong. Good start-up companies generally reach successful milestones for 
merger and acquisition (M&A) or IPO. 
At the same time, there are important differences between today™s 
environment and the rather unique period of a decade ago. The sources 
of innovation are more diverse. They include the United States 
and
 other 
large markets in Europe and Asia. They include consumers in addition to 
suppliers and enterprise customers.
31
 The importance of consumer mar
-kets has continued to grow, especially in new or growing segments such 
as multimedia, social networking, games, cell phones, personal comput
-ers, and even automobiles. Start-up investments by venture capitalists 
are equally diverse. A majority of the large funds that formerly operated 
only in Silicon Valley now have of˜ces in Israel, India, and China. Many 
of the same funds that chose to diversify their investments on the basis of 
29
Offshoring
 is the practice of moving work to developing nations. 
Outsourcing
 is the prac
-tice of purchasing work that was formerly done in-house from an outside vendor. 
30
As this report was being prepared for publication, the effects on venture-funded and 
other entrepreneurial enterprises from downturns in the housing and credit markets 
and the economy as a whole were just beginning to be reported. See for example, Matt 
 
Richtel and Brad Stone, ﬁEconomy Has Become a Drag on Silicon Valley,ﬂ 
New 
York Times,
 April 9, 2008, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/09/technology/09silicon.
html?ref=technology; accessed April 9, 2008.
31
For a discussion of the trend toward application- and process-oriented innovation initi
-ated by customers, see David Moschella, 
Customer-Dri
ven IT,
 Harvard Business School Press, 
Boston, Mass., 2003. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 
geography are also diversifying across new sectors such as ﬁcleanﬂ tech
-nology. As a result, while the total amount of venture capital raised and 
invested is almost identical today to what it was 10 years ago, a materially 
lower percentage is for U.S.-based IT investments, particularly if one takes 
into account dollar currency erosion.
Another phenomenon associated with the 2005-2007 recovery was the 
rapid rise of private equity.
32
 Inexpensive debt instruments have made 
possible large recapitalizations. Even large companies may ˜nd this possi
-bility appealing. In the fall of 2006, for example, Freescale Semiconductor 
agreed to be acquired for approximately $18 billion by a consortium of 
private equity ˜rms led by the Blackstone Group. The size of this transac
-tion signaled that virtually any IT company is within the reach of private 
equity interests, if valuation warrants it and suf˜cient credit is available to 
˜nance such large acquisitions. Although merger and acquisition transac
-tions rose dramatically, the pace of technology IPOs has been rather slug
-gish. These two trends have changed the expectations of IT entrepreneurs. 
It is unclear yet whether those entrepreneurs choosing to build companies 
for a short, independent run before acquisition, rather than with a goal of 
creating independent companies sustainable over the long run, will pro
-duce the same kind and quality of innovation as long-run, entrepreneurial 
companies did in the past. It is also unclear whether the steps taken by 
private equity investors as they restructure the ˜rms that they acquire will 
bene˜t users in the long run and contribute to strengthening or weaken
-ing the IT R&D ecosystem.
33
THE
 EV
OLUTION
 OF
 T
ECHNOLO
GY P
LATFORMS
The combination of hardware structures, system software, and appli
-cations software that together deliver an important foundational set of IT 
capabilities is often called a 
platform
. Important examples today include 
Web 2.0 capabilities that deliver today™s interactive Web sites, the Win
-dows family of operating systems, the Intel x86 instruction set (with 
implementations also available from Advanced Micro Devices [AMD] and 
other vendors), and the combination of open-source software (Linux, the 
Apache Web server, MySQL, and PHP-Perl-Python) used to run dynamic 
Web sites and commonly known as LAMP, for the four software compo
-nents that contribute to the platform.
These platforms have been a critical area of IT innovation over the 
decades. Box 3.1 describes the evolution of major computing platforms up 
32
Dana Cimilluca, ﬁPrivate Equity Fuels Record Merger Run,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal,
 July 2, 
2007. 
33
Ben Worthen, ﬁIs Private Equity Good for Tech Users?ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal,
 June 25, 
2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 55
to the mid-1990s. The rest of this section describes the major IT platforms 
of the past decade. Notably, Web services and open-source community 
development have changed the fundamental nature of software, while 
wireless network connectivity, mobility and portability, and the emer
-gence of power as a critical resource to manage have signi˜cantly affected 
the prevailing hardware designs.
BOX
 3.1
 The Evolution of Information Technology Platforms 
 (1960s to Mid-1990s)
1960s and 1970s
. Mainframe computers and their software systems dominat
-ed. A platform shift from batch to time-sharing occurred, driven by new applica
-tions such as online airline reservations, while machine resources were shared 
across a larger user community. Technology advances made it economical to 
provide scaled-down ﬁmini-computersﬂ to work groups such as engineering 
teams for whom dedicated access could be justi˜ed. 
1970s and 1980s
. The microprocessor yielded a shift to personal computers 
(PCs) and engineering workstations, delivering functionality and performance 
at a price that could be justi˜ed for an individual. The single-user nature of 
these machines affected the dominant operating systems, such as Disk 
Op-erating System (D
OS) and UNIX, as well as the kinds of user applications 
(for example, word processing, spreadsheets, circuit design, and mechanical 
design). Ethernet advanced the client-server model, in which users™ computers 
communicated to back-end ﬁserversﬂ for storage, mail, and printing services on 
a local area network (LAN).
Mid-1980s and early 1990s
. Multiprocessor systems emerged for high-end 
transaction processing and fault tolerance. These were often used for the 
server side of high performance database systems. At the client-machine level, 
ﬁWIMPﬂ interfacesŠWindows, Icons, Menu, Pointing DeviceŠbecame per
-vasive.
1 Routers and switches extended LAN technology and enabled the 
expansion of the National Science Foundation Network (NSFnet). Enterprise 
software, ˜rst in the form of relational database systems and later in the form 
of software tailored to perform particular enterprise functions and industry sec
-tors, emerged as major IT platform elements. PC software also evolved, with 
programs for graphical design and page layout. 
Mid-1990s. The major platform shift was the emergence of the commercial 
Internet. This development was driven by the underlying network equipment 
as well as by new end-user functionality delivered to client-side Web browsers 
from server-side Web servers, using the protocol architecture of the World 
Wide Web. New services rapidly emerged for Web directories, Internet search, 
e-commerce, and auctions.
1See, for example, Thierry Bardini, 
Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the 
Origins of Personal Computing,
 Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, Calif., 2000. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
As platforms evolve, the established IT leaders are presented with 
both new opportunities and new challenges.
34
 Of particular note is that 
leadership in the de˜nition of new platforms has implications not only for 
the ˜rms that participate in that de˜nition but for the wider IT sector. IT 
products and services generally become commoditized over time as mul
-tiple ˜rms acquire the know-how to supply similar, competing products; 
such competition has bene˜ts in terms of lower prices for goods and ser
-vices. Pressures from lower costs overseas for labor and other essentials 
thus require that to maintain leadershipŠor even a strong positionŠin IT, 
U.S. ˜rms must constantly focus on achieving high-value innovation as a 
foundation for developing noncommodity products and services.
35
Basic research support can play an important role in enabling plat
-form leadership. For example, NSF support for work at the National 
Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of 
Illinois provided the United States with an early lead in Web browser and 
server technologies, even though the initial Web implementation was at a 
European research laboratory.
Baseline: Web 1.0 Platform
The year 1995 brought together the World Wide Web (WWW), the 
Mosaic Web browser, and the commercialized Internet. From this con˚u
-ence ˚owed the ˜rst generation of Web applications.
36
 The so-called Web 
1.0 consists of the WWW protocol stack for the exchange of Web pages 
between servers and browsers, and the ˜rst generation of Web sites. Pages 
are described in Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) and transported 
between servers and clients by Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP). 
HTTP is constructed on top of the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP) protocol stack originally developed for the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency Network, or Arpanet. Pages are identi˜ed by 
way of a Uniform Resource Locator (URL).
Despite their genesis in university research laboratories, the Web 1.0 
services quickly shifted from those for researchers and scientists to those 
34
For an analysis of approaches to building platform leadership including those used by 
Google and Qualcomm, see Annabelle Gawer and Michael A. Cusumano, ﬁHow Compa
-nies Become Platform Leaders,ﬂ 
Sloan Management Re
view
 49(2):28-35, Winter 2008. See also 
Timothy Bresnahan and Shane Greenstein, ﬁTechnological Competition and the Structure of 
the Computer Industry,ﬂ 
Journal of Industrial Economics
 47(1):1-40, March 1999.
35
See National Research Council, 
Renewing U.S. Telecommunications Research,
 The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, p. 58, for a discussion of commoditization and its 
effects in the telecommunications sector. 
36
See ﬁ10 Years That Changed the World,ﬂ available at http://www.wired.com/wired/
 archive/13.08/intro.html; accessed October 29, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 57
focused on consumers. Web ﬁpropertiesﬂ (see below) are the Web sites 
that are popular among the growing user community in terms of average 
visits by visitor, number of unique visitors, and other metrics (see Box 3.2 
regarding the transition of Google from a government-funded research 
project to a multibillion-dollar-per-year Web property).
Web Browser, Web Ser
ver, and Portals
The historical role of university developers and researchers in creating 
Web technologies, services, and applications is remarkable. The Mosaic 
Web browser developed at NCSA was commercialized as Netscape Navi
-gator in late 1994, achieving a memorable initial public offering in August 
BOX
 3.2
 Google: An Example of Growing from Research to 
 Global Brand, Building on Scalable Infrastructure
In 1998, Google handled 10,000 search queries per day from a ﬁserver farmﬂ 
located in the dormitory room of Larry Page, computer science graduate student 
at Stanford University. Today, Google has 15,000 employees, diverse products, 
annual revenues of $15 billion, a market capitalization of more than $150 billion, 
and is a verb. Google™s story illustrates the critical nature of university research 
for start-ups and the huge difference that individuals make in the trajectory of a 
start-up.
Larry Page and his Google cofounder Sergey Brin were research assistants 
at Stanford contributing to the National Science Foundation™s Digital Library Ini
-tiative. Search was a natural component of this effort. Web search was not new. 
But Page and Brin had a new idea for improving search quality: the PageRank 
algorithm that weights Web page importance by the number and importance of 
other Web pages that link to it.
Google was incorporated in late 1998 when Page and Brin received a 
$100,000 investment from Sun Microsystems cofounder Andy Bechtolsheim. 
Bechtolsheim had once been a Stanford graduate student as well: he designed 
the Sun Workstation under the supervision of Professor Forest Baskett, supported 
by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) VLSI Project. (It 
ran the University of California, Berkeley, UNIX operating system, engineered by 
Berkeley computer science graduate student and Sun Microsystems cofounder Bill 
Joy under the supervision of Professors Domenico Ferrari and Bob Fabry, also 
supported by DARPA.) Page and Brin were introduced to Bechtolsheim by Stan
-ford computer science Professor David Cheriton, who had previously cofounded 
Granite Networks (high performance networks) and Kealia (high performance 
servers) with Bechtolsheim. The PageRank patent is held by Stanford and licensed 
to Google.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
1995.
37
 The browser was freely available for evaluation, although com
-mercial users needed a for-fee license. Navigator pioneered support for 
dynamically rendered Web pages, providing extensions to HTML and 
HTTP that provided useful new functionality (albeit sometimes ahead of 
formally adopted standards).
Navigator™s market success triggered a response from Microsoft: 
Internet Explorer. Starting with the same (publicly available) code base 
developed at NCSA, Microsoft developed a sequence of versions that 
ultimately surpassed Navigator in technical sophistication and reliabil
-ityŠespecially for Web pages with dynamic content and complicated 
rendering. Again, the business model was free software for consumers 
and licenses for commercial use. By 1998, Netscape surrendered in the 
ﬁbrowser warsﬂ marketplace competition with Internet Explorer, releasing 
its code as open source. This in turn gave birth to the Mozilla (later Firefox) 
browser and its own post-2004 competition with Internet Explorer.
NCSA also developed the early Web server Hyper Text Transfer 
Protocol Daemon (HTTPd), which Netscape likewise commercialized. 
Starting with the same code base, a group independently developed the 
Apache Web server as open source in 1995.
38
 A widely used Web appli
-cations stack is based on the open-source operating system Linux, the 
Apache Web server, MySQL (open-source data management), and PHP-
Perl-Python (a scripting language for program-driven dynamic Web page 
behavior), known as LAMP.
Netscape attempted to transition from being a software company to 
being a ﬁcontentﬂ company by becoming a 
portal
Ša collection of Web-
based services such as user forums, e-mail, shopping services, news, 
Web directories, Internet search, messaging, and, more recently, Web logs 
(blogs) and telephony services (Voice over Internet Protocol). Popular 
Web sites typically provide a portal front end to back-end Web services.
Directories and Search
With the growth in WWW pages, ˜nding information became a major 
need. ﬁJerry™s Guide to the World Wide Web,ﬂ the hierarchical directory 
37
See Audris Mockus, Roy T. Fielding, and James D. Herbsleb, ﬁTwo Case Studies of 
Open Source Software Development: Apache and Mozilla,ﬂ in 
Perspecti
ves on Free and Open 
Software,
 Joseph Feller, Brian Fitzgerald, Scott A. Hissam, and Karim R. Lakhani, eds., MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2005. 
38
For a history of Apache, see Audris Mockus, Roy T. Fielding, and James Herbsleb, ﬁA 
Case Study of Open Source Software Development: The Apache Server,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
22
nd International Conference on Software Engineering,
 Association for Computing Machinery, 
2000, pp. 263-272, available at http://opensource.mit.edu/papers/mockusapache.pdf; ac
-cessed December 27, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 59
originally behind Yahoo!, was ˜rst compiled in 1994 by two Stanford 
University graduate students, Jerry Yang and David Filo.
A 
Web directory
 is a page with organized links to other pages. Editors 
typically create such directories, or authors can create entries themselves. 
Alternatively an automatic crawl of the Web can construct a directory. 
Web 
crawlers 
follow links within found pages to ˜nd subsequently reachable 
pages. These are analyzed for words and phrases that were used to locate 
the page. Search engines use a 
Web index
 to identify pages that match a 
particular user™s search criterion.
Early Web crawlers, circa 1993, included Wanderer (developed at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Aliweb (developed at the 
European Organization for Nuclear Research), both of which constructed 
limited indexes. WebCrawler (developed at the University of Washington 
in 1994) is considered the ˜rst to offer full-text search.
39
 Infoseek and 
Lycos (developed at Carnegie Mellon University) soon followed. Info
-seek supported more complex Boolean searches. It was acquired by the 
Walt Disney Company in 1998 and was used by Go.com.
40
 Lycos, which 
started as a Web search site, evolved into Terra Lycos, an advertising-
 supported Web portal.
The next wave of Web crawlers included AltaVista (from Digital 
Equipment Corporation [DEC]) and Excite (created by students at Stan
-ford University). AltaVista was notable for the way that it implemented 
fast Web crawling and used multiprocessor hardware to handle the grow
-ing scale of search. Excite combined search services from Magellan and 
WebCrawler, and was the search back end for Netscape, Apple, and Micro
-soft. Excite also moved into portal services, ultimately being acquired by 
the ISP@Home to form Excite@Home in 1999.
The Web searchers Dogpile, Inktomi (developed at the University 
of California, Berkeley), and Ask Jeeves emerged in 1996. Dogpile was 
a 
metasearcher,
 combining the results of other search engines. Inktomi 
used a cluster-based server architecture to improve search quality while 
maintaining high throughput. Ask Jeeves (now Ask.com) focused on an 
easy-to-use natural language system.
Google (developed at Stanford University in 1998) also exploits under
-lying cluster computing technology to achieve scale in processing. The 
system™s PageRank algorithm ordered matching pages by their impor
-tance, de˜ned as a function of how many other pages refer to the page 
39
WebCrawler was the search engine acquired by America Online (AOL) in 1995, in turn 
by Excite in 1997, and ˜nally by InfoSpace in the wake of Excite™s bankruptcy in 2001.
40
To illustrate the complex heritage of Web search products, Infoseek™s enterprise search 
product was sold to Inktomi Corporation in 2000, which in turn was sold to Verity in 2002 
prior to Inktomi™s acquisition by Yahoo! 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
and their importance in turn. While the search engine Overture pioneered 
the technology of ad placement and the revenue model of advertising-
supported Web search, Google™s popularity turned ad placement into 
a lucrative revenue source. Ad placement is a formidable technology 
challenge, requiring in response to a search term that large numbers of 
advertisers bidŠin real timeŠfor placing their link on a user™s results 
page. It represents a vibrant research area at the con˚uence of information 
technology and economics.
Yahoo! has assembled its current search service from Inktomi and 
Overture. MSN Search depended on other providers for search, particu
-larly Inktomi until 2004, when it switched to its own service MSN Search. 
Windows Live Search débuted in 2006.
The Emergence of Web Properties
Beyond search and portals, Web 1.0 led to further categories of Web 
services. E-commerce sites such as eBay and Amazon.com are the most 
iconic, but there are many, many more. In September 1995, eBay started 
as an electronic auction site named AuctionWeb. An eBay innovation is 
its reputation system: sellers and buyers rate each other at the end of the 
auction. To simplify the process of paying for auctions, eBay acquired 
PayPal, a Web service that plays the role of a ˜nancial intermediary able 
to maintain the anonymity of buyers and sellers. eBay collects revenues 
from a complex fee structure related to the nature of the item listing and 
the ˜nal price of the auction.
Amazon.com was founded in 1994 and launched in July 1995 to sell 
books online. Amazon.com combines buyer information with collabora
-tive ˜ltering to suggest further products of interest to the buyer. Amazon.
com also presents user reviews and allows users to rate the reviewers. 
Many other ˜rms have also developed a wide array of e-commerce ser
-vices and capabilities.
Amazon.com is particularly interesting as it also ﬁpowersﬂ the elec
-tronic stores of other Web sites by providing interfaces to its services 
infrastructure. Amazon.com Web Services is constructed from underlying 
services for scalable virtual servers, reliable network storage, message link
-ing across processing and networks, comprehensive Web site traf˜c data, 
catalogs and electronic commerce, and historical pricing information.
Evolution: From Web 1.0 to the Web 2.0 Platform
This subsection reviews the rise of Web 2.0, a second generation of 
Web-based technology, services, and applications that began to emerge in 
the time frame of the early 2000s.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 61
De˜ning Web 
2.0
Web 
2.0
 is characterized by community-contributed and community-
managed content, existing in many forms: user-contributed postings and 
comments; user-produced videos, indexed by user-supplied tags and 
augmented by comments and ratings by other users; social networking, 
with community formation for communications and sharing information; 
and photo- and link-sharing services.
41
 Publishers™ reaching a community 
that consumes and enhances content is an enabling element. The network 
is the platform for delivering content to applications that run inside a 
Web browser. In Web 2.0, the community owns and exercises control over 
the site information and can use programmable frameworks to make 
that content dynamic. Users extend the content, labeling it, rating it, and 
ranking it, thus providing the ﬁsocialﬂ in social networking. Contrast this 
with traditional media, with controlled authorship, and proscribed user 
enhancement of content.
Web 
2.0 Platform Elements
The underlying technology for Web 2.0 enables Internet-based appli
-cations, accessible through the user interface provided by a Web browser, 
to customize pages for individual users. For example, Ajax (Asynchro
-nous JavaScript and Extensible Markup Language [XML]) is a Web devel
-opment framework used to create modern interactive Web applications. 
JavaScript adds an interpreted programmatic functionality to XML, a con
-tent format-speci˜cation language. The result is dynamically rendered, 
content-sensitive Web pages. Other programming frameworks such as 
Perl, Python, Ruby on Rails, and Adobe Flex provide similar capabilities 
using different linguistic paradigms and platform building blocks. Each 
has its adherents and advantages, but the effects are similar: Move your 
mouse over a page-rendered map to display a ˚oating palette of links to 
content about that location. The Asynchronous Web browser/Web server 
protocol extensions enhance responsiveness through background com
-munications that obviate the need to reload an entire Web page when 
a user action induces a change. Google, for example, provides an Ajax 
application programming interface (API) to permit individual Web pages 
to include a search bar. The page provides a context-dependent gateway 
into the Google back end.
41
See Tim O™Reilly, ﬁWhat Is Web 2.0,ﬂ September 30, 2005, available at http://www.
oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html; accessed July 
3, 2007. Note that ﬁWeb 2.0ﬂ is sometimes used to refer to the introduction of greatly in
-creased interactivity into Web sites.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Per
vasi
ve Composition in Web 
2.0
Web 2.0 applications construct new applications from existing proto
-cols, services, and Web sites. For example, Really Simple Syndication (RSS) 
is a protocol used to implement content publication by way of ﬁfeedsﬂ to 
distribute news, blogs, podcasts, and other digital media. Reader appli
-cations allow users to subscribe to particular feeds, view newly avail
-able content, and display selected items. As another example, mashups 
illustrate the power of composition within Web service architectures: a 
mashup
 is a kind of Web application that uses the existing Web services 
frameworks to compose a new Web site from existing sites that support 
the necessary access APIs.
Case Study: Facebook as a Platform
Facebook, a popular social networking Web site that traces its history 
to 2004, offers a case study of how modern Web applications exploit per
-vasive composition to create a new platform for application development 
that gives rise to a new ecosystem. Facebook™s essential structure is the 
social graph, associating with each user those other users to whom that 
person is related as a friend or participant in a common group. Applica
-tions are constructed around the social graph. For example, when a user 
changes his or her status (e.g., indicating ﬁI™m in the library now,ﬂ posting 
new photos, and so on), the change appears in the news feed of all of the 
user™s friends.
Growing at the rate of 100,000 new users per day, in mid-2007 Face
-book opened its internal applications development platform to third par
-ties.
42
 It allows developers™ applications to access entry points in the 
Facebook page and to access Facebook-managed information such as 
user pro˜les, friends, photos, and event data. When a user clicks in the 
appropriate area of a Facebook-rendered page, a remote server deployed 
and managed by the application developer is invoked to process the 
request, compute a response, and transmit the result back to Facebook. 
To incentivize developers, Facebook allows them to share in the site™s 
advertising revenues.
Signi˜cant Trend: The Rise of Open Source
Community-based development existed before 1995, although the 
academic and research communities were the most common users of the 
42
See ﬁFacebook Developers Documentation,ﬂ available at http://wiki.developers.face
 book.com/index.php/Main_Page; accessed October 10, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 63
resulting software. From 1995 on, community development accelerated 
greatly, and the resulting software became commonly deployed in services 
and systems accessible by large user communities over the Internet.
What Is Open Source?
Open source
 makes a program™s source code readily available to a 
developer community, with speci˜c restrictions regarding intellectual 
property rights. Open-source projects may be overseen by an implementer-
in-chief, a small committee of developers and/or editors, or even more 
democratic mechanisms. The relevant intellectual property regimes cover 
a wide range, from those that restrict the commercial sale of software incor
-porating open source to those that allow commercialization. Such software 
is not necessarily free. However, the business model most commonly used 
is based on charging for the support, packaging, and customization of the 
software rather than for the software itself.
43
 In the context of Web-based 
services and applications, open-source community development is the 
norm. LAMP
44
 is an example of an application environment founded on 
open-source components.
Implications for the Software Industry
Some traditional software ˜rms have responded to the rise of open 
source by embracing it. As an example, IBM now supports a form of open 
source for its Web-based products. IBM™s Websphere middleware archi
-tecture is a set of services for Web-based applications, incorporating open-
source components such as Linux, Apache Web server, and Java. In 2005, 
IBM released Websphere Application Server Community Edition (WAS 
CE) as open source. WAS CE prepackages commonly needed open-source 
components, providing a platform within which IBM™s other proprietary 
components could be added. Although the software itself is available free 
of charge, technical support is by fee. 
IBM spearheads Eclipse, a community effort to create an integration 
environment for software tools for Java and Web services development. 
Its focus is on enabling the interoperation of tools from a large vendor 
43
Copyrighted open-source software (and some open-source software that is in the public 
domain) can be licensed using a variety of mechanisms. See, for example, Andrew M. St. 
Laurent, 
Open Source and Free Software Licensing,
 O™Reilly Media, Sebastopol, Calif., 2004; 
and Lawrence Rosen, 
Open Source Licensing: Software Freedom and Intellectual Property Law,
 Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2004.
44
See Dale Dougherty, ﬁLAMP: The Open Source Web Platform,ﬂ January 26, 2001, avail
-able at http://www.onlamp.com/pub/a/onlamp/2001/01/25/lamp.html; accessed Octo
-ber 4, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
community. To induce tool vendors to integrate with Eclipse, IBM pro
-vides visibility into its APIs and its underlying tool integration services. 
Open source helps third parties verify that there are no special trapdoors 
or APIs that give IBM™s tools any advantage over their own. In return, 
IBM creates a highly functional environment for software creation, lever
-aging third-party tools for Java and its own Web services model, to attract 
applications developers. This approach is viewed as a critical response to 
Microsoft™s proprietary .NET Framework.
45
Signi˜cant Trend: The Emergence of Mobile 
 and Data-Center Platforms
The major hardware trends of the 1995-2007 period are the following: 
on the Web access side, the rise of mobile devices; on the Web services 
side, the concentration of back-end processing into Internet data centers. 
This subsection reviews some of the dominant hardware trends in both.
Central Processing Units
Intel x86 instruction set processors, with implementations also avail
-able from AMD and other vendors, have become dominant. Introduced 
in the late 1970s and powering the original IBM PC, the Intel x86 has 
driven the information technology industry to new levels of price and 
performance. They are now the basis for virtually all PCs, whether server, 
desktop, laptop, or processor cluster. A number of variations have been 
introduced, some optimized for high performance (the ﬁextremeﬂ cat
-egoryŠsuitable for use in high-end servers), others designed for good 
performance at lower power (the ﬁvalueﬂ categoryŠdriven primarily by 
the demand of laptops for long battery life), and a third category seeking 
a compromise between the two (the ﬁmainstreamﬂ categoryŠsuch as for 
standard desktop PCs). Higher levels of performance have been achieved 
through higher processor clock rates made possible by shrinking semicon
-ductor process feature sizes and scaled voltages. Through architectural 
cleverness, instruction-level parallelism makes it possible to issue more 
than one instruction per clock cycle if the instructions do not require the 
same machine resources. The challenges of cooling advanced processor 
chips have precipitated a fundamental shift to achieving higher perfor
-mance through multicore architectures rather than faster clocks. How best 
to harness multicore processors to achieve higher levels of performance, 
45
For a more detailed discussion, see Marc Erickson and Angus McIntyre, ﬁWhat Is 
Eclipse, and How Do I Use It?ﬂ November 1, 2001, available at http://www.ibm.com
/developerworks/opensource/library/os-eclipse.html; accessed July 3, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 65
particularly for desktop rather than server processing, remains a research 
challenge.
Handheld De
vices
Early attempts at creating convenient handheld devices met limited 
success. The Apple Newton offers one such example. These tended to be 
proprietary devices, with limited connectivity and programmability and 
with narrow functionality. The ˜rst broadly successful handheld was the 
Palm Pilot, introduced in 1995. Keys to its success were its shirt-pocket 
size, long battery life, one-touch PC synchronization, intuitive user inter
-face with personal organizer functionality, simpli˜ed writing recognition, 
instant power on, and a simple programming environment that attracted 
a developer community to enrich and extend the platform.
Following the ˜rst ﬁorganizerﬂ-oriented devices, Apple introduced 
the iPod, which became the most successful consumer-oriented digital 
media player; Research in Motion, its Blackberry device, initially focused 
on e-mail; and Palm, its Treo smartphone. Apple™s recent introduction of 
the iPhone is illustrative of the evolution of the handheld device from a 
specialized gadget to a broad-based mobile computing platform. The new 
handheld platforms are characterized by the following: modern operating 
systems supported by a diverse community of application developers; 
rich wireless connectivity, incorporating multiple radios with transparent 
roaming to enable ubiquitous network computing; full participation in 
consumer and business-oriented Web-based services; and being deeply 
embedded in consumer environments.
Multiple countries contribute to this environment: China produces 
and consumes more mobile phones than any other country, Korea pro
-vides the best and fastest broadband wireless connectivity, Europe and 
Japan lead the world in using consumer mobile services, while the United 
States leads in smartphones and business mobile services.
Internet Data-Center Architecture
The Internet data center has emerged as a new platform for provid
-ing scaled-up processing, memory, and storage resources to support the 
network applications used by billions of clients. 
Internet data centers
 are 
building-scale computing systems, containing vast numbers of process
-ing clusters and storage servers. Major Web properties and many large 
enterprises use Internet data centers in one form or another. The ancestor 
of the data center is the Web hosting facility that came into being in the 
late 1990s. These facilities provide Web site operators with compute cycles 
and data storage for rent, on which they can deploy their Web servers 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
and applications. Resources can be shared or dedicated, with trade-offs 
between performance, security, reliability, and cost. Hosting facilities are 
purpose-built, with power and cooling suf˜cient to support a large num
-ber of machines within the building.
Most Web properties began by placing their own processing clusters 
within third parties™ facilities. But rapid growth, coupled to a shakeout 
of hosting facility operators following the bust in 2000, led to a short
-age of space at hosting facilities. This led ˜rms into designing their own 
building-scale computer facilities, integrating processing, storage, internal 
and external networking, along with integral power and cooling infra
-structures. The resulting data centers typically deploy 100,000 to 1 million 
computers within a single facility.
46
The total power budget of an Internet data center must consider the 
demands of the power distribution system itself and the air conditioning 
systems needed to transfer the heat generated by the equipment as it 
consumes power. Ef˜cient utilization of data-center resources, consider
-ing power as a critical resource to be managed, is critical in data-center 
design.
Mobile Applications and Communications Platforms
Users demand high performance Internet access from their mobile 
devices. Access is achieved either by way of packet data over the cel
-lular telephone system or by access over wireless local area networks 
(WLANs). Third-generation cellular networks are the current state of the 
art. They are available throughout the United States and the rest of the 
world. Pre-third-generation data services provided 64 kilobit per second 
(kbps) circuit-switched data and 384 kbps packet-switched data. This data 
rate is insuf˜cient for media-rich Web page and application delivery to 
mobile devices. EDGEŠEnhanced Data Rates for GSM (Global System 
for Mobile communications) EvolutionŠis an interim method for higher 
data rates. It is widely available in the United States, achieving up to 236.8 
kbps (and a maximum of 473.6 kbps if twice as many slots are used for 
data encoding). Evolved EDGE is a next-generation technology that uses 
more advanced encoding methods to increase data rates up to 1 Mbps.
47
 46
ﬁDown on the Server Farm,ﬂ 
The Economist
, May 22, 2008, available at http://www.
economist.com/displayStory.cfm?source=hptextfeature&story_id=11413148; accessed Oc
-tober 10, 2008.
47
For more information, see Wikipedia, ﬁEnhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution,ﬂ avail
-able at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enhanced_Data_Rates_for_GSM_Evolution; accessed 
July 31, 2007. See also ﬁGSM/3G Market/Technology Update: EDGE Evolution,ﬂ Global 
Mobile Suppliers Association, December 2007, available at http://www.gsacom.com; ac
-cessed February 20, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 67
Recent third-generation deployments include support for High Speed 
Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA), achieving multimegabit transmissions 
toward the client. Up to 3.6 Mbps peak downlink data throughput has 
been achieved in operational networks.
48
 Some operators are now deploy
-ing High Speed Uplink Packet Access (HSUPA), which will also allow 
greater uplink speeds, into the multimegabit rate.
49
 The alternative is WLAN technology. The IEEE 802.11 family of stan
-dards, also known as Wi-Fi, makes use of license-free spectrum bands. 
Inexpensive access equipment that is commonly incorporated in laptop 
computers and other mobile devices placed it in the hands of many users 
and access points. Wi-Fi can obtain up to 11 Mbps (IEEE 802.11b) or 54 
Mbps (IEEE 802.11g) access speeds, but sharing spectrum with other users 
signi˜cantly reduces the effective bandwidth. Wi-Fi is not a replacement 
for cellular data services; it supports shorter distances between the base 
station and terminal than that of cellular data services, cannot provide 
high bandwidth to rapidly moving users, and does not support handoffs 
across access points. Nevertheless, many inexpensive base stations can 
be deployed to cover areas dense with pedestrian users, such as city 
centers and industrial and university campuses. A new generation of 
IEEE 802.11ŠIEEE 802.11nŠis undergoing the process of standardization. 
The target performance of the system is up to 248 Mbps, with 74 Mbps 
typical.
50
Another standard, WiMAX, refers to IEEE 802.16 and was initially 
intended as the speci˜cation for high-bandwidth, point-to-point wireless 
access between ˜xed devices. WiMAX is also intended as a ﬁlast mileﬂ 
technology to be used as an alternative to digital subscriber line (DSL) or 
cable connectivity to homes and of˜ces. Interest has emerged in mobile 
WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e) that will provide connectivity to small access 
devices on the move. Access speeds of up to 70 Mbps and distances of up 
to tens of miles are possible, but there is a trade-off between distance to 
the base station and the data rates that can be achieved. User-observed 
access in the range of 2 Mbps is more likely.
51
48 
See Wikipedia, ﬁHigh-Speed Downlink Packet Access,ﬂ available at http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/HSDPA; accessed July 31, 2007. See also Global Mobile Suppliers Association 
survey of HSPDA and HSUPA deployments worldwide, available at www.gsacom.com; 
accessed February 20, 2007. 
49
More information is available at Wikipedia, ﬁList of HSUPA Networks,ﬂ available at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Deployed_HSUPA_networks; accessed July 31, 2007. 
See also www.gsacom.com; accessed July 31, 2007.
50
See Wikipedia, ﬁIEEE 802.11,ﬂ available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802. 
11#802.11n; accessed July 31, 2007.
51
Data available at Wikipedia, ﬁWiMAX,ﬂ at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WiMAX; ac
-cessed July 31, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Voice o
ver Internet Protocol
Voice over Internet Protocol, or VoIP (also known as IP telephony) 
is a method for encoding voice communications using packet-switched 
rather than the circuit-switched techniques that are used in conventional 
telephone systems. Audio is sampled, digitized, and encoded into pack
-ets, which are then routed on a hop-by-hop basis to the destination, 
where the samples are converted back into an audio form. End devices 
are now powerful enough to perform this conversion processing without 
any specialized hardware. The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) has been 
standardized to establish connections between call originators and desti
-nations. Using SIP, Wi-Fi VoIP-enabled handsets can operate like mobile 
telephones within range of a WLAN. Cellular telephones, already or soon 
to be equipped with Wi-Fi access, will be able to opportunistically shift 
between the cellular network and WLANs, on the basis of quality and 
cost-of-access considerations.
THE
 EV
OLUTION
 OF
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY 
 INDUSTR
Y S
ECTORS
The information technology sector is composed of numerous prod
-ucts and services, perhaps the most signi˜cant of which have been semi
-conductors, computers, and software. This section reviews the historical 
evolution of these essential sectors of the information technology industry, 
with a focus on the developments in the 1995-2007 period. Examination of 
these sectors illuminates the historical sources of U.S. leadership in IT as 
well as the increasing role that the United States and other nations have 
come to play in a today™s globalized IT industry.
Evolution of the Semiconductor, Computer, and Software Subsectors
Let us look ˜rst at the evolution of the industry from the perspective 
of its three essential subsectors: the semiconductor industry, the computer 
industry, and the software industry.
The Semiconductor Industry
The transistor was invented at Bell Laboratories in 1947. The technol
-ogy was widely licensed, and many electronics ˜rms quickly diversi˜ed 
into the industry. These ˜rms were mostly clustered around Boston, New 
York, and Los Angeles. The industry was research-intensive, with contin
-ual product and process advances fueling rapid growth. Particularly in the 
part of Northern California soon to become ﬁSilicon Valley,ﬂ employees 
from some of the original ˜rms formed successful new entrants. The ˜rst 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 69
was Shockley Laboratories, formed by William Shockley, a co-recipient of 
the Nobel Prize in physics for the transistor. He hired eight talented sci
-entists and engineers who in 1957 left to found Fairchild Semiconductor. 
Fairchild in turn suffered employee defections to new spin-offs. Many of 
these became industry leaders, launching the Silicon Valley cluster. Silicon 
Valley ˜rms accounted for about half the output of the U.S. industry by 
1980.
52
U.S. ˜rms initially dominated the industry. Not only did a U.S. ˜rm 
invent the transistor, but the U.S. military was the largest consumer of 
semiconductors and a major funder of semiconductor R&D. Texas Instru
-ments demonstrated the ˜rst integrated circuit in 1958; the same year, the 
U.S. Air Force incorporated semiconductors in designs for the Minuteman 
missile.
53
 Defense and space programs rapidly became major customers. 
By 1963 the military accounted for nearly half of device sales, ˜nanc
-ing around 25 percent of semiconductor R&D.
54
 Subsequent growth was 
driven by the computer industry, also based predominantly in the United 
States.
The ˜rst challenge to the semiconductor industry in the United States 
came from Japan, where the initial inroads were made by ˜rms that 
pioneered transistor radios and went on to transistorize televisions and 
other consumer electronics products. The Japanese government negoti
-ated technology licenses and protected domestic producers, later sponsor
-ing industrywide projects to improve production. In the 1970s, Intel and 
other U.S. ˜rms pioneered memory devices. Japanese ˜rms excelled at 
their manufacture, enabling them to capture a large share of the expand
-ing market.
55
 Later the ˜rms faced competition from established Korean 
˜rms that also became leading producers. The latter were aided by their 
52
Steven Klepper, ﬁSilicon ValleyŠA Chip Off the Old Detroit Bloc,ﬂ in 
Entrepreneurship, 
Growth, and Public Policy,
 David B. Audretsch and Robert Strom, eds., Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England, forthcoming. See also Christophe Lecuyer, 
Making Silicon Valley: 
Inno
vation and the Growth of 
High Tech, 
193
0-
197
0,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2006.
53
Texas Instruments™ Jack S. Kilby received the 2000 Nobel Prize in physics for his part in 
the invention of the integrated circuit. See also Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), 
ﬁSIA Interactive Timeline: 1958,ﬂ available at http://www.sia-online.org/cs/about_sia
/history; accessed October 28, 2008. 
54
Richard N. Langlois and W. Edward Steimueller, ﬁThe Evolution of Competitive Advan
-tage in the Worldwide Semiconductor Industry,ﬂ in 
Sources of Industrial Leadership,
 Richard R. 
Nelson and David C. Mowery, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1999, 
pp. 26-27. See also Ernst Braun and Stuart MacDonald, 
Re
volution in Miniature,
 Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England, 1978.
55
Arthur L. Robinson, ﬁPerilous Times for U.S. Microcircuit Makers,ﬂ 
Science
 208(4444):585, 
1980.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
recruiting of large numbers of expatriates from U.S. universities and Sili
-con Valley ˜rms.
56
 Subsequently, U.S. ˜rms recaptured market share in the manufacture 
of semiconductors, in part owing to favorable exchange rates and growing 
demand for microprocessors. U.S. ˜rms improved their own manufac
-turing while outsourcing production to specialist producers, known as 
foundries. Since the 1960s, U.S. ˜rms had assembled and tested devices 
in Asia.
57
 In the 1980s technological and market developments enabled 
such Asian ˜rms to become manufacturing specialists,
58
 spurring found
-ries in low-wage countries such as Taiwan. Through government efforts 
to license process technology and transfer it to sponsored ˜rms, Taiwan 
developed a vibrant industry that today ranks fourth in the world.
59
 Much 
like Silicon Valley, its industry is composed of numerous spin-offs from 
incumbent ˜rms and government efforts, concentrated in the Hsinchu 
Science Park. Its development was also aided by Taiwanese expatriates, 
many of whom had been educated in the United States and had risen up 
through the ranks of Silicon Valley semiconductor producers.
60
The Taiwanese industry enabled the formation of ˜rms specializing in 
integrated design in the United StatesŠthat is, ﬁfablessﬂ ˜rms (i.e., com
-panies that do not operate their own fabrication facilities and therefore can 
concentrate their R&D resources on design rather than on manufacturing 
process technologies). Fabless ˜rms coexist with vertically integrated pro
-ducers and have helped the U.S. industry maintain its prowess. U.S. ˜rms 
focus on innovative product concept and design, with the manufacturing 
taking place in Taiwan by ˜rms that focus on advanced chip technology 
and high-volume processing. The U.S. ˜rms are concentrated in Silicon 
Valley and other areas with major research universities, re˚ecting the role 
that leading university research centers have played in developing new 
design techniques, software, and engineering talent. As of 2002, 475 fab
-56
Richard N. Langlois and W. Edward Steimueller, ﬁThe Evolution of Competitive Advantage 
in the Worldwide Semiconductor Industry,ﬂ in 
Sources of Industrial Leadership, 
Richard R. Nelson 
and David C. Mowery, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1999, p. 55.
57
Ernest Braun and Stuart MacDonald, 
Re
volution in Miniature
, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England, 1978, pp. 150-151. 
58
Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, ﬁVertical Specialization and Industry Structure 
in High Technology Industries,ﬂ in 
Business Strategy o
ver the Industry Life Cycle,
 Joel C. Baum 
and Anita M. McGahan, eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2004, p. 331.
59
John A. Matthews, ﬁA Silicon Valley of the East: Creating Taiwan™s Semiconductor In
-dustry,ﬂ 
California Management Re
view
 39(4):26-54, Summer 1997; and Hongwu Sam Ouyang, 
ﬁAgency Problem, Institutions, and Technology Policy: Explaining Taiwan™s Semiconductor 
Industry Development,ﬂ 
Research Policy
 35(9):1314-1328, 2006.
60
Hongwu Sam Ouyang, ﬁAgency Problem, Institutions, and Technology Policy: Explain
-ing Taiwan
™s Semiconductor Industry Development,ﬂ 
Research Polic
y 35(9):1314-1328, 2006; 
AnnaLee Saxenian, 
The New Argonauts: Regional Ad
vantage in a Global Economy,
 Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2006.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 71
less ˜rms were located in the United States.
61
 The next closest country in 
number of fabless ˜rms was Canada, with 30 such companies.
62
Recently the United States has specialized in more research-intensive 
aspects of semiconductor production, including design and the develop
-ment of experimental production facilities. Semiconductor Manufacturing 
Technology (SEMATECH), a nonpro˜t consortium, was established to 
pursue advanced R&D in semiconductor manufacturing.
63
U.S. ˜rms have maintained their global share of patents, as appears 
to be true of the patenting activities of ˜rms in other countries as well.
64
 The leading U.S. ˜rms date to the 1950s and 1960s and have been lead
-ing ˜rms for many years; likewise, the leading ˜rms from Japan and 
Europe have been leaders for many years. In contrast, the newcomers 
have appeared from South Korea and Taiwan, which now account for 3 of 
the top 10 ˜rms in the world.
65
 Semiconductor applications are becoming 
more diverse, and customers for the most advanced semiconductors are 
increasingly located in Asian countries, which may well enable them to 
move into the more research-intensive segments of the industry, posing 
greater challenges to the established leaders.
66
The Computer Industry
As with the semiconductor industry, the computer industry began 
principally in the United States, with the military providing early impetus 
61
Qualcomm, which has origins in university research, is the ˜rst ﬁfablessﬂ company to 
become one of the top 10 chip suppliers. See Mark LaPedus, ﬁQualcomm Cracks Top-10 in 
Chip Rankings,ﬂ 
EE Times,
 August 8, 2007, available at http://www.eetimes.com/news/
semi/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=201801923; accessed February 27, 2008. 
62
Jeffrey T. Macher, David C. Mowery, and Alberto Di Minin, ﬁSemiconductors,ﬂ in Na
-tional Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2008.
63
Between 1987 and 1996, the U.S. government provided funding to 
SEMATECH
 to 
match industry investments. The organization subsequently was renamed International 
 SEMATECH
, with half of its current industrial participants now international semiconductor 
˜rms. See http://www.sematech.org; accessed October 30, 2008.
64
Jeffrey T. Macher, David C. Mowery, and Alberto Di Minin, ﬁSemiconductors,ﬂ in Na
-tional Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World, 
Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2008.
65
See Wikipedia, ﬁSemiconductor Sales Leaders by Year: Ranking for Year 2006,ﬂ 
available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worldwide_Top_20_Semiconductor_Sales_
Leaders#Ranking_for_year_2006; accessed July 25, 2007.
66
Jeffrey T. Macher, David C. Mowery, and Alberto Di Minin, ﬁSemiconductors,ﬂ in Na
-tional Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
as a customer and a supporter of research, much of it done in universi
-ties.
67
 The market was unclear, and early entrants were composed of of˜ce 
equipment ˜rms, electronics producers, and new entrants. IBM invested 
heavily in research and marketing to become the early leader. It solidi˜ed 
its position with the System/360, intended for broad use. The only way to 
compete was with compatible products, such as peripherals and software. 
This strategy became more feasible after IBM unbundled its software in 
1970 under antitrust pressure. The Japanese government orchestrated a 
policy to produce products compatible with IBM™s and then to surpass 
IBM. A number of competitive computer ˜rms emerged, but to some 
degree these were hampered by their focus on a target that would soon 
be undermined. In contrast, European countries unsuccessfully attempted 
to grow national champions to compete with IBM.
68
The development of minicomputers and then microcomputers ulti
-mately broke IBM™s stronghold in the realm of computers. Minicomputers 
appealed to sophisticated users who did not need IBM™s technical support, 
enabling new ˜rms to enter the industry successfully. The most promi
-nent was Digital Equipment Corporation, a spin-off of the
 Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology™s Lincoln Laboratory, itself a product of prior 
military funding. The development of the microprocessor created further 
opportunities; the earliest producers were new ˜rms, such as Apple, and 
electronics producers. The introduction of the PC by IBM fundamentally 
changed the market. Its modular design, based on Intel™s microprocessor 
and Microsoft™s operating system, de˜ned the so-called Wintel standard 
that has endured. It also allowed the ˚ourishing of independent markets 
for components, including software, hard disk drives, displays, and other 
peripherals.
U.S. ˜rms were in the forefront of many of these specialized markets 
and have continued to maintain their lead in such areas as microproces
-sors. Simultaneously, the modular design of the PC became driven by a 
low-technology design and assembly process in which ˜rms primarily 
integrate innovations developed by high-technology component suppli
-ers.
69
 Managing the supply chain thus became more important than being 
67
See, for example, Kenneth Flamm, 
Creating the Computer: Go
vernment, Industry, and 
High 
Technology, 
Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 1988.
68
Timonthy F. Bresnahan and Franco Malerba, ﬁIndustrial Dynamics and the Evolution of 
Firms™ and Nations™ Competitive Capabilities in the World Computer Industry,ﬂ in 
Sources 
of Industrial Leadership,
 Richard R. Nelson and David C. Mowery, eds., Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England, 1999, pp. 79-132.
69
Jason Dedrick and Kenneth L. Kraemer, ﬁPersonal Computing,ﬂ in National Research 
Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T.
 Macher 
and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 73
a technological innovator.
70
 Many of the U.S. PC entrants were new ˜rms, 
but it was dif˜cult for them to sustain pro˜ts. Much of the production of 
PCs and more recently their design have shifted to lower-cost regions, 
especially Taiwan, which bene˜ted from the involvement of Taiwanese 
expatriates. Taiwan now has a number of branded PC and component 
producers with signi˜cant market shares. As of 2005, Taiwanese ˜rms 
produced 85 percent of laptops sold worldwide. Much of the production 
of these ˜rms now occurs in China, to take advantage of the lower costs 
of engineers and labor there. IBM sold its PC business to Lenovo of China. 
Today China is the world™s largest producer of PCs.
71
U.S. ˜rms still dominate key component industries, such as micro
-processors, operating systems, graphics, and hard drives. Asian ˜rms are 
leaders in displays, memory devices, power supplies, batteries, mother
-boards, and optical devices. Dell, Hewlett-Packard Company (HP), Apple, 
and Gateway have a market share of 40 percent, but U.S. ˜rms do little 
production and even hand off design to others to concentrate on product 
planning. In this division of labor, component-level R&D, concept design, 
and production planning are concentrated in the United States and Japan, 
applied R&D and the development of new platforms in Taiwan, and 
product development for mature products and nearly all production and 
related engineering in China. The employment of engineers is stable 
but not growing in the United States, whereas it is growing rapidly in 
Taiwan.
72
 The growth in PC demand in Asia and the faster adoption of 
broadband and mobile telephony in some countries outside the United 
States, particularly Asia, may further accelerate the development of the 
industry outside the United States.
The Software Industry
Software is provided both by vendors, in the form of products and 
services, and by users. Until the 1970s, software vendors were largely com
-puter producersŠand hardware-producing companies such as IBM, HP, 
and Sun Microsystems continue to be software producersŠbut the advent 
of the PC stimulated the provision of products by software specialists. 
70
G. Fields, 
Territories of Pro˜t: Communications, Capitalist De
velopment, and the Inno
vati
ve Enterprises of G.F. Swift and Dell Computer,
 Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif., 2004.
71
Jason Dedrick and Kenneth L. Kraemer, 
ﬁPersonal Computing
,ﬂ 
in National Research 
Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T.
 Macher 
and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008. 
72
Ashish Arora, Chris Forman, and Jiwoong Yoon, ﬁSoftware,ﬂ in National Research Coun
-cil, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World
, Jeffrey T. Macher and 
David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
This subsection focuses on software 
producers,
 because software services 
are more dif˜cult to measure, particularly in imports and exports.
73
The software industry has been dominated by U.S. ˜rms. The com
-puter industry was concentrated in the United States when software 
˜rst became unbundled from hardware. Further, the governmentŠthe 
military but also the National Science FoundationŠhas long supported 
computer science research, largely at universities.
74
 Indeed, prior to 1965, 
virtually anyone who learned to ﬁprogramﬂ learned to do so as part of 
the Cold War era Student Achievement Guarantee in Education (SAGE) 
Program. Consequently, U.S. ˜rms were well positioned to be early pro
-viders of software products, ranging from operating systems, to business 
and consumer applications, to Internet-related software such as browsers 
and search engines. The economics of the industryŠlarge up-front invest
-ments in software development and minimal reproduction costsŠhave 
enabled successive generations of U.S. ˜rms to develop entrenched posi
-tions in various software products, as exempli˜ed by Microsoft in operat
-ing systems.
In Japan, concentrated government efforts have failed to create a 
successful international industry. In contrast, Israel, Ireland, and India 
have developed thriving, export-oriented software industries. Each excels 
in different areas. India has succeeded in software services; Israel has 
developed niche software products, particularly in security; and Ireland 
has thrived mainly as a home for U.S. multinationals to localize software 
products for Europe. Nonetheless, Israel, Ireland, and India share impor
-tant characteristics. They have an abundant supply of English-speaking, 
technically skilled workers. Multinationals were either important pro
-ducers of productsŠand as such, suppliers of experienced labor and 
potential founders of domestic ˜rmsŠor were users of software that 
helped stimulate domestic ˜rms. Furthermore, each of these countries 
had signi˜cant expatriate technical communities in the United States 
that played an important role in the formation and management of their 
domestic ˜rms.
75
73
United States Government Accountability Of˜ce (U.S. GAO), 
Offshoring of Ser
vices: An 
Over
view of the Issues,
 GAO-06-5, Washington, D.C., November 2005; U.S. GAO, 
International 
Trade: U.S. and India Data on Offshoring Show Signi˜cant Differences,
 GAO 06-116, Washington, 
D.C., October 2005; U.S. GAO, 
International Trade: Current Go
vernment Data Pro
vide Limited 
 
Insight into Offshoring of Ser
vices,
 GAO-04-932, Washington, D.C., September 2004; and 
Timothy J. Sturgeon, 
Ser
vices Offshoring Working Group: Final Report,
 Industrial Performance 
Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, September 10, 2006. 
74David C. Mowery and Richard N. Langlois, ﬁSpinning Off and Spinning On: The Federal 
Government Role in the Development of the U.S. Computer Software Industry,ﬂ 
Research 
Policy
 25(6):947-966, 1996.
75
Ashish Arora, Alfonso Gambardella, and Steven Klepper, ﬁOrganizational Capabilities 
and the Rise of the Software Industry in the Emerging Economies: Lessons from the His
-Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 75
Public policy is credited with having played an important role in 
Ireland™s success.
76
 Prompted by a poor economy and extensive emigra
-tion in the 1950s, Ireland initiated a policy of luring foreign companies 
through incentives, particularly to attract manufacturing and service 
˜rms involved in international trade. Israel™s success is widely viewed as 
re˚ecting the broader shift engineered by the government toward R&D-
intensive industries, including hardware as well as software.
77 India is the 
exception: there, government policy was at best not harmful, and other 
factors such as cost advantages were more bene˜cial. Furthermore, pat
-ent data suggest that U.S. ˜rms have been increasing the number of their 
inventions in Ireland, Israel, and India.
78
 These countries have developed 
˜rms that continue to grow and seed new ˜rms, resulting in potentially 
greater competition for U.S. software ˜rms.
Common Patterns and Future E
volution
U.S. ˜rms were early leaders in semiconductors, computers, and soft
-ware. The U.S. government, and particularly the U.S. military, played a 
key role in their launch and early development. Government was the 
largest initial buyer in each industry for many years. It also funded a sub
-stantial amount of research at both companies and universities. Inevitably, 
government demand declined in importance as each of the industries 
expanded, although research support in some areas such as software, 
device physics, and computer architectures has persisted for 20 years or 
more. Yet the U.S. ˜rms that started when government was the largest 
customer and the ˜rms that emerged later have both continued to domi
-nate worldwide well after the decline of government support. 
The more labor-intensive and less research-intensive activities have 
moved to lower-wage countries. Often this has been aided by efforts of 
tory of Some U.S. Industries,ﬂ in 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software 
Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel,
 Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella, 
eds., Oxford University Press, USA, New York, N.Y., 2005, pp. 171-206.
76
See, for example, Dan Breznitz, 
Inno
vation and the State,
 Yale University Press, New Ha
-ven, Conn., 2007; and Sean O™Rian, T
he Politics of 
High Tech Growth: De
velopment in Network 
States in the Global Economy,
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2004. 
77For analysis of the effects of R&D policies in Israel, see, for example, Manuel Trajtenberg, 
ﬁR&D Policy in Israel: An Overview and Reassessment,ﬂ in Maryann P. Feldman and Albert 
N. Link, eds., 
Inno
vation Policy in the Knowledge-Based Economy,
 Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, Mass., 2001, pp. 409-454.
78
The number in Israel increased from about 20 patents in 1995 to about 80 in 2004; the 
numbers for India and Ireland in 2004 ranged from 10 to 20 and were increasing. See Ashish 
Arora, Chris Forman, and Jiwoong Yoon, ﬁSoftware,ﬂ in National Research Council, 
Inno
va-tion in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. 
Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
the countries™ governments to import technology from U.S. ˜rms. The 
governments in Japan and Israel have been more proactive, ˜nancing new 
technology developments. U.S. expatriates have brought organizational 
experience from the United States to help establish successful ˜rms in the 
latecomer countries, reinforcing those governments™ efforts. U.S. multina
-tionals have also been instrumental. Many of the latecomer countries have 
developed impressive ˜rms that have moved into the leadership ranks 
and are in turn also seeding new domestic entrants.
Inevitably latecomer countries aspire to move into more sophisticated, 
research-intensive activities. U.S. ˜rms have taken advantage of these new 
opportunities by increasing not only development but also research in 
latecomer countries. At the same time, local demand for IT products in 
the latecomer countries is growing, and these nations are moving into 
the forefront in some areas as lead users. These developments portend 
greater competition for U.S. IT ˜rms in the future, while simultaneously 
presenting new global expansion opportunities.
National Clusters
Firms in certain industries often form in close proximity within a 
country to create 
clusters
. A cluster develops its own dynamics, which 
allow it to evolve. Clusters enable superior access to specialized labor, 
suppliers, and information. Clusters often grow up around major research 
universities, and a strong cluster in turn strengthens nearby institutions 
like universities, which provide the cluster with trained students and 
technical knowledge. Cluster ˜rms in the same line of business observe 
one another and compete ˜ercely. Complementarities also develop. In the 
United States, for example, Silicon Valley has not only leading semicon
-ductor ˜rms, but also some of the largest equipment manufacturers and 
design software ˜rms. Often, a small number of ﬁroot ˜rmsﬂ are respon
-sible for spinning off a large number of ﬁchild ˜rms,ﬂ thereby forming 
clusters.
79
 Rapidly developing technology creates the opportunities for 
the creation of new ˜rms to continue. Thus, clusters are important parts 
of the overall U.S. IT R&D ecosystem.
IT is particularly interesting for the way that it has created entirely 
new industries and transformed old ones.
80
 It is the richness and power 
79
See Steven Klepper, ﬁ
Employee Startups in High-Tech Industrie
s,ﬂ 
Industrial and Cor
-porate Chang
e 10(3):639-674, September 2001; and Steven Klepper, ﬁEmployee Start-Ups in 
High Tech Industry,ﬂ in Stefano Breschi and Franco Malerba, eds., 
Clusters, Networks, and 
Inno
vation
, Oxford University Press, USA, New York, N.Y., 2006.
80
For a discussion of this phenomenon in the case of Silicon Valley, see M. Kenney and D. 
Patton, ﬁThe Coevolution of Technologies and Institutions: Silicon Valley as the Iconic High-
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 77
of these ﬁtools for thoughtﬂ
81
 that has provided so many opportuni
-ties for new ˜rms to form. The United States continues to have two of 
the world™s most sophisticated IT clusters, the San Francisco Bay Area 
(Silicon Valley) and Boston (Route 128).
82
 It should not be surprising that 
outstanding universities and a strong ˜nancial community characterize 
both regions. There are a number of other, smaller national IT clusters 
within the United States, including those in San Diego, California; Seattle, 
Washington; Irvine, California; Austin, Texas; and the Washington, D.C., 
area. Further, an extensive network of intermediaries has developed to 
support IT (and other) entrepreneurs.
83
International Development of Clusters
Since 1995, there has been an international proliferation of IT clusters 
that have signi˜cant R&D underway. They vary in size and with respect 
to the conditions that motivated their growth. In some of these, such as 
India (in particular, Bangalore), and China (Beijing and to a lesser degree 
Shanghai), wage advantages were signi˜cant factors. However, in many 
of these locations, wages were not key factors or, in the case of Scandina
-via™s wireless technology cluster based around Ericsson and Nokia, were 
of no signi˜cance at all. In the cases of the IT clusters in Israel and Ireland, 
initially they enjoyed advantageous wages in comparison with wages in 
the United States and Western Europe, but for these two nations, this is 
no longer the case.
A number of these clusters are based on narrow specializations. 
Taiwanese ˜rms have developed strong niches in electronics assembly, 
particularly for desktop and notebook computers, as well as semicon
-ductor foundries for chip fabrication. Taiwan has parlayed its strengths 
Technology Cluster,ﬂ in P. Braunerhjelm and M. Feldman, eds., 
Cluster Genesis: Technology-
Based Industrial De
velopment,
 Oxford University Press, Oxford, England 2006, pp. 38-60.
81
Howard Rheingold, 
Tools for Thought: The People and Ideas of the Next Computer Re
volution,
 Simon and Schuster, New York, 1985; and Stephen S. Cohen, John Zysman, and Bradford J. 
DeLong, ﬁTools for Thought: What Is New and Important About the ‚E-conomy™?ﬂ January 1, 
2000, available at http://repositories.cdlib.org/brie/BRIEWP138/; accessed July 3, 2007.
82
A key book on the early development of Silicon Valley is Christophe Lecuyer™s
 Making 
Silicon Valley: Inno
vation and the Growth of 
High Tech, 
193
0-
197
0,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 
2006. For a variety of perspectives on the formation of Silicon Valley, see M. Kenney, ed., 
Understanding Silicon Valley: Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region,
 Stanford University Press, 
Stanford, Calif., 2000. See also E.M. Rogers and J.K. Larsen, 
Silicon Valley Fe
ver, 
Basic Books, 
New York, 1984; and AnnaLee Saxenian, 
Regional Ad
vantage: Culture and Competition in Sili
-con Valley and Route 
12
8,
 Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1994.
83
For information on entrepreneurial support networks, see M. Kenney and D. Patton, 
ﬁEntrepreneurial Geographies: Support Networks in Three High-Tech Industries,ﬂ 
Economic 
Geography 
81(2):201-228, 2005.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
into higher-volume consumer products, such as cellular telephones, per
-sonal digital assistants (PDAs), and MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3 (MP3) play
-ers, although the actual assembly is increasingly being shifted to China. 
Despite the gradual increase in Taiwanese semiconductor design ˜rms, 
the United States still dominates in design.
These smaller nations have found valuable niches, yet because of 
their size there is little concern that they will dominant the global indus
-try. India and China are different in that they have wages signi˜cantly 
lower than those in the developed nations. In population and gross 
domestic product (GDP), they dwarf Ireland, Israel, and Scandinavia. 
Further, given their rapid growth they are increasingly signi˜cant in the 
global economy. Table 3.1 documents the relative size and rate of growth 
of the developing IT industry in India, Ireland, and Israel. China is not 
included in Table 3.1 because it has limited software exports at the pres
-ent time.
84
India
Understanding India™s role in the global IT economy is dif˜cult 
because of the speed with which it is changing and the fact that even 
today most of the work is development, not cutting-edge basic research. 
A decade ago, IT R&D in India was con˜ned to the small operations of 
a few U.S. pioneers such as HP, Motorola, and Texas Instruments. India 
did not begin as a performer of development; rather it entered the IT 
economy by providing programmers and doing routine programming 
work. Today, the vast majority of Indian software professionals continue 
to do such routine work. What has changed is that many European and 
U.S. multinational corporations have established research and develop
-ment facilities in India. So India, which only 5 short years ago would have 
hosted very little R&D, is becoming an increasingly signi˜cant IT R&D 
center largely because of the decisions by U.S. IT ˜rms to take advantage 
of an increasingly rich IT ecosystem.
The signi˜cance of the changes in India is worth some attention.  
India™s entry into the global industry dates to 1974, when Burroughs 
Corporation asked Tata Consultancy Services to supply programmers to 
install system software for its U.S. client.
85
 In the 1980s, a few U.S. ˜rms 
set up facilities in Bangalore where Indian engineers and programmers 
84
Association for Computing Machinery Job Migration Task Force, 
Globalization and Off
-shoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force,
 W. Aspray, F. Mayadas, and 
M. Vardi, eds., Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2006, pp. 120-121.
85
S. Ramadori, Chief Executive Of˜cer, Tata Consultancy Services, personal interview by 
Ra˜q Dossani, Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Paci˜c Research Center, Stanford University, 2002. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 79
developed products for global and domestic markets. Knowledge of the 
capabilities of Indian programmers and engineers gradually spread, but 
even in 1990, the Indian IT industry was not well known. By 1995, Indian 
IT industry growth had quickened, and at that time there were 27,500 
Indians in the software services export industry. By 2006, this number 
had increased to 706,000. India has the second-largest number of soft
-ware and software services industry workers in the world, following the 
TABLE 3.1
 Software Exports from India, Ireland, and Israel, Selected 
Years from 1990 to 2005 (in $ millions, except where otherwise noted)
 India
Ireland
Israel
1990
105
2,132
90
2000
6,200
8,865
2,600
2002
7,500
12,192
3,000
2003
8,600
11,819
3,000
2005
17,100
18,631
3,000
Number employed (2003)
260,000
23,930
15,000
Revenue/employee (2003)
33,076
493,988
a273,000
Number employed (2005)
513,000
24,000
NA
Revenue/employee (2005)
33,333
776,000
aNA
NOTE: Data for India are from R. Heeks, 
India™s Software Industry: State Policy, Liberalisation 
and Industrial De
velopment,
 Sage Publications, New Delhi, India, 1996; and Nasscom, 
Re
view 
of the Indian IT Industry,
 New Delhi, India, Nasscom, 2003-2006. Data for Ireland are from 
http://www.nsd.ie/htm/ssii/stat.htm, downloaded September 26, 2006. Data for Israel are 
from http://www.iash.org.il/Content/SoftwareInds/SoftwareInds.asp, downloaded Au
-gust 31, 2003, and http://www.israel21c.org/bin/en.jsp?enDispWho=InThePress&enPage
=BlankPage&enDisplay=view&enDispWhat=Zone&enZone=InThePress&Date=08/11/05, 
downloaded September 26, 2006. Data for Ireland prior to 2003 are in euros (converted at 
1 euro = $1.043, the rate on January 5, 2003). From 2003 on, data are converted at 1 euro to 
$1.26, the rate in January 2004. The most recent ˜gures for Israel are for 2001.
 aSands (p. 45) argues that the revenue/employee for Ireland is overstated because of 
in-country transfers and should be about $160,000. If so, total exports in this table are over
-stated by a factor of three. See A. Sands, ﬁThe Indian Software Industry,ﬂ in A. Arora and 
A. Gambardella, eds., 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry 
in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel,
 Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y., 2005, pp. 
41-71.  This ˜nding is seconded by Dan Breznitz, who calculated that sales per employee for 
Irish-owned software ˜rms hit a high of $104,000 per employee in 1999. See Dan Breznitz, 
Inno
vation and the State,
 Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 2007.
 As outlined in the 
text of this chapter, a number of countries have developed signi˜cant IT sectors. Two of 
them, India and China, are, by virtue of their size, competiveness, and close links to the U.S. 
IT sector, of the greatest signi˜cance for the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem.
SOURCE
: Ra˜q Dossani and Martin Kenney, ﬁThe Implications of Globalization for Software 
Engineering,ﬂ in National Academy of Engineering, 
The Offshoring of Engineering: Facts, Un
-knowns, and Potential Implications
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008.  
Adapted with permission of the National Academy of Engineering, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
United States. The 2007 pace of growth is not slackening, although there 
are indications of labor shortages by 2010.
After 2000, India™s domestic market grew rapidly, from a GDP of 
$460.2 billion to $805.7 billion in 2005.
86
 By early 2007, India was adding 
5 million mobile phone users per month (although subscribers pay only 
$8 per month on average).
87
 Similarly, broadband usage in business and 
among the higher-income groups in India is growing. Even though India 
is a moderate-sized market, if current growth rates continue, it will be one 
of the ˜ve largest in the world.
There are indications that as respect for their capabilities increases, 
Indian ˜rms are becoming trusted advisers for Global Fortune 1000 ˜rms. 
There is some indication that Indian ˜rms are surpassing the U.S. ˜rms 
on software quality metrics and might be overtaking U.S. providers on 
quality as well as labor cost advantage.
88
 U.S. rivals have expanded their 
Indian operations. IBM now has approximately 60,000 employees in India 
and Electronic Data Systems (EDS) approximately 35 percent of its global 
total. India is likely to be a major recipient of further offshoring.
In software itself, India is also developing capabilities. According to 
Google™s of˜cial blog, for example, Google Finance ﬁstarted as a small 
project led by a few engineers in Bangalore and later joined by more 
engineers and ˜nance enthusiasts in Mountain View and New York.ﬂ
89
 All major U.S. software and Internet ˜rms now have large and growing 
operations in India. Many employ more engineers in India than in any 
other nation outside the United States. 
Semiconductor Design
 India is also becoming a major semiconductor 
design center. Indian ˜rms are part of the global value chain for integrated 
circuit (IC) design, having moved from veri˜cation, physical design, and 
silicon production engineering to higher-value work in architecture and 
design of analog and digital circuits.
90
 Indian ˜rms are now marketing 
86
World Bank, ﬁKey Development Data and Statistics,ﬂ 2007, available at http://devdata.
worldbank.org/external/CPPro˜le.asp?PTYPE=CP&CCODE=IND; accessed June 20, 2007.
87
Ruth David, ﬁVodafone Wins Stake in India Cell Phone Market,ﬂ 
Forbes,
 February 2007, 
available at http://www.forbes.com/business/2007/02/12/essar-hutch-vodafone-cx_rd_
0212bid-update2.html; accessed June 20, 2007.
88
Leonard Lynn and Harold Salzman, ﬁThe ‚New™ Globalization of Engineering: How the 
Offshoring of Advanced Engineering Affects Competitiveness and Development,ﬂ paper 
presented at the Sloan Industry Studies Annual Meeting, Boston, Mass., 2007.
89
Google, ﬁSpring Is the Season for Love (and Data),ﬂ posted on The Of˜cial Google Blog, 
March 21, 2006, available at http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2006/03/spring-is-season-for-
love-and-data.html; accessed June 20, 2007.
90
Ra˜q Dossani and Martin Kenney, ﬁImplications of Globalization for Software Engi
-neering,ﬂ in National Academy of Engineering, 
The Offshoring of Engineering: Facts, 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 81their expertise to provide end-to-end solutions. They can manage the 
design handoff to IC producers such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufac
-turing Company (TSMC) directly, without involving the end customer.
Many U.S. semiconductor ˜rms now have engineering operations in 
India,
91
 often their largest outside the United States.
92
 Members of senior 
management of these operations often have degrees and experience in 
the United States.
93
 The number of Indian very-large-scale integrated 
circuit (VLSI) design engineers was 11,300 in 2005
94
 and was projected to 
grow to 33,135 by 2010. For the year 2005, revenues were estimated to be 
$583 million; they are expected to reach $2 billion by 2010.
95
 The leading 
semiconductor design software ˜rms are also increasing their presence in 
India, both to service the local market and to support the global market. 
Although there are currently no commercial fabrication facilities in India, 
the design functions for many parts of the value chain in semiconduc
-tor, design software, and equipment suppliers are beginning to emerge. 
There is suf˜cient anecdotal evidence to suggest that India is quite rapidly 
becoming a force in semiconductor design.
Computer Networking Equipment
 Networking equipment manufactur
-ing has undergone a severe shakeout since the collapse of the IT bubble. 
Shifting development to low-cost regions is certainly a consideration. The 
leading ˜rms all have engineering operations in India. As with semicon
-ductors, India produces a small amount of networking equipment inter
-nally or for export. Nevertheless, this situation appears to be changing. 
For example, Cisco Systems™ Globalization Center and chief globalization 
 
Unknowns, and Potential Implications
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008, 
 pp. 49-68.
91
See Jeffrey T. Macher, David C. Mowery, and Alberto Di Minin, ﬁSemiconductors,ﬂ 
in National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Global Industries: U.S. Firms Competing in a 
New World,
 Jeffrey T. Macher and David C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2008; and Clair Brown and Greg Linden, ﬁSemiconductor Engineers in a 
Global Economy,ﬂ in National Academy of Engineering, 
The Offshoring of Engineering: Facts, 
Unknowns, and Potential Implications,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008, 
pp. 149-178. 
92
It is important to note that some semiconductor ˜rms have more employees in their 
manufacturing or semiconductor assembly and test operations in East Asian nations such 
as China and Malaysia.
93
Ra˜q Dossani and Martin Kenney, ﬁImplications of Globalization for Software Engineer
-ing,ﬂ in National Academy of Engineering, 
The Offshoring of Engineering: Facts: Unknowns, and 
Potential Implications,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008, pp. 49-68.
94
Indian Semiconductor Association, ﬁSemiconductor Driven Industry in IndiaŠA Per
-spective,ﬂ February 2006, PowerPoint presentation made available to committee member 
Martin Kenney by Rajendra Khare, president, Indian Semiconductor Association.
95
The committee thanks Rajendra Khare, president of the Indian Semiconductor Associa
-tion, for these data.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
of˜cer are now located in India. Cisco plans to double or triple its current 
number of approximately 2,000 employees in India.
96
 Cisco already has 
more employees in India than it has anywhere else outside the United 
States. The same is true of Juniper Networks,
97
 and even the China-based 
Huawei Technologies employed about 1,300 engineers in Bangalore in late 
2006.
98
 The anecdotal evidence suggests that the number of telecommu
-nications equipment engineers in India will continue to grow, although 
most of this employment will be in multinational corporations (MNCs). 
It is likely that even with this growth, the number of telecommunica
-tions equipment engineers in India will trail that of the United States and 
China.
IT Start-ups in India
 The Indian ecosystem for IT start-ups is compli
-cated.
99
 The ˜rst category is ﬁtraditional,ﬂ India-only start-ups whose 
headquarters and design operations are in IndiaŠfor example, the U.S.-
venture-funded Tejas Networks. The second category is ˜rms established 
in the United States but having operations in India. U.S. operations may be 
limited to a headquarters with ˜nance and marketing functions, with the 
remaining operations in India; the latter has the majority of the employees 
and undertakes all product development. Alternatively, there are start-
ups that have almost all of their employees in the United States with an 
engineering facility in India; Tensilica Technologies India is an example 
of this organization.
100
 Finally, there are ˜rms that have the management 
and core engineering team in the United States, with the rest of the engi
-neering team in India. An example is Telsima, Inc., established in 2004 
with international venture funding to develop WiMAX-based broadband 
96
Cisco, ﬁCisco Provides Update on US $1.1 Billion Investment in India,ﬂ Decem
-ber 6, 2006, available at http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/global/asiapac/news/2006/
pr_12-06b.html?CMP=AF17154&vs_f=News@Cisco:+Technology+Innovation+&+Development+
 News&vs_p=News@Cisco:+Technology+Innovation+&+Development+News&vs_k=1; ac
-cessed June 20, 2007.
97
R. Savitha, ﬁJuniper Networks Of˜ce in Chennai by Year-End,ﬂ 
Hindu Business Line
, May 26, 2007, available at http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/2007/03/27/stories/ 
2007032703750400.htm; accessed June 29, 2007.
98
Ravi Sharma, ﬁHuawei Keeping Fingers Crossed on Simpler Work Visa Norms for 
Chinese Personnel,ﬂ 
The 
Hindu
, December 17, 2006, available at http://www.hindu.com/ 
2006/12/17/stories/2006121701920400.htm; accessed June 20, 2007. 
99
Ra˜q Dossani and Martin Kenney, ﬁThe Evolving Indian Offshore Services Environment: 
Greater Scale, Scope and Sophistication,ﬂ Sloan Industry Studies Working Papers,
 Num
-ber WP-2007-34, 2007, available at 
http://www.industry.sloan.org/industrystudies
/workingpapers/index.ph
p; accessed October 25, 2007.
100
Ashish Dixit, ﬁTensilica Technologies India: An Update,ﬂ paper presented at the Glo
-balization of ServicesŠThe Second Annual Conference, Stanford, Calif., December 12, 2006, 
available at 
http://iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/4587/Tensilica.pd
f; accessed June 20, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 83wireless access and software for mobility solutions for media-rich (data-
intensive) applications.
101
 Measuring the technical sophistication of these start-ups is dif˜cult, 
but anecdotal evidence suggests that at least some of them are quite 
sophisticated. Examples of recent acquisitions of Indian start-ups by U.S. 
˜rms
102,103
 indicate that these ˜rms are creating value and that more start-
ups should be expected.
China
China has become the undisputed global IT equipment-manufacturing 
leader
, which has helped fuel its rapid economic growth. China™s success 
in IT equipment production is different from that of other developing 
nations in that these are high-technology products.
104
 Chinese exports of 
IT equipment increased from $645 million in 1990 to $81 billion in 2004.
105
 Nevertheless, IT manufacturing is mostly a low-margin business. Thus 
far, with the possible exception of ˜rms such as Huawei and Lenovo, 
Chinese ˜rms do not compete as global brands; they manufacture for 
others.
106
 The Chinese government is furthering its domestic industry while 
also encouraging foreign ˜rms to produce and perform R&D locally. It 
has steadily increased R&D funding in engineering and the sciences and 
also encourages the development of its local technology standards in 
˜elds such as wireless. Some have interpreted this as ﬁa strategy to domi
-nate the global market for information technology goods.ﬂ
107
 Another 
interpretation is that the Chinese government and ˜rms seek to decrease 
their dependence on foreign standards and patents, mostly held by U.S. 
˜rms, and for which they must pay royalties. The Chinese government 
101
Telsima, Inc. 2007. ﬁCorporate Brochure,ﬂ available at http://www.telsima.com/pic/
pdf/download/Corporate_Brochure.pdf; accessed June 20, 2007. 
102Synopsys, ﬁSynopsys Acquires ArchPro Design Automation,ﬂ June 18, 2007, available at 
http://synopsys.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=468; accessed June 20, 2007.
103
Computergram International, ﬁBroadcom Acquires Indian Fabless Chip Firm Armedia,ﬂ 
July 6, 1999, available at http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-55071676.html; accessed 
June 20, 2007.
104
Dani Rodrick, ﬁWhat™s So Special About China™s Exports?ﬂ CEPR Discussion Paper No. 
5484, January 2006, available at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=90234
8; accessed July 2, 2007.
105
Jason Dedrick and Kenneth L. Kraemer, ﬁIs Production Pulling Knowledge Work to 
China? A Study of the Notebook PC Industry,ﬂ 
Computer,
 July 2006, p. 37, available at http://
pcic.merage.uci.edu/papers/2006/dedrick.pdf; a
ccessed June 22, 2007.
106
Ibid
.107
David Lague, ﬁChina Overtakes U.S. as Supplier of Information Technology Goods,ﬂ 
International 
Herald Tribune,
 December 11, 2005, available at http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2005/12/11/business/worldbusiness/11cnd-hitech.html?ex=1291957200&en=748942b64ba
7f2b9&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss; accessed June 22, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
places signi˜cant pressure on foreign MNCs wishing to operate in China 
to establish joint ventures through which the Chinese partner can learn 
about foreign technologies.
Semiconductors
 China has become the largest single market in the world 
for semiconductors.
108
 In 2005, it accounted for 24 percent of global semi
-conductor production and was responsible for 90 percent of consumption 
growth even as it produced only 7 percent of the worldwide total.
109
 As a 
result, China runs a signi˜cant trade imbalance in semiconductors, which 
is considered a serious issue by Chinese policy makers.
A Chinese fabless semiconductor design industry is now emerging. 
The ˜rms are small, yet most are enjoying rapid growth. In semicon
-ductor fabrication China is a minor player, although with the facilities 
already announced or under construction in 2006, its production capac
-ity could approach 10 percent of worldwide wafer production.
110
 Much 
of this foundry capacity competes directly with Taiwan, not with U.S. 
manufacturers, and little of it will be at the most advanced levels of 
technologies.
111
Software and Services
 The Chinese software services industry is much 
smaller than its Indian counterpart.
112
 According to the Chinese Software 
Industry Association, there are 300,000 workers employed in more than 
6,000 ˜rms; of these workers approximately 160,000 are software profes
-sionals, about 25 per ˜rm.
113
 According to the Ministry of Commerce, 
the revenues of the Chinese IT and software services industry increased 
from $7.17 billion in 2000 to $19.35 billion in 2003. During the same 
period, software exports increased from $250 million to $2 billion.
114
 A 
108PricewaterhouseCoopers, 
China™s Impact on the Semiconductor Industry 
2006/Update, 2007, 
p. 7
, 
available at http://www.pwc.com/extweb/onlineforms.nsf/weblookup/USENGTCE
NChina™sImpactontheSemiconductorIndustry-2006Update-DownloadForm?opendocument; 
accessed June 22, 2007.
109
Ibid., p. 1.
110
Ibid., p. 24.
111
Ibid., p. 25.
112
This subsection, ﬁSoftware and Services,ﬂ draws heavily on Chapter 3 in Association 
for Computing Machinery Job Migration Task Force, 
Globalization and Offshoring of Software: 
A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force
, W. Aspray, F. Mayadas, and M.Y. Vardi, eds., 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2006.
113
T. Tschang and L. Lan Xue, ﬁThe Chinese Software Industry,ﬂ in A. Arora and A. 
Gambardella, eds., 
From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry in 
Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel,
 Oxford University Press, USA, New York, N.Y., 2005, 
pp. 131-167.
114
China Software Industry Association, ﬁChina Software Export Achieved 7 Times Growth 
in Five Years,ﬂ 2005, available at http://www.csia.org.cn/chinese_en/index/; accessed 
March 2005. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 85recent report notes that China's total IT services revenues are rising but 
are barely half of India™s $12.7 billion.
115
 Growth is driven by internal 
demand, and exports make up only 10 percent of total annual software 
service revenues. (For comparison, the global IT services market in 2006 
was $671.4 billion.
116
)The Chinese software export industry faces many obstacles. It is frag
-mented, with few ˜rms capable of undertaking large projects.
117
 As China 
is the world™s manufacturer, many of its products contain embedded 
software. Some portion of this work may be relocated to China.
118
 The 
Chinese ˜rms providing IT services to the West are mostly small. Western 
˜rms have also established software subsidiaries in China to support their 
growing Chinese businesses and to provide offshore services to Asia-
Paci˜c nations, particularly Japan.
119
IT R&D in China
 In 2006, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) announced that China was the world™s sec
-ond-largest R&D spender.
120
 Although accurate ˜gures on R&D spending 
are dif˜cult to come by, there can be little doubt that R&D is growing 
rapidly. A number of U.S., European, and particularly Taiwanese electron
-ics ˜rms have established R&D facilities in China. It is likely that most 
of these facilities focus on adapting products for the local market or on 
production engineering, but some have global product mandates or are 
115
K.C. Krishnadas, ﬁFragmented China Software Sector No Match for India, Report 
Finds,ﬂ 
EE Times,
 February 18, 2005, available at http://www.informationweek.com/story/
showArticle.jhtml?articleID=60402234&tid=5979; accessed October 4, 2007. 
116
Robert De Souza, Kathryn Hale, Freddie Ng, and Akimasa Nakao, ﬁDataquest Alert: IT 
Services Forecast, Worldwide, 2007-2011 (Update),ﬂ G00152463, October 9, 2007, available at 
http://www.gartner.com/DisplayDocument?id=530210; accessed February 27, 2008.
117
K.C. Krishnadas, ﬁFragmented China Software Sector No Match for India, Report 
Finds,ﬂ 
EE Times,
 February 18, 2005, available at http://www.informationweek.com/story/
showArticle.jhtml?articleID=60402234&tid=5979; accessed October 4, 2007. 
118
C. Brown and G. Linden, ﬁOffshoring in the Semiconductor Industry: A Historical 
Perspective,ﬂ in Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard, eds., 
Brookings Trade Forum
, Brookings 
Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
119
ﬁChina Becomes Japan™s Biggest Software Outsourcing Base,ﬂ 
Xinhua
, April 12, 2007, 
available at http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2007-04/12/content_5968762.htm; ac
-cessed June 22, 2007.
120
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, ﬁChina Will Become 
World™s Second Highest Investor in R&D by End of 2006, Finds OECD,ﬂ 2006, available 
at http://www.oecd.org/document/26/0,2340,en_2649_201185_37770522_1_1_1_1,00.html; 
accessed June 22, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
doing research for their ˜rms™ global operations.
121
 The most celebrated 
of these, the Microsoft Research Asia laboratory in Beijing, employed 
approximately 300 scientists in 2007.
122
 Furthermore, major Chinese ˜rms 
such as Huawei and Lenovo are investing heavily in R&D. At the current 
level, China is one of the largest R&D performers in the world. At least in 
some cases, the R&D is already world-class.
Data Communications Equipment
 The Chinese data communications 
equipment industry has grown rapidly, with two globally recognized 
Chinese ˜rms: Huawei Technologies and ZTE Corporation. Huawei sales 
reached $11 billion in 2006, with 65 percent from outside China.
123
 ZTE™s 
global sales reached $2.8 billion.
124
 Huawei™s customers include major 
Western operators, such as British Telecom. Nevertheless, there is no 
evidence that China is generating large numbers of telecommunications 
equipment start-ups, despite the fact that it has substantial venture capital 
resources and a rapidly developing internal market for telecommunica
-tions products. In the future, it is possible that entrepreneurs may begin 
establishing start-ups.
Conclusions
 Chinese IT R&D will continue its rapid growth, given its 
past growth, the inherent commercial opportunities, and the importance 
given to it by the Chinese government. The enormous buildup in IT pro
-ductive capacity in China will become a magnet for production engineer
-ing and higher-level R&D. Given the likely growth of China™s domestic 
market
, no major IT ˜rm can afford to ignore the market, and it will be 
necessary to support that market with some domestic production. Given 
China™s expanding labor pool of low-cost engineers, multinational cor
-porations experiencing pressure on margins are likely to expand their 
engineering activities there.
125
 In terms of R&D, China is rapidly increas
-121
Xiaohong Quan, ﬁMultinational Corporations™ R&D in China: IP Protection and Inno
-vation for the Global Market,ﬂ PowerPoint presentation, November 29, 2005, available at 
http://iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/4317/Xiaohong_(Iris)_Quan_presentation.pdf; accessed 
June 22, 2007.
122
Microsoft Research, 2007, available at http://research.microsoft.com/aboutmsr/labs/
asia/; accessed June 22, 2007.
123
Huawei, ﬁFinancial Highlights,ﬂ 2007, available at http://www.huawei.com/corporate_
information/˜nancial_highlights.do; accessed June 22, 2007.
124
ZTE, ﬁCorporate Reports,ﬂ 2007, available at http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/main/˜les/
 2008/04/09/333826174089.pdf; accessed June 22, 2007.
125
China™s current supply of ﬁengineersﬂ who are comparable to engineers in the U.S. 
workforce is likely smaller than Chinese government data might at ˜rst suggest. However, 
graduation rates are rising, and China is rapidly increasing its production of engineering 
and technology Ph.D.™s. See V. Wadhwa, G. Geref˜, B. Rissing, and R. Ong, ﬁWhere the En
-gineers Are,ﬂ 
Issues in Science and Technology, 
Spring 2007. (But see also Denis Fred Simon, 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 87ing its share of total global R&D.
 Some Chinese ˜rms are already global 
competitors in the IT industry, and there are likely to be more.
Taiwan
Taiwan gradually worked its way up the value ladder from produc
-ing the simplest parts and assembling consumer electronics products to 
designing and engineering all but the most sophisticated products. In the 
process, Taiwanese manufacturers have become among the largest elec
-tronics ˜rms in the world. In addition, Taiwan established a world-class 
semiconductor fabrication industry supporting the U.S. fabless semicon
-ductor industry. Taiwanese ˜rms have become an integral part of global 
commodity chains developed by U.S. ˜rms.
Facing competition from Japan, U.S. ˜rms sought lower prices by 
shifting assembly and low-end manufacturing to Taiwan and Korea in 
the 1960s. U.S. ˜rms and their Japanese competitors established produc
-tion facilities in Taiwan, sourcing low-technology components from local 
vendors. The microcomputer provided an opening for Taiwanese ˜rms 
to supply low-technology parts and components to PC makers. These 
˜rms soon evolved into contract assemblers, drawing on a base of smaller 
component makers. By the early 1990s, Taiwan had become the global 
center for the production of every component in the PC except for the 
microprocessor, dynamic random-access memory (DRAM), hard drive, 
graphics chips, and software. By the late 1990s, Taiwanese ˜rms were 
assembling not only desktop PCs but notebook computers as well. A U.S. 
vendor provided the basic speci˜cations for a desktop or notebook PC, 
and a Taiwanese vendor designed, assembled, and shipped the computer 
with the vendor™s name. Taiwanese ˜rms began to feel margin pressure 
as local wages increased. They began offshoring production to China. By 
2000, every signi˜cant Taiwanese electronics ˜rm had a presence in China. 
Taiwan specialized in the most sophisticated manufacturing, design, mar
-keting, and other headquarters functions. The assemblers have diversi˜ed 
from PCs into other consumer electronics products. They did this as con
-tract manufacturers and not under their own brands, unlike Korea with 
its Samsung Electronics and LG Electronics global brands.
Taiwan has also become a world leader in contract semiconduc
-tor fabrication. Its foundries are enormously capital-intensive facilities, 
deploying advanced fabrication technologies. The availability of these 
foundries has enabled U.S. entrepreneurs to establish a signi˜cant number 
of successful specialty IC design ˜rms. Taiwan™s own IC design sector 
Cong Cao, Ron Hira, and Rick Rashid, ﬁNot Enough U.S. Engineers? (FORUM),ﬂ 
Issues in 
Science and Technology,
 Summer 2007.)
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
employed approximately 14,000 chip designers in 2004 and generated $8.6 
billion in revenue in 2005.
126
 The Taiwanese design industry faces many 
challenges. Taiwan™s wages are nearly double those of China and India. 
Taiwanese chip designers™ capabilities match those of Taiwanese assem
-blers but lag behind the leading-edge system-level designers, making it 
dif˜cult for them to get the most lucrative design wins. The movement of 
the Taiwanese assemblers to China may also relocate business opportuni
-ties to lower-cost Chinese designers.
To summarize, Taiwan™s position is as a supplier to global ˜rms, pri
-marily from the United States. Although the desktop or laptop PC may 
have been designed in Taiwan and manufactured in China, most of the 
added value is captured on the one hand by the U.S. brands that control 
the distribution channels and on the other by the U.S. ˜rms that provide 
the high-value components (such as the microprocessor and the software). 
In fact, using these lower-cost Asian suppliers has kept the U.S. PC indus
-try competitive. Taiwanese ˜rms also provide the critical foundries for the 
smaller but highly pro˜table U.S. specialty chip design ˜rms. The Taiwan
-ese IT industry has evolved a mutually bene˜cial division of labor with its 
U.S. partners. With the exception of Taiwan™s foundries, most of its ˜rms 
are likely to continue to experience extreme pricing pressure, forcing them 
to respond by offshoring much of their lower-end work to China.
INFRASTRUCTURE T
O ENABLE MULTIFACETED INNO
VATION
Information technology plays a pervasive and indispensable role in 
the United States. As IT becomes almost ubiquitous, Americans use it in 
increasingly sophisticated ways for work, family life, and entertainment. 
For example:

By 2006, almost 70 percent of adult Americans (18 and older) 
owned a desktop computer, and 30 percent had a laptop. 

In 2001, the Apple iPod was introduced, forever changing the music 
and entertainment landscape: by 2006, 20 percent of adult Americans had 
an iPod. 

Over the past decade, cellular telephones and handheld devices 
have launched a new form of ﬁmobileﬂ communications, connecting 
people through voice and data applications no matter where they are: in 
2006, 73 percent of adult Americans had cell phones, and 11 percent had 
a handheld device.
127
126
Clair Brown and Greg Linden, ﬁSemiconductor Engineers in a Global Economy,ﬂ in Na
-tional Academy of Engineering, 
The Offshoring of Engineering: Facts, Unknowns, and Potential 
Implications,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008, pp. 149-178. 
127
Data on the percentage of Americans reporting that they had speci˜c technology are 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 89These networking and device technologies are used for more than 
entertainment and desktop or laptop computing, however. Applications 
areas such as transportation, banking and ˜nancial services, and health 
care have been greatly impacted by use of IT. Information technology is 
now found in dishwashers, cars, lasers, medical equipment, smartcards, 
and numerous other devices and machines. Critical broadband connec
-tivity connects these endpoints, keeping them working together to create 
business and consumer value. The network itself continues to evolve, just 
as do the devices and software that it connectsŠthe infrastructure gets 
faster, cheaper, and more reliable, and devices are becoming smaller and 
multimodal.
128
In the eyes of most Americans, these technologies are not only indis
-pensable to the nation™s business operations and their derived productiv
-ity, but also facilitate the ongoing learning and creativity of U.S. citizens.
Multifaceted Innovation
Information technology innovation no longer happens only in uni
-versity or corporate laboratories. Customer-created value is increasingly 
prominent: IT consumers are leveraging research, innovating, and creat
-ing value by combining networking hardware, software, and devices into 
novel solutions and businesses (see Figure 3.2). In 1995, supplier-created 
value through technological 
product 
innovations in information technol
-ogy predominated. However, this pattern has been changing, as custom
-ers are increasingly creating value through IT 
application
 innovations in 
industries including health care, professional services, ˜nancial services, 
manufacturing, retail, media and publishing, and education.
129 As a result 
of the co-evolution of business and IT, the IT R&D ecosystem is becoming 
increasingly linked with R&D in the wider global economy.
The signi˜cance of multifaceted innovation to IT has increased sig
-ni˜cantly during the study period 1995 to 2007. During this period, IT has 
permeated almost all aspects of business and society. One consequence of 
this pervasiveness is that the market-facing, customer-involved aspects of 
IT are growing very fast. This means, among other things, that ﬁIT jobsﬂ 
are changingŠnow often requiring customer-speci˜c, market-speci˜c, 
and business-speci˜c expertise, not just technology-speci˜c expertise. IT 
from Pew Internet and American Life Project Survey, April 2006, available at http://www.
pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_ICT_Typology.pdf; accessed October 18, 2007. Pew surveyed 
4,001 Americans 18 years of age and older by telephone.
128
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, 
Digital Prosperity: Understanding 
the Economic Bene˜ts of the Information Technology Re
volution,
 Washington, D.C., March 13, 
2007.
129
David Moschella, ﬁAligning R&D with Industry Change,ﬂ presentation to the commit
-tee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
is enabling new products and services, and innovation in IT also includes 
innovations in these products and services. The National Research Coun
-cil expects to embark on a congressionally mandated project looking at 
education, training, and research dimensions of innovation in IT-enabled 
services.
130
Indeed, revenues in the IT sectors are increasingly coming from ser
-vices (including software maintenance) rather than from product sales. 
According to Michael Cusumano, software product companies and types 
of ˜rms experiencing the shift toward services face three kinds of chal
-lenges: identifying the best revenue mix (of products and services, bearing 
in mind that products drive service revenues), creating service offerings 
that can make a ˜rm™s products less commodity-like, and making service 
130 
Section 1005 of Public Law 110-69 (the America COMPETES Act of 2007) calls for the 
Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy, through the National Academies, to conduct a 
study and to report to Congress on ﬁhow the Federal Government should support, through 
research, education, and training, the emerging management and learning discipline known 
as service science,ﬂ which is de˜ned as ﬁcurricula, training, and research programs that are 
designed to teach individuals to apply scienti˜c, engineering, and management disciplines 
that integrate elements of computer science, operations research, industrial engineering, 
business strategy, management sciences, and social and legal sciences, in order to encourage 
innovation in how organizations create value for customers and shareholders that could not 
be achieved through such disciplines working in isolation.ﬂ
Figure 
3-
2.
epsCustomer-Created
 Value
Supplier-Created Value
1995
2010
Percentage of Value
0100
Customer-Created
Valu
eSupplier-CreatedValue
FIGURE 3.2
 Shift from supplier-created to customer-created value, 1995-2010. 
SOURCE:
 Adapted from David Moschella, ﬁAligning R&D with Industry Change,ﬂ 
presentation to the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 91
delivery more ef˜cient (through reuse of software components, standard
-ized process frameworks and training, and automation of services). Thus 
both suppliers and their customers have ample new opportunities to inno
-vate in underlying technologies, in product- and service-delivery models, 
in new business models, and in new product and service offerings.
131
U.S. leadership in many IT-related markets is under competitive pres
-sure. The changing locus of IT innovation, including customers as well 
as university or corporate laboratories, makes demand leadership by U.S. 
consumersŠthat is, having consumers that are among the most techno
-logically sophisticated in the world, with leading-edge product require
-mentsŠincreasingly important to the U.S. global competitiveness in IT. 
With multifaceted IT innovation, the rationale is that the most dynamic 
IT companies will ultimately be in countries with the most demanding IT 
customers.
132
 Thus if a nation™s users are not global lead usersŠrequiring 
and using the most advanced IT functionalitiesŠthen in the market seg
-ments where their demand lags, that nation™s user-driven IT innovation 
also will lag.
133
U.S. consumers are not at the leading edge in important market seg
-ments such as mobile telephones and wireless services.
134
 In part, this has 
to do with the fact that the wireless infrastructure in this country trails, 
in coverage and speed, the infrastructure in the European Union, Japan, 
and now increasingly, China.
135
 It is also increasingly evident that U.S. 
consumers are not the leading adopters of new wireless services such as 
131
As Michael A. Cusumano discusses, the shift to services on the part of traditional 
IT-product companies creates new opportunities for innovation, but it also creates new 
challenges for dedicated IT-services companies. See Michael A. Cusumano, ﬁThe Changing 
Software Business: Moving from Products to Services,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
, January 2008, pp. 
20-27. 
132
For a recent survey of the literature on the adoption and diffusion of IT in businesses, in
-cluding ﬁco-invention,ﬂ see Chris Forman and Avi Goldfarb, ﬁDiffusion of Information and 
Communication Technologies to Businesses,ﬂ in Terry Hendershott, ed., 
Handbook of Econom
-ics and Information Systems,
 Elsevier, 2006, working paper version available at http://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=896750#PaperDownload; accessed March 24, 2008. 
133
For development of the lead-user concept, see, for example, Eric von Hippel, ﬁLead 
 
Users: A Source of Novel Product Concepts,ﬂ 
Management Science
 32(7):791-805, 1986; and 
Glen L. Urban and Eric von Hippel, ﬁLead User Analyses for the Development of New 
Industrial Products,ﬂ 
Management Science
 34(5):569-582, 1988. 
134
Recent developments in the U.S. wireless market are signs of signi˜cant innovation, 
including the 3G iPhone from Apple, new competitor products by such vendors as Samsung 
and LG, and Google™s entry into the mobile phone arena with its Android platform. 
135
According to the European Union™s (EU™s) 12th report on telecommunications mar
-kets, mobile penetration stood at 103 percent, and the EU had overtaken Japan with the 
largest population of 3G subscribers, with 45 million as of the end of 2006; available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/itemlongdetail.cfm?item_id=3304; 
accessed August 28, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
ring tones, ringback tones, games, and payment services. The direction of 
causality is unclear, but infrastructure clearly plays a fundamental role. 
Both consumer demand and enabling infrastructure are necessary: for 
example, it is pointless to demand video on a cell phone if the wireless 
infrastructure cannot support it, or to expect home health care delivery 
offerings to prosper if broadband penetration is low (see the subsection 
below entitled ﬁBroadband Speeds and Capabilitiesﬂ for examples of 
bandwidths needed to support particular functionalities).
Network Infrastructure and Innovation Leadership
An environment of leading-edge users of technology creates the 
essential context for technology™s next wave and its effective applica
-tion. In such an environment, all sectors of society, including consumers, 
businesses, and governments, exploit and make best use of advanced 
information technology. However, as more leading-edge deployments of 
IT rely on mobility and a multimedia-capable infrastructure, it appears 
that the key IT suppliers in these markets will tend to focus their efforts on 
populations outside the United States because these markets are growing 
and because the infrastructures are better able to support users of these 
leading-edge technologies. This focus will, in turn, help those users grow 
in sophistication and comfort with the technology, surpassing users in 
the U.S. domestic markets. A situation in which U.S. consumers and users 
become increasingly less demanding in terms of product features and 
capabilities is cause for concern, because IT innovation is, increasingly, 
occurring at the ﬁedgeﬂŠthrough user-driven application innovation.
United States Behind in IT Deployment in Some Domains
While the United States has long led the world as the largest IT mar
-ket, thereby commanding the attention of the leading global providers of 
IT products and services, other countries are increasingly taking the lead 
in deploying IT for certain domains ahead of the United States. Accord
-ing to Morgan Stanley Research, ﬁThe large U.S. telecom operators are 
well behind their European peers in regard to ˜xed/mobile convergence, 
due to both structural and system issues.ﬂ
136
 In addition to mobile carrier 
infrastructure, other areas in which the U.S. failure to deploy IT intel
-ligently is causing our society to fall behind in important ways include 
broadband infrastructure deployment, health care, and homeland secu
-136
Mark Shuper, Adnaan Ahmad, Simon Flannery, Nick Delfas, Scott Coleman, Vance 
Edelson, and Franklin Fu, 
Telecommunications 
4G: Still the Early Days (WiFi/WiMax in Focus)
, Morgan Stanley Research Telecommunications Report, August 2006.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 93
rity. For example, the Markle Foundation™s 2002 report 
Protecting America™s 
Freedom in the Information Age
 describes the importance of ˜rst-rate infor
-mation collection, analysis, communications, and sharing for purposes 
of countering threats from terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, 
as well as pointing out how the U.S. failure to mobilize and deploy IT 
resources effectively harms response capabilities.
137
In the past, the U.S. government has played a strong role in estab
-lishing U.S. IT demand leadership.
 From the 1960s through the 1980s, 
the U.S. government played a fundamental role in the development of 
numerous ˜elds of information technologyŠboth as a sponsor of broad-
based research and as a lead customer in emerging markets.
138
 During 
this period, often through military and space programs, the U.S. govern
-ment served as a demand leaderŠa ˜rst customer for new commercial 
products that promised orders large enough to sustain investment in 
new products and processes.
139
 Government has also served as a builder 
of infrastructure in advance of wider demand, notably for networking in 
research and education.
However, as commercial markets have outpaced federal procure
-ments, the federal government™s role in shaping and sustaining the IT 
R&D ecosystem has diminished. For example:

As IT industries have matured and commercial demand for IT has 
soared, the government has ceased to be the ﬁleadﬂ customer (in terms of 
137
See Markle Foundation, 
Protecting America™s Freedom in the Information Age,
 New York, 
N.Y., October 2002, available at http://www.markle.org/downloadable_assets/nstf_full.
pdf; see also Markle Foundation, 
Creating a Trusted Information Network for 
Homeland Security,
 New York, N.Y., December 2003, at http://www.markle.org/downloadable_assets/nstf_
 report2_full_report.pdf; both accessed August 28, 2007. See also Jonathan Marino, ﬁDHS Tech 
Chief Wants Broadband for First Responders,ﬂ 
Go
vernment Executi
ve,
 March 15, 2007, avail
-able at http://www.govexec.com/dailyfed/0307/031507j2.htm; accessed October 18, 2007.
138
For example, research supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency™s 
(DARPA™s) Information Processing Techniques Of˜ce (IPTO) from 1962 through the mid-
1980s led to developments including time-sharing, interactive computer graphics, net
-working, integrated circuit design, and intelligent systems. For a comprehensive history 
of DARPA™s IPTO and its style of ﬁmanaging for innovation,ﬂ see Arthur L. Norberg and 
Judy E. O™Neill, with contributions by Kerry J. Freedman, 
Transforming Computer Technology: 
Information Processing for the Pentagon, 
1962-1986, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 
Md., 1996. See also National Research Council, 
Funding a Re
volution: Go
vernment Support for 
Computing Research,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999. 
139
Federal procurement of integrated circuits for NASA™s Apollo spacecraft and for the 
Minuteman II missile guidance system sparked and sustained early industry investments 
in manufacturing capacity and encouraged commercial markets for integrated circuits. A 
notable example of a civilian agency as lead customer is the Census Bureau™s purchase of the 
˜rst Univac computer in 1951. See also National Research Council, 
Funding a Re
volution: Go
v-ernment Support for Computing Research,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
cutting-edge needs or dominant purchasing power) for general-purpose 
hardware or software. The military continues to be a lead customer in 
certain speci˜c areas (for example, extremely large scale, cyberphysical 
weapons systems), and in these it faces a struggle to ensure adequate 
internal and contractor capabilities.
140

In some cases, where the government™s requirements had been 
perceived as beyond then-current commercial offerings, the government 
chose to ﬁmakeﬂ rather than ﬁbuyﬂ needed technologies. Sometimes, the 
government ˜nds it dif˜cult toŠor does notŠappreciate when the deci
-sion crossover between ﬁmakeﬂ and ﬁbuyﬂ has occurred. As a result, some 
agencies must now struggle to maintain decades-old and obsolete, but 
mission-critical, technologies while also attempting to modernize these 
systems using state-of-the-practice commercial technologies.
141

Although the U.S. government was rated a leader in readiness 
for e-government in 2003,
142
 this may not translate into the same kind of 
lead role that the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
played in prior decades.
143

 The U.S. federal government generally does not stand at the fore
-front in terms of innovative IT use, and federal spending on IT does not 
dominate the commercial marketplace. Thus the government does not 
serve as an effective ﬁlead customerﬂ to spur development of new and 
innovative commercial technologies and products.

In cooperation with the business school INSEAD, the World Eco
-nomic Forum produces 
The Global Information Technology Report, 
which 
140
This is the subject of an ongoing National Research Council (NRC) study on advancing 
software-intensive system producibility and of an NRC workshop report: National Research 
Council, 
Software-Intensi
ve Systems and Uncertainty at Scale,
 The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2007. For a discussion of the implications of increased Department of 
Defense reliance on commercial software during a period of increasing globalization in IT 
industries, see also Defense Science Board, 
Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on 
Mission Impact of Foreign In˚uence on DoD Software,
 Of˜ce of the Undersecretary of Defense 
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Washington, D.C., September 2007.
141
See National Research Council,
 The Social Security Administration™s E-Go
vernment Strategy 
and Planning for the Future,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
142
In 2003, a United Nations survey found that the United States led the world in ﬁe-
 government readiness,ﬂ followed by Sweden, Australia, Denmark, and the United Kingdom. 
Readiness was measured by a composite index based on an assessment of Web sites, tele
-communications infrastructure, and human resource endowment (including literacy). See 
United Nations, 
UN Global E-Go
vernment Readiness Report: UN Global E-Go
vernment Sur
vey 
200
3, available at http://www.unpan.org/egovernment3.asp; accessed July 16, 2007. 
143
ﬁDARPA funding of advanced technologies, particularly in Information Technology 
(IT), has had enormous impact, although largely on platform technologies that had wide 
and profound spillovers.ﬂ See National Research Council, 
Inno
vation Policies for the 
21
st 
Century: Report of a Symposium,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, 
footnote 2, p. xiv. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 95
ranks 122 countries on the basis of their ﬁnetworked readiness.ﬂ This is 
a metric that the Forum uses to measure the countries™ preparation to 
participate in and bene˜t from developments in information technology. 
In the 2006-2007 report, the networked readiness ranking for the United 
States was seventh place; the United States had been in ˜rst place in the 
2005-2006 rankings. The drop in the U.S. ranking was attributed to ﬁrela
-tive deterioration of the political and regulatory environment.ﬂ
144 
In its 
2007-2008 report, however, the World Economic Forum raised the United 
States™ networked readiness ranking to fourth overall, after Denmark, 
Sweden, and Switzerland. The new report placed particular focus on the 
role of networked readiness in spurring innovation. The reported U.S. 
strengths included availability of capital and the quality of U.S. R&D insti
-tutions; the reported weaknesses included cost and speed of broadband 
connectivity.
145
Comparing Aspects of Broadband in the United States and Abroad
Compared with the more highly regulated environment of past 
decades, the current telecommunications market environment in the 
United States has yielded many consumer bene˜ts. However, these ben
-e˜ts have not accrued evenly. By the early years of the 21st century, 
although broadband was regarded as a national and local imperative, 
there was substantial geographical variation in the nature of broadband 
competition, broadband was not available everywhere, and investments 
144
The World Economic Forum™s national Networked Readiness Indicator (NRI) has three 
components: the environment for IT offered by the country; the readiness of the country™s 
individuals, businesses, and governments; and the usage of IT among these stakeholders. 
The 10 top-ranked countries were Denmark, Sweden, Singapore, Finland, Switzerland, the 
Netherlands, the United States, Iceland, the United Kingdom, and Norway. These countries 
all had NRI scores between 5.71 and 5.42. By comparison, France ranked 23rd, with a score of 
4.99, and Mexico ranked 49th, with a score of 3.91. (However, the United States was cited for 
maintaining its ﬁprimacy in innovation, driven by one of the world™s best tertiary education 
systems and its high degree of cooperation with the industry as well as by the extremely 
ef˜cient market environment.ﬂ) See World Economic Forum, ﬁDenmark Climbs to the Top 
in the Rankings of the World Economic Forum™s Global Information Technology Report 
2006-2007,ﬂ Press Release, available at http://www.weforum.org/en/media/Latest%20
 Press%20Releases/gitr_2007_press_release; accessed July 18, 2007. 
145
World Economic Forum, 
The Global Information Technology Report 
200
7-2008,
 available at 
http://www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/gcp/Global%20Information%20Technology%20
Report/index.htm; accessed April 9, 2008. Some observers reportedly were skeptical of the 
improvement in the U.S. ranking owing to their concerns about U.S. broadband capabilities, 
penetration, adoption, and costs. See John Markoff, ﬁStudy Gives High Marks to U.S. In
-ternet,ﬂ 
New 
York Times
, April 9, 2008, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/09/
technology/09internet.html?ex=1208404800&en=5625fba016b5acbf&ei=5070&emc=eta1; 
 
accessed April 9, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
in additional facilities and performance improvements were uncertain.
146
 In that environment, although the United States was a world leader in 
computer usage, it was already lagging in broadband connectivity (espe
-cially in the areas of speed and priceŠsee Table 3.2) compared with other 
countries (albeit those with geographic, population-density, and indus
-trial policy characteristics different from those of the United States).
A number of international rankings show that the United States lags 
in international comparisons. For example, IDC™s ﬁInformation Society 
Indexﬂ (ISI) measures the ability of 53 nations to participate in the infor
-mation revolution. To construct the ISI, IDC includes 15 variables grouped 
into four types of infrastructure indexes: social, Internet, computer, and 
telecommunications (telecom) infrastructures. In 2003, the United States 
ranked ˜rst in IDC™s computer index, but only 20th in the telecom index, 
which included the number of broadband households.
147
 Another inter
-national ranking, by the International Telecommunications Union, based 
on broadband subscribers per 100 people, put the United States in 20th 
place in 2006, after a steady decline from 3rd place in 1999.
148
 Table 3.2 presents a snapshot of the United States™ uneven interna
-tional standing in broadband in 2007: according to OECD data, it leads 
in total number of subscribers, is in the middle of the 10 countries listed 
in terms of per capita penetration, and is far behind in advertised down
-load speed (at relatively high prices). However, like some of their foreign 
counterparts, U.S. carriers have continued to deploy combination service 
offerings and pricing arrangements (for example, bundling television, 
telephone, and data services in one cable or ˜ber-optic phone offering), 
and therefore prices and capabilities are likely to continue to improve in 
at least some areas of the United States. 
The goal of more-ubiquitous, lower-cost, and higher-speed broad
-band deployment
149
 has been the focus of signi˜cant analysis and advo
-146
National Research Council, 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits,
 National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2002; discussion of ˜ndings on pp. 13, 18, and 21. 
147
In 2003, the top 10 countries in IDC™s composite ISI rankings were Denmark, Sweden, 
United States, Switzerland, Canada, Netherlands, Finland, Korea, Norway, and the United 
Kingdom. The IDC™s computer index includes PCs per household, IT spending as a fraction 
of GDP, IT services™ contribution to GDP, and software spending; the telecom index includes 
the number of broadband households, wireless subscribers, and handset shipments. See 
IDC, ﬁIDC™s Information Society Index,ﬂ available at http://www.idc.com/groups/isi/
main.html; accessed July 18, 2007. 
148
J. Windhausen, Jr., 
A Blueprint for Big Broadband,
 EDUCAUSE White Paper, January 
2008, p. 12, citing International Telecommunications Union data, available at http://www.
educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/EPO0801.pdf; accessed March 13, 2008.
149
For technical, regulatory, and policy analyses of broadband, see National Research 
Council, 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 
2002.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 97
cacy. In January 2002, for example, TechNet, a group of Silicon Valley chief 
executive of˜cers, proposed that the President and policy makers ﬁmake 
broadband a national priority and set a goal of making an affordable 
100-megabits per second broadband connection available to 100 million 
American homes and small businesses by 2010.ﬂ
150
 A June 2007 report 
from the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) uses 
an externalities argument to make its case that government action is 
needed to advance broadband deployment, because market forces will 
not be suf˜cient:
First, it [broadband] is a not just a consumer technology like the iPod or 
Blu-Ray player, it is ﬁprosumerﬂ technology that is enabling consumers 
to also be producers who contribute to economic growth and innova
-tion. Second, it exhibits positive network externalities where the bene˜ts 
from broadband adoption accrue not just to individual consumers, but 
to other broadband users and society as a whole. Because of this the 
150
See TechNet, 
A National Imperati
ve: Uni
versal A
vailability of Broadband by 
2010, 
January 
15, 2002, available at 
http://www.technet.org/resources.dyn/2002-01-15.64.pd
f; accessed 
June 27, 2007.
TABLE
 3.2  A Snapshot Comparison of Broadband in 10 Countries 
 in 2007
Country
Total 
Number of 
Broadband
Subscribers 
(million)
Number of 
Broadband 
Subscribers 
 per 100 
Inhabitants
Average 
Advertised
Broadband 
Download
Speed 
(megabits 
per second)
Average 
Monthly 
Cost of 
Broadband 
(U.S. $)
United States
66.2
22.1
8.9
53
Japan
27.2
21.3
93.7
34
Germany
17.5
21.2
9.2
NA
Korea
14.4
29.9
43.3
42
United Kingdom
14.4
23.7
10.6
33
France
14.3
22.5
44.2
37
Italy
 9.3
15.8
13.1
NA
Canada
 8.1
25.0
7.8
51
Spain
 7.5
17.0
6.901
NA
Netherlands
 5.5
33.5
5.312
39
NOTE: NA, not available.
SOURCE
: Based on data of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
presented in J. Windhausen, Jr., 
A Blueprint for Big Broadband,
 EDUCAUSE White Paper, 
January 2008, pp. 20-21; 23-24, available at http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/
EPO0801.pdf.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
social returns from investing in more broadband exceed the private 
returns of companies and consumers. As a result, market forces alone 
will not generate the societally optimal level of broadband, at least for 
the foreseeable future. In markets like this, public policiesŠin this case a 
proactive national broadband strategyŠare needed to maximize overall 
societal welfare.
151
Additionally, based on 2006 OECD data, the ITIF found that the United 
States had fallen to rank 12th behind countries including Korea, Japan, 
and Iceland.
A 2007 report of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA), 
Broadband in America, 
describes federal efforts 
toward the vision of ﬁuniversal, affordable accessﬂ to broadband technol
-ogy: these include Federal Communications Commission (FCC) efforts 
to modify regulations in order to provide incentives for network invest
-ments by local telephone companies and to stimulate facilities-based 
investments by other providers, support for cable franchise reforms, and 
more timely and cost-effective access to rights-of-way on federal land.
152
 Using data from various sources, the NTIA reported large increases in 
various types of high-speed network access (via telephone lines and cable, 
as well as high-speed wireless) and decreases in prices, over the period 
from 2001 to 2007. 
Signi˜cantly, however, the NTIA report notes that ﬁthe lack of a sin
-gle authoritative data set makes it dif˜cult to establish with certainty 
whether broadband penetration has become ubiquitous, and this Report 
acknowledges the bene˜ts of better data gathering tools.ﬂ
153
 In part, the 
piecemeal nature of the U.S. data compared with the data available for 
some other countries naturally re˚ects the multiplicity of federal, state, 
and local policies and regulatory regimes for different types of technolo
-gies and providers, as well as the large and growing number of providers 
(see Table 3.3). Nevertheless, data limitations make it dif˜cult to piece 
together a complete, current snapshot of broadband in the United States 
or to evaluate the various claims regarding progressŠor lagsŠin broad
-band availability. Moreover, the often wide differences between available 
ﬁbroadbandﬂ speeds in the United States and foreign counties complicate 
direct comparisons.
151
Robert D. Atkinson, 
The Case for a National Broadband Policy,
 The Information Technology 
and Innovation Foundation, Washington, D.C., June 2007.
152
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
Networked Nation: 
Broadband in America,
 U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., January 2008, pp. 
i, ii, available at http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/2008/NetworkedNationBroadbandin
 America2007.pdf; accessed March 13, 2008.
153
Ibid., p. 12.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 99
Unlike the United States, Korea and Japan are small in area, with 
political institutions that favor a government role in industrial policy. 
While overall comparisons among countries are dif˜cult, relative rank
-ings in broadband penetration, speeds, and costs are nonetheless relevant 
because of the linkages between enabling infrastructure, demand leader
-ship, and innovation leadership. For example, although the household 
penetration (fraction of households that subscribe to a broadband service) 
of broadband in Korea in 2007 was 90 percent, in the United States it was 
TABLE
 3.3  Number of Providers of High-Speed Lines Nationwide 
in the United States, 1999-2006, by Technology (over 200 kilobits per 
second in at least one direction)
Number of Providers
Month, Year
ADSL
aCable
Modem
All
Other
bTotal
cDecember 1999
 28
 43
 65
105
December 2000
 68
 39
 87
136
December 2001
117
 59
122
203
December 2002
178
 87
169
299
December 2003
274
110
246
432
December 2004
352
147
312
552
December 2005
820
242
835
1,347
December 2006
862
278
882
1,397
NOTES: According to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
data through December 2004 include only providers with at least 250 lines per state, which 
were the only ones required to ˜le; some historical data have been revised.
 According to the 2002 report of the National Research Council entitled 
Broadband: Bring
-ing 
Home the Bits
 (National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2002, p. 63), 200 kilobits per 
second is not adequate to support a single, TV-quality video stream to each house.  
 aADSL, or asynchronous digital subscriber line, is carried over copper telephone lines. 
Because it provides essential infrastructure, broadband constitutes a foundation for leader
-ship elsewhere. Attention here could produce bene˜ts in a number of other areas, including 
health care (for example, access to broadband facilitates the transfer and analysis of elec
-tronic patient records and test results, particularly imaging). Note that the Federal Com
-munications Commission has started a pilot funding program for a nationwide, broadband 
network dedicated to health care.  See ﬁRural Health Care Pilot Program,ﬂ available at 
http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/rural/rhcp.html; accessed October 18, 2007.  
 bﬁAll Otherﬂ includes synchronous digital subscriber line (SDSL), traditional wireline, ˜ber, 
satellite, ˜xed and mobile wireless, and power line.
 cTotal is not simply the sum of the ˜rst three columns because some providers offer services 
using multiple technologies.
SOURCE
: Data from National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 
Net
-worked Nation: Broadband in America, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 2008, 
Table 1, based on data from Federal Communications Commission,
 High-Speed Ser
vices for 
Internet Access: Status as of December 
31
, 
200
6, 
Washington, D.C., October 2007, Table 7.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
only 51 percent. The United States also lags in penetration per 100 inhabi
-tants (see Table 3.2). In 2007 the average bandwidth was over 40 Mbps 
in Korea; it was under 10 Mbps in the United States; the average cost per 
1 megabit of capacity was under $1 per month in Korea; it was almost $6 
in the United States (see Table 3.2). Korea™s high-speed infrastructure is 
widely credited with enabling its inhabitants to attain demand leadership 
in content-rich online games.
Japan is pursuing a very aggressive strategy of broadband deploy
-ment. It reportedly had the world™s fastest broadband service in 2007 
(see Table 3.2), a speed (on average, 93.7 Mbps) that enables Japanese con
-sumers to watch full-screen, broadcast-quality television over the Inter
-net. Japan™s broadband lead over the United States is attributed in part 
to
 better physical infrastructure (newer and better telephone wires and 
shorter distances between the central of˜ce and homes); DSL in Japan is 
often 5 to 10 times as fast as the services widely offered by U.S. cable pro
-viders. However, Japanese industrial policy also plays a role: the Japanese 
government used subsidies, tax incentives, and regulation to promote 
high-speed broadband deployment:

Government subsidies and tax incentives reportedly spurred Nip
-pon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.™s (NTT™s) nationwide build-out of 
˜ber-optic lines (offering connection speeds of up to 100 megabits per sec
-ond) to about 8.8 million Japanese homes. NTT, Japan™s largest telephone 
company, was once government-controlled.

Government regulation required large telephone companies (NTT, 
for example) to open up their copper wire networks to small Internet pro
-viders at prices that allowed these new broadband companies to charge 
as little as $22 a month for a DSL connection faster than almost all U.S. 
broadband services.
These levels of broadband service are enabling the development of a 
number of valuable new applications, such as low-cost, high-de˜nition 
teleconferencing for telemedicine and advanced telecommuting.
154
A fundamental step to being the world leader in information tech
-nology use is for the United States to deploy world-class broadband 
connectivity aggressively over the next decade. The United States cur
-rently lags behind other nations such as Japan and Korea in upgrading 
and deploying national broadband connectivity. Setting, and reaching, 
a highly ambitious targetŠsuch as making 1,000 megabits per second 
154
See Blaine Harden, ﬁJapan™s Warp-Speed Ride to Internet Future,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, August 29, 2007, p. A01, available at 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2007/08/28/AR2007082801990_pf.html
; accessed August 29, 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 101broadband connectivity available to 100 million American homes and 
small businesses by 2020
Šwould enable the United States to leap well 
ahead of other countries in this area and to hold that lead.
155
Governments can use economic incentives and targeted regulations 
to promote higher-speed connectivity across a common physical infra
-structure. By using multiple wavelengths or colors, a single ˜ber today is 
able to carry 1 to 10 terabits of data.
156
 U.S. terrestrial ˜ber networks have 
large amounts of ﬁdarkﬂ (unused) ˜ber, and many ˜bers already lit could 
accommodate additional colors.
157
 However, a large obstacle remains: 
the deployment of ˜ber or the installation of other upgrades to the ﬁlast 
mileﬂ to connect all the endpoints (homes, businesses, government agen
-cies, and other organizations) to the national networks. In the United 
States, the connectivity landscape is in part a product of historical policy 
goals (such as universal access for telephony) and the structure of U.S. 
economic regulation. There is merit in considering models for broadband 
 
deploymentŠfor example, models of companies competing in the value-
added services market using a common physical infrastructure,
158
 or 
models whereby facilities-based competition is fostered.
159
 Value-added 
services that can bene˜t from gigabit connectivity include movies on 
demand, multimedia Web browsing, many-to-many video communica
-tions, news groups, and so forth. However, the question remains as to 
who makes the infrastructure investments and who extracts the value of 
these services.
In the United States, the complex system of federal, state, and local 
governance and regulations can present numerous transactional bottle
-necks, such as right-of-way restrictions and content franchising (for exam
-ple, for video), to pursuing such approaches. These may tend to favor the 
155
This target is more ambitious than TechNet™s proposal for accelerating broadband 
deployment and demand, which called for 100 megabit-per-second connectivity by 2010. 
See ﬁAccelerating Broadband Deployment and Demand,ﬂ available at http://www.technet.
org/issues/broadband/; accessed September 7, 2007. A goal of gigabit connectivity would 
be useful in helping the United States leapfrog Japan and other nations now moving ahead 
in broadband deployment. 
156
See ﬁIntroducing DWDM [Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing],ﬂ http://www.
cisco.com/univercd/cc/td/doc/product/mels/cm1500/dwdm/dwdm_fns.htm; accessed 
September 7, 2007. 
157
TeleGeography Research, ﬁGlobal Bandwidth Research Service: Executive Summary,ﬂ 
Washington, D.C., 2008, available at http://www.telegeography.com/products/gb/index.
php; accessed October 31, 2008.
158
An inexact analogy would be the federal government paying for an interstate highway 
system and the private sector creating products (such as cars, gas stations, and motels) that 
bene˜t from the use of this infrastructure. 
159
See National Research Council, 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits,
 National Academy 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2002.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
incumbents and slow overall progress toward attaining higher-speed, 
lower-cost broadband deployment that can support data-rich IT applica
-tions and services and enable leading-edge,
 customer-driven innovation 
by U.S. consumers.
Broadband Speeds and Capabilities 
With respect to broadband, how fast is fast enough? That is, what 
bandwidth target is desired in order to enable multifaceted innovation? 
The ﬁanswerﬂ is actually a moving target. Consequently, in the 2002 
National Research Council report 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits,
 the 
Committee on Broadband Last Mile Technology did not set bandwidth-
speci˜c de˜nitions for what constituted ﬁbroadbands,ﬂ and it deliber
-ately did not set speci˜c bandwidth targets for policy makers. Instead, 
that committee established a functional de˜nition: ﬁBroadband services 
should provide suf˜cient performanceŠand wide enough penetration of 
services reaching that performance levelŠto encourage the development 
of new applications.ﬂ
160
 Furthermore, that committee recommended a 
more coherent, consistent broadband policy framework that is service-
oriented, rather than being technology-centric.
161
 An important consideration in thinking about broadband leadership 
and the question of what bandwidth to ﬁtargetﬂ is the fact that broadband 
data rates considered adequate a few years ago are no longer suf˜cient to 
support new applications and services.
162
 Higher-speed services attract 
more customers because they are more useful for high-data-rate applica
-tions (such as video). A higher-speed infrastructure stimulates multifac
-eted innovation. 
In January 2008, the California Broadband Task Force (CBTF) pub
-lished its ˜nal report, 
The State of Connecti
vity: Building Inno
vation Through 
Broadband.
163
 The CBTF recommendations included building out ﬁhigh 
speedﬂ broadband infrastructure for all Californians, as well as promoting 
innovative uses of broadband technology. The CBTF adopted a working 
de˜nition of broadband that includes a basic minimum speed (expected to 
increase over time) of 512 kbps.
164
 Table 3.4, adapted with minor stylistic 
160
Ibid., p. 80.
161
Ibid., pp. 32-33. 
162
Ibid.; see, especially, Ch. 2 for a discussion of then-current broadband technologies, 
speeds, and capabilities (as well as economic, regulatory, and policy factors). 
163
California Broadband Task Force, 
The State of Connecti
vity: Building Inno
vation Through 
Broadband,
 January 2008, available at http://www.calink.ca.gov/taskforcereport/; accessed 
March 17, 2008.
164
Ibid., pp. 8, 12.
.Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 103TABLE
 3.4  Bandwidth Ranges Corresponding to Advanced 
Applications and Services
Bandwidth Range
Applications and Services Enabled
500 kbpsŒ1 Mbps
Voice over IP [Internet Protocol]
SMS [short message service]
Basic e-mail
Web Browsing (simple sites)
Streaming Music (caching)
Low-Quality Video (highly compressed)
1 MbpsŒ5 Mbps
Web Browsing (complex sites)
E-mail (larger-size attachments)
Remote Surveillance
IPTV-SD (1-3 channels) [standard definition Internet Protocol
  television]
File Sharing (small/medium)
Telecommuting (ordinary)
Digital Broadcast Video (1 channel)
Streaming Music
5 MbpsŒ10 Mbps
Telecommuting (converged services)
File Sharing (large)
IPTV-SD (multiple channels)
Switched Digital Video
Video on Demand SD
Broadcast SD Video
Video Streaming (2-3 channels)
HD [High-Definition] Video Downloading
Low-Definition Telepresence
Gaming
Medical File Sharing (basic)
Remote Diagnosis (basic)
Remote Education
Building Control and Management
10 MbpsŒ100 Mbps
Telemedicine
Educational Services
Broadcast Video SD and Some HD
IPTV-HD [high-definition Internet Protocol television]
Gaming (complex)
Telecommuting (high-quality video)
High-Quality Telepresence
HD Surveillance
Smart/Intelligent Building Control
continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
changes from the CBTF report, illustrates the types of applications and 
services made feasible by increasing bandwidth.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, the intention of the committee has been to illuminate 
the complex story of the evolution of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem during 
the 1995-2007 period. First, it summarized the tumultuous business and 
technological changes experienced in the IT industry since 1995. The IT 
R&D ecosystem was affected by business transformations as the Inter
-net was commercialized. In the process, the world experienced the larg
-est venture capital investment bubble in history and an accompanying 
dramatic stock market bubble. The bubble may not have been entirely 
negative, because major new ˜rms were created and the ways that people 
work and play were transformed. However, the collapse of the bubble did 
lead to a massive reduction in venture capital investing that some believe 
signi˜cantly retarded the commercialization of information technologies. 
Also, the collapse of the bubble may have discouraged students from 
entering the computer science and computer engineering ˜elds, possibly 
leading to longer-term labor shortages.
Bandwidth Range
Applications and Services Enabled
100 MbpsŒ1 Gbps
HD Telemedicine
Multiple Educational Services
Broadcast Video Full HD
Full IPTV Channel Support
Video on Demand HD
Gaming (immersion)
Remote Server Services for Telecommuting
1 GbpsŒ10 Gbps
Research Applications
Telepresence Using Uncompressed High-Definition Video 
  Streams
Live Event Digital Cinema Streaming
Telemedicine Remote Control of Scientific/Medical Instruments
Interactive Remote Visualization and Virtual Reality
Movement of Terabyte Data Sets
Remote Supercomputing
SOURCE
: Adapted from table entitled ﬁWhat Is Broadband,ﬂ p. 12, California Broadband 
Task Force, 
The State of Connecti
vity: Building Inno
vation Through Broadband,
 January 2008, 
available at http://www.calink.ca.gov/taskforcereport/; accessed March 17, 2008.
TABLE
 3.4  continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TH
E CHANGING
 LANDSCAPE
: 
1995
-200
7 105The committee then turned its attention to the evolution of major 
platforms (such as Web 2.0, open-source development, new mobile access 
devices, and services executing within Internet data centers) and to the 
evolution of the major component sectors of semiconductors, computers, 
and software. In technological terms, there were two extremely powerful 
major developments during the period of study: The ˜rst of these was 
the mass popularization of the Internet for purposes of business, uses as 
tools, and recreational use. The second was the rise of mobile telephony. 
Information technologies in this time period became ubiquitous. In purely 
technical terms, IT has permeated nearly every part of daily existence and 
knitted the world closer together. With this change came a globalization in 
which, for the ˜rst time in history, engineers even in developing nations 
became more capable of being integrated in the global economy. By dis
-cussing India and ChinaŠtwo growing, potential IT industry giantsŠin 
particular, the committee places the situation of the U.S. IT R&D eco
-system into a global context. Today, it is no longer possible to understand 
the health and competitiveness of an isolated U.S. IT R&D ecosystem; it 
is now necessary to place it in a global context.
Finally, the committee considered the multifaceted nature of IT inno
-vation. IT innovation is no longer mainly supplier-driven. Increasingly, 
customers are creating value through application innovations. As these 
new applications and IT-enabled services grow in importance, IT workers 
will increasingly need more than just technology skills. They will need 
in-depth business- and market-related knowledge to leverage technology 
use and differentiate their products and services. For the United States to 
lead in this new environment, an appropriate network infrastructure is 
required: ubiquitous, higher-speed, and more-affordable broadband.
With that as background for understanding the current state of the 
U.S. IT R&D ecosystem, the next chapter argues that the changes since 
1995 have resulted in a globalized and fast-changing R&D ecosystem. If 
the United States does not navigate successfully in this global environ
-ment, it will no longer enjoy a position at the center of technological 
change, one that it has enjoyed for the past decade or more.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4A Globalized, Dynamic Information 
Technology R&D Ecosystem
Profound changes have altered the U.S. national information technol
-ogy (IT) research and development (R&D) ecosystem during the 1995-
2007 period that is the focus on this report. The forces of globalization 
have shaken the foundations of the product, labor, and ˜nancial markets 
of the IT industry. They have created tremendous opportunity, but they 
also mean that the United States will have to work even harder to remain 
the global leader in IT R&D. R&D funding models, in both academic and 
industrial environments, have also evolved. Finally, the nature of the 
employer-employee relationship has continued to change across most sec
-tors, but perhaps in a deeper way in the IT industry than anywhere else.
THE
 GLOBALI
ZATION
 OF
 PRODUCT AND LABOR M
ARKETS
 As world markets such as those of India, China, and Eastern Europe 
open, competition for information technology workers has become global, 
with many U.S. companies looking the world over for the best talent, in 
the right place, at the right price. Most U.S.-based technology companies 
are now global from birth, driving innovation through collaborations 
with foreign technologists. For example, Figure 4.1 shows the signi˜cant 
increase from 1990 to 2005 in joint patenting by Silicon Valley inventors 
working with global teams. Figure 4.1 and Box 4.1 illustrate the global 
nature of IT innovation and sourcing.
Fueling the trend toward global sourcing are signi˜cant advances in 
telecommunications and networking technologies, as well as the evolu
-106Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 107tion of work and business processes. One powerful trend is for ˜rms to 
consider what work they should retain internally and what they should 
purchase from outside vendors. The decision to purchase from an outside 
vendor work that was formerly done internally is termed 
outsourcing
.The other powerful trend is to scan the globe to decide where speci˜c 
work processes should be undertaken. Often, ˜rms are deciding that work 
can be done more ef˜ciently and effectively in nations outside the United 
States. Of course, multinational ˜rms have a long history of establish
-ing subsidiaries abroad. What has changed in the past four decades is 
the increasing movement of work to developing nations. This practice 
is referred to as 
offshoring.
 More recently, there has been an upsurge in 
offshore outsourcing. Finally, this offshoring initially was for the manufac
-ture of goods, but recently it has extended to the production of software 
and IT services.
1The Offshoring of U.S. IT 
Jobs
According to a recent study by the McKinsey Global Institute, the 
offshoring of work is more prevalent in the IT sector than it is in any of 
the other U.S. industry sectors studied. Published in 2005, the report esti
-mated that by 2008, U.S. ˜rms would offshore 18 percent of their demand 
for high-wage workers in the packaged-software sector and 13 percent 
1Ron Hira and Anil Hira, 
Outsourcing America: The True Cost of Shipping Jobs O
verseas and 
What Can Be Done About It,
 AMACOM, New York, N.Y., 2005.
Figure 
4-
1.
epsneeds shades for shapes
Ta
iwan
Israel
Japan
Singapore
Sout
hKorea
German
yC
hina
Indi
aF
inland
010
020
030
040
050
060
070
0Number
 of
 Pate
nt
s2000
-2
00
519
95
-1
99
919
90
-1
99
4FIGURE
 4.1  Foreign co-inventors listed on patents with Silicon Valley inventors, 
1990-2005.  
SOURCE
: AnnaLee Saxenian, University of California, Berkeley, pre
-sentation to the committee, Mountain View, Calif., February 23, 2007. Based on data 
analysis conducted by Collaborative Economics, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
BOX
 4.1
 iPod and iTunes: Internationalization 
 of Design and Implementation
The Apple iPod is a digital music player with a highly stylized industrial design 
and an easy-to-use click-wheel user interface. It was not the ˜rst media player, but 
it is certainly the most commercially successful. The ˜rst model was announced 
on October 2001. By April 2007, over 100 million had been sold. As an example 
of the rapid design cycle of modern consumer products, ˜ve generations have 
been launched in only 6 years: the iPod, iPod mini, iPod shuf˚e, iPod nano, and 
video iPod.
The iPod plays audio and video media in standard formats, such as the open 
standards MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3) and Apple proprietary formats.
A key element of Apple™s success is the platform which it developed for digital 
media that encompassed its online store, iTunes. iTunes was introduced in April 
2003 to sell individual songs at the price of $0.99 each. iTunes Media is encoded 
using Apple™s AAC format with additional levels of encryption. The representation 
and its associated digital rights management system make it possible to authorize 
up to ˜ve computers and an unlimited number of iPods to play the ˜les. An unlim
-ited number of audio compact disks can be produced from the digital representa
-tion, but at a loss in quality. 
The iPod offers an interesting case study in the internationalization of prod
-uct design and implementation.
1 For the ˜fth-generation video iPod, among the 
most costly components are those contributed by companies headquartered in 
Japan (Toshiba, which supplies the hard drive), Korea (Samsung Electronics, 
which supplies the ˚ash memory), and the United States (Broadcom Corpora
-tion, which supplies the multimedia processor). These components are in turn 
manufactured around the globeŠin China (hard drive), in Taiwan or Singapore 
(media processor), and in Korea (the memory). The device is assembled by the 
Taiwanese ˜rm Inventec Corporation in Mainland China. The analysis by Linden, 
Kraemer, and Dedrick indicates that out of a suggested retail price of $299, the 
cost of all components of the iPod is $144. 
Of the $155 price difference, $80 ac
-crues to Apple and $75 to the distributor and retailer. Apple™s value is the single 
largest component and is larger than that associated with the most expensive 
physical component, Toshiba™s hard drive. This value of Apple represents the 
company™s considerable competitive advantage in product conception, design, 
and marketing. Apple is amply compensated for the innovation that the ˜rm has 
embedded in the product.  The portion captured by U.S. ˜rmsŠdesign, distribu
-tion, and salesŠexceeds the value of its manufactured components. Although to 
a large extent the iPod is not manufactured in the United States, it is designed 
and sold here, and U.S. ˜rms do quite well in the bargain.
1See G. Linden, K. Kraemer, and J. Dedrick, ﬁWho Captures Value in a Global Innovation 
System? The Case of Apple™s iPod,ﬂ Personal Computing Industry Center, University of Cali
-fornia, Irvine, June 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 109in IT services.
2 The McKinsey study used data from the U.S. Department 
of Labor™s Bureau of Labor Statistics, as well as global company-level 
data, to derive a microeconomic picture of the extent of offshoring that 
had occurred and was expected to occur. The McKinsey study reported 
that the theoretical maximum global resourcing for packaged software 
and IT services represents from 44 to 48 percent of the industry™s total 
employment. However, it is estimated that only 13 to 18 percent would 
be offshored, owing to a number of barriers ranging from management 
attitudes, to business process suitability, to lack of suf˜cient scale, to intel
-lectual property protection.
3 Another study, by Alan S. Blinder, also uses the Bureau of Labor Sta
-tistics data, devising a model that categorizes jobs into two groupsŠthose 
that can be personally delivered (e.g., medical care, child care, and so 
forth) and those that can be ﬁimpersonallyﬂ deliveredŠthat is, the job 
can be delivered to the end user electronically over long distances with 
little or no degradation in quality (for example, by call center operators).
4 Blinder™s study places all IT jobs in offshorable categories and concludes 
that the percentage of offshorable IT jobs is roughly twice that estimated 
by the McKinsey study.
5 To fully understand the real impact of offshoring in IT, however, one 
must match up the demand for workers with the supply of workers in 
the countries to which work is being outsourced. The McKinsey report 
concludes that although the potential talent pool in low-wage companies 
is large and growing rapidly, only 17 percent of the potential engineering 
talent supply is suited for work with international companies.
6 The report 
explains the reasons for its conclusion, which was based on interviews with 
83 human resource managers in multinational companies: the
 reasons are 
2McKinsey Global Institute, 
The Emerging Global Labor Market,
 June 2005, available at 
http://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/emerginggloballabormarket/index.asp; ac
-cessed August 27, 2007. 
3As this report was being prepared for publication, a continued weakening of the U.S. 
currency had increased the cost of goods and services sourced from abroad. Such a trend 
decreases the bene˜ts of outsourcing and offshoring for U.S. ˜rms.
4Alan S. Blinder, 
How Many U.S. Jobs Might Be Offshorable?,
 Center for Economic Policy 
Studies [CEPS] Working Paper No. 142, CEPS, Princeton University, March 2007, available 
at www.princeton.edu/~blinder/papers/07ceps142.pdf.
5The notion that all IT jobs can be done remotely from the consumer and/or the core 
business was questioned by the committee. Many IT jobs are critical to the successful imple
-mentation of a business and/or are central to a ˜rm™s competitive differentiation. Further, 
IT R&D also involves work by large teams, who collaborate to create new platforms or 
services.
6Notice that the McKinsey study™s conclusion is a point estimate. It is likely, even ex
-tremely likely, that nations and workers will try to improve their education and capabilities 
so that they can participate in the global economy, because in many of these nations this 
will ensure higher incomes.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
dispersion of the labor force, domestic competition for talent, and indi
-vidual limitations (e.g., inadequate language skills, limited practical skills, 
lack of cultural ˜t, inability to work on teams, and lower educational attain
-ment) as well as considerable scarcity of middle-management skills.
This shortage of quali˜ed staff is becoming a headache, according to a 
recent survey conducted by 
The Economist
. According to the 600 executives 
of multinational companies that were surveyed, the shortage of quali˜ed 
staff ranked as their biggest concern in China, second in Japan (after cul
-tural differences), and fourth in India (after problems with infrastructure, 
bureaucracy, and wage in˚ation). 
The Economist
 goes on to say:
Technical skills, particularly in information technology, are lacking in 
many parts of the region, even India. One of the main concerns is that 
there are not enough skilled graduates to ˜ll all the jobs being created in 
a vibrant sector. Nasscom, which represents India™s software companies, 
has estimated that there could be a shortfall of 500,000 IT professionals 
by 2010. This means companies recruiting at job fairs in India are having 
to make lucrative offers to capture the most promising students. Even a 
junior software engineer can expect to take home $45,000/year.
7A high turnover rate also helps to drive up wage costs. 
The same article in 
The Economist
 reminds readers how supply and 
demand in labor markets must equalize through wages, and that the 
transfer of IT jobs from countries such as the United States to countries 
such as India and China, while politically and socially alarming, tends 
to be an overstated and self-regulating phenomenon. According to the 
 
McKinsey study, for IT and engineering-based services, if the United 
States and the United Kingdom continue at their current rate to concen
-trate their activities in India, China, and the Philippines, the U.S. and U.K. 
demand for engineers will fully absorb the supply of suitable engineers 
in India, China, and the Philippines by 2011.
8The U.S. Workforce and the 
Global IT Industry
Information technology professionals play an important role beyond 
the research and development organizations of technology vendors. 
7ﬁCapturing Talent,ﬂ
 The Economist,
 August 16, 2007, available at http://www.economist.
com/business/displaystory.cfm?story_id=9645045; accessed August 27, 2007. See Ra˜q 
 
Dossani, 
India Arri
ving: 
How This Economic Powerhouse Is Rede˜ning Global Business
, Ameri
-can Management Association, New York, N.Y., 2007, for a discussion of how institutions of 
higher education in India are responding to this shortage.
8McKinsey Global Institute, 
The Emerging Global Labor Market,
 June 2005, available at 
http://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/emerginggloballabormarket/index.asp; ac
-cessed August 27, 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 111
Because IT is transforming the foundational business processes of all 
corporations, IT professionals are increasingly critical to corporations 
in diverse sectors, such as retailing, hospitality, ˜nance, and pharma
-ceuticals. Outside corporate walls, IT professionals are also at work in 
entrepreneurial and small businesses, as well as creating the next wave of 
software services through technologies such as the Web 2.0 infrastructure. 
Many are independent consultants.
IT professionals work on a wide variety of challenging technical proj
-ects, ranging from research into new scienti˜c frontiers such as high 
performance computing, speech recognition technology, sensors or radio-
frequency identi˜cation to new computing platform development and 
corporate business re-engineering (integrating technology to improve 
productivity signi˜cantly). A recent report from market research ˜rm 
Forrester
 Research points to the sophistication of the IT professional job 
in today™s enterprise.
9 According to Forrester, IT professionals can follow 
a variety of career pathsŠsourcing, management, innovation, architec
-tureŠeach of which requires a combination of relationship-management, 
not just project-management, skills and activities.
Continued Strong Demand for IT Workers
According to data collected by the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
there are more professional IT workers in the United States today than 
ever before; ﬁIT professional workersﬂ in this case are de˜ned as computer 
support specialists; computer programmers; computer systems analysts; 
computer software engineers; applications, computer, and information 
systems managers; computer software engineers; systems software, net
-work, and computer systems administrators; all other computer spe
-cialists; network systems and data communications analysts; database 
administrators; computer hardware engineers; computer and information 
scientists; and computing researchers. In fact, a recent report on globaliza
-tion and the offshoring of software states:
10
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports, despite a sig
-ni˜cant increase in offshoring over the past ˜ve years, more IT jobs are 
available today in the US than at the height of the dot.com boom. More
-over, IT jobs are predicted to be among the fastest-growing occupations 
over the next decade.
9Lorie M. Orlov, Samuel Bright, and Lauren Sessions, 
Is There a Career Future in Enterprise 
IT?
 Forrester Research, Cambridge, Mass., August 10, 2006.
10
Association for Computing Machinery Job Migration Task Force, 
Globalization and Off
-shoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force,
 W. Aspray, F. Mayadas, and 
M. Vardi, eds., Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2006.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
A recent report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics that contains occu
-pational employment projections through 2016 states:
Computer and mathematical science occupations are projected to add 
822,000 jobsŠat 24.8 percent, the fastest growth among the eight profes
-sional subgroups. The demand for computer-related occupations will 
increase in almost all industries as organizations continue to adopt and 
integrate increasingly sophisticated and complex technologies. Growth 
will not be as rapid as during the previous decade, however, as the 
software industry begins to mature and as routine work is outsourced 
overseas. About 291,000Šor 35 percentŠof all new computer and math
-ematical science jobs are anticipated to be in the computer systems design 
and related services industry. The management, scienti˜c, and technical 
consulting services industry is projected to add another 86,000 computer 
and mathematical science jobs. This expected 93-percent increase is due 
to the growing need for consultants to handle issues such as computer 
network security.
11
 The report also states that among all ˜elds of science and engineering, 
ﬁcomputer specialistﬂ is projected to account for 77 percent of all job 
growth and 66 percent of all available jobs (which includes both growth 
and positions available due to retirement).
Data from the National Science Foundation (NSF) reinforce the picture 
of a relatively strong job market for science and engineering graduates, 
particularly for computer and information science graduates. According 
to NSF™s Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System, the overall 
unemployment rate of scientists and engineers in the United States was 
2.5 percent in 2006, compared with 3.2 percent in 2003; 2.5 percent is the 
lowest rate since the early 1990s. For computer/information scientists, the 
overall unemployment rates were 2.5 percent in 2006 (down from 4.0 per
-cent in 2003).
12 Also, according to a 2006 survey from NSF, the median sal
-ary level for computer and information science graduates with bachelor™s 
degrees was $45,000 (the median for all science and engineering ˜elds was 
$39,000); at the master™s level, the median salary was $65,000 (the median 
for all science and engineering ˜elds was $56,000).
13
11
Arlene Dohm and Lynn Shniper, ﬁOccupational Employment Projections to 2016,ﬂ 
Monthly Labor Re
view,
 Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, D.C., November 2007, pp. 
86-125. 
12
Nirmala Kannankutty, 
Unemployment Rate of U.S. Scientists and Engineers Drops to Record 
Low 
2.5% in 
200
6, Science Resources Statistics InfoBrief, NSF 08-305, National Science Foun
-dation, Washington, D.C., March 2008. For electrical/computer hardware engineers, overall 
unemployment rates for 2006 were higher than for computer/information scientists, but still 
improved: 3.3 percent (down from 5.5 percent in 2003).
13
Steven Proudfoot, 
An O
ver
view of Science, Engineering, and 
Health Graduates: 
200
6, NSF-
08-34 (revised), March 2008, available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf08304/, 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 113
Strong Concerns About Sustaining a Strong IT Workforce 
Despite the demand, the number of students specifying an intention 
to major in computing and information sciences has dropped signi˜cantly 
in the past 6 years. For example, according to College Board data for 2006, 
the number of students indicating on their SAT test a desire to major in 
computing and information sciences has dropped by almost 50 percent 
since 2001.
14
 Also according to the College Board, in 2006 the SAT math
-ematics scores (an indicator for success in IT) of those intending to major 
in computing and information sciences averaged 478, far lower than the 
mathematics scores for those intending to major in other scienti˜c and 
mathematical disciplines. These statistics not only point to a sharp decline 
in the number of students entering the IT educational pipeline,
15
 but also 
raise a concern about the skill sets of those attracted to the discipline.
The problem of declining enrollments in the computing disciplines 
(as compared with the projected demand) is compounded by the severe 
lack of participation of underrepresented groups in IT. Although the 
participation of women, minorities, and people with disabilities in other 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics ˜elds is rising overall, 
their participation is especially low, and even declining, in computing. In 
2006, women received 59 percent of all bachelor™s degrees, but only 21 
percent of computer science degrees.
16
 African-American and Hispanic 
graduates received only 10 percent and 6 percent of 2004 computer sci
-ence degrees, respectively. Women and minorities are even more severely 
underrepresented in positions requiring a doctoral degree. Of the 1,189 
Ph.D. graduates in computer science or computer engineering in 2005, 
only 18 percent were women, and only 38 of the total 1,189 (3 percent) 
accessed April 9, 2008. See also Jay Vegoso, ﬁEmployment and Salaries of Recent CS Gradu
-ates,ﬂ 
CRA Bulletin
, March 25, 2008, available at http://www.cra.org/wp/index.php?p=141; 
accessed April 9, 2008.
14
College Board, 
200
6 College Bound Seniors: Total Group Pro˜le Report,
 2006, available 
at http://www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2006/
 national-report.pdf; accessed February 20, 2007.
15
Although the following facts are not necessarily a perfect surrogate for high school stu
-dents™ interest in computer science, it is interesting to note that about 12,000 students in the 
class of 2007 took the Computer Science A Advanced Placement (AP) test; about 4,000 took 
the more rigorous Computer Science AB test. For comparison, about 14,000 students took 
the Art History and French tests; almost 50,000 took the Economics Macro test, and about 
28,000 took the Economics Micro test. See College Board, 
The 
4th Annual AP Report to the Na
-tion,
 Appendix B, 2008, available at http://professionals.collegeboard.com/profdownload/
 ap-report-to-the-nation-2008.pdf; accessed April 4, 2008.
16
National Center for Education Statistics, 
Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System 
(200
5-0
6),
 U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C., May 1, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
were members of underrepresented minorities (African-American, Native 
American, or Hispanic).
17
The picture is also bleak in the workforce. In 2006, the percentage of 
women in management, professional, and related occupations was 50.6 
percent, whereas the percentage of women in computer and mathemati
-cal occupations was only 25.6 percent.
18
Such low participation has implications beyond the nation™s ability 
to create and sustain a suf˜ciently large IT workforce. Women and minori
-ties can bring different life experiences and perspectives to innovation, 
which lead to the design of products and services that bene˜t a broader 
range of people. Such perspectives are especially important, considering 
the changing demographics of the U.S. population
19
 as well as the global 
market for IT products and services. If U.S. companies intend to maintain 
their competitive advantage both at home and abroad, they must seek the 
input of a broader segment of the population to achieve innovation. For 
example, a recent analysis of innovation and diversity with respect to IT 
patenting revealed that within the United States, mixed-gender invention 
teams produced the most frequently cited IT patentsŠwith citation rates 
that were 26 to 42 percent higher than the norm.
20
How can young people be encouraged to enter computing ˜elds? 
One essential ingredient is to ensure a strong national IT educational 
pipeline that prepares and encourages all quali˜ed students regardless 
of race, gender, or ethnicity to enter the discipline. Without sustained 
attention and additional measures to attract and retain all quali˜ed stu
-dents, it will be especially dif˜cult to reverse the negative trends.
21
17
S. Zweben, ﬁRecord PhD. Production Continues; Undergraduate Enrollments Turning 
the Corner,ﬂ 
Computing Research News 
19(3):7-22, 2007.
18
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 
Current Population Sur
vey: 
Household Data: Annual A
ver
-ages: 
200
7, BLS, Washington, D.C., Table 11: Employment by detailed occupation, sex, race, 
and Hispanic ethnicity, p. 212. 
19
Council of Economic Advisors for the President™s Initiative on Race, 
Changing America: 
Indicators of Social and Economic Well-Being by Race and 
Hispanic Origin,
 U.S. Government 
Printing Of˜ce, Washington, D.C., September 2007, available at 
http://www.access.gpo.
gov/eop/ca/index.htm
l. 20
Catherine Ashcraft and Anthony Breitzman, 
Who In
vents IT? An Analysis of Women™s Par
-ticipation in Information Technology,
 National Center for Women and Information Technology, 
Boulder, Colo., March 2007.
21
For examples of new measures to improve STEM education and strengthen educational 
opportunities for students in K-12 (such as ways to retain and reward the most effective 
teachers), see ﬁTestimony of William H. Gates, Chairman, Microsoft Corporation and Co-
Chair, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Before the Committee on Science and Technology, 
United States House of Representatives, March 12, 2008,ﬂ available at http://democrats.
science.house.gov/Media/File/Commdocs/hearings/2008/Full/12mar/gates_testimony_
12mar08.pdf; accessed March 17, 2008. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 115
Concerns About K-
12
 IT/Computing Education and Talent Generation
Concerns about talent generation are exacerbated by the state of the 
kindergarten-through-grade-12 (K-12) IT/computing education system in 
the United States. In its report 
The New Educational Imperati
ve: Impro
ving 
High School Computer Science Education,
 the Computer Science Teachers 
Association (CSTA) correctly assesses the situation as follows:
Computers have in˜ltrated all areas of society, and there is now a clear 
link between technology, innovation, and economic survival. In light of 
this, one would expect a move within our society to support and stan
-dardize computer science education. Yet, no national KŒ12 computer 
science curriculum exists. Lack of leadership on high school computer 
science education at the highest legislative and policy levels has resulted 
in insuf˜cient funding for classroom instruction, resources, and profes
-sional development for computer science teachers. In addition, complex 
and contradictory teacher certi˜cation requirements as well as salaries 
that cannot possibly compete with industry make it exceedingly dif˜cult 
to ensure the availability of exemplary computer science teachers. In the 
face of confusing de˜nitions of computer literacy, information ˚uency, 
and the various sub-branches of computer science itself, many schools 
have lost sight of the fact that computer science is a scienti˜c discipline 
and not a ﬁtechnologyﬂ that simply supports learning in other curricu
-lum areas. Computer science is not about point and click skills. It is a 
discipline with a core set of scienti˜c principles that can be applied to 
solve complex, real-world problems and promote higher-order thinking. 
In short, knowledge of computer science is now as essential to today™s 
educated student as any of the traditional sciences.
22
 In addition to resources, appropriate information technology ˚uency 
objectives for K-12 are needed.
23
 Recent research by the CSTA shows the 
following:

Only 26 percent of schools require students to take a computer sci
-ence (CS) course;

Only 40 percent of schools even offer advanced placement (AP) 
CS;

Lack of time in the students™ schedules is the greatest impediment 
to students taking computing courses;
22
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), 
The New Educational Imperati
ve: Im
-pro
ving 
High School Computer Science Education,
 available at http://csta.acm.org/; accessed 
August 27, 2007. 
23
For an early assessment of ˚uency issues, see National Research Council, 
Being Fluent 
with Information Technology,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM

89 percent of high school computer science teachers say that they 
experience a sense of isolation and a lack of collegial support in their 
schools and in their districts;

Most administrators do not understand that computing is a scien
-ti˜c discipline just like physics and biology;

There is no consistency in CS teacher certi˜cation requirements; 

Computing teachers do not receive the professional development 
that they need to keep their teaching and technical skills current;

Administrators, legislators, and congressional committees do not 
understand the link between supporting K-12 computing education and 
economic and workplace issues.
24
Such concerns about the professional IT pipeline and talent pool have 
arisen as the U.S. share of worldwide bachelor™s and doctoral degrees in 
science and engineering has decreased signi˜cantly. The relative decline 
in the U.S. global position in science and technology overall is also evi
-dent in the falling U.S. share of global R&D investment, patents, scienti˜c 
publications, and researchers (see Table 4.1). If it is to maintain its founda
-tion for competitive strength, the United States faces a long-term need to 
attract quali˜ed people to science and technology careers.
25
 THE
 GLOBALI
ZATION
 OF
 VENTURE
 C
APITAL
Until the late 1980s, for all intents and purposes the United States was 
the only nation with a vibrant venture capital industry that supported 
technology-based start-ups.
26
 For this reason the United States was in 
a privileged position. For an entrepreneur seeking to build a global-
class IT ˜rm, it was necessary to come to the United StatesŠand many 
entrepreneurs did. It was in the 1990s that venture capital industries in 
Taiwan and Israel began growing, with the Taiwanese venture capitalists 
funding manufacturing ˜rms such as Quanta Computer Incorporated and 
ASUS
TeK Computer; in Silicon Valley they funded start-ups particularly 
24
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) Curriculum Improvement Task Force, 
The New Educational Imperati
ve: Impro
ving 
High School Computer Science Education,
 CSTA, As
-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., February 2005.
25
For a business-oriented discussion of the importance of maintaining the STEM pipeline, 
see, for example, Testimony of William H. Gates, Chairman, Microsoft Corporation and Co-
Chair, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Before the Committee on Science and Technology, 
United States House of Representatives, March 12, 2008, available at http://democrats.
science.house.gov/Media/File/Commdocs/hearings/2008/Full/12mar/gates_testimony_
12mar08.pdf; accessed March 17, 2008. 
26
The committee thanks Martin Haemmig, Martin Haemmig International, for providing 
much of the venture capital data used in this section.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 117
in semiconductor design.
27
 The Israeli ˜rms funded by venture capitalists 
were concentrated in IT (particularly in enterprise software, communica
-tions technologies, and security), and many of them immediately opened 
U.S. of˜ces and later went public on the NASDAQ. For both countries, 
strong relationships with the United States and U.S. venture capitalists 
were important for their growth.
28
Changing Patterns in 
Global 
Venture Capital
For at least the past three decades, the U.S. venture capital limited 
partnerships have been the bene˜ciaries of in˚ows of capital from around 
the world, particularly from European ˜nancial institutions. This capital 
was primarily invested in U.S. technology start-up ˜rms. During that 
period, the United States was the destination of choice for investment 
funds, entrepreneurs, and venture capital ˜rms.
27
For example, for evidence from semiconductor design ˜rms that went public on U.S. 
markets, see M. Kenney and D. Patton, ﬁThe Coevolution of Technologies and Institutions: 
Silicon Valley as the Iconic High-Technology Cluster,ﬂ in P. Braunerhjelm and M. Feldman, 
eds., 
Cluster Genesis: Technology-Based Industrial De
velopment, 
Oxford University Press, Ox
-ford, England, 2006, pp. 38-60.
28
Martin Kenney, Martin Haemmig, and W. Richard Goe, ﬁVenture Capital,ﬂ in 
Inno
va-tion in
 Global Industries: U.S Firms Competing in a New World,
 Jeffrey T. Macher and David 
C. Mowery, eds., The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008. On Israel, see Gil 
Avnimelech and Morris Teubal, ﬁVenture Capital Start-up Co-evolution and the Emergence 
and Development of Israel™s New High Tech Cluster,ﬂ 
Economics of Inno
vation and New Tech
-nology
 13(1):33-60, 2004.
TABLE
 4.1  Declining Relative U.S. Standing in Worldwide Share of 
Various Areas of Science and Technology: Share of Global Total (in 
percent) for Selected Years from 1985 to 2003
Area
1985
1986
1988
2002
2003
Investment in domestic research and 
 development
46
37
New U.S. patents
54
52
Scientific publications
38
30
Scientific researchers
41
29
Bachelor™s degrees in science and 
  engineering
39
29
New doctorates in science and engineering
52
22
NOTE:  Data are only for select years, as provided in source.  
SOURCE
: Data from Council on Competitiveness, 
Competiti
veness Index: Where America 
Stands
, Washington, D.C., 2007, p. 67. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
As late as 1995, there were few globalized venture capital ˜rms, such 
as Apax Partners, Advent, So˜nnova Ventures, Hambrecht and Quist 
Capital Management, and Walden International, but most of the elite U.S. 
IT-oriented venture capital ˜rms invested in international deals rarely and 
idiosyncratically. During the rise of the dot-com era, start-up ˜rms from 
Europe, Asia, and Latin America were able to secure funding through 
European and U.S. markets. This encouraged U.S. venture capitalists 
to expand their investments abroad. However, it was not until after the 
collapse of the stock market bubble in 2000 that U.S. venture capital 
˜rms decidedly expanded their global reach, with a particular focus on 
China, Israel, and India. U.S. venture capitalists began building link
-ages with venture capital ˜rms in other nations and, if and when there 
was a suf˜cient deal ˚ow, contextual understanding, and relationships, 
they developed more permanent foreign operations abroad. According to 
Ernst & Young, over the period 2005 to 2006, 19 percent of venture capital 
investing was done across national borders and continents,
29
 an increase 
of 250 percent from 5 years earlier. Another 10 percent of the deals are 
intra-European or intra-Asian. Thus nearly 30 percent of venture capital 
is invested across borders.
As Table 4.2 illustrates, North America (predominantly, the United 
States) clearly remains the most important venture capital location in the 
world. First, more venture capital is invested there than in the rest of the 
world combined. Second, it is at the center of the ˚ows of venture capital, 
with more ˚owing into and out of North America than to and from any 
other region. Finally, with the exception of U.S. centricity and the resultant 
˚ows into and out of North America, there are only minimal interregional 
˚ows of capital. This situation is unlikely to change soon, although that is 
no reason for complacency: the sophistication of non-U.S.-based venture 
capitalists and the track record of their funds are beginning to rival those 
of U.S. venture capitalists and the success of their funds, thereby creating 
unavoidable competition for both deal ˚ow and limited-partner capital 
over the long term.
The United States continues to invest more venture capital in IT 
than do all other regions combined, despite a decline of approximately 8 
percent in such U.S. investments from 2003 to 2007. The U.S. investment 
across all sectors was roughly ˚at over this period with the exception of 
communications, which continued to drop, suggesting a powerful hang
-29
Ernst & Young, 
Acceleration: Global Venture Capital Insights Report 
200
7, 2007, available at 
http://www.indiavca.org/upload/library/29_E&Y_Global_VC_Insight_Report_2007.pdf; 
accessed November 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 119
over effect from the collapse of the dot-com bubble. In Europe and Israel, 
the decline was greater and spread into nearly every sector.
30
The greatest recent change in the location of venture capital investing 
is the emergence of China as a major focus of the investment of venture 
capital, in particular by foreign ˜rms. In 2006, Chinese ˜rms received $1.9 
billion in venture capital investment, making China the second-largest 
national recipient of venture capital investment.
31
 In IT, much of the 
venture capital investment in China thus far has been in ˜rms that are 
adapting Western Internet business models for China (for example, gam
-ing, travel sites, job sites, portal, search, and so forth). One area of innova
-tion has been in the mobile applications ˜eld. Such investments require 
relatively little technological innovation but can be very successful, as the 
Chinese market and online population are already very large and growing 
30
Martin Haemmig, Martin Haemmig International, presentation to the committee, data 
on cumulative capital invested in IT by region and sector, based on Ernst & Young data, 
Mountain View, Calif., February 23, 2007.
31
Ernst & Young, 
Acceleration: Global Venture Capital Insights Report 
200
7, 2007, available at 
http://www.indiavca.org/upload/library/29_E&Y_Global_VC_Insight_Report_2007.pdf; 
accessed November 17, 2008.
TABLE
 4.2  Interregional Flows of Venture Capital Investment 
(in millions of U.S. dollars), by Location of Firm and Location of 
Investment, 2005
Location of  
Venture 
Capital Firm 
(Origin 
of Investor)
Location and Amount of Investments ($ million)
North 
America
Europe
Israel
Asia
Rest of 
World
Total
North 
 America  
21,914
1,837
158
798
218
24,925
Europe 
840
3,486
35
163
 59
4,583
Israel 
139
30
208
0  
0377
Asia 
502
118
4502
  
31,129
Rest of 
 world 
52
42
759
231
391
  
Total 
23,447
5,513
412
1,522
511
31,405
SOURCE
: Compiled by Martin Haemmig, Martin Haemmig International, www.martin
 haemmig.com, from data provided by National Venture Capital Association/Venture Eco
-nomics, European Venture Capital Association, 
Asian Venture Capital Journal,
 and Israeli 
Venture Capital Association.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
very rapidly. Thus far there have been very few impactful R&D-intensive 
Chinese start-ups funded by venture capitalists,
32
 and unlike Japan or 
Europe, no global IT brand except possibly Lenovo and Huawei has 
emerged out of China despite its economic prowess. However, there can 
be little doubt that the technological and scienti˜c level of Chinese R&D 
is advancing rapidly, and given the size of the market there is the distinct 
possibility that global-class IT ˜rms could emerge in the next 5 years.
India differs from China in important respects. Indian start-up ˜rms 
have access to talented engineers and bene˜t from a sizable local market. 
However, growth is hampered by a scarcity of management skills and a 
weak, though improving, business infrastructure. In terms of developing 
an IT R&D ecosystem in India capable of generating top-quality start-ups, 
the role of the R&D operations of Silicon Valley ˜rms in India has to be 
considered. Already, ˜rms such as Adobe Systems, Broadcom Corpora
-tion, Cisco Systems, Google, Intel Corporation, Juniper Networks, Oracle, 
and many more are developing products in India. The results of this 
hands-on experience will be seasoned product-development specialists. 
It is almost certain some of these engineers will become entrepreneurs. 
Despite the scarcity of management skills, indigenous and foreign venture 
capitalists are already looking for opportunities in India. This is a likely 
indication that many Indian start-ups will begin to emerge and receive 
funding over the next several years.
Prior to the late 1990s, the United States bene˜ted from the in˚ow of 
capital from other nations. Today the ˚ows of capital are bidirectional. 
U.S. venture capitalists are globalizing rapidly as IT entrepreneurship 
becomes more globally dispersed. U.S. venture capitalists are also mobi
-lizing their networks and unique know-how to bene˜t their portfolio 
˜rms regardless of location. As long as the U.S. venture capitalists retain 
their edge in the soft skills required to build successful start-up compa
-nies, they will remain at the center of gravity of the global start-up deal 
˚ow and will likely retain their centrality despite this globalization. If, 
however, portfolio ˜nancial returns degrade, if the number of successful 
initial public offerings (IPOs) fails to recover to historical levels, and if 
the weight of ecosystem frictions (discussed later in this chapter) proves 
impossible to overcome, the asset class will weaken, and the globalization 
of venture capital could cause non-U.S. ˜rms to rise to prominence.
32
The most R&D-intensive Chinese IT ˜rms are probably Huawei Technologies and ZTE 
Corporation, neither of which was funded by venture capital. Lenovo is another important 
Chinese IT ˜rm, which purchased IBM™s personal computer division, but Lenovo is not 
known for cutting-edge IT research or products.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 121
Venture Capital Investment in IT
U.S. venture capitalists continue to invest more than those of any 
other nation in the IT ˜elds: in the ˜rst half of 2006 they invested $7.15 
billion in IT, with the software and communications segments receiving 
the most capital. In the ˜rst half of 2006, the rest of the world™s venture 
capital investment in IT ˜rms was not even one-third that of the United 
States.
33
 Nevertheless, the percentage of venture capital investment in IT 
declined from 66 percent of the U.S. total to approximately 55 percent in 
the ˜rst half of 2006. As Table 4.3 indicates, total venture capital invest
-ments declined in the United States, Europe, Israel, and China from 2001 
to 2006 (after the collapse of the Internet bubble). This global decline 
was accompanied by a decline in the percentage of total venture capital 
invested in IT. There was also a slight decrease in the number of IT ˜rms 
funded, from 3,420 in 2000 to 3,192 in 2007.
34
 Venture capital investment 
in the U.S. IT ˜rms dropped from year 2000, but appears to have stabi
-lized by 2007. From the perspective of this committee, there can be no 
doubt that with respect to venture capital funding of IT ˜rms, the United 
States completely dominates other areas of the world. Moreover, with the 
exception of China and India, the other major locations of venture capital 
33
Martin Haemmig, ﬁChina™s and India™s Role in ‚IT™ Through Venture Capital,ﬂ presenta
-tion to the committee, Mountain View, Calif., February 23, 2007. Based on data from Ernst 
& Young and Venture One.
34
Ibid.
TABLE
 4.3  Decline in Percentage of Venture Capital Invested in 
Information Technology Between 2001 and 2006
2001
2006
Venture Capital Investments
Total 
 Invested 
 Capital 
($ billion)
IT Share
of Total 
(percent)
Total
Invested
Capital
($ billion)
IT Share
of Total
(percent)
In the United States
36.4
66
25.7
48
In Europe
 9.8
60
 5.2
51
In Israel
 2.2
79
 1.4
72
In China
 2.9
a73
 1.9
49
 aChina venture investment for 2001 is skewed by $1 billion investments in each of two 
companies: Heijan Technology and Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corpora
-tion (SMIC).
SOURCE
:  Martin Haemmig, Martin Haemmig International, ﬁChina™s and Israel™s Role in 
‚IT™ Through Venture Capital,ﬂ presentation to the committee, Mountain View, Calif., Febru
-ary 23, 2007.  Based on data from Ernst & Young and VentureOne, Q1 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
investing suffered similar or even greater declines in IT-related invest
-ment between 2001 and 2006.
FRICTIONS
 IN
 THE
 U.S. IT R&D E
COS
YSTEM
It appears that a number of inef˜ciencies have been growing in the 
U.S. IT R&D ecosystem over the past several years. They do not seem to 
be concentrated in any single area. Together, they form a pattern of fric
-tions that, over time, could hurt the health and competitiveness of the U.S. 
ecosystemŠparticularly given its increasingly global nature. Symptoms 
of these frictions can be found by examining the data on technology com
-pany initial public offerings, technology company mergers and acquisi
-tions (M&As), and overall venture capital activity during the 1995-2006 
period. 
Although success stories like that of Google (see Box 3.2 in Chapter 3) 
leave many with the super˜cial impression that all is well with venture-
funded innovation, closer examination suggests that Google is a unique 
case in scope and magnitude and that the ˜eld of play in recent years has 
lacked depth and breadth. Although reaching an IPO is not a guarantee of 
long-term future success, IT companies that do not have the opportunity 
to tap public equity markets will not have the capital required to grow 
into major industry players and to contribute meaningfully to the creation 
of high-quality jobs in this country. 
In 2006, there were only 40 U.S. technology IPOs; by contrast, in 1995, 
there were 195.
35
 The year 1995 was not yet caught in the distortion of 
the technology bubble of the late 1990s (the number of technology IPOs 
peaked during the bubble, at 381 in 1999), and the year 2006 is no longer 
held back by the post-technology bubble crash. Instead, these numbers 
represent a meaningful downward trend that has become even more pro
-nounced in 2008
36
 and is unlikely to reverse in the near term.
This decline in IPOs is not due to a retrenchment of overall U.S. 
venture capital activity. The total amount of venture capital invested in 
the United States in 2006 was reported to be about $26 billion, compared 
with just over $8 billion in 1995 (see Table 4.4). Similarly, almost twice as 
35
Paul Deninger, Jeffries and Company, presentation to the committee, Boston, Mass., 
April 19, 2007, citing data from Thompson Financial and Jeffries Broadview IPO Database. 
The ˜gure excludes telecommunications providers, Internet Protocol service providers, and 
transactions in which under $15 million were raised.
36
See, e.g., Ernst & Young, ﬁGlobal IPO Activity Fallen by More Than Half Since 2007: 
Lowest Number of Deals over an 11 Month Period Since 1995,ﬂ Ernst & Young, London, 
December 9, 2008. Available at http://www.ey.com/global/content.nsf/International/
 Media_-_Press_Release_-_Global_IPO_activity_fallen_by_more_than_half_since_2007; ac
-cessed December 11, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 123
many venture capital deals (companies ˜nanced) were reported for 2006 
as for 1995.
37
 This increase in overall venture activity (amounts invested, numbers 
of deals) does not correspond to an increase in the number of venture 
capital ˜rms. To the contrary, the number of ˜rms has decreased. Fueled 
by the bubble, the number of U.S. venture capital ˜rms making at least 
one investment in a given year reached 2,206 in the peak year 2000. As 
is often the case in such situations, the weaker players do not survive 
and the industry must consolidate: by 2005, this number had dropped 
to 960.
38
What accounted for a much lower number of IPOs in 2006 as com
-pared with 1995? Although the IT industry did traverse a rough period 
37
According to PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capital Association
 Mone
yTree 
 data, available at https://www.pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/ns/nav.jsp?page=notice& 
iden=B; accessed August 28, 2007.
38
Paul Deninger, Jeffries and Company, presentation to the committee citing data from 
Ernst & Young, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
TABLE
 4.4  U.S. Venture Capital, Merger and Acquisition (M&A), 
and Technology Company Initial Public Offering Activity, 1995-2006
Year
Venture
Capital 
Deals
(no.)
Total U.S.
Venture
Capital
Investment
($ billion)
U.S. M&A
Transactions:
IT, Media,
Telecommunications
(no.)
U.S. 
Technology 
Company
Initial Public 
Offerings 
(no.)
1995
1,844
8.1
1,461
195
1996
2,573
11.3
1,956
243
1997
3,156
14.9
2.652
155
1998
3,647
21.1
2,847
116
1999
5,507
54.1
3,602
381
2000
7,911
105.2
3,704
264
2001
4,481
40.7
2,403
 26
2002
3,091
21.9
2,452
 22
2003
2,914
19.8
2,000
 22
2004
3,069
22.5
2,294
 52
2005
3,127
23.1
2,524
 54
2006
3,533
26.3
2,584
 40
SOURCES
: Venture capital deal data from PricewaterhouseCoopers/National Venture Capi
-tal Association
 MoneyTree 
data, available at https://www.pwcmoneytree.com/MTPublic/
ns/nav.jsp?page=notice&iden=B; accessed August 28, 2007. Data on initial public offering 
and merger and acquisition transactions from Paul Deninger, Jeffries and Company, presen
-tation to the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007, citing data from Ernst & Young.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
from 2001 to 2003, IT spending in the United States has bounced back, 
new technology platforms have emerged and attracted a new generation 
of IT start-up companies, and IT has become more widely deployed and 
economically and socially important. One factor in this changing scene 
has been a shift toward M&As: a greater percentage of young technol
-ogy companies chose to merge with a larger strategic partner rather than 
becoming a publicly traded company on a U.S. exchange. As shown in 
Table 4.4, the number of M&A transactions in the IT, media, and telecom
-munications sectors rose steadily from 1,461 in 1995 to a peak of 3,704 in 
2000, then dropped to an average of about 2,400 transactions annually 
during the period 2001 to 2006.
39
 However, although M&As have become 
the preferred exit of U.S. IT companies, the number of M&A transactions 
has not grown in recent years. The juxtaposition of these two trends (a 
rapid decline in U.S. IT IPOs and a stable, but ˚at, M&A environment) 
suggests why the returns to venture funds from their IT investments have 
sharply declined over the period of this study™s scope. With this decline 
in returns from IT investments, venture investors will naturally rebalance 
their portfolios, making fewer IT investments in favor of investments in 
other sectors.
The reasons that may explain the decline in IPOs are multiple and 
hard to quantify. It is instructive to note that the decline has been a U.S. 
phenomenon. Even as U.S. public equity markets such as NASDAQ and 
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) have experienced a dearth of IT 
IPOs in recent years, other markets outside the United States have been 
more successful and have managed to attract listings from companies 
that a decade ago would not have considered an IPO in other than a U.S. 
market. Clearly, the globalization of ˜nancial markets and the increased 
competitiveness of exchanges such as the London Stock Exchange™s Alter
-native Investment Market (AIM) or the Hong Kong exchange have con
-tributed to the weakness described in this section.
40
 Another factor may be 
Chinese government incentives for companies in China to use domestic 
exchanges for their public offerings. However, these factors do not appear 
to fully explain the decline.
Over the years, new laws and regulations have been introduced that 
appear to have had negative and unanticipated side effects on the effec
-tiveness of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem. Moreover, there are indications 
that older laws and regulations have not been fully adapted to the chang
-39
Paul Deninger, Jeffries and Company, presentation to the committee, citing data from 
Jeffries Broadview Global Mergers 7 Acquisitions database, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007. 
M&A transactions dipped to only 2,000 transactions in 2003, and then recovered. There were 
2,584 M&A transactions in 2006.
40
Paul Deninger, Jeffries and Company, presentation to the committee, Boston, Mass., 
April 19, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 125
ing realities of a globalized IT environment that is based on new techno
-logical platforms and new innovation methods. 
As one example, a major source of friction for young IT companies is 
the current U.S. patent system. Patents are being more actively acquired 
and vigorously enforced in recent years.
41
 Firms are facing dramatically 
increased hazards of litigation as plaintiffs and even more rapidly increas
-ing hazards as defendants.
42
 The increase in litigation cannot be explained 
by the patenting rate, the level of R&D activity, ˜rm value, or indus
-try composition,
43
 leaving changes in patent system implementation (for 
example, increases in the number of patents being sought and imperfec
-tions in patent issuance
44
) as the most likely explanations.
Firms that spend more on R&D are more likely to be sued, and ˜rms 
that acquire more patents are more likely to sue. The sharp increase in the 
probability of being sued per R&D dollar spent implies an increase in the 
ﬁtaxﬂ that litigation imposes on innovation. Small ˜rms face much higher 
marginal enforcement costs and marginal taxes on R&D.
The number of patent lawsuits ˜led annually in the United States 
began to rise in the late 1980s and doubled (to almost 1,600 a year) dur
-ing the 1990s.
45
 Simultaneously, the cost to try a patent case in the United 
States has also increased far more sharply than R&D budgets have. 
According to a 2001 economic survey conducted by the American Intel
-lectual Property Law Association, the median cost to try a patent case 
with $1 million to $25 million at risk was almost $1.5 million.
46
 By 2003, 
this amount had increased to $2 million. Moreover, as the amount at risk 
increases, litigation becomes more expensive. In cases with more than $25 
million at risk, the litigation costs were $3 million in 2001 through 2004, 
41
National Research Council, 
A Patent System for the 
21
st Century,
 The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2004, p. 19. 
42
According to Bessen and Meurer, the number of patent lawsuits ˜led annually in the 
United States doubled during the 1990s, from almost 800 in 1990 to almost 1,600 in 1999; 
their research also ﬁsuggests that patent litigation can affect innovation incentives.ﬂ James 
Bessen and Michael Meurer, ﬁThe Patent Litigation Explosion,ﬂ paper presented at Ameri
-can Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, 2005, p. 1 and Figure 1, available at 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=831685#PaperDownload; accessed 
March 6, 2008. For litigation hazard ˜ndings, see ibid., Table 2. 
43
Ibid., Abstract.
44For discussion of patent system implementation and issuance, see, for example, National 
Research Council, 
A Patent System for the 
21
st Century,
 The National Academies Press, Wash
-ington, D.C., 2004, Chs. 3 and 4. 
45
James Bessen and Michael Meurer, ﬁThe Patent Litigation Explosion,ﬂ paper presented 
at the American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, 2005. These analyses are 
based on Derwent data from the United States Patent and Trademark Of˜ce.
46
American Intellectual Property Law Association, 
200
1 Report of the Economic Sur
vey,
 Arlington, Va., 2001.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
and $4 million in 2003 through 2005.
47
 Most patent litigation never reaches 
trial but is settled instead.
The phenomenon dubbed by some as the ﬁpatent trollﬂ has also been 
on the rise.
48
 Some in the legal profession have argued that entities that 
acquire ownership of patents with the intention of licensing them, rather 
than acquiring patents by developing new products, are not in themselves 
harmful or the root cause of excessive litigation. Instead, they consider 
poor-quality patents as the root cause.
49
 However, in the current patent 
environment, others do consider these activities to have adverse effects 
both on the patent system and on innovation.
50 Furthermore, the choice of 
jurisdiction where a ˜ling is made can dramatically in˚uence the outcome 
of a patent lawsuit, introducing more risk and volatility into the litigation 
process for intellectual-property-intensive companies. This can give rise 
to ﬁforum shopping,ﬂ where plaintiffs seek a jurisdiction thought to favor 
plaintiffs. The likelihood of a plaintiff™s verdict, for example, is substan
-tially higher in courts in the Eastern District of Texas and in the Central 
District of California than anywhere else in the country.
These trends suggest that the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem has become far 
more contentious than it was in the past. In summary, the cost of protect
-ing and defending intellectual property is undergoing rapid in˚ation. The 
long-term effects of this phenomenon may be more pernicious:

The costs of protecting an invention go up. It takes more money 
to ˜le a patent. It takes longer to be granted a patent. One must ˜le in 
multiple jurisdictions as markets have become more global. 

It costs more to defend oneself. It is possible for companies that 
never produce or commercialize a product to extract relatively high 
47
American Intellectual Property Law Association, 
200
3 Report of the Economic Sur
vey, 
Arlington, Va., 2003; and American Intellectual Property Law Association, 
200
5 Report of the 
Economic Sur
vey
, Arlington, Va., 2005. For more on direct costs of and potential inef˜ciencies 
in the patent system, see National Research Council, 
A Patent System for the 
21
st Century,
 The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2004.
48
The term 
patent troll
 was reportedly coined in 1981 as a pejorative term to describe com
-panies that game the patent system by snapping up critical bits of technology, then shopping 
for settlements from companies that might be infringing on the patents. Mike McNamee, ed., 
ﬁWashington Outlook: A Patent War Is Breaking Out on the Hill,ﬂ 
Business Week
, July 4, 2001, 
available at http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_27/c3941058_mz013.
htm; accessed September 12, 2007. 
49
See, for example, James F. McDonough, ﬁThe Myth of the Patent Troll: An Alternative 
View of the Function of Patent Dealers in an Idea Economy,ﬂ 
Emory Law Journal 
56:189-228, 
2006, available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=959945; accessed 
March 6, 2008. 
50
See, for example, David G. Barker, ﬁTroll or No Troll? Policing Patent Usage with an 
Open Post-Grant Review,ﬂ 
Duke Law and Technology Re
view,
 No. 9, 2005, available at http://
www.law.duke.edu/journals/dltr/articles/pdf/2005dltr0009.pdf; accessed March 6, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 127
license fees from companies that must then add these costs to those of 
building a market and bringing products to market.

When damages are awarded, the contribution of the infringed pat
-ent can be attributed a disproportionate role.
Taken together, these trends may have a sti˚ing effect on young IT compa
-nies, especially those just bringing products to market, that have limited 
funds and no patent portfolios for use in cross-licensing agreements or 
as the basis for countersuits. Such companies run a greater risk today of 
never acquiring suf˜cient intellectual property protection and mustering 
enough legal resources to withstand costly and lengthy litigation.
TechNet, a preeminent bipartisan political network of chief executive 
of˜cers and other senior executives of leading U.S. IT companies, views 
this matter as a fundamental issue for the IT industry. Key elements of a 
successful reform of the U.S. patent litigation system might include the 
following:

Clear standards for forum selection that curtail the ability of 
plaintiffs to ˜le infringement actions in jurisdictions most likely to favor 
plaintiffs;

Reforms that direct courts to calculate the royalty or damages 
awards on the basis of a consideration of the proportionate value of the 
patentee™s contribution to the product in question rather than on the full 
value of the entire product;

Provisions of current law that have never been interpreted to per
-mit the recovery of worldwide damages in U.S. courts;

Standards governing awards of multiple damages for willful i
n-fringement; and

Additional reforms, as necessary, to curtail practices that are a 
drain on innovation.
Another source of friction comes from the unexpected and unan
-ticipated consequences of corporate-governance reform legislation on 
venture ˜rms pursuing an IPO. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Public 
Law 107-204), referred to as SOX, and in particular its Section 404, were 
passed to improve the quality of corporate governance among U.S. pub
-licly traded companies and to reduce the risks of ˜nancial fraud. SOX 
was created and enacted to a large degree in response to the corporate 
scandals of such large companies as Enron, WorldCom, and Tyco. (See 
the discussion of ˜nancial scandals as shocks to the IT R&D ec
osystem 
in the Chapter 3 subsection entitled ﬁFinancial Scandals and Bankrupt
-cies [December 2001]ﬂ). Thus, the intended ˜rm for which SOX was 
designed was a multi-billion-dollar, multinational corporation listed on 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
U.S. exchanges. It was not a typical high-growth, sub-$100 million tech
-nology company led by creative entrepreneurs and technologists and 
funded by U.S. venture capitalists. Yet, these smaller companies have been 
subjected to the same regulations created for the large ˜rms, and the costs 
of compliance are disproportionately more burdensome.
51
Young technology companies lack the critical mass required to deploy 
the administrative staff, processes, and controls mandated by SOX in 
order to pursue an IPO in the United States. Their lifeblood is technology 
innovation. They often cannot afford to reallocate a large percentage of 
their resources away from research and development toward general and 
administrative costs in order to become compliant and seek a U.S. IPO. 
Therefore, when crafting corporate-governance legislation and regula
-tions, it is important that policy makers take into consideration unin
-tended consequences on smaller companies.
INDUSTRIAL
 R
ESEARCH
: SHIFTIN
G PATTERNS OF 
 CORPORATE I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R&D
The large industrial research laboratories have traditionally been a 
signi˜cant institutional category in the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem.
52
 How
-ever, by the late 1980s the ˜rms supporting major laboratories, such as 
AT&T Bell Laboratories, IBM, and Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, came 
under intensifying pressure to shift their research portfolios toward more 
applied research and development work. Some other ˜rms, most notably 
Cisco, have pursued a corporate strategy of ﬁresearch by acquisition,ﬂ 
rather than establishing and maintaining a central research infrastructure 
(see Box 4.2).
53
51
CRA International, ﬁSarbanes-Oxley Section 404 Costs and Implementation Issues: 
Spring 2006 Survey Updates,ﬂ Washington, D.C., April 17, 2006. The CRA survey was spon
-sored by four large accounting ˜rms. Self-reported costs for compliance with SOX Section 
404 were as follows: smaller companies with market capitalizations of between $75 million 
and $700 million estimated that implementation costs (including audit fees) amounted to 
about $1.2 million the ˜rst year and $860,000 the second year. For larger companies with 
market capitalizations over $700 million, the ˜rst- and second-year costs were estimated to 
be about $8.5 million and $4.8 million, respectively. For the smaller companies, SOX Section 
404 compliance costs were estimated to be about half of all audit fees the ˜rst year and about 
the same as non-404 audit costs the ˜rst yearŠin other words, SOX Section 404 compliance 
basically doubled the audit fees.
52
R. Rosenbloom and W. Spencer, eds., 
Engines of Inno
vation
, Harvard Business School 
Press, Boston, Mass., 1996.
53
These changes are part of a more general trend toward what is sometimes called open 
innovation, whereby ideas ˚ow both from and into corporations: in order to prosper in the 
face of new markets and competitors, incumbents must transform themselves from ﬁclosedﬂ 
innovation models (with heavy corporate investment in internal R&D) that are no longer 
sustainable to more open models, without centralized control and where ideas transfer 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 129
In the process of shifting toward more applied work, the traditional 
industry research laboratories underwent a traumatic downsizing. The 
˜rms within which they were housed experienced fundamental changes 
in their business environments owing to increased competition caused by 
deregulation as well as that from new industry entrants, which in at least 
some cases were leveraging new IT developments. The business utility of 
the large central R&D laboratory was called into question. Already in the 
early 1980s, the ˜rst of the major electronics-related laboratories to expe
-rience downsizing was RCA™s Sarnoff LaboratoriesŠwhich became too 
expensive to support as RCA lost its competitive position in the television 
industry as Japanese and European (i.e., Royal Philips Electronics N.V.) 
˜rms and competitors increasingly wrested control of the newest techno
-logical developments from RCA.
54
 U.S. ˜rms irrevocably lost control of 
image-display technologies to East Asian companies.
55
The explanation for the demise of corporate IT R&D laboratories is 
complex. Ultimately, corporate executives, representing their sharehold
-ers, judged that there was insuf˜cient or too delayed return on investment 
in research. Firms that controlled their industry sector through monopo
-lies or near monopolies often operated the leading laboratories. As these 
monopolies ended, their ability and commitment to maintain R&D spend
-ing waned.
56
 Underinvestment yielded to a vicious downward spiral 
of fewer new technology products to bring to market, further eroding 
market share and pro˜tability. For example, RCA was the pioneering 
U.S. television manufacturer, holding most of the basic TV patents. By the 
mid-1990s its market dominance had collapsed. Yet even as many ˜rms in 
the IT industry reduced the size of their research laboratories, Microsoft 
and Intel established and greatly expanded their own industrial research 
activity.
out into start-ups and enter by way of acquisition or merger. See Henry Chesbrough, 
Open 
Inno
vation: The New Imperati
ve for Creating and Pro˜ting from Technology, 
Harvard Business 
School Press, Boston, Mass., 2003.
54
See, for example, Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., 
In
venting the Electronic Century: The Epic Story 
of the Consumer Electronics and Computer Industries, with a New Prefac
e, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2005; Margaret Graham, 
RCA and the VideoDisc: The Business of 
Research,
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1986; and Michael Porter, 
Cases 
in Competiti
ve Strategy,
 Free Press, New York, N.Y., 1983. For a further discussion of the col
-lapse of the U.S. consumer electronics industry, see Martin Kenney and James Curry, 
The 
Globalization of the Tele
vision and Personal Computer Industries,
 Final Report to the Alfred P. 
Sloan Foundation, July 26, 1999, available from the authors upon request.
55
For a discussion of this process, see T. Murtha, S. Lenway, and J. Hart, 
Managing New 
Industry Creation,
 Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif., 2001.
56
For a discussion of the impacts of the AT&T divestiture on Bell Laboratories and on 
telecommunications research more broadly, see National Research Council, 
Renewing U.S. 
Telecommunications Research,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2006.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
BOX
 4.2
 Acquisition and DevelopmentŠ
 A Substitute for Basic Research?
The overwhelming success of U.S. ˜rms that emerged from the venture 
capital-˜nanced information technology (IT) research and development (R&D) 
ecosystem in the United States belongs to ˜rms that were not disposed to basic 
research conducted in central laboratories. For example, Gordon Moore, one of 
the founders of Fairchild Semiconductor and Intel Corporation, believed that such 
basic research was unwise, and at Intel a research laboratory was never estab
-lished.1 If Intel, which has grown to be one of the largest ˜rms and certainly the 
richest semiconductor ˜rm in Silicon Valley, did not establish a corporate labora
-tory, then it is not surprising that other venture capital-˜nanced semiconductor 
˜rms also have not established laboratories. The strategic question of whether 
not having a laboratory to develop new business opportunities places a ˜rm in 
danger of being out˚anked in the rapidly changing IT industries has not yet been 
satisfactorily answered.
The wisdom in Silicon Valley prior to the 1990s was that purchasing start-ups 
was futile. Key personnel in the newly acquired ˜rm would leave to establish a 
competitor, and the acquirer would be left with an empty shell. Cisco Systems dem
-onstrated that it was possible to do acquisitions and, more important, to use the en
-trepreneurial ecosystem as a substitute for laboratory-derived new technologies.
2 Through a sophisticated, multifaceted monitoring of its environment, Cisco was 
able to uncover innovations before their widespread adoption and then to purchase 
a ˜rm that had created such an innovation together with its technologyŠand, all 
importantly, to retain a suf˜cient number of the ˜rm™s key personnel. In effect, Cisco 
is allowing the ecosystem to do its R&D. As the data on the location of Cisco™s 
acquisitions show, the company particularly depends on the entrepreneurial envi
-ronments such as Silicon Valley to provide its acquisitions. The great majority of 
the 60 ˜rms acquired by Cisco as of 2007 were located in the San
 Francisco Bay 
Area.There are small clusters of Cisco acquisitions in
 Massachusetts (about 12 
˜rms) and Texas (about 10 ˜rms), but only about 20 ˜rms from the rest of the 
United States and fewer than 20 from the rest of the world.
3These acquisitions came in addition to Cisco™s spending approximately 15 
percent of its revenue on R&D, much of which is simply to keep existing product 
lines up to date. Cisco™s ability to evolve with the rapidly changing networking 
marketplace without a dedicated research laboratory, along with the movement 
from circuit switching to packet switching, combined to overwhelm the incumbent 
telecommunications equipment providers in the marketplace and sealed the fate 
of their research laboratories, not only in the United States but in most other na
-tions as well.
Acquisitions have become a routine aspect of Cisco™s business model and 
increasingly of the business model of other major ˜rms in the IT R&D ecosystem.
Established ˜rms routinely monitor the environment for promising start-ups. Salient 
examples are the purchase by Microsoft Corporation of Vermeer Technologies, the 
producer of an early client-server Web publishing software ˜rm, and of Hotmail, 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 131
The affordability of research was also affected by the shift from large, 
technically sophisticated computers to personal computers (PCs) and sys
-tems built as commodity boxes with standardized software. Once-well-
established computer manufacturers such as Control Data Corporation, 
Prime Computer, Digital, Tandem Computers, and Compaq Computer 
Corporation have disappeared from the industry landscape, in part owing 
to the rise of commodity PCs. High-volume PC makers such as Dell, 
Acer Incorporated, and Hewlett-Packard Company™s personal computer 
division cannot justify basic research on the very slim pro˜t margins that 
characterize this industry sector. What has happened in the case of the 
PC is that R&D has shifted up the supply chain to the component mak
-ers, that is, Intel, and to software ˜rms such as Microsoft, Adobe, Intuit, 
and others. As importantly, if the products of the component makers and 
the e-mail start-up, and the purchase by Google of Keyhole for its satellite map
-ping technologies, and then a variety of other small digital mapping start-ups to 
improve its map program.
It is interesting to note that Intel has subsequently established a network of 
more conventional research laboratories and created a collection of small ﬁlabletsﬂ 
close to major universities to capture innovations emerging from that element 
of the ecosystem.
4 In 2006, Cisco appointed its ˜rst vice president of research, 
Douglas E. Comer, a computer science professor from Purdue University, and 
established the Cisco Research Center. At this time, the organization appears to 
play a coordination role rather than that of a research laboratory.
51Gordon E. Moore, ﬁThe Accidental Entrepreneur,ﬂ 2001, available at http://nobelprize.org/
nobel_prizes/physics/articles/moore/index.html; accessed June 20, 2007; and Keith Naughton, 
ﬁOutsourcing: Silicon Valley East,ﬂ 
Newsweek,
 March 6, 2006, available at http://www.news
-week.com/id/46807; accessed November 18, 2008.
2David Mayer and Martin Kenney, ﬁEconomic Action Does Not Take Place in a Vacuum: 
Understanding Cisco™s Acquisition and Development Strategy,ﬂ 
Industry and Innovation
 11(4):299-325, 2004.
3Data on Cisco acquisitions compiled by committee member Martin Kenney from information 
available on Cisco™s Web site, www.cisco.com.
4See ﬁIntel Research Network of Labs,ﬂ available at http://techresearch.intel.com/articles/
None/1475.htm; accessed August 22, 2007; and ﬁNetwork of Labs Home,ﬂ available at http://
www.intel-research.net/; accessed March 27, 2008.The U.S. lablets are in Berkeley, California; 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and Seattle, Washington.
5See ﬁCisco Research,ﬂ available at http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac50/ac207/crc/
 index1.html; accessed August 22, 2007.
BOX
 4.2  continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
software ˜rms are affected by commoditization or a move toward open-
source software, this supplier-based R&D could also be threatened.
Among the new generation of Internet ˜rms, the ˜rm perhaps best 
known for hiring holders of advanced degrees in IT ˜elds is Google, 
though it does not have a traditional industrial research organization;
57
 rather, its researchers are developers who are part of product teams who 
happen to write technical papers. Yet the size and scale of the systems and 
applications that they are building place them at the research frontier in 
many areas. Even here, however, competitive pressures and time to mar
-ket make it dif˜cult to come up with the sustained investments necessary 
to tackle truly fundamental research problems.
58
THE
 F
UNDIN
G 
AND
 O
RGANI
ZATION
 OF 
INFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY 
R&DFederal 
Versus Industrial R&D
The principal reason for the dramatic advances in information tech
-nology and the subsequent increase in innovation and productivity is 
the ﬁextraordinarily productive interplay of federally funded university 
research, federally and privately funded industrial research, and entre
-preneurial companies founded and staffed by people who moved back 
and forth between universities and industry.ﬂ
59
 This ˚ow of ideas and 
people, stimulated by investments in research, is a critical element of the 
IT R&D ecosystem.
Looking across all ˜elds of science and engineering, it can be seen the 
United States has signi˜cantly increased total R&D funding over the past 
50 years. Particularly in the past two decades, most of that increase has 
been in the industrial rather than the federal portion (see Figure 4.2).
However, the vast majority of industry R&D funding is for develop
-ment, with limited funding devoted to applied research and a relatively 
small amount for basic research (see Figure 4.3). While not all indus
-trial research is applied research and not all university research is basic 
57
See ﬁAbout Google Research,ﬂ available at http://research.google.com/about.html; ac
-cessed August 22, 2007.
58
Historically, the locus of industrial research has tended to be in industries and companies 
that enjoy high growth and high margins. As these industries and companies mature, unless 
they ˜nd new high-growth/high-margin opportunities, their pro˜t margins decrease and 
they often cut back on research. In this view, the demise of industrial research is not inevi
-table; rather, industrial research investment ˚ows from slowing industries and companies 
to others in emerging, high-growth sectors. 
59
National Research Council, 
Funding a Re
volution: Go
vernment Support for Computing Re
-search,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1995, p. vii.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 133
Figure 
4-
2.
epsFedera
l Shar
eIndustr
y Shar
eOther
19
54
19
5619
58
1960
196
219
64
19
66
196
819
70
19
7219
7419
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
9019
92
19
9419
961998
2000
20
02200
4087,5
00
17
5,
00
0262,50
035
0,000
In millions of adjusted 
doll
ar
s (2
00
5 consta
nt 
doll
ar
s)
Ye
ar
Figure 
4-
3.
epsBasi
c Re
search
Applie
d Re
search
De
ve
lopmen
t19
9419
9619
98
2000
20
0220
04
062,50
012
5,
00
018
7,50
0250,
00
0In millions of adjusted 
doll
ar
s (2
00
5 consta
nt 
doll
ar
s)
Ye
ar
FIGURE
 4.2  Total U.S. research and development funding across all ˜elds of 
science and engineering, 1954-2004, by source.
  
SOURCE
: Computing Research 
Association.
FIGURE
 4.3  Industry research and development funding for basic research, ap
-plied research, and development, 1994-2004.  
SOURCE
: Computing Research 
Association.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
research, to a large extent this is a valid characterization of activities by 
these two critical elements of the IT R&D ecosystem. The character of this 
development-heavy R&D is different from and complementary to feder
-ally funded university-based research. The former tends to be focused 
on product and process development, areas that have more immediate 
impact on business pro˜tability. However, it is basic research that ﬁputs 
ideas in the larderﬂ for later use in innovative products.
Getting the fruits of university-based research into the marketplace 
presents a growing challenge for the people and the institutions involved. 
The speed and success with which university research results are trans
-ferred to industry and commercialized depend critically on universities™ 
choices of technology-transfer mechanisms and incentives and the degree 
to which entrepreneurship is encouraged within the university commu
-nity. As Litan, Mitchell, and Reedy have found, the type of technology-
transfer organization (TTO) established by a university, as well as the 
metrics chosen for evaluating the TTO™s effectiveness and the incentives 
offered for entrepreneurial activity by the university community, can fos
-ter or impede technology transfer to industry.
60
One common arrangement is a centralized TTO (which receives all 
faculty invention disclosures and negotiates all licenses). Although TTOs 
focus on revenues, licensing, and commercialized inventions, they often 
have maximization of university revenue (looking for a ﬁbig hitﬂ) as the 
central objective, rather than maximization of the numbers of commer
-cialized inventions. Alternative mechanisms and incentive structures are 
in use, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. These include 
policies of ﬁfree agency,ﬂ whereby faculty members can choose whether 
or not to go through the university TTO, as long as they return some por
-tion of their pro˜ts to the university; regional alliances among multiple 
universities; Internet-based ﬁmatchmakingﬂ approaches that are built to 
maximize volume; and ﬁloyaltyﬂ models in which universities relinquish 
all rights in hopes of faculty donating some of their gains back to the uni
-versity. Litan, Mitchell, and Reedy conclude that it is preferable to move 
away from the ﬁbig hitﬂ model of university technology transfer toward 
models (including open-source collaborations and non-exclusive licens
-ing) that concentrate on the number of and speed with which university 
innovations are sent into the marketplace.
61
60
See Robert E. Litan, Lesa Mitchell, and E.J. Reedy, ﬁThe University as Innovator: Bumps 
in the Road,ﬂ 
Issues in Science and Technology,
 Summer 2007, available at http://www.issues.
org/23.4/litan.html; accessed December 13, 2007.
61
Ibid.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 135
Federal Funding of Information Technology R&D
Unlike industrial R&D, federal R&D funding consists of a much 
greater proportion of the investmentŠand signi˜cant increasesŠin basic 
research. Note that the main increase in the federal investment in basic and 
applied research in the past 35 years, and particularly in the most recent 
decade, has been in the biomedical sciences (see Figure 4.4 for federal 
agency funding data compiled by the Computing Research Association).
Concerns over the level of federal support for IT R&D are longstand
-ing. In its 1999 report 
Information Technology Research: In
vesting in Our 
Future,
62
 the President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee 
(PITAC) argued in great detail for a doubling over a period of 5 years of 
the federal investment in IT R&D, noting that ﬁcritical problems are going 
unsolved, and we are endangering the ˚ow of ideas that has fueled the 
information economy,ﬂ and describing the level of investment at that time 
as ﬁdangerously inadequate.ﬂ
Comparing the targets for annual increases set in the PITAC report 
(Table 4.5) and the actual budget levels shown in Figure 4.5 shows that 
although the federal IT R&D budget initially rose rapidly following pub
-lication of the 1999 PITAC report, the lower rate of growth in subsequent 
years has meant that the budget level 9 years after the release of the 
PITAC report still has not reached the target set in that report.
This pattern mirrors a broader underinvestment in the physical sci
-ences and engineering highlighted in two recent studies: 
Engineering 
Research and America™s Future 
(2005) and 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm 
(2007).
63
 Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm 
had as a major focus the rela
-tive lack of investment in engineering and the physical sciences (which 
include information technology). It is not that investments in the biomedi
-cal sciences have been excessive but that investments in engineering and 
the physical sciences have been too small, placing U.S. technological and 
economic leadership at risk.
Looked at in isolation rather than in comparison with the rapid 
growth in funding for the biomedical sciences, the federal investment 
62
President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), in ﬁExecutive Sum
-mary,ﬂ
 Information Technology Research: In
vesting in Our Future, 
Report to the President, 
February 24, 1999, available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/report/exec_summary.htm
l; accessed June 27, 2007; see also from the same report: Section V, ﬁCreating an Effective 
Management Structure for Federal IT R&D,ﬂ available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/
 report/section_5.htm
l; accessed June 27, 2007. 
63
National Academy of Engineering, 
Engineering Research and America™s Future: Meeting 
the Challenges of a Global Economy, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005. 
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic 
Future, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
in IT R&D has also enjoyed a generous increase in the past two decades 
(see Figure 4.5). However, this increase must be calibrated by several 
factors, including the enormous and increasing importance of the ˜eld, 
the continued potential for high-impact breakthroughs, and the nation™s 
investment in other ˜elds. As Figure 4.4 clearly shows, not only does the 
federal investment in IT R&D included in ﬁMath and Computer Scienceﬂ 
pale in comparison with the investment in ﬁBiomedical Sciences,ﬂ but it 
is smaller than the investment in ﬁAll Other Life Science,ﬂ ﬁEngineering,ﬂ 
ﬁPhysical Sciences,ﬂ and ﬁEnvironmental ScienceﬂŠexceeding only the 
investment in ﬁPsychologyﬂ and ﬁSocial Scienceﬂ!
Figure 
4-
4.
eps15
30
45
60
0Na
tional
Institutes
 of
Health
Biomedical
Sciences
Al
l Ot
he
r Life
 Scienc
ePsyc
hology
En
gineerin
gPhys
ical
 Sciences
En
vironmenta
l Scienc
eMa
th
 an
d Comput
er
 Scienc
eSocial
 Scienc
eﬁOth
er
ﬂIn billions of 
consta
nt 20
07 
doll
ar
s1970
197
219
74
19
7619
78
19
8019
82
198
419
86198
819
90
199
219
94
19
961998
2000
20
0220
042006
Ye
ar
FIGURE
 4.4  Federal funding for basic and applied research, by ˜eld, 1970-2006.  
SOURCE
: Computing Research Association. 
TABLE
 4.5  Funding Increases for IT R&D Recommended by the 
President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee, FY 2000-
FY 2004 ($ millions)
Fiscal Year (FY)
Recommended Increase
FY 2000
472
FY 2001
733
FY 2002
976
FY 2003
1,192
FY 2004
1,370
SOURCE: President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), ﬁExecutive 
Summary,ﬂ in 
Information Technology Research: In
vesting in Our Future, 
Report to the Presi
-dent, February 24, 1999, available at http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/report/exec_summary.
html; accessed June 27, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 137
Indeed, America™s public investment in civilian (nonmilitary) R&D 
in information technology communication lags other economies of inter
-est in absolute dollar terms (see estimates developed by the Institute for 
Defense Analyses for the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and 
Technology in Table 4.6). 
TABLE
 4.6  Comparisons of European Union, Japanese, and U.S. 
Estimated Public Funding of Civilian Information Technology and 
Communications Research and Development (in billions of dollars, 
purchasing power parity)
Year 
European Union-15
Japan
United States
1999
2.7
1.9
1.2
2000
2.9
2.1
1.3
2001
3.0
2.3
1.6
2002
3.3
2.5
1.5
2003
3.3
2.6
1.7
2004
3.4
2.7
1.9
2005
3.5
2.7
1.8
SOURCE
: Institute for Defense Analyses, Science and Technology Policy Institute, brief
-ing to the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, January 9, 2007. 
Based on data from ﬁResearch and Development in Information Science and Technology in 
Large Industrialised Countries,ﬂ Commissioned by the Ministère délégué à l™Enseignement 
 
sup
érieur et à la Recherche, Summary Report, April 2006.
Figure 
4-
5.
eps08751,
75
02,62
53,50
0In millions of adjusted 
FY
 2000
 doll
ar
s20
07
 (re
q)20
08
 (re
q)20
0620
0019
9619
9019
88
19
86
19
8419
7819
76198
019
82
19
92
19
9419
8820
02
20
04Fisc
al
 Ye
ar
FIGURE
 4.5  Federal funding for information technology research and develop
-ment, ˜scal years 1976-2008.  NOTE: (req), requested.  
SOURCE
: Computing 
Research Association.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) was about 
$13,247 billion in 2006. Of this, some $521 billion (almost 4 percent) is 
attributed to what BEA classi˜es as the ﬁinformation-communications-
technology (ICT) producing industries.ﬂ
64
 Furthermore, this sectorŠ
sparked and fueled by IT R&DŠexperienced double-digit real growth 
for the third consecutive year in 2006, increasing by 12.5 percent.
65
 In 
2006, these industries accounted for about 4 percent of the economy but 
contributed 14.2 percent of real GDP growth.
66 
Table 4.7 shows a differ
-ent measure of the sector™s economic contribution: its contribution to real 
value added (real value added captures the contribution of an industry™s 
labor and capital to real GDP). These contributions, although substantial, 
re˚ect only a portion of the overall long-term bene˜ts from IT research 
investments.
Organization of University Research
Federal funding for university research in information technology has 
traditionally followed a model of a three-legged stool (see Box 4.3 for a 
quick view into one university™s funding sources and patterns). One leg 
consisted of modest grants provided by the National Science Foundation
67
 and the Defense Science Of˜ces (Of˜ce of Naval Research, Army Research 
Of˜ce, and Air Force Of˜ce of Scienti˜c Research) to single investigators 
to work primarily on fundamental research problems. These were either 
peer-reviewed or evaluated by a panel drawn from technical experts 
within the government. The grants were suf˜cient to fund one to two 
students to work on a research problem.
64
According to the BEA, the ICT-producing industries consist of the following: com
-puter and electronic products within durable-goods manufacturing; publishing industries 
(including software) and information and data processing services within information-
 producing industries; and computer systems design and related services within profes
-sional, scienti˜c, and technical services. See Thomas F. Howells III and Kevin B. Barefoot, 
ﬁAnnual Industry AccountsŠAdvance Estimates for 2006,ﬂ 
Sur
vey of Current Business,
 Table 1, May 2007, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, D.C., available at http://bea.
gov/scb/pdf/2007/05%20May/0507_annual_industry_accounts.pdf; accessed August 28, 
2007.
65
See ibid.
, Table B. 
66
See ibid.
, Table A.
67
NSF™s Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) sup
-ports research in three broad areas: computing and communication foundations, computer 
and network systems, and information and intelligent systems. Other IT-relevant funding 
sources include the NSF™s Of˜ce of Cyberinfrastructure and initiatives within the Engineer
-ing Directorate. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 139
TABLE
 4.7  Percentage Changes in and Real Value Added to U.S. 
Gross Domestic Product, by Industry Group, 2003-2006
2003 (%)
2004 (%)
2005 (%)
2006 (%)
U.S. gross domestic product 
2.5
 3.9
 3.2
 3.3
Private industries (overall)
2.7
 4.2
 3.3
 3.7
Information-communications-
technology (ICT)-producing 
 private industries
7.2
13.7
13.3
12.5
SOURCE
:  Data from Thomas F. Howells III and Kevin B. Barefoot, ﬁAnnual Industry 
AccountsŠAdvance Estimates for 2006,ﬂ 
Sur
vey of Current Business,
 Table B, May 2007, 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington, D.C., available at http://bea.gov/scb/pdf/
2007/05%20May/0507_annual_industry_accounts.pdf; accessed August 28, 2007.
As a second leg of this model and at the opposite extreme from mod
-est grants to single investigators, the NSF also funded larger-scale, theme-
oriented research endeavors through such programs as Engineering 
Research Centers and Science and Technology Centers. The Department 
of Defense (DOD) developed the Multidisciplinary University Research 
Initiative (MURI) Program for similar purposes. These programs were 
intended to receive support for relatively long periods of timeŠ5 to 10 
years, rather than 2 or 3 years for single-investigator grantsŠand often 
involved further requirements in terms of industry or institutional match
-ing support. Such centers could encompass the research activities of two 
dozen faculty members or more, with the result that funding was thinly 
spread and best used to support work at the intersection of individual 
investigators™ interests. Critical-mass research efforts necessary to achieve 
breakthroughs were dif˜cult to achieve.
The third leg, uniquely epitomized by Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) support, was critical-mass funding for small 
teams of faculty and their graduate students: 5 to 6 investigators plus 
15 to 20 graduate students. The level of funding was comparable with 
and sometimes exceeded that of an NSF center, but it was focused on the 
research activity of a much smaller group. Furthermore, such efforts were 
not pursued in a vacuum but in the context of a program (see Box 4.4). 
These efforts consisted of perhaps a dozen similarly sized teams, span
-ning universities and industry, developing competing technologies but 
also cooperating on developing a common underlying infrastructureŠ
including, importantly, a research community in an area of strategic need. 
Examples include the DARPA VLSI Project and the High Performance 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
BOX
 4.3
 The Changing Sources of Information 
 Technology R&D Funding
The Computer Science and Arti˜cial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) is one of the premier information 
technology university laboratories in the world. With 93 principal investigators, 
471 graduate students, 112 research staff, 46 other staff, and a $45 million per 
year research expenditure, it is without question a large research enterprise. The 
laboratory has long enjoyed high levels of research support from the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). 
Table 4.3.1 shows the percentage breakdown of funding sources for the 
MIT laboratory™s activities between 2000 and 2008.
1 The data show a dramatic 
decrease in the percentage of DARPA funding, matched by a similarly large in
-crease in funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF). By the end of 
the period, the laboratory™s funding base is more balanced than in 2000, with 
roughly equal portions from nongovernment sources (mostly industry), NSF, and 
the Department of Defense (D
OD). In 2000, D
OD provided almost two-thirds of 
the laboratory™s funding.
TABLE 4.3.1  Percentage of Funding for MIT™s Computer Science and Arti˜cial Intelligence 
Laboratory, 2000-2008, by Source
SO
URCE
: Rodney Brooks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ﬁIT Research Funding: 
An MIT CSAIL Perspective,ﬂ presentation to the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.  
Updated and corrected percentages provided to the committee by personal communication 
from Rodney Brooks, July 15, 2008.
One dimension of the data not made obvious in this table is the increas
-ing level of support from foreign ˜rms for MIT™s research. Quanta Computer, a 
major manufacturer of personal computers based in Taiwan, has entered into a 
long-term, $20 million research agreement with MIT to investigate what will come 
ﬁbeyond the notebook computer.ﬂ
2 Nokia, a major manufacturer of telecommunica
-Table 4.3.1 in Box.eps2008(%)2007(%)2006(%)2005(%)2004(%)2003(%)2002(%)2001(%)2000(%)Source12.113.416.113.07.94.63.34.9Other U.S.Government24.223.119.625.625.626.637.947.9DARPA29.727.824.328.629.733.443.654.2DOD Total 27.426.726.825.322.915.39.97.9NSF69.267.967.266.960.553.356.867.0Government30.832.132.833.139.546.743.233.0Nongovernment1.351.662.97.571.728.3Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 141
Computing and Communications Program of the late 1980s through the 
1990s. This program type of organization was essential in transitioning 
fundamental research to a size and scale of proof of concept that the rest 
of the ecosystem could then begin to commercialize.
68
In 2000, NSF introduced the Information Technology Research (ITR) 
Program to provide a large-grant funding mechanism. The program did 
not, however, provide the same sort of programmatic context that DARPA 
has been able to provide. Thus, the research teams were not organized 
in a way that enabled them to achieve even better results through the 
process of competition, cooperation, shared infrastructure, and research 
community formation. With DARPA™s shift away from its traditional sup
-port for university-based information technology research in this decade, 
this third leg of the stool, critical for the ˜eld™s success in the past, has 
largely been lost.
In 2007, however, the NSF Directorate for Computer and Information 
Science and Engineering (CISE) made a small but positive step forward 
in this regard, with the new Expeditions in Computing Program, which is 
68
For more on DARPA™s early and continuing roles in IT, see ﬁHappy Birthday, Sputnik! 
(Thanks for the Internet),ﬂ 
Computerworld
, September 24, 2007, available at http://compute
r world.com/action/article.do?command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9036482&pageNumber=1; 
accessed October 18, 2007.
tions equipment based in Finland, has established a research laboratory close to 
MIT to pursue collaborative activities.
3 Clearly, even support for university research 
is becoming globalized.
1Rodney Brooks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ﬁIT Research Funding: An MIT 
CSAIL Perspective,ﬂ presentation to the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
2See ﬁQuanta Computer, Inc. and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Announce 
TParty ProjectŒCSAIL Spotlight,ﬂ http://www.csail.mit.edu/node/363; accessed December 11, 
2008.3See ﬁNokia and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Celebrate the 
Opening of 
Nokia Research Center Cambridge,ﬂ April 21, 2006, available at http://press.nokia.com/
PR/200604/1046070_5.html; accessed August 24, 2007. 
BOX
 4.3  continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
BOX
 4.4
 The Role of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
in the 
Organization of Information Technology R&D
In the early years of the information technology (IT) industry in the United 
States, the Department of Defense (D
OD) played a crucial role, as a supporter of 
research and as a sophisticated procurer of IT systems. In the 1960s and 1970s, 
the D
OD pulled forward such strategic IT sectors as integrated circuits, computer-
aided design software, time-sharing systems, and packet switching networks (i.e., 
the Advanced Research Projects Agency network, or ARPAnet).
The science of˜ces of the military servicesŠthe 
Of˜ce of Naval Research 
(ONR), the Army Research 
Of˜ce (AR
O), and the Air Force 
Of˜ce of Scienti˜c 
Research (AF
OSR)Šhave a long history of supporting fundamental research 
related to D
OD missions. Further, the D
OD maintains its own establishment of 
research laboratories, to develop speci˜c prototype defense capabilities while also 
evaluating concepts from the defense contractor community. In terms of organizing 
research outside the D
OD, the major funder of IT research and advanced devel
-opment has traditionally been DARPA: the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (originally ﬁARPAﬂ).
1Formed in the late 1950s in the wake of the Soviet launching of 
Sputnik
 and 
the American public furor that followed,
2 the agency has acquired an almost magical 
reputation for establishing ambitious research goals, organizing research communi
-ties, and executing programs that expand the technology base to demonstrate new 
military capabilities. The agency™s unof˜cial charter is to ﬁavoid future technological 
surprise.ﬂ Its modus operandi is critical-mass funding to support project teams, or
-ganized into cooperative and competitive multiteam programs, under the direction 
of an empowered program manager (PM) who stands as the mediator between the 
researchers on the one hand and the D
OD customers on the other.
3Many within the IT research community point to the late 1980s and early 
1990s as the high-water mark of DARPA support for the ˜eld. The mid-1980s saw 
the emergence of DARPA™s Strategic Computing Program (SCP) to apply arti˜cial 
intelligence (AI) techniques to D
OD applications in autonomous vehicles, in ˚eet 
battle management, and in a pilot™s associate. In addition to the demand pull that 
these stressing applications placed on speech understanding, computer vision, 
user interfaces, and planning systems, they also put stretch demands on the un
-derlying networked hardware and software systems on which they would execute. 
That is, these applications™ requirements pushed the state of the art in these ˜elds 
and also required more capabilities in the underlying systems. Therefore, SCP 
represented a very signi˜cant increment in defense funding for IT research.
41For more on DARPA (originally ARPA) management style, see National Research Coun
-cil, Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research,
 National Academy 
Press, Washington, D.C., 1999, pp. 98-105.
2Roger D. Launiusk, ﬁSputnik and the 
Origins of the Space Age,ﬂ available at http://history.
nasa.gov/sputnik/sputorig.html; accessed March 27, 2008.
3See ﬁStrategic Vision,ﬂ available at http://www.darpa.mil/stratvision.html; accessed January 
7, 2009.
4Alex Roland and Philip Shiman, 
Strategic Computing: DARPA and the Quest for Machine 
Intelligence, 1983-1993,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2002.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 143
The High Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194) was 
motivated in part by a 1988 report of the National Research Council, 
Toward a 
National Research Network
.5 Key outcomes of the act were the creation of the 
federal High Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC) Program
6 and the establishment of a mechanism to coordinate research in communications 
across the science and technology agencies of the government.
7 Although some 
agencies saw their funding for HPCC-related research increase owing to the act, 
much of the work that came under the HPCC rubric was already being carried out 
by federal agencies. 
The multiagency focus combined with the HPCC Program™s high visibility 
and compelling stretch performance goals are credited with motivating a whole 
generation of researchers to enter the ˜eld and contribute to HPCC™s success. 
The size and diversity of the research program grew signi˜cantly, encompassing 
more universities and more ˜rms. A perhaps less well known outcome was that 
the High Performance Computing Act has fostered collaborative work in which a 
small number of research administrators within these diverse and often competitive 
organizations have worked together to rationalize their research and development 
investments in order to maximize leverage and minimize overlap of effort and to 
promote and publicize their scienti˜c and technical accomplishments. 
On the nega
-tive side, some have observed that the size of the program attracted the attention 
of lobbyists, who sought to in˚uence procurements, and of legislators, who sought 
to earmark funds for projects within their constituencies. 
Within the D
OD, SCP evolved from an AI program with a modest comput
-ing component to a major program in HPCC. The program laid the foundation for 
today™s scalar cluster-based processors and storage systems on which virtually 
every major Web site depends. By the mid-1990s, DARPA deemphasized its in
-vestment in high performance computing, with the technical leadership shifting 
to the Department of Energy Accelerated Strategic Computing Initiative (ASCI) 
Program.
8 The ASCI Program focused on developing very large scale parallel 
BOX
 4.4 continued
5National Research Council, 
Toward a National Research Network
, National Academy 
Press, Washington, D.C., 1988. This publication is sometimes referred to as the Kleinrock 
report, after the authoring committee™s chair, Leonard Kleinrock.
6See, for example, D.B. Nelson, ﬁHigh Performance Computing and Communications Pro
-gram,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing,
 Minneapolis, 
Minn., 1992.
7Membership in the program, now known as the Networking and Information Technology 
Research and Development Program, has expanded over the years. The current members are 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency, the National Nuclear Security Agency, the 
Of˜ce of Science of the Department of 
Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Archives and Records Administra
-tion, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Institutes of Health, 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, the National Security Agency, the National Science Foundation, and the 
Of˜ces 
of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Science and Technology) and Director of Defense 
Research and Engineering of the Department of Defense.
8Department of Energy, Defense Programs, 
Accelerated Strategic Computing Initiative 
(ASCI) Program Plan,
 D
OE/DP-99-000010592, Washington, D.C., January 2000.
continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
intended to provide longer-term research support for teams. The program 
currently has a total budget of $30 million. Each expedition will be funded 
at up to $2 million per year for 5 years, and CISE estimates that it will 
provide three new awards each year.
69
69
According to CISE, ﬁThe intent is to provide the opportunity to pursue ambitious, fun
-damental research agendas that promise to de˜ne the future of computing and information. 
In planning Expeditions, investigators are encouraged to come together within or across 
departments or institutions to combine their creative talents in the identi˜cation of compel
-ling, transformative research agendas that promise disruptive innovations in computing 
and information for many years to come.ﬂ See ﬁExpeditions in Computing,ﬂ September 13, 
2007, available at http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf07592/nsf07592.txt; accessed October 
23, 2007.
machines targeted for the department™s nuclear weapons design needs (known 
as stockpile stewardship). Most of its funding was directed to its contractor-
 managed weapons laboratoriesŠLawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos National Laboratory, and Sandia National LaboratoriesŠand the machine 
vendor community. The university HPCC community found it increasingly dif˜cult to 
receive critical funding to sustain the project teams that had been formed during 
the earlier stages of HPCC, particularly in areas of computer architecture, parallel 
software, and internetworking. In 1998 the Next Generation Internet Research Act 
(Public Law 105-305) was passed, broadening the scope and name of the pro
-gram to the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development 
(NITRD) Program. Today, the NITRD Program and the National Coordination 
Of˜ce 
for NITRD are together the major coordinating umbrella for IT research within the 
federal government.
Two major characteristics of DARPA-sponsored IT research between the 
1960s and 1980s contributed to its success. The ˜rst was DARPA™s particular 
style of project-focused research, mentioned above, typically spanning teams of 
four to ˜ve faculty investigators and their students (although teams also included 
industrial participants), organized into programs in which the teams are driven to 
cooperate and/or compete through the oversight of the PM. The PM served as 
a critical intermediary between the researchers and the military customer, plac
-ing the research results in the relevant military context while also expressing the 
military needs in a language that the researchers could understand. The second 
characteristic was the recognition that it is often just as strategic to build a research 
community, such as one skilled in developing software for new parallel architec
-tures, as it is to develop the particular technologies that such a community might 
invent. These characteristics of DARPA successes suggest that simply increasing 
funding without such a programmatic structure will not yield an ecosystem that is 
as effective as it was during the past.
BOX
 4.4  continued
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 145
CHAN
GES
 IN
 THE
 R
ELATIONSHIP
 B
ETWEEN
  EMPLO
YEES
 AND
 E
MPLO
YERS
The foundations of the American system of employment were con
-ceptualized under the New Deal and institutionalized in law and by col
-lective bargaining agreements. In return for employees™ loyalty and best 
efforts, employers agreed to ful˜ll both legally and culturally prescribed 
obligations: a reasonable expectation of job security and such bene˜ts as 
health insurance and pension plans. Beginning in the mid-1980s, the cul
-tural contract between worker and employer began to unravel as employ
-ment practices and policies shifted toward a laissez-faire philosophy remi
-niscent of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
70
 This context is important 
when considering the IT workforce issues and patterns of student enroll
-ments discussed previously.
A number of developments contributed to this unraveling. The ˜rst 
was ﬁdownsizingﬂ or ﬁrightsizing,ﬂ euphemisms for what had formerly 
been known as ﬁlayoffs.ﬂ Until the mid-1980s most layoffs occurred dur
-ing recessions or when ˜rms found themselves in ˜nancial trouble. Lay
-offs were primarily con˜ned to blue-collar and clerical workers, who 
often returned to work once the economy improved. In hard times, pro
-fessionals and managers could assume that they were safe even from 
temporary layoffs.
During the 1980s, the rules of the game changed. For the ˜rst time 
in history, ˜rms began to shed professional, technical, and managerial 
workers in large numbers. In fact, by the mid-1990s corporate downsiz
-ings were more likely to target managers and professionals than to dis
-miss other white-collar or blue-collar workers.
71
 Moreover, downsizings, 
70
The unraveling of the New Deal employment system has been exetensively documented 
in Thomas A. Kochan, Harry C. Katz, and Robert B. McKersie, 
The Transformation of American 
Industrial Relations,
 Basic Books, New York, N.Y., 1986; Peter Cappelli, Laurie Bassi, Harry 
Katz, David Knoke, Paul Osterman, and Michael Useem, 
Change at Work,
 Oxford, New York, 
N.Y., 1997; Paul Osterman, 
Broken Ladders: Managerial Careers in the New Economy,
 Oxford 
University Press, New York, N.Y., 1996; Paul Osterman, 
Securing Prosperity: The American 
Labor Market: 
How It 
Has Changed and What to Do About It,
 Princeton University Press, Prince
-ton, N.J., 1999; and Paul Osterman, Thomas A. Kochan, M. Locke Richard, and Michael J. 
Piore, 
Working in America: Blueprint for the New Labor Market,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 
2001.
71
On the nature and extent of downsizing, see Thomas S. Moore, 
The Disposable Work Force,
 Aldine, New York, N.Y., 1996; American Management Association, 
1996
 AMA Sur
vey on 
Downsizing, Job Elimination and Job Creation,
 New York, N.Y., 1996; and Harry S. Farber, ﬁThe 
Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States: 1981-1995,ﬂ pp. 55-142 in 
Brookings Papers on 
Economic Acti
vity: Microeconomics,
 The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1977. On the 
impact of downsizing on employee perceptions, attitudes, and lives, see Katherine Newman, 
Falling from Grace: The Experience of Downward Mobility in the American Middle Class,
 Vintage, 
New York, N.Y., 1989;  Charles Heckscher, 
White-Collar Blues,
 Basic Books, New York, N.Y., 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
unlike layoffs of the past, seemed independent of economic cycles. Under 
pressure from global competition and their stockholders, ˜rms had dis
-covered that streamlining the workforce was necessary to achieve their 
bottom-line targets and boost their stock prices.
72
By the late 1990s three practices were augmenting and exacerbating 
the downsizing: the outsourcing of work to external suppliers, the off
-shoring of jobs, and the use of contingent labor. Contingent workers are 
individuals hired, often through staf˜ng agencies, for a limited period 
of time to perform speci˜c work. Although ˜rms have long employed 
temporary workers for seasonal and short-term needs, during the late 
1980s corporations began to view temporary labor as an extension of the 
broader strategy of outsourcing. The shift from permanent to contingent 
employment became particularly widespread in IT centers and among 
high-technology ˜rms.
73
 The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that, 
by 1995, 40 percent of all programmers and 29 percent of other IT work
-ers were either contingently employed or worked through outsourcing 
˜rms.
74
 In Silicon Valley, contractors often comprise between 15 and 30 
percent of the labor force.
75
 Data on employment turnover are consistent with the demise of 
employment security and stable relations between employers and employ
-ees. Between 1983 and 2004, average tenure with one™s current employer 
fell by 2.1 years (from 7.3 to 5.2 years) among men between the ages of 
35 and 44. Among men between 45 and 54 and between 55 and 65 years 
of age, the declines were greater: 3.2 years (from 12.8 to 9.6 years) and 5.5 
years (from 15.3 to 9.8 years), respectively.
76
The combination of downsizing, outsourcing, offshoring, and contin
-gent work dramatically altered the tenor of the employment relationship. 
The ˜rst casualty was loyalty. Despite stable levels of job satisfaction and 
1995; Denise Rousseau, 
Psychological Contracts in Organizations,
 Sage Publications, Thou
-sand Oaks, Calif., 1995; and Denise Rousseau and R.J. Anton, ﬁFairness and Obligations in 
Termination Decisions: The Role of Contributions, Promises and Performance,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Organizational Beha
vior
 12(4):287-299, 1991.
72
Wayne F. Cascio, Clifford E. Young, and James R. Morris, ﬁFinancial Consequences of 
Employment-Change Decisions in Major U.S. Corporations,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal
 40(5):1175-1189, 1997.
73
Stephen R. Barley and Gideon Kunda, 
Gurus, 
Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Ex
-perts in a Knowledge Economy,
 Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 2004.
74
Angela Clinton, ﬁFlexible Labor: Restructuring the American Workforce,ﬂ 
Monthly Labor 
Re
view
 120(8):3-27, 1997.
75
Chris Benner, 
Work in the New Economy: Flexible Labor Markets in Silicon Valley,
 Blackwell, 
Malden, Mass., 2002.
76
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 
Employee Tenure in 
200
4, 
USDL-04-1829, BLS, Washing
-ton, D.C., 2004, available at http://www.bls.gov/news.release/History/tenure_09212004.
txt. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A GLOBALI
ZED
, 
DYNAMIC
 INFORMATION
 TEC
HNOLOG
Y R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 147
a vibrant economy, employees became increasingly distrustful of their 
employers and less sanguine about their future over the 1990s.
77
 Employ
-ers, for their part, dropped the pretense of hiring with any expectation of a 
long-term relationship. Some openly cautioned new hires about the ˜rm™s 
limited commitment to them. Apple™s human resource policy, which was 
reputedly given to each new hire, stated:
Here™s the deal Apple will give you; here™s what we want from you. 
We™re going to give you a really neat trip while you™re here. We™re going 
to teach you stuff you couldn™t learn anywhere else. In return . . . we 
expect you to work like hell, buy the vision as long as you™re here. . . . 
We™re not interested in employing you for a lifetime, but that™s not the 
way we™re thinking about this. It™s a good opportunity for both of us that 
this is probably ˜nite.
78
The second and more important casualty of the altered employment 
relationship has been the integrity of America™s system for insuring the 
health and welfare of the workforce. During the New Deal the govern
-ment and industry reached an agreement on how to care for the sick and 
elderly: Rather than adopting national and universal health care coverage 
and pension funds, Americans would receive health insurance and pen
-sions through their employers. The employment relationship thus became 
the cornerstone of America™s social safety net, but as the health care 
costs and pension obligations have risen and as job security has fallen, 
an increasing number of employers have ceased providing either bene˜t 
to workers. Between 1979 and 2004, the percentage of Americans with 
employer-provided health insurance fell from 69 percent to 56 percent. 
The rate of decline has been even steeper for Hispanic Americans.
79 While 
the trends are not speci˜c to the IT industry, not only is it not immune to 
them, but the fast-changing nature of IT businesses, their rapid globaliza
-tion, and the need for maximal ˚exibility of operations has exacerbated 
these trends in the IT industry.
Trends in pension funds are equally striking.
80
 Between 1983 and 
2004, the percentage of American workers covered only by a de˜ned-
77
National Research Council, 
The Changing Nature of Work: Implications for Occupational 
Analysis, 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.
78
Barbara Ettorre, ﬁThe Contingency Workforce Moves Mainstream,ﬂ 
Management Re
view
 83(2):10-16, 1994, quoting from Apple Computer™s written employment contract with every 
full-time employee.
79Lawrence Mishel, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto, 
The State of Working America
, An 
Economic Policy Institute Book
, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y., 2007, Figure 3H.
80
Data on participation in pension plans are from Alicia H. Munnell and Annika Sunden, 
ﬁ401K Plans Are Still Coming Up Short,ﬂ in 
Issues in Brief, 
Center for Retirement Research, 
Boston College, Boston, Mass., 2006. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
bene˜t plan fell from 62 percent to 20 percent. Conversely, during the 
same period the percentage of the workforce covered only by a de˜ned-
contribution plan grew from 12 percent to 63 percent. As of 2004, one-˜fth 
of working Americans who were eligible to contribute to de˜ned contri
-butions made no contribution whatsoever. Less than 1 percent of work
-ers earning less than $60,000 annually contribute the maximum. Among 
those earning between $60,000 to $80,000 annually, only 8.3 percent make 
maximum contributions. In fact, only 58 percent of Americans who make 
more than $100,000 a year contribute maximally. The situation among 
technical contractors is at least equally dire, if not more so. Although 
the well-educated and well-paid high-tech contractors whom Barley and 
Kunda
81
 interviewed were mostly in their 40s and 50s, 45 percent had 
no retirement account whatsoever. Another 20 percent had only an indi
-vidual retirement account (IRA). Only 20 percent participated in a 401K 
or simpli˜ed employee pension (SEP) plan.
81
Stephen R. Barley and Gideon Kunda, 
Gurus, 
Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Ex
-perts in a Knowledge Economy,
 Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 2004. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The U.S. information technology (IT) research and development eco
-system was the envy of the world in 1995, and it remains unquestionably 
the strongest today. However, this position of leadership is not a birth
-right. U.S. leadership has been under pressure on several fronts, and lead
-ership cannot be sustained without renewal.
1 In recent years, the rapid 
globalization of markets, labor pools, and capital ˚ows has helped enable 
the rise of many strong national competitors. It has created tremendous 
new opportunities, but globalization also means that the United States 
will have to work even harder to remain the world leader in IT R&D. 
Meanwhile, national policies have not always risen to the challenge (such 
as in IT education and federal funding for research) or have generated 
unintentional side effects that have reduced the IT R&D ecosystem™s effec
-tiveness (for example, as a result of regulations that affect the corporate 
overhead and competitiveness of innovative IT companies). Thus, the 
need has never been greater for the nation to recommit itself to providing 
1These observations are corroborated by a recent report by the RAND Corporation that 
compares claims of a decline in U.S. global science and technology (S&T) leadership in recent 
literature with relevant data up to 2006. The RAND report concludes that the United States 
continues to perform ﬁat or near the top in many measures of S&T leadership, [but that] 
this leadership must not be taken for grantedﬂ and recommends that institutions and incen
-tives integral to the creation and performance of S&T discoveries be sustained and, when 
necessary, adapted to the changing global economy. See Titus Galama and James Hosek, 
U.S. Competiti
veness in Science and Technology,
 RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, Calif., 
2008, p. xxiv, available at http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG674/;
 accessed 
November 20, 2008.
5Findings and Recommendations
149
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
the resources needed to fuel U.S. IT innovation, to mitigate unintended 
negative consequences from laws and regulations, and to continue to be 
a nation of lead innovators and users of IT.
The ˜ndings and recommendations of the committee presented in 
the sections below are organized according to four broad objectives. The 
numbering of the objectives and the related numbering of the ˜ndings 
and recommendations re˚ect the logical ˚ow of the arguments, not neces
-sarily temporal or other priorities. The objectives are as follows:
Ł Objecti
ve 
1. Strengthen the effectiveness and impact of federally 
funded information technology research.
Ł Objecti
ve 
2. Remain the strongest generator of and magnet for tech
-nical talent.
Ł Objecti
ve 
3. Reduce friction that harms the effectiveness of the U.S. 
information technology R&D ecosystem, while maintaining other impor
-tant political and economic objectives.
Ł Objecti
ve 
4. Ensure that the United States has an infrastructure for 
communications, computing, applications, and services that can enable 
U.S. information technology users and innovators to lead the world.
OB
JECTI
VE 1. 
STREN
GTHEN
 THE
 EFFECTI
VENESS
  AND
 IMPACT
 OF
 F
EDERALL
Y FUNDED I
NFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY 
RESEARCH
Advances in information technology have transformed our lives, pow
-ered our economy, and changed the conduct of science and engineering (see 
Chapter 2). The ˜eld of IT is relatively nascent, however, and even greater 
opportunities lie aheadŠprovided that IT research is adequately funded. 
The federal government plays a key role in this regard (see Chapter 4).
The importance of federal investment in scienti˜c research was under
-scored emphatically in a recent report of the National Academies, 
Rising 
Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future,
2 which was followed by the administration™s American 
Competitiveness Initiative and passage of the America COMPETES Act 
of 2007.
3 A strong case has also been made over the years for investment in IT 
in particular. A 1995 report of the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) 
2National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Eco
-nomic Future, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
3The America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technol
-ogy, Education, and Science Act (America COMPETES Act) became Public Law 110-69 on 
August 9, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 151
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), 
Evol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communications Initiati
ve to Support the 
Nation™s Information Infrastructure,
 concluded that ﬁfederal investment in 
information technology research has played a key role in the U.S. capa
-bility to maintain its international lead in information technology.ﬂ
4 The 
ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram used in that report (and updated in CSTB™s 2003 
Inno
vation in Information Technology
5), reproduced as Figure 2.1 in Chapter 
2 of this report, compellingly illustrates the critical role that government-
funded research, in combination with industry R&D, has played in the 
establishment of U.S. industries with annual revenues of over $1 billion. 
Federal investment in fundamental research in information technology 
has been crucial to the development of the billion-dollar industries that 
maintain America™s leadership in this critical ˜eld.
6Finding 1.1. A robust program of federally sponsored research and 
development (R&D) in information technology (IT) is vital to the 
nation.
Advances in information technology and its applications have played 
a central role in fueling the success of U.S. scienti˜c, engineering, busi
-ness, and governmental communities in the past 50 years. Information 
technology has transformed and continues to transform all aspects of 
life in the United States: commerce, education, employment, health care, 
manufacturing, government, national security, communications, enter
-tainment, science, and engineering. Information technology also drives 
the U.S. economyŠboth directly (the IT sector itself) and indirectly (other 
sectors that are ﬁpoweredﬂ by advances in IT). In short, leadership in 
information technology is vital to our nation.
A number of reports of the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board have examined the U.S. IT innovation system. Their 
4National Research Council, 
Evol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communications 
Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure, 
National Academy Press, Wash
-ington, D.C., 1995, p. 3.
5National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Information Technology,
 The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.
6See National Research Council, 
Evol
ving the 
High Performance Computing and Communi
-cations Initiati
ve to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure, 
National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 1995; and National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Information Technology, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003
. Note that the federal R&D invest
-ment is only a fraction of the total R&D investment required to launch a new product, 
market, or industry, but it provides essential, high-risk seed money. In return, although 
returns to any individual investment are by no means guaranteed, the tax income to the 
federal government from billion-dollar industries can vastly exceed the federal research 
investment.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
key ˜ndings were recapped in the 2003 report 
Inno
vation in Information 
Technology, 
which contained the following observations:
Ł  
America™s international leadership in ITŠleadership that is vital to 
the nationŠsprings from a deep tradition of research. .
 . . Ł  
The success of the IT research enterprise re˚ects a complex partner
-ship among government, industry, and universities. .
 . . Ł  
The federal government has had and will continue to have an e
s- sential role in sponsoring fundamental research in ITŠlargely 
university-basedŠbecause it does what industry does not and can
-not do. . . . Industrial and governmental investments in research 
re˚ect different motivations, resulting in differences in style, focus, 
and time horizon. .
 . .Ł  
Past returns on federal investments in IT research have been extraor
-dinary for both U.S. society and the U.S. economy. .
 . . Priming that 
pump for tomorrow is today™s challenge.
7Finding 1.2. The level of federal investment in fundamental research 
in information technology continues to be inadequate.
As noted in Chapter 4, the 1999 report of the President™s Information 
Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), 
Information Technology Research: 
In
vesting in Our Future,
8 described the level of federal investment in IT 
R&D at that time as ﬁdangerously inadequateﬂ and argued for a doubling 
of that investment over a period of 5 years. Through efforts coordinated 
by the National Coordination Of˜ce for Networking and Information 
Technology Research and Development (NITRD), the federal govern
-ment set out to achieve that goal. However, funding by the NITRD par
-ticipating agencies soon fell short of the annual targets set by PITAC and 
9 years later has not reached the recommended doubling of the IT R&D 
budget.
9 7National Research Council, 
Inno
vation in Information Technology, 
The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2003, pp. 2-4.
8President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), 
Information Technology 
Research: In
vesting in Our Future, 
Report to the President, February 24, 1999, ﬁExecutive Sum
-mary,ﬂ available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/report/exec_summary.htm
l, accessed June 
27, 2007; see also from the same report: Section V, ﬁCreating an Effective Management Struc
-ture for Federal IT R&D,ﬂ available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/report/section_5.htm
l; accessed June 27, 2007.
9As noted in Chapter 4, this pattern mirrors a broader underinvestment in the physical 
sciences and engineering highlighted in two recent National Academies studies: National 
Academy of Engineering, 
Engineering Research and America™s Future: Meeting the Challenges 
of a Global Economy, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005; and National 
Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine, 
Rising 
Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 153
The committee believes that the level of federal investment in informa
-tion technology research remains inadequate. Indeed, in the 9 years since 
the PITAC report, the role of IT in all aspects of the life of this nationŠfrom 
entertainment to commerce to health care to national securityŠhas grown 
dramatically. At the same time, globalization has expanded dramatically, 
leading to increasing specialization and pushing the United States to 
move higher up the value chain, a position that is more R&D-intensive. 
Short-term competitive pressures on U.S. IT ˜rms have increased dramati
-cally, with the result that few companies are investing in long-term R&D 
and most high-impact industrial research laboratories are gone.
Recommendation 1.1. As the federal government increases its 
investment in long-term basic research in the physical sciences, 
engineering, mathematics, and information sciences, it should care
-fully assess the level of investment in IT R&D, mindful of the 
economic return, societal impact, enablement of discovery across 
science and engineering, and other bene˜ts of additional effort in 
IT, and should ensure that appropriate advisory mechanisms are in 
place to guide investment within the IT R&D portfolio.
The committee™s analysis of the opportunities in the expanding IT 
economy, the global competition faced by the United States, and the criti
-cal foundation that the federal investment in IT R&D provides for a broad 
range of economically and socially important IT applications convinced 
it that the nation™s research base is inadequate and that additional invest
-ment is needed. 
It is dif˜cult to estimate how much should be invested in IT R&D, 
in part because that estimate must take into account the alternatives 
for that investment. Looking more broadly at federal R&D investment, 
the 2007 study 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm 
made the following 
recommendation:
Increase the federal investment in long-term basic research by 10 per
-cent each year over the next seven years through reallocation of existing 
funds, or, if necessary, through the investment of new funds. Special 
attention should go to the physical sciences, engineering, mathematics, 
and information sciences and to Department of Defense (DOD) basic-
research funding.
10
10National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Eco
-nomic Future,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, pp. 136-137.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
A detailed discussion of the rationale and supporting evidence for the 
recommendation are presented in that report.
11
Looking at how to establish priorities within the federal research 
portfolio, the 1993 study 
Science, Technology, and the Federal Go
vernment: 
National Goals for a New Era 
argued that ﬁthe United States should be 
among the world leaders in all major areas of scienceﬂ but that some dif
-ferentiation was necessary: in some ˜elds it was suf˜cient to be ﬁamong 
the world leaders,ﬂ but in others ﬁthe United States should maintain clear 
leadership.ﬂ The 1993 study went on to note criteria that would call for 
clear leadership in a ˜eld:
Ł  
The ˜eld is demonstrably and tightly coupled to national objectives 
that can be met only if U.S. research performers are clear leaders. For 
example, the ˜eld of condensed-matter physics drives technological 
advances in such industrial sectors as microelectronics, advanced 
materials, and sensors.
Ł  
The ˜eld so captures the imagination that it is of broad interest to 
society. An example in astronomy is the recent detection of differ
-ences in the cosmic background radiation related to the creation of 
the universe.
Ł  
The ˜eld affects other areas of science disproportionately and there
-fore has a multiplicative effect on other scienti˜c advances, especially 
those where clear leadership is the objective. For example, molecular 
biology is critical to advances in health care, biotechnology, agricul
-ture, and industrial processes.
12
Building on the 1993 study, the 2005 National Academy of Engineer
-ing study 
Engineering Research and America™s Future: Meeting the Challenges 
of a Global Economy
 included the following recommendation:
The committee strongly recommends that the federal R&D portfolio be 
rebalanced by increasing funding for research in engineering and physi
-cal science to levels suf˜cient to support the nation™s most urgent pri
-orities, such as national defense, homeland security, health care, energy 
security, and economic competitiveness. Allocations of federal funds 
should be determined by a strategic analysis to identify areas of research 
in engineering and science that support these priorities. . . .
13
The Committee on Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Infor
-11
Ibid., Ch. 6, especially pp. 136-143.
12National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 
Science, Technology, and the Federal Go
vernment: National Goals for a New Era, 
National 
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1993, pp. 18-20.
13
National Academy of Engineering, 
Engineering Research and America™s Future: Meeting the 
Challenges of a Global Economy, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, p. 4.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 155
mation Technology Research and Development Ecosystem is persuaded 
that an evaluation of the government™s research priorities, which will be 
required to implement the research investment growth recommended in 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm,
 will show that the economic return and 
other bene˜ts of additional effort in IT justify a signi˜cant increase in 
this ˜eld. This evaluation merits the attention of ˜rst-tier scientists and 
engineers from academia, industry, and government. The mechanism for 
capturing and conveying such advice also merits attention. 
The High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194) 
was enacted to ﬁprovide for a coordinated Federal program to ensure 
continued United States leadership in high-performance computing,ﬂ 
re˚ecting information technology™s vital role in the economy, national 
security, and science. Among its provisions is the establishment of a high-
performance computing advisory committee to provide an independent 
assessment of the program, including ﬁwhether the research and devel
-opment undertaken pursuant to the program is helping to maintain the 
United States leadership in computing technology.ﬂ That advisory com
-mittee was ˜rst convened in 1997 and named the President™s Information 
Technology Advisory Committee. Its charter was augmented by the Next 
Generation Internet Research Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-305). 
In 2005, instead of reauthorizing PITAC, the administration decided 
that the PITAC mission would be assumed by the President™s Council of 
Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), which established a 12-
member subcommittee to consider networking and IT. Should the execu
-tive and/or legislative branches concur that an increased (or retargeted) 
focus on IT R&D investment is warranted, reconsideration of what federal 
advisory mechanisms would be most useful may also be warranted. The 
committee believes that it would be important to include ˜rst-tier IT 
researchers from academia and industry in any future advisory group.
OBJECTI
VE 2. 
REMAIN
 THE
 STRON
GEST
 G
ENERATOR
  OF
 AND
 MA
GNET
 FOR
 TECHNICAL
 TALENT
The IT professions are fast-paced, highly creative, and challenging; 
they often require specialized skills and advanced education. Although 
strong demand for IT workers is projected in the United States, there 
is growing concern about the development of IT talent.
14
 Despite the 
14
The recent RAND report on U.S. competitiveness identi˜ed similar concerns, noting 
weaknesses in the U.S. kindergarten through grade 12 education system with respect to 
preparing students in the area of science and technology or attracting suf˜cient numbers 
of U.S. students to scienti˜c careers in research or industry. See Titus Galama and James 
Hosek, 
U.S. Competiti
veness in Science and Technology,
 RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, 
Calif., 2008, p. xxiii, available at http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG674/; ac
-cessed November 20, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
demand for IT workers, the number of students specifying an intention to 
major in computing and information sciences has dropped signi˜cantly 
in the past 6 years.
15
 The composition of the IT workforce is also a cause for concern. The 
participation of women, persons with disabilities, and certain minorities 
such as African-Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans is rising 
overall in other science, technology, engineering, and mathematics ˜elds. 
In computing, however, the participation of underrepresented groups is 
especially low, and is even declining.
16
 The trends described above have a direct effect on employers™ ability 
to hire IT professionalsŠwith some IT professional areas, such as senior 
programmers and systems analysts, being of more concern than others.
17
 An excess demand for talent is also felt, perhaps most acutely, in federal 
agencies such as the Department of Defense that have specialized IT 
needs and requirements for particular personnel (for example, people 
who can be granted security clearances).
18
 Finding 2.1. Rebuilding the computing education pipeline at all 
levels requires overcoming numerous obstacles, which in turn por
-tends signi˜cant challenges for the development of future U.S. IT 
workforce talent.
Concerns about the generation of talent are exacerbated by the poor 
state of the U.S. IT/computing education system for kindergarten through 
grade 12 (K-12). In its report 
The New Educational Imperati
ve: Impro
ving 
High School Computer Science Education,
 the Computer Science Teachers 
Association correctly assesses the situation as one in which knowledge of 
computer science is as essential as knowledge of any of the traditional sci
-15
National Center for Women and Information Technology data, as derived from the Col
-lege Board, 
200
6 College Bound Seniors: Total Group Pro˜le Report,
 2006, available at http://
www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2006/national-
 report.pdf; accessed July 2, 2007. 
16
The National Science Foundation (NSF) Broadening Participation in Computing pro
-gram intends to increase the number of U.S. citizens and permanent residents receiving 
postsecondary degrees in computing disciplines, with emphasis on students from commu
-nities (women, persons with disabilities, and selected minorities) with ﬁlongstanding un
-derrepresentation.ﬂ Information is available at http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.
jsp?pims_id=13510&org=NSF&sel_org=NSF&from=fund; accessed March 27, 2008.
17
National Center for Women and Information Technology data, as derived from Society 
for Information Management, 
The Information Technology Workforce: Trends and Implications 
200
5-2008
. 18
See, for example, the discussions of shortfalls in software expertise in National Research 
Council, 
Summary of a Workshop on Software-Intensi
ve Systems and Uncertainty at Scale,
 The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 157
ences, but in which curriculums, leadership, funding, professional devel
-opment for teachers, and ˚uency objectives for students are all de˜cient 
(see the discussion in Chapter 4, in the subsection entitled ﬁConcerns 
About K-12 IT/Computing Education and Talent Generationﬂ).
19
Enrollment is dropping because students, parents, guardians, and 
school counselors do not understand that computing is a discipline 
focused on solving real problems, nor that computing is a foundational 
and broad science. In addition, in most public schools, computing is an 
electiveŠstudents (especially advanced placement and college-bound 
students) have packed schedules and often do not have the time to take 
electives. It is likely that the recent emphasis on standardized testing in 
core areas is also pulling funding and teachers away from computing.
Finding 2.2. The participation in IT of women, people with disabili
-ties, and certain minorities, including African-Americans, Hispan
-ics, and Native Americans, is especially low and is declining. This 
low level of participation will affect the ability of the United States 
to meet its workforce needs and place it at a competitive disadvan
-tage by not allowing it to capitalize on the innovative thinking of 
half of its population. 
The National Academies™ 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm
 included 
the following recommendation:
Make the United States the most attractive setting in which to study and 
perform research so that we can develop, recruit, and retain the best 
and brightest students, scientists, and engineers from within the United 
States and throughout the world.
20
 The committee supports this general recommendation. It further b
e-lieves for the following reasons that IT warrants special emphasis within 
the broad science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) 
umbrella as the federal agencies begin to implement the America COM
-PETES Act of 2007:
19
Computer Science Teachers Association, 
The New Educational Imperati
ve: Impro
ving 
High 
School Computer Science Education,
 available at http://csta.acm.org/; accessed August 27, 
2007. For an early assessment of ˚uency issues, see National Research Council, 
Being Fluent 
with Information Technology,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.
20National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 
Rising Abo
ve the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Eco
-nomic Future,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, p. 9.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
Ł Computing is a foundational science to all other STEM disciplines.
Ł Computing is foundational to recent U.S. productivity gains.
Ł Computing is increasingly a critical business infrastructure of most 
major corporations.
Ł There is a growing demand for IT workers.
Further, as indicated below, the K-16 computing education pipeline is 
showing signs of signi˜cant stress:
Ł Enrollments in postsecondary 4-year degree programs have been 
dropping over the past 6 years.
Ł Unlike most STEM disciplines, computing is an elective in almost 
all K-12 curriculums, causing students to leave high school with little or 
no exposure to the discipline; they may have mastered computing literacy 
(or usage) but not ˚uency. 
Ł Computing has one of lowest rates of participation by underrepre
-sented groups of any of the STEM disciplines.
Against this backdrop, the committee makes the following recom
-mendation, focusing speci˜cally on information technology:
Recommendation 2.1. To build the skilled workforce that it will 
need to retain high-value IT industries, the United States should 
invest more in education and outreach initiatives to nurture and 
increase its IT talent pool.
The America COMPETES Act of 2007 contains a number of initia
-tives to create and bolster a diversity of STEM education programs in 
the United States. This is good news if the initiatives are funded and car
-ried out effectively. However, too often the ﬁTﬂ (technology) component 
of STEM with respect to IT can be misunderstood as signifying merely 
teaching students to use computers, or making sure that schools are 
wired for the 21st century. Agencies implementing this legislation should 
take special care to ensure that computer science and IT instruction are 
not overlooked in favor of those disciplines that the broader population 
better understands.
21
 There has been much debate over how many U.S. IT jobs (and U.S. 
jobs more generally) can and will be sent offshore. Methodologies for such 
studies are complex and inconsistentŠthey use different data sets, differ
-21With respect to implementation processes, a useful resource might be the comprehensive 
look at science education standards found in National Research Council, 
National Science 
Education Standards
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1996.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 159
ent views of what IT practitioners and researchers do (and hence what can 
be compartmentalized and offshored), and different time frames. Trying 
to match projected ﬁoffshorableﬂ jobs to suitable labor supply in develop
-ing countries is like gazing into a crystal ball. A recent report that focused 
on the globalization and offshoring of software concluded:
While offshoring will increase, determining the speci˜cs of this increase 
[is] dif˜cult given the current quantity, quality, and objectivity of data 
available. Skepticism is warranted regarding claims about the number 
of jobs to be offshored and the projected growth of software industries 
in developing nations.
22
One thing is clearŠthe global search for talent in IT is a fact of life, 
and it is changing the way that ˜rms innovate, the way that ˜rms staff IT 
development teams, and the overall nature of the U.S. workforce. In fact, 
viewing the dynamic IT R&D ecosystem as merely one of out˚ows and 
in˚ows may be too limiting.
23
 It does not really matter if one subscribes 
to the view that offshoring will have an evolutionary rather than a revo
-lutionary effect on the United States or the view that offshoring™s nega
-tive impact in the United States will quickly escalate. The United States 
cannot be complacent about offshoring or about declining enrollments in 
IT-related ˜elds.
Finding 2.3. Although some IT professional jobs will be offshored, 
there are more IT jobs in the United States than at any time during 
the dot-com boom, even in the face of corporate offshoring trends.
Many have pointed out a recent surge in the number of U.S. com
-puter science doctorates awarded. On closer examination, it becomes clear 
that this otherwise encouraging phenomenon is almost entirely due to 
increases in the number of degrees awarded to non-U.S. students.
24
 Many 
22
Association for Computing Machinery Job Migration Task Force, 
Globalization and Off
-shoring of Software: A Report of the ACM Job Migration Task Force,
 W. Aspray, F. Mayadas, and 
M. Vardi eds., Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2006. 
23
AnnaLee Saxenian argues that we should look at this search for talent as ﬁbrain circula
-tionﬂ and not ﬁbrain drain.ﬂ She believes that a new type of global talent, which she calls 
the new ﬁArgonauts,ﬂ is undermining the old pattern of one-way ˚ows of talent. These 
ﬁArgonautsﬂ go where they can participate in the best educational or wealth creation op
-portunities; they are creating a richer and decentralized ˚ow of skill, capital, and technology. 
See AnnaLee Saxenian, 
The New Argonauts: Regional Ad
vantage in a Global Economy,
 Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2006.
24
National Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Science Resources Statistics (SRS), ﬁS&E 
[Science and Engineering] Doctorate Awards: 2005,ﬂ available at http://www.nsf.gov/
 statistics/nsf07305/; accessed November 20, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
of these students go on to apply for work visas in the United States or 
for green cards. Many are turned away because of immigration policies 
and quotas, despite the fact that the United States has already invested 
large amounts of money and resources toward their education. In addi
-tion, many IT employers have expressed frustration about this state of 
affairs. Immigrants have been especially signi˜cant in high-technology 
entrepreneurship; for at least one-quarter of the U.S. engineering and 
technology companies started between 1995 and 2005, mostly in software 
and innovation/manufacturing-related services (ﬁelectronics, computer 
and hardware design and service companies in addition to engineering 
services, research and testingﬂ),
25
 at least one of the key founders was 
born outside the United States (see Chapter 1).
Recommendation 2.2. The United States should increase the avail
-ability and facilitate the issuance of work and residency visas to 
foreign students who graduate with advanced IT degrees from U.S. 
educational institutions.
OB
JECTI
VE 3. 
REDUCE
 FRICTION
 THAT
 HARMS
  THE
 EFFECTI
VENESS
 OF
 THE U.S. I
NFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
An emerging pattern of inef˜ciencies in the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem 
could, over time, hurt the health and competitiveness of the U.S. eco
-system. Symptoms of frictions can be found by examining the data on 
technology company initial public offerings (IPOs), technology company 
mergers and acquisitions (M&As), and overall venture capital activity 
during the 1995-2007 period. There has been a meaningful decline in the 
numbers of technology IPOs in the United States and a trend toward 
M&As as the preferred exit strategy for start-up ˜rms (see in Chapter 
4  the section entitled ﬁFrictions in the U.S. IT R&D Ecosystemﬂ). While 
M&As have become the preferred exit of U.S. IT companies, the M&A 
environment for IT companies has been stable, but ˚at. As a consequence 
of fewer IPOs and a shift toward M&A exits, the returns to venture capital 
funds from their IT investments have declined sharply over the period 
examined in this study. 
Finding 3.1. Fewer young, innovative IT companies are gaining 
access to U.S. public equity markets.
25
Vivek Wadhwa, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Geref˜, ﬁAmerica™s New Im
-migrant Entrepreneurs: Part 1,ﬂ Duke Science, Innovation, and Technology Paper No. 23, 
January 4, 2007, p. 19, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=990152; accessed December 
26, 2007. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 161
The reasons that may explain this decline in technology IPOs and in 
returns from IT venture investments are multiple and hard to quantify. 
Nevertheless, the committee believes that they are, at least in part, symp
-toms of an added friction in the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem. There is no way 
to interpret in a favorable light the sharp decline in the number of IT 
companies reaching the IPO milestone. Although reaching an IPO is not 
a guarantee of long-term future success, IT companies that do not have 
the opportunity to tap public equity markets will not have the capital 
required to grow into major industry players and to contribute meaning
-fully to the creation of high-quality jobs in the United States. 
Over the years, new laws and regulations have been introduced that 
appear to have had negative, unanticipated, and unwanted side effects 
on the effectiveness of the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem. Moreover, there are 
indications that older laws and regulations have not been fully adapted 
to the changing realities of a globalized IT environment that is based on 
new technological platforms and new innovation methods. 
As one example, a major source of friction for young IT companies is 
the current U.S. patent system. Patents have been more actively acquired 
and vigorously enforced in recent years.
26
 Firms are facing dramatically 
increased hazards of litigation as plaintiffs and even more rapidly increas
-ing hazards as defendants (see Chapter 4).
27
 The sharply increased prob
-ability of being sued implies an increase in the ﬁtaxﬂ per R&D dollar that 
litigation imposes on innovation. Small ˜rms face much higher marginal 
enforcement costs and marginal taxes on R&D. 
As the U.S. IT R&D ecosystem has become far more contentious, the 
cost of protecting and defending intellectual property is undergoing rapid 
in˚ation. The long-term effects of this phenomenon may be more perni
-cious, in terms of the costs of protecting an invention, the costs of defend
-ing against an infringement claim, and the size of damages awarded, 
relative to the contribution of an infringed patent. 
Taken together, these trends may have a sti˚ing effect on young IT 
companies, especially those just bringing products to market, that have 
limited funds and no patent portfolios for use in cross-licensing agree
-ments or as the basis for countersuits. These companies run a greater 
26
National Research Council, 
A Patent System for the 
21
st Century,
 The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2004, p. 19.
27
According to Bessen and Meurer, the number of patent lawsuits ˜led annually in the 
United States doubled during the 1990s, from almost 800 in 1990 to almost 1,600 in 1999; 
their research also ﬁsuggests that patent litigation can affect innovation incentives.ﬂ James 
Bessen and Michael Meurer, ﬁThe Patent Litigation Explosion,ﬂ paper presented at the 
American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, 2005, p. 1, available at http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol13/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=831685#PaperDownload; accessed March 6, 
2008. For litigation hazard ˜ndings, see ibid., Table 2.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
risk today of never acquiring suf˜cient intellectual property protection 
and mustering enough legal resources to withstand costly and lengthy 
litigation.
Key elements of a successful reform of the U.S. patent litigation sys
-tem might include the following:
Ł Clear standards for forum selection that curtail the ability of plain
-tiffs to ˜le infringement actions in ﬁplaintiff-friendlyﬂ jurisdictions;
Ł Reforms that direct courts to calculate the awards of royalties or 
damages on the basis of the proportionate value of the patentee™s contri
-bution to the product in question rather than on the full value of the entire 
product;
Ł Provisions of current law that have never been interpreted to per
-mit the recovery of worldwide damages in U.S. courts;
Ł Standards governing awards of multiple damages for willfulness; 
and
Ł Additional reforms, as necessary, to curtail practices that are a 
drain on innovation.
Another source of friction is that corporate-governance reform legis
-lation has had unexpected consequences for start-up ˜rms. Historically, 
initial public offerings have been one of the important exits for venture 
˜rms. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-204), called SOX, 
and in particular its Section 404, were passed in response to corporate 
scandals at several large companies, in order to improve the quality of cor
-porate governance among U.S. publicly traded companies and to reduce 
the risks of ˜nancial fraud. However, the type of ˜rm for which SOX was 
designed was a multi-billion-dollar, multinational corporation listed on 
U.S. exchangesŠnot a sub-$100 million technology company seeking to 
grow rapidly. Yet under SOX, these smaller ˜rms are subject to the same 
regulations created for the large ˜rms, and the costs of compliance are 
disproportionate. As a result, it is harder for new, small ˜rms to grow into 
new major industry players by tapping public equity markets.
Recommendation 3.1. Congress and federal agencies such as the 
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Patent and Trade
-mark Of˜ce should consider the impact of both current and pro
-posed policies and regulations on the IT ecosystemŠand especially 
on young, innovative IT businessesŠand consider measures to 
mitigate these where appropriate. 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 163
OB
JECTI
VE 4. 
ENSURE
 THAT
 THE
 UNITED
 STATES
  HAS
 AN 
INFRASTRUCTURE
 THAT
 CAN 
ENABLE
  U.S. 
INFORMATION
 TECHNOLO
GY 
USER
S 
AND
  INNO
VATORS 
TO
 LEAD
 THE
 WORLD
 IT innovation no longer happens only in university or corporate labo
-ratories. Customer-created value is increasingly prominent: IT consum
-ers are leveraging research, innovating, and creating value by combin
-ing networking hardware, software, and devices into novel solutions 
and businesses (see Chapter 3). In the mid-1990s, supplier-created value 
through technological 
product 
innovations in information technology 
predominated. However, this pattern has been changing, as custom
-ers are increasingly creating value through IT 
application
 innovations in 
industries including health care, professional services, ˜nancial services, 
manufacturing, retail, media and publishing, and education.
28
 Similarly, 
an explosion of Web- and Internet-delivered content and services, many 
of which feature user-generated content, has led to increasing end-user-
driven innovation. 
Finding 4.1. The most dynamic IT sector is likely to be in the coun
-try with the most demanding IT customers and consumers. 
An environment of leading-edge users of technology creates the 
essential context for technology™s next wave and its effective applica
-tion. In such an environment, all sectors of society, including consumers, 
businesses, and governments, exploit and make the best use of advanced 
information technology. However, if a nation™s IT users are not global lead 
usersŠrequiring and using the most advanced IT functionalitiesŠthen 
in the areas where demand lags, that nation™s user-driven IT innovation 
will also lag. 
Access to broadband, which provides the high-speed communica
-tions links in the ﬁlast mileﬂ to connect homes and organizations to the 
Internet, is one especially important ingredient. The current telecom
-munications market environment in the United States has yielded many 
consumer bene˜ts compared with the more highly regulated environment 
of past decades. However, despite broadband being frequently cited as a 
national and local imperative, the nation continues to strive for affordable, 
ubiquitous, and high-performance broadband. Notably, there is signi˜
-cant geographical variation in the availability of broadband service and 
the degree of market competition. Moreover, although there have been 
28
David Moschella, Leading Edge Forum, ﬁAligning R&D with Industry Change,ﬂ presen
-tation to the committee, Boston, Mass., April 19, 2007.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
promising recent developments, such as announcements of large ˜ber-to-
the-home deployments by AT&T and Verizon, an enhanced-performance 
standard for cable modem service (Data Over Cable Service Interface 
Speci˜cations 3.0), and deployment of increasingly capable wireless ser
-vices, the extent to which such enhanced facilities and other performance 
improvements will be deployed nationwide is uncertain.
29
 In contrast, 
many other nations have been carrying out successful national programs 
to deploy high-speed, low-cost broadband. As a result, although the 
United States had an early lead in broadband deployment and remains a 
world leader in computer usage, it ˜nds itself today lagging a number of 
other nationsŠnotably Japan and KoreaŠin broadband connectivity. 
Finding 4.2. In terms of nationwide availability, use, and speed of 
broadband, the United StatesŠthe inventor of broadband technol
-ogyŠhas been losing ground compared with other nations. 
A fundamental step toward being the world leader in information 
technology use is for the United States to deploy world-class broadband 
connectivity aggressively over the next decade. A number of groups have 
cited the availability of broadband as an important goal. For example, 
in January 2002, TechNet, a group of Silicon Valley chief executive of˜
-cers, proposed that the President and policy makers ﬁmake broadband a 
national priority and set a goal of making an affordable 100-megabits per 
second broadband connection available to 100 million American homes 
and small businesses by 2010.ﬂ
30
 More recently, in January 2008, the California Broadband Task Force 
(CBTF) recommended the building out of ﬁhigh speedﬂ broadband infra
-structure for all Californians and the promotion of innovative uses of 
broadband technology. The CBTF™s working de˜nition of broadband 
includes a basic minimum speed, expected to increase over time, of 512 
kbps.
31
In the United States, a complex system of federal, state, and local 
governance and regulations can present numerous bottlenecks to pursu
-ing ubiquitous, higher-speed, more-affordable broadband. 
29
National Research Council, 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits,
 National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2002; discussion of ˜ndings on pp. 13, 18, and 21. 
30
See TechNet, 
A National Imperati
ve: Uni
versal A
vailability of Broadband by 
2010, 
January 
15, 2002, available at http://www.technet.org/resources.dyn/2002-01-15.64.pdf; accessed 
June 27, 2007.
31
California Broadband Task Force, 
The State of Connecti
vity: Building Inno
vation Through 
Broadband,
 January 2008, available at http://www.calink.ca.gov/taskforcereport/; accessed 
March 17, 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 165
Recommendation 4.1. The United States should establish an ambi
-tious target for regaining and holding a decisive lead in the broad 
deployment of affordable gigabit broadband services. Federal and 
state regulators should explore models and approaches that reduce 
regulatory and jurisdictional bottlenecks and should increase incen
-tives for investment in these services. 
SettingŠand reachingŠa highly ambitious target such as the one 
proposed by TechNet would enable the United States to leap well ahead 
and hold that lead.
32
 However, this committee has chosen to follow the 
lead of the Committee on Broadband Last Mile Technology, which in its 
2002 NRC report 
Broadband: Bringing 
Home the Bits, 
deliberately chose not 
to establish speci˜c bandwidth targets for policy makers (see in Chapter 3 
the subsection entitled ﬁBroadband Speeds and Capabilitiesﬂ). What con
-stitutes ﬁfast enoughﬂ has been and will continue to be a moving target. 
An effective policy regime would ensure that the capabilities of what is 
available at an affordable price would continue to improve in perfor
-mance commensurate with application needs and would provide suf˜
-cient ﬁheadroomﬂ to provide an opportunity for additional innovation.
Historically, the U.S. government has played a strong role (as an R&D 
funder and as a lead customer) in establishing U.S. IT demand leadership. 
Although its total share of the IT market is much smaller than it once was, 
the U.S. government nonetheless can play an important role as demand 
leader in the increasingly competitive, global IT markets of todayŠand 
tomorrow. This implies a role of broadly fostering research and com
-mercial innovation and also, where appropriate, sponsoring R&D to help 
meet particular government demands. The federal government has a 
natural leadership role in certain sectors, such as defense and homeland 
security (especially in the area of cyberphysical systems), in which federal 
agencies™ requirements are particular to their missions and commercial 
analogues are scarce.
33
 Recommendation 4.2. 
Government (federal, state, and local) should 
foster commercial innovation and itself make strategic investments 
32
This bandwidth target is more ambitious than TechNet™s proposal for accelerating broad
-band deployment and demand, which called for 100-megabit-per-second connectivity by 
2010; available at http://www.technet.org/issues/broadband/; accessed September 7, 2007. 
A goal of gigabit connectivity would be useful in helping the United States leapfrog Japan 
and other nations now moving ahead in broadband deployment. 
33
For analyses of speci˜c areas where government R&D leadership in software is needed 
to ensure timely innovation to meet defense needs, see National Research Council, 
Prelimi
-nary Obser
vations on DoD Software Research Needs and Priorities: A Letter Report,
 The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
in IT R&D and deployment so that the United States can retain 
a global lead position in areas where it has particular mission 
requirements.
CONCLUSION
The globalization of the world™s economy is a fact that cannot be 
ignored. The global IT R&D landscape now is quite different from what it 
was in 1995. To thrive in this new environment, the United States should 
play to its strengths, notably its continued leadership in conceptualizing 
the idea-intensive new concepts, products, and services that the rest of the 
world desires. This is the area in which the greatest increments of value 
added are captured. 
Toward this end, it is necessary for the United States to have the best-
funded and most-creative research institutions; to develop and attract the 
best technical and entrepreneurial talent among its own people as well as 
from around the world; to make its economy the world™s most attractive 
for forming new ventures and growing small, innovative ˜rms; and to 
create the environment to ensure the deployment of the most advanced 
technology infrastructure, applications, and services here in the United 
States for the bene˜t of our people, institutions, and ˜rms. 
The committee trusts that this report will be useful to policy makers 
and the public in helping the nation achieve these goals and in fostering a 
vibrant and thriving U.S. IT R&D ecosystem for many decades to come.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Eric Benhamou
, 
Co-Chair,
 is chair and chief executive of˜cer (CEO) of 
Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC. Benhamou Global Ventures, started 
in 2003, invests and plays an active role in innovative high-tech ˜rms 
throughout the world. Mr. Benhamou is also the chairman of the board 
of directors of 3Com Corporation and Palm, Inc. He is an adjunct profes
-sor of Entrepreneurship and Family Enterprise at INSEAD. He served as 
CEO of Palm, Inc., from October 2001 until October 2003. Mr. Benhamou 
served as CEO of 3Com Corporation from September 1990 until Decem-
ber 31, 2000. Mr. Benhamou™s professional and personal accomplishments 
center on the creation and intelligent deployment of information tech
-nology toward improving the performance of businesses and nonpro˜t 
organizations and the quality of life of individuals around the world. In 
1981, Mr. Benhamou cofounded Bridge Communications, an early net
-working pioneer, and was vice president of engineering until the merger 
with 3Com in 1987. Before joining Bridge Communications, he worked 
4 years at Zilog, Inc., serving as project manager, software engineering 
manager, and design engineer. In 2003, Mr. Benhamou was appointed to 
the Joint High Level Advisory Panel of the U.S.- Israel Science and Tech
-nology Commission by U.S. Commerce Secretary Donald Evans. In 1997, 
President Clinton appointed Mr. Benhamou to the President™s Informa
-tion Technology Advisory Committee, which advises the president on 
research and development focal points of federal programs to maintain 
ABiosketches of Committee 
 Members and Staff
169
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17
0 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
U.S. leadership in advanced computing and communications technologies 
and their applications. In 1998, Mr. Benhamou was recognized by former 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu with the Foreign Investor 
Jubilee Award. That same year, Mr. Benhamou received the Ellis Island 
Medal of Honor, which pays homage to the immigrant experience, as 
well as to individual achievements of U.S. citizens from various ethnic 
backgrounds. In 1998, he became a fellow of the International Engineer
-ing Consortium. He is a graduate of the American Leadership Forum, 
which seeks to revitalize leadership within communities across the nation. 
In 1997, Mr. Benhamou received the Medaille Nessim Habif from Ecole 
Nationale Supérieure d™Arts et Métiers, Paris. 
In1992,hereceivedthe
In 1992, he received the 
President™s Environment and Conservation Challenge Award, the United 
States™ highest environmental award. Mr. Benhamou currently serves 
as chairman of the board of Cypress Semiconductor, as lead director of 
RealNetworks, Inc., and Voltaire, and as a member of the board of direc
-tors of Silicon Valley Bancshares. He serves on the board of directors of 
privately held companies, Contextream, Finjan, and Purewave Networks. 
He served on the board of the New America Foundation, a Washington, 
D.C.-based think tank until December 2007. Mr. Benhamou serves on 
the executive committee of TechNet. He was a member of the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) and is a member of the 
Markle Task Force on Information Security. In addition, he serves on the 
boards of the INSEAD School of Business, the Stanford University School 
of Engineering, and Ben Gurion University of the Negev. He is the chair
-man of the Israel Venture Network, a venture philanthropy organization 
for a stronger Israeli society. Mr. Benhamou holds honorary doctoral 
degrees from Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Widener University, 
Western Governors University, and the University of South Carolina. 
He has a Master of Science degree from Stanford University™s School of 
Engineering and a Diplôme d™Ingénieur from Ecole Nationale Supérieure 
d™Arts et Métiers, Paris.
Randy H. Katz
, 
Co-Chair,
 (NAE), is the United Microelectronics Cor
-poration Distinguished Professor, Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science Department, University of California, Berkeley. He joined the 
Berkeley faculty in 1983, where since 1996 he has been the United Micro
-electronics Corporation Distinguished Professor in Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science. He is a fellow of the Association for Computing 
Machinery (ACM) and the IEEE, and a member of the National Academy 
of Engineering and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has 
published more than 250 refereed technical papers, book chapters, and 
books. His textbook, 
Contemporary Logic Design,
 has sold more than 85,000 
copies and has been used at more than 200 colleges and universities. A 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 171
second edition, cowritten with Gaetano Borriello, was published in 2005. 
He has supervised 43 M.S. theses and 33 Ph.D. dissertations (including 
one ACM Dissertation Award winner and eight women), and leads a 
research team of more than 10 graduate students, technical staff, and 
academic visitors. Recognitions of Dr. Katz™s work include 13 best-paper 
awards (including one ﬁtest of timeﬂ paper award and one selected for a 
50-year retrospective on IEEE Communications publications), three best-
presentation awards, the Outstanding Alumni Award of the Computer 
Science Division, the Computing Research Association™s (CRA™s) Out
-standing Service Award, the Berkeley Distinguished Teaching Award, 
the Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Decoration, the IEEE Reynolds 
Johnson Information Storage Award, the American Society for Engineer
-ing Education™s Frederic E. Terman Award, and the ACM Karl V. Karl
-strom Outstanding Educator Award. In the late 1980s, with colleagues 
at the University of California, Berkeley, Dr. Katz developed Redundant 
Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID), a $15 billion per year industry sector. 
While on leave for government service in 1993-1994, he established white
 house.gov and connected the White House to the Internet. His current 
research interests are reliable, adaptive distributed systems supported by 
new services deployed inside the network. His prior research interests 
have included database management, very large scale integrated circuit 
(VLSI) computer-aided design (CAD), high performance multiproces
-sor (Snoop cache coherency protocols) and storage (RAID) architectures, 
transport (Snoop TCP) and mobility protocols spanning heterogeneous 
wireless networks, and converged data and telephony network and 
service architectures. Dr. Katz received his undergraduate degree from 
Cornell University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University 
of California, Berkeley. In May 2007 he received a Doctor of Philosopy 
(Honoris Causa) from the University of Helsinki.
Stephen R. Barley
 is the Charles M. Pigott Professor of Management Sci
-ence and Engineering; the co-director of the Center for Work, Technology 
and Organization at Stanford University™s School of Engineering; and the 
co-director of the Stanford/General Motors Collaborative Research Labo
-ratory. He holds a Ph.D. in organization studies from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Prior to coming to Stanford in 1994, Dr. Barley 
served for 10 years on the faculty of the School of Industrial and Labor 
Relations at Cornell University. He was editor of the 
Administrati
ve Sci
-ence Quarterly
 from 1993 to 1997 and the founding editor of the 
Stanford 
Social Inno
vation Re
view
 from 2002 to 2004. He has served on the editorial 
boards of the Academy of Management journal, 
The Journal of Management 
Studies and Organization Science.
 Dr. Barley has been the recipient of the 
Academy of Management™s New Concept Award. He was a member of 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
the Board of Senior Scholars of the National Center for the Educational 
Quality of the Workforce and co-chaired the National Research Council 
committee on the changing occupational structure in the United States 
that produced the report 
The Changing Nature of Work
 in 1999. Dr. Barley 
has written extensively on the impact of new technologies on work, the 
organization of technical work, and organizational culture. He edited a 
volume on technical work, entitled 
Between Craft and Science: Technical 
Work in the United States,
 published in 1997 by Cornell University Press. 
In collaboration with Gideon Kunda of Tel Aviv University, Dr. Barley 
recently published a book on contingent work among engineers and 
software developers, entitled 
Gurus, 
Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant 
Experts in the Knowledge Economy,
 with Princeton University Press. Dr. Bar
-ley teaches courses on the management of R&D, the organizational impli
-cations of technological change, organizational behavior, social network 
analysis, and ethnographic ˜eld methods. He has served as a consultant 
to organizations in a variety of industries including publishing, banking, 
computers, electronics, and aerospace.
Andrew B. Hargadon
 is an associate professor of technology management 
and director of technology management programs at the Graduate School 
of Management at the University of California, Davis. Prior to his aca
-demic appointment, he worked as a product designer at IDEO and Apple 
Computer and taught in the Product Design program at Stanford Uni
-versity. Dr. Hargadon™s research focuses on the effective management of 
innovation, and he has written extensively on knowledge and technology 
brokering, the role of learning and knowledge management in innovation, 
and the strategic role of design in managing technology transitions. His 
research has been used to develop or guide new innovation programs in 
organizations as diverse as the Canadian Health Services, Silicon Valley 
start-ups, Hewlett-Packard, and the U.S. Navy. Dr. Hargadon has pub
-lished numerous articles and chapters in leading scholarly and applied 
publications, including 
Har
vard Business Re
view, Administrati
ve Science 
Quarterly, Organization Science, California Management Re
view,
 and 
Research 
in Organizational Beha
vior.
 He serves on the editorial board of 
Administra
-ti
ve Science Quarterly, Organization Science, Organization Studies,
 and the 
Academy of Management Re
view.
 He teaches corporate executive programs 
and gives lectures on the creativity, design, and management of innova
-tion. He received his Ph.D. from the Management Science and Engineer
-ing Department in Stanford University™s School of Engineering, where 
he was named Boeing Fellow and Sloan Foundation Future Professor of 
Manufacturing. He received his B.S. and M.S. in Stanford University™s 
Product Design Program in the Mechanical Engineering Department.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 173
Martin Kenney
 is a professor in the Department of Human and Com
-munity Development at the University of California, Davis, and senior 
project director, Berkeley Roundtable on the International Economy, Uni
-versity of California, Berkeley. He has authored or edited ˜ve books and 
more than 100 articles on the development of high-technology clusters, 
the growth of venture capital, and university-related entrepreneurship 
in the United States, China, and Europe. Dr. Kenney™s current work con
-centrates on three areas. His research on services offshoring to India has 
helped him develop both an important perspective on the issue and 
a range of contacts and knowledge throughout the Indian outsourcing 
industry. In another area, Dr. Kenney has been studying the venture capi
-tal industry since 1988. More recently, his work in this area has focused 
on the globalization of venture capital. Finally, Dr. Kenney has advised 
numerous corporations, universities, governments, and ˜nancial institu
-tions on a range of issues, including university/industry relationships, 
economic development, and venture capital. He has keynoted for a major 
U.S. law ˜rm on offshore outsourcing and participated in World Bank East 
Asian studies on high-technology clusters and venture capital. He has 
built a comprehensive database of initial public offerings (IPOs) in the 
years 1996-2004, from which he is mining a number of novel correlations. 
He received his Ph.D. in development sociology in 1984 from Cornell 
University and his B.A. in 1974 and M.A. in 1976, both in sociology, from 
San Diego State University.
Steven Klepper
 is Arthur Arton Hamerschlag Professor of Economics and 
Social Science at the Department of Social and Decision Sciences in the 
College of Humanities and Social Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University. 
He is also on the faculty of the Tepper School of Business and is an af˜liate 
of the H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management at Car
-negie Mellon. His ˜elds of specialization include the evolution of indus
-try and the determinants of technological change, statistical procedures 
to cope with measurement error, and tax compliance. He is an associate 
editor of 
Management Science
 and is on the editorial boards of 
Economics 
of Inno
vation and New Technology
 and 
Empirica.
 He is a research associate 
in the Centre for Research on Innovation and Competition, the Univer
-sity of Manchester, and has served on the National Science Foundation™s 
Economics Advisory Panel. His books and articles focus on innovation, 
economic development, economic evolution, and technological change as 
a factor in the growth and decline of industry. His publications include 
ﬂFirm Survival and the Evolution of Oligopoly,ﬂ 
Rand Journal of Economics
 (2002); ﬂEntry, Exit, Growth, and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle,ﬂ 
American Economic Re
view
 (1996); with W. Cohen, ﬂA Reprise of Size and 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
R&D,ﬂ 
Economic Journal
 (1996); with W. Cohen, ﬁFirm Size and the Nature 
of Innovation Within Industries,ﬂ 
Re
view of Economics and Statistics
 (1996). 
He received his Ph.D. in economics from Cornell University in 1975.
Edward D. Lazowska
 (NAE) holds the Bill and Melinda Gates Chair in 
Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Washington. His 
research and teaching concern the design, implementation, and analysis of 
high performance computing and communication systems. Dr. Lazowska 
is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and a fellow of 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He chaired the Computing 
Research Association board of directors from 1997 to 2001, the National 
Science Foundation™s Computer and Information Science and Engineering 
Advisory Committee from 1998 to 1999, the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency™s Information Science and Technology Study Group from 
2004 to 2006, and the President™s Information Technology Advisory Com
-mittee from 2003 to 2005. He served for 6 years on the National Research 
Council™s (NRC™s) Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
(CSTB), and has served on a number of NRC study committees, includ
-ing the Committee on Improving Learning with Information Technology, 
the Committee on Science and Technology for Countering TerrorismŠ
Panel on Information Technology, the Committee on Research Horizons 
on Networking, and the Committee to Review the Multi-Agency HPCC 
Program. He contributed extensively to the CSTB summary report 
Inno
va-tion in Information Technology.
 Dr. Lazowska received his A.B. from Brown 
University in 1972 and his Ph.D. from the University of Toronto in 1977, 
when he joined the University of Washington faculty.
Lenny Mendonca
 is a director (senior partner) in the San Francisco of˜ce 
of McKinsey & Company, Inc., the world™s leading global management 
consulting ˜rm, where he leads the ˜rm™s knowledge development. Mr. 
Mendonca is on the Shareholders™ Council of McKinsey (its board of 
directors), oversees the ˜rm™s communications (including the 
McKinsey 
Quarterly
), and is chair of the McKinsey Global Institute. He has helped 
dozens of corporate, government, and nonpro˜t clients solve their most 
dif˜cult management challenges. Mr. Mendonca is the chairman of the 
Bay Area Council, on the board of directors of the Economic Institute 
of the Bay Area and the Bay Area Science and Innovation Consortium. 
He is on the board of the New America Foundation, Common Cause, a 
trustee for the Committee for Economic Development, and on the Advi
-sory Council for the Stanford Graduate School of Business. He serves on 
the board of ChildrenNow, DonorsChoose, and the California Business for 
Educational Excellence Foundation, and is a member of the Alliance for 
the San
 Francisco Uni˜ed School District. Mr. Mendonca has led several 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 175
McKinsey research efforts. He has written and spoken extensively on glo
-balization, corporate social responsibility, economic development, regula
-tion, education, energy policy, health care, ˜nancial services, and corpo
-rate strategy. He received his M.B.A. and certi˜cate in public management 
from the Stanford Graduate School of Business. He holds an A.B., magna 
cum laude, in economics from Harvard College. Mr. Mendonca is the 
founder and owner of the Half Moon Bay Brewing Company.
David C. Nagel
 is the former president and CEO of PalmSource, Inc. 
Before going to PalmSource, Dr. Nagel held leadership positions as chief 
technology of˜cer (CTO), AT&T; president, AT&T Labs; and CTO, Con
-cert (a joint venture of AT&T and British Telecommunications Group). 
Dr. Nagel also was senior vice president, Apple Computer; and chief of 
NASA Human Factors Research, NASA Ames Research Center. He has 
also served on national and international advisory committees, includ
-ing the President™s Information Technology Advisory Committee and the 
Federal Communications Commission™s Technology Advisory Council 
(1999). Dr. Nagel also is a member of the boards of directors of Tessera 
Technologies, Inc., and Leapfrog Technologies, Inc. He also serves as 
chairman of Arcsoft, a private developer of software for mobile imaging, 
and as lead independent director of Epocrates, Inc., a private company 
and leading provider of medical information systems for mobile devices 
and the World Wide Web. He has a Ph.D. in psychology (perception and 
mathematical) and an M.S. and B.S. in engineering, all from the University 
of California, Los Angeles. He is on the board of trustees of the Interna
-tional Computer Science Institute and an emeritus director of the board 
of the Tech Museum of Innovation, San Jose, California.
Arati Prabhakar
 joined U.S. Venture Partners (USVP) in 2001 after 15 years 
of working with world-class engineers and scientists across many ˜elds to 
brew new technologies. As a general partner at USVP, her primary focus 
is fabless semiconductor and semiconductor manufacturing opportuni
-ties. She serves on the boards of directors of Arradiance, Kilopass, Kleer, 
Leadis Technology (NASDAQ: LDIS), Lightspeed Logic, Pivotal Technolo
-gies, and SiBeam. Dr. Prabhakar was a program manager and then direc
-tor of the Microelectronics Technology Of˜ce at the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) from 1986 to 1993. At DARPA, she 
supported R&D in company and university laboratories in semiconductor 
manufacturing, imaging, optoelectronics, and nanoelectronics. In 1993, 
President Clinton appointed her director of the National Institute of Stan
-dards and Technology, where she led the 3,000-person staff until 1997. 
Dr. Prabhakar then joined Raychem Corporation as senior vice president 
and chief technology of˜cer. She was subsequently vice president and 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176
 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
then president of Interval Research Corporation. Dr. Prabhakar received 
her B.S. in electrical engineering from Texas Tech University in 1979. She 
received an M.S. in electrical engineering in 1980 and a Ph.D. in applied 
physics in 1984 from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). She 
began her career as a Congressional Fellow at the Of˜ce of Technology 
Assessment in 1984 to 1986. Dr. Prabhakar has been honored as a distin
-guished alumna of Texas Tech and of Caltech, and she has been awarded 
an honorary doctorate from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. She is a 
fellow of the IEEE and serves on advisory boards for Stanford University, 
the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of California, 
Santa Barbara.
Raj Reddy
 (NAE) is the Mozah Bint Nasser University Professor of Com
-puter Science and Robotics in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie 
Mellon University. He began his academic career as an assistant professor 
at Stanford University in 1966. He has been a member of the Carnegie 
Mellon faculty since 1969. He served as the founding director of the 
Robotics Institute from 1979 to 1991 and as the dean of the School of Com
-puter Science from 1991 to 1999. Dr. Reddy™s research interests include the 
study of human-computer interaction and arti˜cial intelligence. His cur
-rent research interests include the Million Book Digital Library Project, a 
multifunction information appliance that can be used by the uneducated, 
the Fiber to the Village Project, Mobile Autonomous Robots, and Learn
-ing by Doing. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering 
and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He was president of 
the American Association for Arti˜cial Intelligence from 1987 to 1989. 
Dr. Reddy was awarded the Legion of Honor by President Mitterand 
of France in 1984. He was awarded the ACM Turing Award in 1994, the 
Okawa Prize in 2004, the Honda Prize in 2005, and the Vannevar Bush 
Award in 2006. He served as co-chair of the President™s Information Tech
-nology Advisory Committee from 1999 to 2001 under Presidents Clinton 
and Bush. Dr. Reddy received a B.E. degree from the Guindy Engineering 
College of the University of Madras, India, in 1958 and an M.Tech degree 
from the University of New South Wales, Australia, in 1960. He received 
a Ph.D. degree in computer science from Stanford University in 1966.
Lucinda Sanders
 is a cofounder of the National Center for Women and 
Information Technology and currently is executive in residence, Alliance 
for Technology, Learning and Society (ATLAS) with the University of 
Colorado. Ms. Sanders developed many years of industry and execu
-tive experience in the communications software business, with a broad 
knowledge base including customer relationship management (CRM) 
e-business solutions, call-center technologies, and multimedia commu
-Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 177
nications. From May 1999 to August 2001, she was vice president, Avaya 
Inc., CRM Solutions R&D and CTO. From August 1996 to May 1999 she 
served as CTO for Lucent Technologies Customer Care Solutions and 
from January 1995 to August 1996 she served as department head for 
Lucent Bell Labs R&D. Ms. Sanders has received numerous awards such 
as the Distinguished Engineering Alumni Award, Silicon Valley Tribute 
to Women in Industry, Partner of Choice, Trail Blazer, Touch Award, and 
Bell Labs President™s Silver Award. She also received the most prestigious 
Bell Labs award (the Fellow Award), which recognized her for techni
-cal excellence in software architectures, participation on teams creating 
˜rst-to-market solutions for enterprise private branch exchange (PBX) 
systems, multimedia communication systems (including Voice over IP), 
and call centers. She has a M.S. in computer science from the University of 
Colorado and a B.S. in computer science from Louisiana State University 
and holds six patents.
CSTB S
TAFF
Joan D. Winston
 was a program of˜cer for the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council from 
March 2006 through May 2008. She also worked on CSTB studies that 
produced 
Preliminary Obser
vations on DoD Software Research Needs and 
Priorities: A Letter Report
 (2008), 
Social Security Administration Electronic 
Ser
vice Pro
vision: A Strategic Assessment
 (2007), and
 Summary of a Workshop 
on Software-Intensi
ve Systems and Uncertainty at Scale
 (2007). She was a con
-sultant to CSTB in 2005-2006. Before joining CSTB, she was an assistant 
director (information technology team) at the Government Accountability 
Of˜ce. From 1998 to 2001, she was principal associate at Steve Walker 
and Associates, LLC, which managed early-stage venture funds focusing 
on information technology. From 1995 to 1998, she was director of policy 
analysis for Trusted Information Systems, Inc. From 1986 to 1995, she held 
various analytical and project direction positions at the congressional 
Of˜ce of Technology Assessment (OTA) and was recognized as an OTA 
senior associate in 1993. Before OTA, she worked brie˚y for the Congres
-sional Research Service of the Library of Congress. Ms. Winston started 
her career as an engineer at the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Inc., in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. She has an S.B. in physics and an S.M. in tech
-nology and policy, both from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Jon Eisenberg
 is director of the Computer Science and Telecommunica
-tions Board of the National Research Council. He has also been study 
director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies explor
-ing Internet and broadband policy and networking and communications 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17
8 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
technologies. In 1995-1997 he was a Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy 
Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science at the 
U.S. Agency for International Development, where he worked on technol
-ogy transfer and information and telecommunications policy issues. Dr. 
Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Washing
-ton in 1996 and B.S. in physics with honors from the University of Mas
-sachusetts at Amherst in 1988.
Kristen R. Batch
 was an associate program of˜cer for the Computer Sci
-ence and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council 
from 2002 to 2008, where she was also involved with projects focusing 
on the interoperability of voter registration databases and the policy and 
ethical implications of offensive information warfare and studies that 
resulted in the following publications: 
Toward a Safer and More Secure 
Cyberspace
 (2007), 
Engaging Pri
vacy and Information Technology in a Digital 
Age
 (2007), 
Asking the Right Questions About Electronic Voting 
(2005),
 Sign
-posts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet Na
vigation 
(2005), 
A Re
view of the FBI™s Trilogy Information Technology Modernization Program 
(2004), and 
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 
11
 (2002). While pursuing an M.A. in international communications from 
American University, she interned at the National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration in the Of˜ce of International Affairs and 
at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in the Technology 
and Public Policy Program. She received a B.A. from Carnegie Mellon 
University in literary and cultural studies and Spanish, and received two 
travel grants to conduct independent research in Spain.
Margaret Marsh Huynh
, senior program assistant, was with CSTB from 
January 1999 to November 2007. She supported a number of projects, 
including Whither Biometrics, Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy, 
Advancing Software-Intensive Systems Producibility, and Assessing the 
Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology Research and Devel
-opment Ecosystem. She also worked on the projects that produced the 
reports 
Signposts in the Cyberspace: The Domain Name Systems and Inter
-net Na
vigation
 (2005)
, Getting Up to Speed: The Future of Supercomputing 
(2004)
, Beyond Producti
vity: Information Technology, Inno
vation, and Creati
v-ity 
(2003)
, IT Roadmap to a Geospatial Future 
(2002)
, Building a Workforce 
for the Information Economy 
(2001)
, and 
The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual 
Property in the Information Age
 (2000). Ms. Huynh also assisted with the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration workshop 
on improving spectrum management through economic and other incen
-tives (2006), the Government Accountability Of˜ce/NRC forum on infor
-mation resource management and the Paperwork Reduction Act (2005), as 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 179
well as the workshops on IT issues for the behavioral and social sciences. 
Prior to coming to the NRC, Ms. Huynh worked as a meeting assistant 
at Management for Meetings, April to August 1998, and as a meeting 
assistant at the American Society for Civil Engineers from September 
1996 to April 1998. Ms. Huynh has a B.A. (1990) in liberal studies with 
minors in sociology and psychology from Salisbury University, Salisbury, 
Maryland.
Morgan R. Motto
, program associate, has been with CSTB since Decem
-ber 2007 supporting several projects, including the Wireless Technology 
Prospects and Policy, Improving Processes and Policies of Information 
Technology in the Department of Defense, Future of Libraries and Muse
-ums, and the State Voter Registration Databases. Previously, she worked 
with the Board on Environmental Studies and Toxicology (BEST) on the 
Human Biomonitoring for Environmental Toxicants, Sediment Dredging 
at Superfund Megasites, Applications of Toxicogenomic Technologies to 
Predictive Toxicology and Risk Assessment, Evaluating the Ef˜ciency of 
Research and Development Programs at the Environmental Protection 
Agency, Review of the NIOSH Respiratory Disease Research Program, 
Review of the Federal Strategy to Address Environmental, Health, and 
Safety Research Needs for Engineered Nanoscale Materials, and Improv
-ing Risk Analysis Approaches Used by the U.S. EPA. Prior to coming to 
the NRC, Ms. Motto worked as project manager for international affairs 
and technology at the U.S. Pan Asian American Chamber of Commerce.
 She earned a B.A. in International Affairs and East Asian Studies from 
the Elliott School of International Affairs at the George Washington 
University.
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PERSPECTI
VES
 ON
 THE
 I
NFORMATION
  TECHNOLO
GY R&D E
COS
YSTEM
 NOVEMBER
 2, 2006
 WASHIN
GTON
, D.C.
10:45-11:00 a.m.
 Welcome to the Open Session and Workshop 
Overview of Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board (CSTB) and Study (Goals, 
Timing)
 Eric Benhamou and Randy 
H. Katz, Committee and 
Workshop Co-Chairs
11:00 a.m.-12:00 noon 
 Perspectives from Study Sponsor and Charge to 
the Committee
  Peter Freeman, National Science Foundation
12:00 noon-12:30 p.m.
 Working Lunch
12:30-2:30 p.m.
 Panel One: Perspectives on the IT R&D Ecosys
-tem from Federal Agencies Making IT R&D 
Investments
BWorkshop Agendas
180
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 181 Discussion Topics:
 Ł What are your agency™s investment philoso
-phy, strategy, and interests for IT research?
 Ł From your perspective, what is the state of 
the IT R&D ecosystem? Has this changed or do you see it changing?  Ł What aspects of the ecosystem do you think are working well, and where are you looking 
to make improvements? 
 Ł What do you think could be done to maintain or improve the health and vitality of the 
ecosystem? Who can do this? Who should do this? Ł What studies and data, including funding data, 
do you think the committee should take into 
account (please provide these or provide links).
 Panelists: Simon Szykman, National Coordination Of˜ce for Networking and Information Technology R&D
 Deborah Crawford, National Science Foundation Anthony Tether, Defense Ad
vanced Research Projects 
Agency André van Tilborg, Of˜ce of the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense, Science and Technology
 Daniel Hitchcock, Department of Energy
 Michael Marron, National Institutes of 
Health  Q&A with panelists
2:30-2:45 p.m. Break
2:45-4:15 p.m. Panel Two: Perspectives on the IT R&D 
Ecosystem from Academic and Business 
Communities  Discussion Topics:
 Ł From your perspective, what is the state of 
the IT R&D ecosystem? Has this changed or do you see it changing?  Ł What aspects of the ecosystem do you think are working well, and where would you look 
to make improvements? 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 Ł What do you think could be done to maintain or improve the health and vitality of the 
ecosystem? Who can do this? Who should do this? Ł What studies and data do you think the committee should take into account (please provide or provide links).
 Panelists: William Aspray, Association for Computing 
Machinery Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
 Andrea 
Hoffman, TechNet 
 Charles Wessner, Board on Science, Technology, and 
Economic Policy, National Research Council 
 Q&A with panelists
4:15-5:45 p.m. Panel Three: Perspectives on the Potomac-Area 
IT Start-up Environment
  Discussion Topics:
 Ł From your perspective, what is the regional 
climate like for IT start-ups? How has this changed? Where do you see it going?
 Ł What is the provenance of most of the 
successful start-ups in this region?
 Ł What are the key advantages for start-ups in 
this area? The key hindrances?
 Ł What is your perspective on funding prospects and viability of IT-centered 
start-ups based on technology transferred 
from university research? Based on 
technology developed in government-industry partnerships? Spun out of national laboratories and Federally Funded Research 
and Development Centers (FFRDCs)? Ł What could be done to improve funding and 
viability of IT-centered start-ups? Who should 
do this? Who can do this? Ł What studies and data do you think the committee should take into account (please provide or provide links)?
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 183 Panelists: John May, New Vantage Group
 Jonathan Silver, Core Capital Partners
 Raymar Dizon, Maryland Department of Business and Economic Development Q&A with panelists
5:45 p.m.  Closing Remarks by Committee and Public Eric Benhamou and Randy H. Katz, Co-Chairs6:15-7:00 p.m. Adjournment and Public ReceptionINFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R&D E
COS
YSTEM
  WORKSHOP
ŠS
ILICON
 VALLE
Y FEBRUARY 23, 2007MOUNTAIN
 VIEW, CALIFORNIA9:00-9:15 a.m. Welcome to the Open Session and Workshop
  Eric Benhamou and Randy H. Katz, Committee and Workshop Co-Chairs
9:15-10:45 a.m.  Panel I: Perspectives on China™s and India™s Roles in the IT R&D Ecosystem Session Organizer: Martin Kenney, Uni
versity of California, Davis Panelists: Vinod Dham, NewPath Ventures LLC 
 Dixon Doll, DCM-Doll Capital Management  Martin Haemmig, Consultant  Lenny Mendonca, McKinsey & Company  Q&A with panelists
10:45-11:00 a.m.
 Break
11:00 a.m.-12:30 p.m. 
 Panel II: Perspectives from Long-Time Observers 
of the Ecosystem Session Organizer: Randy 
H. Katz, University of California, Berkeley; Committee and Workshop 
Co-Chair Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
 Panelists: John Markoff, New York Times,
 and Visiting 
Lecturer, Stanford Uni
versity  Geoffrey Moore, TGC Ad
visors  Kara Swisher, 
Wall Street Journal 
 Hal Varian, Uni
versity of California, Berkeley  Q&A with panelists
12:30-1:30 p.m. Working Lunch
 Remarks and Discussion  John Toole, Executi
ve Director and CEO, Computer 
History Museum1:30-3:00 p.m. Panel III: Perspectives from Serial Entrepreneurs 
and Angel Investors
 Session Organizer: Arati Prabhakar, U.S. Venture 
Partners Panelists:  Ron Conway, Angel In
vestors  Judy Estrin, Packet Design  Andreas 
von Bechtolsheim, Sun Microsystems 
 Q&A with panelists
3:00-3:30 p.m. Break
3:30-5:00 p.m. Panel IV: A Cross-Industry, Global View of the 
Ecosystem Session Organizer: Ste
ven Klepper, Carnegie Mellon 
University  Panelists: Timothy Bresnahan, Stanford Uni
versity  Ra˜q Dossani, Stanford University  David Mowery, Uni
versity of California, Berkeley (participating by conference phone)
 AnnaLee Saxenian, University of California, Berkeley (participating by conference phone)
 Q&A with panelists
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 1855:00-5:30 p.m. Banking Business Models for Working with 
Innovative Companies Kenneth Wilcox, Silicon Valley Bank and SVB 
Financial Group 
5:30 p.m. Closing Remarks for Workshop
6:00 p.m. Working Dinner
7:30 p.m. Discussion with Carver Mead, Foveon, Inc. The public is welcome.INFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY R&D E
COS
YSTEM
  WORKSHOP
ŠB
OSTON
 APRIL 19, 2007BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS8:00 a.m. Welcome to the Open Session and Workshop 
 Eric Benhamou and Randy H. Katz, Committee and Workshop Co-Chairs
  
8:00-8:30 a.m. European Venture Perspectives on the IT R&D 
Ecosystem Paul Deninger, Jeffries Broad
view  Q&A8:30-10:00 a.m.  Policy Dimensions of the IT R&D Ecosystem Session Moderator: Eric Benhamou, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC; Committee and Workshop 
Co-Chair  Panelists:  Erik Brynjolfsson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 Bob Litan, Kauffman Foundation (participating by conference phone)
 Bob Kimball, RealNetworks, Inc. (participating by conference phone)
 Q&A with panelists
10:00-10:30 a.m. Break
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186 ASSESSING
 THE IMPACTS
 OF
 CHANGES
 IN
 THE IT
 R&D 
ECOS
YSTEM
10:30 a.m.-12:00 p.m.  State of UniversityŒIndustry Relationships in the IT R&D Ecosystem Session Moderator: Raj Reddy, Carnegie Mellon 
University  Panelists:  Katharine Ku, Stanford University Scott Shane, Case Western Reser
ve University (participating by conference phone)
  Rodney Brooks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 Kenneth Morse, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 Q&A with panelists
12:00 p.m.-1:00 p.m.  Working Lunch, with Speaker
 Irving Wladawsky-Berger, IBM 
1:00-1:15 p.m. Break
1:15-2:30 p.m. International Dimensions of the IT R&D Ecosystem Session Moderator: Eric Benhamou, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC; Committee and Workshop 
Co-Chair  Panelists:  Orna Berry, Gemini Israel Funds and Israel Venture 
Association  David Wei, Leno
vo (participating by conference 
phone)  David Moschella, Leading Edge Forum Q&A with panelists
2:30-3:00 p.m. Break
3:00-4:30 p.m. Emerging IT PlatformsŠfrom Sensors to 
Internet Data Centers, from Open Source to 
Web 2.0
 Session Moderator: Randy H. Katz, University of California, Berkeley; Committee and Workshop 
Co-Chair Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 187 Panelists:  Jamey Hicks, Nokia Research Center, Cambridge
 Jeffrey Jaffe, No
vell, Inc.  Luiz Andre Barroso, Google, Inc. 
(participatingby
(participating by conference phone)
 Siobhan O™Mahoney, 
Harvard Business School Q&A with panelists
4:30-5:00 p.m.  Break
5:00-6:30 p.m. Workforce and Social Issues
 Session Moderators: Stephen Barley, Stanford 
University; and Lucy Sanders, National Center for Women and Information Technology
 Panelists:  Phillip J. Bond, Information Technology Association 
of America Daryl Chubin, American Association for the Advancement of Science David Finegold, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey John Sargent, Department of Commerce 
 Q&A with panelists
6:30 p.m. Adjournment 6:30-8:30 p.m. Dinner7:15 p.m. Speaker: Robert M. Metcalfe, Polaris Venture 
PartnersAssessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.